File:Emerald Lakes, New Zealand.jpg|The Emerald Lakes, Mt Tongariro
Its major export partners are Australia, United States, Japan, China, and the United Kingdom.
The service sector is the largest sector in the economy, followed by manufacturing and construction and then farming and raw material extraction.
In 1788 Captain Arthur Phillip assumed the position of Governor of the new British colony of New South Wales which according to his commission included New Zealand.
It has contributed forces to several regional and global peacekeeping missions, such as those in Cyprus, Somalia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Sinai, Angola, Cambodia, the Iran–Iraq border, Bougainville, East Timor, and the Solomon Islands.
The House of Representatives is democratically elected and a Government is formed from the party or coalition with the majority of seats.
New Zealand is also a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
Following concerns that the South Island might form a separate colony, premier Alfred Domett moved a resolution to transfer the capital from Auckland to a locality near the Cook Strait.
In 1645, Dutch cartographers renamed the land ''Nova Zeelandia'' after the Dutch province of Zeeland.
Māori decorated the white wood of buildings, canoes and cenotaphs using red (a mixture of red ochre and shark fat) and black (made from soot) paint and painted pictures of birds, reptiles and other designs on cave walls.
'''New Zealand'''  ( ) is an island nation in the southwestern Pacific Ocean.
Rugby union is considered the national sport and attracts the most spectators.
In 1898 Seddon's government passed the Old-age Pensions Act of 1898, the first general pensions scheme in the British Empire.
The Gallipoli campaign played an important part in fostering New Zealand's national identity and strengthened the ANZAC tradition it shares with Australia.
Golf, netball, tennis and cricket have the highest rates of adult participation, while netball, rugby union and football (soccer) is popular among young people.
A hāngi is a traditional Māori method of cooking food using heated rocks buried in a pit oven.
There are now Māori language immersion schools and two television channels that broadcast predominantly in Māori.
Cabinet, formed by ministers and led by the Prime Minister (currently John Key), is the highest policy-making body in government and responsible for deciding significant government actions.
In 1907, at the request of the New Zealand Parliament, King Edward VII proclaimed New Zealand a dominion within the British Empire, reflecting its self-governing status.
The British Government appointed James Busby as British Resident to New Zealand in 1832 following a petition from northern Māori.
New Zealand art and craft has gradually achieved an international audience, with exhibitions in the Venice Biennale in 2001 and the "Paradise Now" exhibition in New York in 2004.
It was declared one of New Zealand's official languages in 2006.
The supremacy of Parliament, over the Crown and other government institutions, was established in England by the Bill of Rights 1689 and has been ratified as law in New Zealand.
Before the arrival of humans an estimated 80% of the land was covered in forest, with only high alpine, wet, infertile and volcanic areas without trees.
Reflecting this, New Zealand's culture is mainly derived from Māori and early British settlers, with recent broadening arising from increased immigration.
While the demonym for a New Zealand citizen is New Zealander, the informal "Kiwi" is commonly used both internationally and by locals.
the power to dissolve Parliament or refuse the Royal Assent of a bill into law).
The country geographically comprises two main landmasses—that of the North Island, or Te Ika-a-Māui, and the South Island, or Te Waipounamu—and numerous smaller islands.
After European colonisation, Māori began cooking with pots and ovens and the hāngī was used less frequently, although it is still used for formal occasions such as tangihanga.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the six largest cities of New Zealand
With the development of refrigerated shipping in the 1880s meat and dairy products were exported to Britain, a trade which provided the basis for strong economic growth in New Zealand.
Early settlers brought over their ethnic music, with brass bands and choral music being popular, and musicians began touring New Zealand in the 1860s.
The country's isolation delayed the influence of European artistic trends allowing local artists to developed their own distinctive style of regionalism.
Even though the majority of the population now lives in cities, much of New Zealand's art, literature, film and humour has rural themes.
Note that for each island, either its English or Māori name can be used, or both can be used together.
The resulting intertribal Musket Wars encompassed over 600 battles between 1801 and 1840, killing 30,000–40,000 Māori.
The New Zealand Parliament holds legislative power and consists of the Queen and the House of Representatives.
The South Island is the largest landmass of New Zealand, and is divided along its length by the Southern Alps.
In 1973, New Zealand's export market was reduced when the United Kingdom joined the European Community and other compounding factors, such as the 1973 oil and 1979 energy crisis, led to a severe economic depression.
New Zealand is heavily dependent on international trade, particularly in agricultural products.
New Zealand has competitive international teams in rugby union, netball, cricket, rugby league, and softball and has traditionally done well in triathlons, rowing, yachting and cycling.
''Aotearoa'' (often translated as "land of the long white cloud") is the current Māori name for New Zealand.
For instance, in 2010 Auckland was ranked the world's 4th most liveable city and Wellington the 12th by the Mercer Quality of Life Survey.
In 2009–10, an annual target of 45,000–50,000 permanent residence approvals was set by the New Zealand Immigration Service—more than one new migrant for every 100 New Zealand residents.
It has recently undergone a process of revitalisation, being declared one of New Zealand's official languages in 1987, and is spoken by 3.7% of the population.
Most international visitors arrive via air and New Zealand has six international airports, but  only the Auckland and Christchurch airports connect directly with countries other than Australia or Fiji.
The railways were privatised in 1993, but were re-nationalised by the government in stages between 2004 and 2008.
File:NZ Landscape.jpg|Rural scene near Queenstown
The Māori were the first people to reach New Zealand, followed by the early European settlers.
Māori tattoos (moko) consisting of coloured soot mixed with gum were cut into the flesh with a bone chisel.
There are 18 peaks over , the highest of which is Aoraki / Mount Cook at .
Nearly one quarter of highly skilled workers live overseas, mostly in Australia and Britain, which is the largest proportion from any developed nation.
Fiordland's steep mountains and deep fiords record the extensive ice age glaciation of this south-western corner of the South Island.
Others are endangered or have had their range severely reduced.
In the September 2014 quarter, unemployment was 5.4%.
The two main islands (the North Island, or Te Ika-a-Māui, and the South Island, or Te Waipounamu) are separated by the Cook Strait,  wide at its narrowest point.
The New Zealand Geographic Board discovered in 2009 that the names of the North Island and South Island had never been formalised, and names and alternative names were formalised in 2013.
The colony gained a representative government in 1852 and the first Parliament met in 1854.
Recorded Music NZ also publishes the country's official weekly record charts.
Since 1876, various councils have administered local areas under legislation determined by the central government.
The North Island cities are generally slightly warmer in February, but the South Island cities are warmest in January.
The Moriori population was all but wiped out between 1835 and 1862, largely because of Taranaki Māori invasion and enslavement in the 1830s, although European diseases also contributed.
New Zealand's transport network comprises  of roads, including  of motorways, and  of railway lines.
Other significant minority religions include Hinduism (2.3%), Buddhism (1.5%) and Islam (1.2%).
The government has negotiated settlements of these grievances with many iwi, although Māori claims to the foreshore and seabed have proved controversial in the 2000s.
New Zealand is a member of the United Nations, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Pacific Islands Forum, and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
Between 2003 and 2008, Reporters Without Borders consistently ranked New Zealand's press freedom in the top twenty.
This set the names as North Island or Te Ika-a-Māui, and South Island or Te Waipounamu.
By 2050 the population is forecast to reach 5.3 million, the median age to rise from 36 years to 43 years and the percentage of people 60 years of age and older to rise from 18% to 29%.
Consequently, the country has a young population compared to most industrialized nations, with 20% of New Zealanders being 14 years old or younger.
Deregulation in the 1980s saw a sudden increase in the numbers of radio and television stations.
Tokelau is a non-self-governing territory that uses the New Zealand flag and anthem, but is administered by a council of three elders (one from each Tokelauan atoll).
The 249 municipalities that existed in 1975 have now been consolidated into 67 territorial authorities and 11 regional councils.
Living standards in New Zealand fell behind those of Australia and Western Europe, and by 1982 New Zealand had the lowest per-capita income of all the developed nations surveyed by the World Bank.
The indigenous Māori Christians tend to be associated with the Anglican and Catholic churches, while Pacific people tend to be Presbyterian, Methodist, Catholic and Latter-day Saint adherents.
Popular  ingredients or dishes include lamb, salmon, crayfish (lobster), dredge oysters, whitebait, pāua (abalone), mussels, scallops, pipis and tuatua (both are types of New Zealand shellfish), kumara (sweet potato), kiwifruit, tamarillo and pavlova, the national dessert.
Surface patterns consisting of spirals, ridges, notches and fish scales decorate most carvings.
The general snow season is about early June until early October in the South Island.
Three species of bats (one since extinct) were the only sign of native land mammals in New Zealand until the 2006 discovery of bones from a unique, mouse-sized land mammal at least 16 million years old.
Standards have since relaxed and New Zealand fashion has received a reputation for being casual, practical and lacklustre.
In addition to Vietnam and the two world wars, New Zealand fought in the Korean War, the Second Boer War, the Malayan Emergency, the Gulf War and the Afghanistan War.
Pipe bands became widespread during the early 20th century.
Ongoing unrest, the proposed settlement of New Zealand by the New Zealand Company (which had already sent its first ship of surveyors to buy land from Māori) and the dubious legal standing of the Declaration of Independence prompted the Colonial Office to send Captain William Hobson to claim sovereignty for Great Britain and negotiate a treaty with the Māori.
The main Christian denominations are Roman Catholicism (12.6%), Anglicanism (11.8%), Presbyterianism (8.5%) and "Christian not further defined" (i.e.
In 1840, representatives of the British Crown and Māori Chiefs signed the Treaty of Waitangi, making New Zealand a British colony.
The North Island is less mountainous but is marked by volcanism.
Physical isolation has not caused biological isolation, and this has resulted in a dynamic evolutionary ecology with examples of very distinctive plants and animals as well as populations of widespread species.
English is the predominant language in New Zealand, spoken by 96.1% of the population.
New Zealand was one of the last major landmasses settled by humans.
The New Zealand Music Awards are held annually by Recorded Music NZ; the awards were first held in 1965 by Reckitt & Colman as the Loxene Golden Disc awards.
Victorious rugby tours to Australia and the United Kingdom in the late 1880s and the early 1900s played an early role in instilling a national identity.
They traded European food, metal tools, weapons and other goods for timber, Māori food, artifacts and water.
The influence of the United States on New Zealand weakened following protests over the Vietnam War, the refusal of the United States to admonish France after the sinking of the ''Rainbow Warrior'', disagreements over environmental and agricultural trade issues and New Zealand's nuclear-free policy.
In 1642, Abel Tasman, a Dutch explorer, became the first European to sight New Zealand.
At May 2012, the general unemployment rate was around 6.7%, while the unemployment rate for youth aged 15 to 21 was 13.6%.
In 1975, a Waitangi Tribunal was set up to investigate alleged breaches of the Treaty, and it was enabled to investigate historic grievances in 1985.
Tourism plays a significant role in New Zealand's economy, contributing $15.0 billion to New Zealand’s total GDP and supporting 9.6% of the total workforce in 2010. International visitors to New Zealand increased by 3.1% in the year to October 2010 and are expected to increase at a rate of 2.5% annually up to 2015.
people identifying as Christian but not stating the denomination, 5.5%).
On 3 September 1939 New Zealand allied itself with Britain and declared war on Germany with Prime Minister Michael Savage proclaiming, "Where she goes, we go; where she stands, we stand."
(Control over native policy was granted in the mid-1860s.)
A seasonal workers scheme for temporary migration was introduced in 2007 and in 2009 about 8,000 Pacific Islanders were employed under it.
New Zealand is involved in the Pacific Islands Forum, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum (including the East Asia Summit).
File:Pencarrow Head, Wellington, New Zealand from Santa Regina, 24 Feb. 2007.jpg|Pencarrow Head, Wellington
New Zealand ranks 8th in the Center for Global Development's 2012 Commitment to Development Index, which ranks the world's most developed countries on their dedication to policies that benefit poorer nations.
Europeans brought English fashion etiquette to New Zealand, and until the 1950s most people dressed up for social occasions.
Snowfall is less common on the North Island, although it does occur.
It is unknown whether Māori had a name for the whole country before the arrival of Europeans, with ''Aotearoa'' originally referring to just the North Island.
The Māori loanword Pākehā has been used to refer to New Zealanders of European descent, although others reject this appellation.
New Zealand is long and narrow (over  along its north-north-east axis with a maximum width of ), with about  of coastline and a total land area of .
Social organisation was largely communal with families (whanau), sub-tribes (hapu) and tribes (iwi) ruled by a chief (rangatira) whose position was subject to the community's approval.
Most early English literature was obtained from Britain and it was not until the 1950s when local publishing outlets increased that New Zealand literature started to become widely known.
According to Mary Edmond-Paul, "World War I had left scars on New Zealand society, with nearly 18,500 in total dying as a result of the war, more than 41,000 wounded, and others affected emotionally, out of an overseas fighting force of about 103,000 and a population of just over a million."
, New Zealand was ranked 13th worldwide in press freedom by Freedom House, with the 2nd freest media in the Asia-Pacific region after Palau.
New Zealand has a high-income advanced economy with a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of US$36,254.
In response to the New Zealand Company's attempts to establish an independent settlement in Wellington and French settlers purchasing land in Akaroa, Hobson declared British sovereignty over all of New Zealand on 21 May 1840, even though copies of the Treaty were still circulating throughout the country for Māori to sign.
More penguin species are found in New Zealand than in any other country.
The Queen is represented by the Governor-General, whom she appoints on the advice of the Prime Minister.
New Zealand and Australia are both part of the wider regions known as Australasia and Oceania.
The Realm of New Zealand also includes Tokelau (a dependent territory); the Cook Islands and Niue (self-governing states in free association with New Zealand); and the Ross Dependency, which is New Zealand's territorial claim in Antarctica.
Early Māori adapted the tropically based east Polynesian culture in line with the challenges associated with a larger and more diverse environment, eventually developing their own distinctive culture.
Just over 25% of New Zealand's population was born overseas, with the majority (52%) living in the Auckland region.
High demand for agricultural products from the United Kingdom and the United States helped New Zealanders achieve higher living standards than both Australia and Western Europe in the 1950s and 1960s.
Exports account for 24% of its output, making New Zealand vulnerable to international commodity prices and global economic slowdowns.
Elizabeth II is the Queen of New Zealand and the head of state.
Wellington was chosen for its harbour and central location, with parliament officially sitting there for the first time in 1865.
Even as late as the 1960s it made up over a third of all export revenues, but since then its price has steadily dropped relative to other commodities and wool is no longer profitable for many farmers.
File:Lake Gunn.jpg|Lake Gunn
After the Second World War, Māori were discouraged from speaking their own language (''te reo Māori'') in schools and workplaces and it existed as a community language only in a few remote areas.
New Zealand English is similar to Australian English and many speakers from the Northern Hemisphere are unable to tell the accents apart.
There are five types of government-owned tertiary institutions: universities, colleges of education, polytechnics, specialist colleges, and wānanga, in addition to private training establishments.
However, New Zealand conservationists have pioneered several methods to help threatened wildlife recover, including island sanctuaries, pest control, wildlife translocation, fostering, and ecological restoration of islands and other selected areas.
The New Zealand media industry is dominated by a small number of companies, most of which are foreign-owned, although the state retains ownership of some television and radio stations.
The Māori-based Ringatū and Rātana religions (1.4%) are also Christian.
New Zealand also played key parts in the naval Battle of the River Plate and the Battle of Britain air campaign.
This is now most evident in the Southern Alps, formed by compression of the crust beside the Alpine Fault.
In 1947 the country adopted the Statute of Westminster, confirming that the British Parliament could no longer legislate for New Zealand without the consent of New Zealand.
Chorus, which was split from Telecom in 2011, still owns the majority of the telecommunications infrastructure, but competition from other providers has increased.
Despite the US's suspension of ANZUS obligations the treaty remained in effect between New Zealand and Australia, whose foreign policy has followed a similar historical trend.
The pre-eminent Māori architecture consisted of carved meeting houses (wharenui) decorated with symbolic carvings and illustrations.
In 1856 the colony effectively became self-governing, gaining responsibility over all domestic matters other than native policy.
Conditions vary sharply across regions from extremely wet on the West Coast of the South Island to almost semi-arid in Central Otago and the Mackenzie Basin of inland Canterbury and subtropical in Northland.
New Zealand's fertility rate of 2.1 is relatively high for a developed country, and natural births account for a significant proportion of population growth.
The number of fungi recorded from New Zealand, including lichen-forming species, is not known, nor is the proportion of those fungi which are endemic, but one estimate suggests there are about 2,300 species of lichen-forming fungi in New Zealand and 40% of these are endemic.
New Zealand is located near the centre of the water hemisphere and is made up of two main islands and a number of smaller islands.
The two main types of forest are those dominated by broadleaf trees with emergent podocarps, or by southern beech in cooler climates.
Since the , there have been 71 electorate seats (which includes 7 Māori electorates), and the remaining 49 seats are assigned so that representation in parliament reflects the party vote, although a party has to win one electoral seat or 5% of the total party vote before it is eligible for these seats.
New Zealand's geographic isolation for 80 million years and island biogeography has influenced evolution of the country's species of animals, fungi and plants.
Another 41.9% indicated that they had no religion.
While officially the Chatham Islands Council is not a unitary authority, it undertakes many functions of a regional council.
Further conditions apply for those born from 2006 onwards.
Christianity is the predominant religion in New Zealand, although its society is among the most secular in the world.
The table below lists climate normals for the warmest and coldest month in the six largest cities of New Zealand.
About 25 million years ago, a shift in plate tectonic movements began to contort and crumple the region.
Primary and secondary schooling is compulsory for children aged 6 to 16, with the majority attending from the age of 5.
Nationally, legislative authority is vested in an elected, unicameral Parliament, while executive political power is exercised by the Cabinet, led by the Prime Minister, who is currently John Key.
Early colonial New Zealand allowed the British Government to determine external trade and be responsible for foreign policy.
Participation in the world wars gave some New Zealand writers a new perspective on New Zealand culture and with the post-war expansion of universities local literature flourished.
New Zealand is a high-income economy and ranks highly in international comparisons of national performance, such as health, education, economic freedom and quality of life.
Non-Māori Polynesian cultures are also apparent, with Pasifika, the world's largest Polynesian festival, now an annual event in Auckland.
The Liberal Government, later led by Richard Seddon, passed many important social and economic measures.
Māori quickly adopted writing as a means of sharing ideas, and many of their oral stories and poems were converted to the written form.
New Zealand's capital city is Wellington, while its most populous city is Auckland.
New Zealand is considered the fourth most peaceful country in the world according to the 2016 Global Peace Index.
New Zealand, still part of the colony of New South Wales, became a separate Colony of New Zealand on 1 July 1841.
Since European arrival paintings and photographs have been dominated by landscapes, originally not as works of art but as factual portrayals of New Zealand.
Greenstone was fashioned into earrings and necklaces, with the most well-known design being the hei-tiki, a distorted human figure sitting cross-legged with its head tilted to the side.
In 1891 the Liberal Party led by John Ballance came to power as the first organised political party.
As part of the resurgence of Māori culture, the traditional crafts of carving and weaving are now more widely practised and Māori artists are increasing in number and influence.
Furthermore, 67% of New Zealanders say they trust their political institutions, far higher than the OECD average of 56%.
Because of financial pressures and the desire to consolidate railways, education, land sales and other policies, government was centralised and the provinces were abolished in 1876.
Europeans did not revisit New Zealand until 1769 when British explorer James Cook mapped almost the entire coastline.
Dutch explorer Abel Tasman sighted New Zealand in 1642 and called it ''Staten Landt'', supposing it was connected to a landmass of the same name at the southern tip of South America.
The term Oceania is often used to denote the region encompassing the Australian continent, New Zealand and various islands in the Pacific Ocean that are not included in the seven-continent model.
The Polynesian sport of waka ama racing has increased in popularity and is now an international sport involving teams from all over the Pacific.
As of June 2016, the population of New Zealand is estimated at 4.69 million and is increasing at a rate of approximately 2.1% per year.
Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch all receive a yearly average of more than 2,000 hours of sunshine.
Radiocarbon dating, evidence of deforestation and mitochondrial DNA variability within Māori populations suggest New Zealand was first settled by Eastern Polynesians between 1250 and 1300, concluding a long series of voyages through the southern Pacific islands.
Accordingly, the title "Dominion of New Zealand" dates from 1907.
The Privy Council in London was the country's final court of appeal until 2004, when it was replaced with the newly established Supreme Court of New Zealand.
The country fought in both world wars, with notable campaigns in Gallipoli, Crete, El Alamein and Cassino.
On 7 April 2008, New Zealand and China signed the New Zealand–China Free Trade Agreement, the first such agreement China has signed with a developed country.
The Realm of New Zealand is the territory over which the Queen of New Zealand is sovereign and comprises New Zealand, Tokelau, the Ross Dependency, the Cook Islands and Niue.
Telecom was rebranded as Spark New Zealand in 2014.
In the 2013 census, 55.0% of the population identified with one or more religions, including 49.0% identifying as Christians.
Since the , a form of proportional representation called Mixed Member Proportional (MMP) has been used.
Queen Elizabeth II is the country's head of state and is represented by a Governor-General.
The remaining vegetation types consist of grasslands, the majority of which are tussock.
New Zealand's national defence needs are modest because of the unlikelihood of direct attack, although it does have a global presence.
New Zealand music has been influenced by blues, jazz, country, rock and roll and hip hop, with many of these genres given a unique New Zealand interpretation.
In the adult population 14.2% have a bachelor's degree or higher, 30.4% have some form of secondary qualification as their highest qualification and 22.4% have no formal qualification.
Between March 2005 and August 2006 New Zealand became the only country in the world in which all the highest offices in the land—Head of State, Governor-General, Prime Minister, Speaker and Chief Justice—were occupied simultaneously by women.
Since human arrival almost half of the country's vertebrate species have become extinct, including at least fifty-one birds, three frogs, three lizards, one freshwater fish, and one bat.
The 1923 and 1926 Imperial Conferences decided that New Zealand should be allowed to negotiate their own political treaties and the first commercial treaty was ratified in 1928 with Japan.
The territorial authorities consist of 13 city councils, 53 district councils, and the Chatham Islands Council.
The country's diverse scenery and compact size, plus government incentives, have encouraged some producers to film big budget movies in New Zealand, including ''Avatar'', ''The Lord of the Rings'', ''The Hobbit'', ''The Chronicles of Narnia'', ''King Kong'' and ''The Last Samurai''.
New Zealand was ranked sixth in the 2013 Human Development Index, fourth in The Heritage Foundation's 2012 Index of Economic Freedom, and 13th in INSEAD's 2012 Global Innovation Index.
Of the seven largest cities, Christchurch is the driest, receiving on average only  of rain per year and Wellington the wettest, receiving almost twice that amount.
Māori developed traditional chants and songs from their ancient South-East Asian origins, and after centuries of isolation created a unique "monotonous" and "doleful" sound.
Unemployment peaked above 10% in 1991 and 1992, following the 1987 share market crash, but eventually fell to a record low of 3.4% in 2007 (ranking fifth from twenty-seven comparable OECD nations).
In 1989, the government reorganised local government into the current two-tier structure of regional councils and territorial authorities.
