The existing 27-book canon of the New Testament was reconfirmed (for Roman Catholicism) in the 16th century with the Council of Trent (also called the Tridentine Council) of 1546, the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for Eastern Orthodoxy.
Both implicit and explicit citations, as well as countless allusions, appear throughout the books of the New Testament, from the Gospels and Acts, to the Epistles, to the Apocalypse.
Christian scholars assert that when these bishops and councils spoke on the matter, they were not defining something new, but instead "were ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church".
According to the ''Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible'', modern scholars are divided between the apostolic view and several alternative hypotheses put forth in the last hundred years or so.
Adventists have often taught a distinction between "moral law" and "ceremonial law".
The order of an early edition of the letters of Paul is based on the size of the letters: longest to shortest, though keeping 1 and 2 Corinthians and 1 and 2 Thessalonians together.
*an Apocalypse, the Book of Revelation, which is a book of prophecy, containing some instructions to seven local congregations of Asia Minor, but mostly containing prophetical symbology, about the end times.
Wherefore they are not to be placed even among the rejected writings, but are all of them to be cast aside as absurd and impious."
The Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation.
Within the US, the Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy (1978) is a statement, articulating evangelical views on this issue.
From the middle of the 3rd century, patristic authors cited the ''Epistle'' as written by James the Just.
Some scholars today maintain the traditional claim that Luke the Evangelist, an associate of St. Paul who was probably not an eyewitness to Jesus' ministry, wrote the Gospel of Luke and Acts of the Apostles.
The Old Syriac gospels are fragmentarily preserved in two manuscripts: the 5th-century Curetonian Syriac and the Sinaitic Syriac from the 4th or 5th century.
Other works earlier held to be Scripture, such as 1 Clement, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Diatessaron, were excluded from the New Testament.
For example, order of words (i.e.
This gospel begins with the preaching of John the Baptist and the baptism of Jesus.
There are far fewer witnesses to classical texts than to the Bible, and unlike the New Testament where the earliest witnesses are often within a couple decades of the original, the earliest existing manuscripts of most classical texts were written about a millennium after their composition.
*four narratives of the life, teaching, death and resurrection of Jesus, called "gospels" (or "good news" accounts);
#In Christ, all of God's work of creation, revelation, and redemption is brought to fulfillment
The identities of each author were agreed upon at an early date, certainly no later than the early 2nd century.
*Second Epistle to the Thessalonians*
According to Adventist beliefs, the moral law continues into the "New Testament era", but the ceremonial law was done away with by Jesus.
: "6... such books as the Gospels of Peter, of Thomas, of Matthias, or of any others besides them, and the Acts of Andrew and John and the other apostles... they clearly show themselves to be the fictions of heretics.
The author has traditionally been identified with John the Apostle to whom the Gospel and the epistles of John were attributed.
As a result, the author is sometimes referred to as John of Patmos.
The author of the Epistle of James identifies himself in the opening verse as "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ".
There is no evidence among the canons of the First Council of Nicaea of any determination on the canon.
Scholars are also divided on the traditional claim that Mark the Evangelist, an associate of St. Peter who may have been an eyewitness to Jesus' ministry, wrote the Gospel of Mark.
These are called interpolations.
Our confessions do teach biblical infallibility.
Several Syriac translations were made and have come to us.
: "3 Among the disputed writings, which are nevertheless recognized by many, are extant the so-called epistle of James and that of Jude, also the second epistle of Peter, and those that are called the second and third of John, whether they belong to the evangelist or to another person of the same name.
Lactantius, a 3rd–4th century Christian author wrote in his early-4th-century Latin ''Institutiones Divinae'' (''Divine Institutes''):
Both Scripture and Tradition must be accepted and honoured with equal sentiments of devotion and reverence.
*Schøyen Manuscript 2560 (Coptic; copied in the 4th century)
Some ascribe the writership date as circa 81–96 AD, and others at around 68 AD.
No Old Syriac manuscripts of other portions of the New Testament survive, though Old Syriac readings, e.g.
Their traditions derive authority from the Bible, and are therefore always open to reëvaluation.
The Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles were both written by the same author, and are thus referred to as the Lucan texts.
A Bohairic translation was made later, but existed already in the 4th century.
Views of the authoritativeness of the New Testament often depend on the concept of ''inspiration'', which relates to the role of God in the formation of the New Testament.
*Epistle to the Galatians
The Canon of the New Testament, like that of the Old, is the result of a development, of a process at once stimulated by disputes with doubters, both within and without the Church, and retarded by certain obscurities and natural hesitations, and which did not reach its final term until the dogmatic definition of the Tridentine Council."
Those who hold a more liberal view of the Bible as a human witness to the glory of God, the work of fallible humans who wrote from a limited experience unusual only for the insight they have gained through their inspired struggle to know God in the midst of a troubled world.
A few scholars identify the author of the Gospel of Mark as probably a Gentile, and similarly for the Gospel of Matthew, though most assert Jewish-Christian authorship.
The books of the New Testament were all or nearly all written by Jewish Christians—that is, Jewish disciples of Christ, who lived in the Roman Empire, and under Roman occupation.
The often referred to Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, a book written to prove the validity of the New Testament, says: ” A study of 150 Greek manuscripts of the Gospel of Luke has revealed more than 30,000 different readings...
* First Epistle of Peter, ascribed to the Apostle Peter.
And among these some have placed also the Gospel according to the Hebrews... And all these may be reckoned among the disputed books."
The date when a manuscript was written, however, does not necessarily reflect the date of the form of text it contains.
During this period, modern textual criticism was born.
Gospel is a calque (word-for-word translation) of the Greek word , ''euangelion'' (''eu-'' "good", ''-angelion'' "message").
It is not indeed right to overlook the fact that some have rejected the Epistle to the Hebrews, saying that it is disputed by the church of Rome, on the ground that it was not written by Paul."
According to the view of some Messianic Jewish congregations, Jesus did not annul the Torah, but that its interpretation is revised and ultimately explained through the Apostolic Scriptures.
Messianic Judaism generally holds the same view of New Testament authority as evangelical Protestants.
Increasing standardization of distinct (and once local) text-types eventually gave rise to the Byzantine text-type.
It will vary slightly depending on whether the focus is on the Old Testament, the letters of New Testament or the Canonical gospels.
Regarding the teachings of the New Testament compared to the Old, and the application in the New Covenant, Adventists have traditionally taught that the Decalogue is part of the moral law of God, which was not abrogated by the ministry and death of Jesus Christ.
It also plays an important role in the quest for a Historical Jesus.
Likewise, Damasus' commissioning of the Latin Vulgate edition of the Bible, c. 383, was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in the West.
Christians regard both the Old and New Testaments together as sacred scripture.
The First Epistle of John is traditionally held to have been composed by John the Apostle (the author of the Gospel of John) when the writer was in advanced age.
Ancient and modern scholars have always been divided on the issue of authorship.
* Epistle of Jude, written under the name of Jude, the brother of Jesus and James.
They believe that the discussion in  is specific enough (more specific than Mark's or Matthew's) that a date after 70 seems likely.
Some synods of the 4th century published lists of canonical books (e.g.
The New Testament of the 16th-century Luther Bible continues, to this day, to place Hebrews, James, Jude, and the Apocalypse last.
Especially the doctrine of inerrancy is variously understood according to the weight given by the interpreter to scientific investigations of the world.
Toward these ends, the "spirit" of the New Testament, more than the letter, is infallible and authoritative.
*Curetonian Gospels (Syriac; copied in the 5th century)
Church tradition identified him as Luke the Evangelist, the companion of Paul, but the majority of scholars reject this due to the many contradictions between Acts and the authentic Pauline letters.
405, Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse.
A similar type of textual criticism is applied to other ancient texts.
Both of them are interpreted by the teachings of the Church.
Though the translation makes less use of Greek words than the Sahidic, it does employ some Greek grammar (e.g., in word-order and the use of particles such as the syntactic construction μεν&nbsp;— δε).
Since most manuscripts of the New Testament do not derive from the first several centuries, that is, they were copied after the rise of the Byzantine text-type, this form of text is found the majority of extant manuscripts and is therefore often called the "Majority Text."
Even if the original Greek versions were lost, the entire New Testament could still be assembled from the translations.
The author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself several times as "John".
Other books were held in high esteem but were gradually relegated to the status of New Testament apocrypha.
Luke, who wrote the Gospel of Luke and the Book of Acts, is frequently thought of as an exception; scholars are divided as to whether Luke was a Gentile or a Hellenic Jew.
These four gospels that were eventually included in the New Testament were only a few among many other early Christian gospels.
They often address different concerns to those of the preceding epistles.
Unlike the Textus Receptus, these have a pronounced Alexandrian character.
Furthermore, Luke-Acts has views on Jesus' divine nature, the end times, and salvation that are similar to the those found in Pastoral epistles, which are often seen as pseudonymous and of a later date than the undisputed Pauline Epistles.
*The Chester Beatty Papyri (Greek; the New Testament portions of which were copied in the 3rd century)
By the 4th century, textual "families" or types of text become discernible among New Testament manuscripts.
Bart Ehrman of the University of North Carolina has argued for a scholarly consensus that many New Testament books were not written by the individuals whose names are attached.
Scholars agree that the Gospel of John was written last, by using a different tradition and body of testimony.
In fact, Origen would have possibly included in his list of "inspired writings" other texts kept out by the likes of Eusebius—including the Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 Clement.
In addition, there are so many quotes from the New Testament in early church documents and commentaries that the entire New Testament could also be assembled from these alone.
Many scholars and critics also believe that the Comma Johanneum reference supporting the Trinity doctrine in 1 John to have been a later addition.
*a narrative of the Apostles' ministries in the early church, called the "Acts of the Apostles", and probably written by the same writer as the Gospel of Luke, which it continues;
Biblical paraphrases and poetic renditions of stories from the life of Christ (e.g., the Heliand) became popular in the middle ages, as did the portrayal of the arrest, trial and execution of Jesus in Passion plays.
In the initial centuries of early Christianity, there were many books widely considered by the church to be inspired, but there was no single formally recognized New Testament canon.
These three versions were made directly from the Greek, and are frequently cited in the apparatuses of modern critical editions.
*First Epistle to the Corinthians
For each subsequent century, more and more manuscripts survive that contain a portion or all of the books that were held to be part of the New Testament at that time (for example, the New Testament of the 4th-century Codex Sinaiticus, once a complete Bible, contains the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas), though occasionally these manuscripts contain other works as well (e.g., Papyrus 72 and the Crosby-Schøyen Codex).
This gospel begins with a philosophical prologue and ends with appearances of the resurrected Jesus, it is about Jesus's miracles.
Two different secondary endings were affixed to this gospel in the 2nd century.
Nonetheless, full dogmatic articulations of the canon were not made until the Canon of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism, the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek Orthodox.
A brief summary of the acts was read at and accepted by the Councils of Carthage in 397 and 419.
Certain books, referred to as Antilegomena, continued to be questioned, especially James and Revelation.
The two most commonly cited examples are the last verses of the ''Gospel of Mark'' and the story of the adulterous woman in the ''Gospel of John''.
Pope Damasus I's Council of Rome in 382, if the ''Decretum Gelasianum'' is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical canon identical to that mentioned above, or, if not, the list is at least a 6th-century compilation.
They believe the Bible as originally revealed is the word of God, but that the processes of transcription and translation have introduced errors into the texts as currently available, and therefore they cannot be regarded as completely inerrant.
Scholars are more divided over the traditional claim that Matthew the Apostle wrote the Gospel of Matthew and that John the Apostle wrote the Gospel of John.
Regarding authorship, although the Epistle to the Hebrews does not internally claim to have been written by the Apostle Paul, some similarities in wordings to some of the Pauline Epistles have been noted and inferred.
It is similar, but not identical, to the modern New Testament canon.
As the Catechism states in §§ 80 and 81, Revelation has "one common source ... two distinct modes of transmission."
The ministry and Passion of Jesus, as portrayed in one or more of the New Testament Gospels, has also been a theme in film, almost since the inception of the medium (e.g., "La Passion", France, 1903).
Examples of the Western text are found in Codex Bezae, Codex Claromontanus, Codex Washingtonianus, the Old Latin (i.e., Latin translations made prior to the Vulgate), as well as in quotations by Marcion, Tatian, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Cyprian.
Justin Martyr (c. 100–165 AD) who was acquainted with Polycarp, who had been mentored by John, makes a possible allusion to this book, and credits John as the source.
* The Gospel of Matthew, ascribed to the Apostle Matthew.
They view the Bible as the inspired Word of God, and as absolutely inerrant in its contents (though not necessarily in every translation).
Its authorship has been attributed either to John the Apostle (in which case it is often thought that John the Apostle is John the Evangelist, i.e.
Also, many of these variants are so particular to the Greek language that they would not appear in translations into other languages.
The authorship of a number of these is disputed.
The information used to create the late-4th-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the ''Ecclesiastical History'' HE of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen’s list at HE 6:25.
Indeed, no one questioned the early 2nd century consensus until the 18th century.
The existence of such texts is even mentioned at the beginning of the Gospel of Luke.
Notwithstanding these facts, "Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary-interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion."
They generally call the New Testament the "Christian Greek Scriptures", and see only the "covenants" as "old" or "new", but not any part of the actual Scriptures themselves.
While many variations have been discovered between early copies of biblical texts, almost all have no importance, as they are variations in spelling, punctuation, or grammar.
The New Testament has been preserved in more than 5,800 Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac, Slavic, Ethiopic and Armenian.
While some of these documents were apostolic in origin, others drew upon the tradition the apostles and ministers of the word had utilized in their individual missions, and still others represented a summation of the teaching entrusted to a particular church center.
This translation represents a mixed text, mostly Alexandrian, though also with Western readings.
They were opposed by Uriah Smith and George Butler at the 1888 Conference.
* Second Epistle to Timothy*
There are some movements that believe the Bible contains the teachings of Jesus but who reject the churches that were formed following its publication.
the Divine Word, who is doubly edged with the two testaments of the law and the gospel.
Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation.
The Gospel of John is structured differently and includes stories of several miracles of Jesus and sayings not found in the other three.
Most modern Bibles have footnotes to indicate passages that have disputed source documents.
Following the doctrine of sola scriptura, Protestants believe that their traditions of faith, practice and interpretations carry forward what the scriptures teach, and so tradition is not a source of authority in itself.
It contains only 22 books (neither the Minor Catholic Epistles of 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, and Jude, nor the Book of Revelation were part of this translation).
A text-type referred to as the "Caesarean text-type" and thought to have included witnesses such as Codex Koridethi and minuscule 565, can today be described neither as "Caesarean" nor as a text-type as was previously thought.
For example, the Gnostic writings of Valentinus come from the 2nd century AD, and these Christians were regarded as heretics by the mainstream church.
Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.
Most of the Old Syriac, however, as well as the Philoxonian version have been lost.
* First Epistle of John, ascribed to John the Apostle.
Officials of the Presbyterian Church USA report: "We acknowledge the role of scriptural authority in the Presbyterian Church, but Presbyterians generally do not believe in biblical inerrancy.
Though all Christian churches accept the New Testament as Scripture, they differ in their understanding of the nature, extent, and relevance of its authority.
The author of the First Epistle of Peter identifies himself in the opening verse as "Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ", and the view that the epistle was written by St. Peter is attested to by a number of Church Fathers: Irenaeus (140–203), Tertullian (150–222), Clement of Alexandria (155–215) and Origen of Alexandria (185–253).
* Second Epistle of Peter, ascribed to the Apostle Peter, though widely considered not to have been written by him.
John Robinson also notes that each book of the New Testament had to be written prior to the destruction of The Temple.
Use of the term ''New Testament'' to describe a collection of first and second-century Christian Greek Scriptures can be traced back to Tertullian (in ''Against Praxeas'' 15).
The term "catholic" (Greek: καθολική, ''katholikē''), used to describe these letters in the oldest manuscripts containing them, here simply means "general" or "universal".
There is even an example of a pseudepigraphical letter composed under the guise of a presumably lost letter of the Apostle Paul, the Epistle to the Laodiceans.
This article will use the terms in the following manner:
These were all extremely important figures in the early church, writers would have mentioned their deaths if the New Testament had been written later.
The Epistle of Jude title is written as follows: "Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James" (NRSV).
*Codex Vercellensis (Latin; copied in the 4th century)
This openness to doctrinal revision has extended in Liberal Protestant traditions even to the reevaluation of the doctrine of Scripture upon which the Reformation was founded, and members of these traditions may even question whether the Bible is infallible in doctrine, inerrant in historical and other factual statements, and whether it has uniquely divine authority.
These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine, who regarded the canon as already closed.
A "text-type" is the name given to a family of texts with similar readings due to common ancestors and mutual correction.
The oldest clear endorsement of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John being the only legitimate gospels was written ''circa'' 180 AD.
The Pauline epistles are the thirteen New Testament books that present Paul the Apostle as their author.
Robinson notes that most scholars interpret the Olivet Discourse as a post 70 AD account of the destruction of The Temple, couched in language to make it appear to be a prophecy, culminating in the Second Coming of Jesus to end the world.
All the works that eventually became incorporated into the New Testament are believed to have been written no later than around 150 AD,  and a small minority of scholars would date them to no later than 70 AD.
A review of Richard Bauckham's book ''Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testimony'' states "The common wisdom in the academy is that stories and sayings of Jesus circulated for decades, undergoing countless retellings and embellishments before being finally set down in writing."
The Slavonic, Armenian and Ethiopian traditions have different New Testament book orders.
According to Bart D. Ehrman, "These scribal additions are often found in late medieval manuscripts of the New Testament, but not in the manuscripts of the earlier centuries."
Biblical criticism draws upon a wide range of scholarly disciplines including archaeology, anthropology, folklore, linguistics, Oral Tradition studies, and historical and religious studies.
In attempting to determine the original text of the New Testament books, some modern textual critics have identified sections as additions of material, centuries after the gospel was written.
Both extended readings and phrases directly from the New Testament are also incorporated (along with readings from the Old Testament) into the various Christian liturgies.
If it is true that Mark was written around the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, around 70, they theorize that Luke would not have been written before 70.
* Epistle of James, written by an author named "James", often identified with James, the brother of Jesus.
EH 4.29.6 mentions the Diatessaron: "But their original founder, Tatian, formed a certain combination and collection of the gospels, I know not how, to which he gave the title Diatessaron, and which is still in the hands of some.
*''Inerrancy'' relates to the absolute correctness of the Bible in factual assertions (including historical and scientific assertions).
Adventist theologians generally reject the "verbal inspiration" position on Scripture held by many conservative evangelical Christians.
Syriac was spoken in Syria, and Mesopotamia, and with dialect in Roman and Byzantine Palestine where it was known as Jewish Palestinian Aramaic.
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus and Tertullian held the letters of Paul to be on par with the Hebrew Scriptures as being divinely inspired, yet others rejected him.
The earliest versions of the New Testament are the translations into the Syriac, Latin, and Coptic languages.
* Epistle to Titus*
Over time, some disputed books, such as the Book of Revelation and the Minor Catholic (General) Epistles were introduced into canons in which they were originally absent.
Although these councils did include statements about the canon, when it came to the New Testament they were only reaffirming the existing canon, including the Antilegomena.
Nevertheless, the Gospel of Matthew known today was composed in Greek and is neither directly dependent upon nor a translation of a text in a Semitic language.
Presbyterians do not insist that every detail of chronology or sequence or prescientific description in scripture be true in literal form.
For example, the earliest surviving copies of parts of the Roman historian Tacitus' main work, the Annals of Imperial Rome (written in 116 AD), come from a single manuscript written in 850 AD, although for other parts of his work, the earliest copies come from the 11th century, while other parts of his work have been lost.
In North America, the most contentious of these issues among these churches at the present time is how far the ordination of gay men and lesbians should be accepted.
Six of the letters are disputed.
Some of the more important manuscripts containing an early text of books of the New Testament are:
Many consider the epistle to be written in the late 1st or early 2nd centuries.
Many early manuscripts, however, contain individual readings from several different earlier forms of text.
*Syriac Sinaiticus (Syriac; copied in the 4th century)
The sheer number of witnesses presents unique difficulties, but it also gives scholars a better idea of how close modern Bibles are to the original versions.
According to Norman Geisler and William Nix, "The New Testament, then, has not only survived in more manuscripts than any other book from antiquity, but it has survived in a purer form than any other great book—a form that is 99.5% pure"
All three, excluding the Epistle to Philemon, of these are believed to be pseudepigraphic:
This was the beginning of modern New Testament textual criticism, which over subsequent centuries would increasingly incorporate more and more manuscripts, in more languages (i.e., versions of the New Testament), as well as citations of the New Testament by ancient authors and the New Testament text in lectionaries in order to reconstruct the earliest recoverable form of the New Testament text and the history of changes to it.
It is likely that the issue of the authorship of each gospel had been settled at least somewhat earlier, as the earliest sources are in complete agreement on the issue.
The Pastoral epistles were apparently not part of the ''Corpus Paulinum'' in which this order originated and were later inserted after 2 Thessalonians and before Philemon.
As Christianity spread, these books were later translated into other languages, most notably, Latin, Syriac, and Egyptian Coptic.
*Codex Bobiensis (Latin; copied in the 4th century, but containing at least a 3rd-century form of text)
days come, saith the Lord, when I shall establish a new testament (from Latin ''testamentum'') on the house of Israel, and on the house of Judah.
While the various works have traditional ascriptions of authorship, these ascriptions are in some cases defended by scholars, and in other cases disputed or rejected.
All of these concepts depend for their meaning on the supposition that the text of Bible has been properly interpreted, with consideration for the intention of the text, whether literal history, allegory or poetry, etc.
The Christian Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses accepts the New Testament as divinely inspired Scripture, and as infallible in every detail, with equal authority as the Hebrew Scriptures.
Some who take this view believe that Luke's prediction of the destruction of the temple could not be a result of Jesus predicting the future but with the benefit of hindsight regarding specific details.
The New Testament canon as it is now was first listed by St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, in 367, in a letter written to his churches in Egypt,  Festal Letter 39.
Although 2 Peter internally purports to be a work of the apostle, many biblical scholars have concluded that Peter is not the author.
