Towns do not organize a central fireworks display, except for Rotterdam where the national fireworks display can be seen near the Erasmus Bridge.
There are also traditional family events and meals and modern celebrations such as hosting parties and going to nightclubs.
However, the New Year is generally not as big a celebration as Eid ul-Fitr.
In Portugal the New Year celebration is taken very seriously.
The bigger stores invest in these firecrackers and display them in the streets.
When midnight arrives, fireworks are launched from the waters at Marina Bay, lighting up the whole bay against the backdrop of the Singapore skyline.
In the first minutes after midnight, people toast with champagne, wish each other a happy new year, fortune and health, and go outside for the fireworks.
In Melbourne, the city follows suit with Sydney having a 9:30 Family Fireworks followed by the midnight fireworks.
Due to the recent development in electronic media for the last decade, Pakistani young people are more inclined towards adopting world trends.
* "New Year's Day" by U2.
In the town of Antigua, people usually gather at the Santa Catalina Clock Arch to celebrate New Year's Eve ().
The cake contains a ''fève'', a small china doll; whomever finds it becomes king or queen and gets to wear a gold paper crown and choose his or her partner.
It has Latin music, fireworks at midnight along with the signature song "Auld Lang Syne" in Spanish.
Cities, cafés and restaurants are crowded.
During these special programs, is a tradition to broadcast songs about the end of the year.
Some believe that people should eat seven, nine, or twelve times on New Year's Eve.
Typical dishes included holiday fare, ''pancit'' (for long life) and ''hamón''.
This is supposed to bring good fortune; the round lentils represent coins.
Malta organized its first New Year's street party in 2009 in Floriana.
Other significant parties occur in  Piaţa Constituţiei.
Urban areas usually host many New Year's Eve parties and countdown celebrations hosted by the private sector with the help of the local government.
They have a large celebration, make toasts, and make wishes for a happy New Year.
The most popular fiesta is the one that is held at café 't Vat in the main tourist district.
Special holiday programs are broadcast on Venezuelan television stations.
Large crowds would gather around to watch and laugh at the entertainment and the drivers are forced to give the "widows" some coins in order to obtain passage through the street.
In the countries that were formerly part of the Soviet Union, New Year's has the same cultural significance as Christmas has in the United States, but without the religious connotations.
It often includes zampone or cotechino (a meal made with pig's trotters or entrails), and lentils.
People also try to start the new year without debts.
In Poland New Year's Eve (''Sylwester'') celebrations include both indoor and outdoor festivities.
Moravian congregations still observe the Watch Night service on New Year's Eve.
Traditionally, most households host or attend a midnight feast called the ''Media Noche''.
Other traditional dishes are boiled cod, stewed kale and cured saddle of pork.
The Solar New Year are always celebrated on the first day of January while Lunar New Year varies.
On the waterfront of Marina Bay, 20,000 inflatable "wishing spheres" carrying 500,000 wishes written by Singaporeans form a visual arts display filled with brilliant colors beamed from the spotlights erected along the Esplanade promenade open area.
There is a special evening meal that concludes with Kransekage, a special dessert, along with champagne.
In Central Asia, New Year's Eve celebrations were inherited from Soviet traditions; thus they are similar to those of Russia.
The celebration is during the summer, like in many South American countries, so it's normal to see many families in the New Year at tourist centers of the Argentine Atlantic coast (Mar del Plata, Necochea, Villa Gesell, Miramar, etc.
Hindus organize a Puja so that the coming year can be fruitful for them.
This is followed by dinner.
Gisborne, New Zealand— west of the International Date Line—is the first major city to see the beginning of the new year.
A New Year's Eve tradition in Ecuador is for men to dress haphazardly in drag (clowny looking make-up, cheap colorful wigs, very hairy legs in miniskirts) for New Year's Eve representing the "widow" of the year that has passed.
There is a tradition to listen to the Kremlin clock bell ringing twelve times on the radio or on TV, which is followed by the national anthem.
The Muslims during the year's last Jumma prayer of mosque permanently pray a Munajat(which is done all over the mosques of the country) so that Allah may bless them and the coming year can be fruitful.
Families give presents to their friends as well as informal acquaintances.
These parties, which include balls hosted by hotels, usually display their own fireworks and are often very well-attended.
The popularity of the spectacle also inspired similar "drop" events outside of New York City, which often use objects that represent a region's culture, geography, or history—such as Atlanta's "Peach Drop", representing Georgia's identity as the "Peach State".
New Year's Eve is celebrated across Macedonia.
It is traditional to eat Twelve Grapes, one on each chime of the clock.
New Year's Eve in Greece has many traditions.
Traditionally, people celebrate it at home, but some of them prefer to go to nightclubs.
In Costa Rica, families usually gather around 9 pm for parties that last until 1 or 2 am, the next day.
However, the inclusion of the prize was forbidden by the European Union for safety reasons.
At five minutes to twelve most people watch the president's speech on TV or watch popular New Year TV shows.
New Year's Eve in Serbia is traditionally celebrated extensively.
The Hindu community organize Pujas for a fruitful year ahead and the Christian community often go to church for a watch night service till midnight praying for blessing in the coming new year.
Aside from the traditional Thai New Year called ''Songkran (Thailand)'' (which falls on April 13 or April 14), Thais also celebrate the arrival of the Gregorian New Year on January 1 with their families, relatives and friends, which includes a family dinner and following different customs.
In the Roman Catholic Church, January 1 is a solemnity honoring the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of Jesus; it is a Holy Day of Obligation in most countries (Australia being a notable exception), thus the Church requires the attendance of all Catholics in such countries for Mass that day.
Since 1951, NHK has traditionally broadcast ''Kōhaku Uta Gassen'' (''Red and White Song Battle'') on New Year's Eve, a music competition where two teams of popular musicians (the red and white teams, which predominantly contain female and male performers respectively) perform songs, with the winning team determined by a panel of judges and viewer votes.
People get together to eat cake, dance, and laugh.
In Lisbon the New Year is celebrated with a grand concert.
There are several traditions among Costa Rican families, including eating 12 grapes representing 12 wishes for the new year, and running across the street with luggage to bring new trips and adventures in the upcoming year.
However a vigil Mass may be held on the evening before a Holy Day; thus it has become customary to celebrate Mass on the evening of New Year's Eve.
Rarely followed today is the tradition that consist in eating lentil stew when bell tolls midnight, one spoonful per bell.
Several customs must only be done at midnight: some throw about coins to increase wealth in the coming year, or jump to increase their height, while some follow the Spanish custom of eating twelve grapes, one for each month of the year.
On this day, parents, children and relatives are gathered together to spend some remarkable moments all together.
In 1992, the sketch comedy troupe Royal Canadian Air Farce began airing its annual ''Year of the Farce'' special on CBC Television, which features sketches lampooning the major events and news stories of the year.
The combination of live concerts, a spectacular fireworks display and millions of revelers combine to make the Copacabana's New Year's party one of the best in the world.
Popular songs include "Viejo año" ("Old year"), by Gaita group Maracaibo 15, and "Cinco pa' las 12" ("Five minutes before twelve"), which was versioned by several popular singers including Nestor Zavarce, Nancy Ramos and José Luis Rodríguez El Puma.
In Budapest, the Timewheel runs out on New Year's Eve, and is mechanically rotated so that the sand run through it for another year.
Lahore known for its open-hearted people celebrates the new year eve with zeal and fervor.
At midnight, fireworks are displayed all across the country.
People in Denmark may go to parties or entertain guests at home.
In past centuries, some Hungarians believed that animals were able to speak on New Year's Eve, and that onion skins sprinkled with salt could indicate a rainy month.
Watch Night took on special significance to African Americans on New Year's Eve 1862, as slaves anticipated the arrival of January 1, 1863, when Lincoln had announced he would sign the Emancipation Proclamation.
They are burnt right at midnight to shed the old year and represent a new beginning.
The resulting blob of metal is analyzed, for example by interpreting shadows it casts by candlelight.
People generally gather with friends at parties, in pubs, clubs, in the streets, or city squares to eat, drink, and celebrate the new year.
People usually eat grapes and drink Champagne with close family members and friends.
Earlier in the evening at around 8:00, there is a 10k run called Carrera de San Silvestre which starts on the street called La Castellana and ends at the stadium of Vallejas.
Filipinos usually celebrate New Year's Eve in the company of family or close friends.
People wish each other a happy New Year, and sometimes share a toast with neighbours.
Vegetarians can eat potato salad with navy beet and pâté.
Music is heard from all the houses and bars, nightclubs, street parties, Soca raves.
Initially, a small prize (usually a small metal toy) was also included within the cake.
However, the organization does not go after individual citizens holding private celebrations.
Mexicans celebrate New Year's Eve, (Spanish: ''Vispera de Año Nuevo'') by eating a grape with each of the twelve chimes of a clock's bell during the midnight countdown, while making a wish with each one.
The Presidents of the republics gave their New Year speech in the morning - the new Czech President Miloš Zeman renewed the tradition of Christmas speeches.
Big and small celebrities and personalities perform as well as enjoy in these parties.
Near, or after midnight, Santa Claus (''Deda Mraz'') visits houses and leaves presents under the tree, to be unpacked then or, if the family is asleep, to be discovered in the morning.
* "This Is the New Year" by A Great Big World.
The Finnish Broadcasting Company broadcasts the reception of the New Year at Helsinki Senate Square.
In Mexico City there is a street festival on New Year's Eve centered on the Zocalo, the city's main square.
New Year's Eve (''Silvestr/Silvester'') celebrations and traditions in Czech Republic and Slovakia are very similar.
In both Koreas, they call New Year's Day 설날 (Seoll-Nal).
It is attended by an average of 100,000 people.
In Puerto Rico, New Year's Eve is celebrated with friends and family.
The party attracts more than one million people.
Some people attend a watch night service.
New Year traditions and celebrations in Canada vary regionally.
Nowadays, the tradition is followed by almost every Spaniard, and the twelve grapes have become synonymous with the New Year.
In China, although the celebrations of the Lunar New Year are not until a few weeks after the Gregorian New Year, celebrations of the Gregorian New Year are held in some areas, particularly in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Xiamen.
Celebrations with fireworks and rock concerts have taken place in Beijing's Solana Blue Harbor Shopping Park, while cultural shows and other events are held at the city's Millennium Monument, Temple of Heaven, Great Wall of China and the Summer Palace.
Family celebrations usually last until midnight, then some continue partying with friends until dawn.
Ukrainian families traditionally install spruce trees at home, the equivalent of a Christmas tree.
Some of the braver Ecuadorians jump through these burning effigies 12 times to represent a wish for every month.
Although Clark returned the following year, a speech impediment caused by the stroke forced him to retire as full-time host and cede duties to Ryan Seacrest; Clark continued to make desk appearances on the program annually until his death in 2012.
Trumpets and fireworks are the most important elements of New Year's Eve for Indonesians.
In Guatemala, banks close on New Year's Eve, and businesses close at noon.
Two notable music-oriented television specials air near New Year's Eve.
In addition, the celebration is broadcast on Rede Globo on the year end show ''Show da Virada''.
The portrayal of festivities on radio and television has helped ingrain certain aspects of the celebration in American pop culture; beginning on the radio in 1928, and on CBS television from 1956 to 1976 (which also included coverage of the ball drop), Guy Lombardo and his band, The Royal Canadians, presented an annual New Year's Eve broadcast from the ballroom of New York's Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
Spanish band Mecano's single "Un Año Más" is popular in Spanish-speaking countries; it describes the final minutes of New Year's Eve by people following the Spanish traditions.
In addition, private organizations also hold New Year's countdown parties at major shopping malls and landmarks.
There are several fireworks shows across the country.
Family parties start  around 5:00 pm, and last until 1:00 to 3:00 am, the following day.
The countdown to New Year's is broadcast through the leading TV channel and the celebrations usually continue until sunrise.
In Sarajevo, people gather in the Square of children of Sarajevo where a local rock band entertains them.
The celebration is focused on a major street party along Princes Street.
The event was hosted by Mario Lopez with musical guests American Authors and Chicago.
Champagne is traditionally drunk.
The dinner features traditional dishes such as tabouli, hummus, kibbi, and other Lebanese foods.
The Christians go to the churches for a watch night service till midnight praying for blessing in the coming new year.
STV covers both worldwide New Year celebrations, and details of events happening around Scotland.
Fireworks are lit throughout the night.
People clean their home and prepare Kadomatsu or Shimenawa to welcome the god before New Year's Eve.
Fireworks are a popular tradition; in large cities such as Bratislava, or Prague, the fireworks start before noon and steadily increase until midnight.
During the day, children sing the New Year's carols to be given money or treat.
Every year the length of them is compared, and high praises are held for the company that has managed to import the largest ribbon.
Hotels, discos and major restaurants in Indonesia offer special meals, entertainment and dancing.
Gifts exchanges may follow.
The actual countdown is primarily followed from the clock on top of the Casa de Correos building in Puerta del Sol Square in Madrid.
Immigrants from the former USSR celebrate Novy God, the Russian version of the holiday.
Indoors, families celebrate New Year's Eve with an abundance of food.
During these last twelve seconds of the year people keep silence and make their secret wishes for the next year.
The largest celebration in Australia is held in its largest city: Sydney.
At 8:30 pm, the President reads a television message of greetings to Italians.
The climax of the celebration is fireworks launched as the Town Hall Tower bells chime on the stroke of midnight.
During the family dinner, the hostess puts some of her jewelry in a plate and serves it in the side of the table, as a symbol of the coming year's prosperity.
Grandfather Frost and his granddaughter Snowmaiden bring presents on New Year's Eve.
New Year's Eve (''Szilveszter'') in Hungary is celebrated with home parties and street parties, including a gathering in downtown Budapest.
People will then congregate in a central square or similar to watch and celebrate.
Dessert will often be vanilla pudding or rice cream, and there will be cakes and coffee later in the evening - commonly accompanied by a glass of cognac.
Traditionally, the race was timed to end at midnight, but in recent times it was rescheduled for the convenience of family entertainment, now concluding at around 9pm.
Mongolians began celebrating the Gregorian New Year in the Socialist period, with influence from the former Soviet Union.
On January 1 (''Nieuwjaarsdag'' in Dutch) children read their "New Year's letter" and give holiday greeting cards of decorated paper featuring golden cherubs and angels, colored roses and ribbon-tied garlands to parents and godparents, on decorated paper.
In France, New Year's Eve (''la Saint-Sylvestre'') is usually celebrated with a feast, ''le Réveillon de la Saint-Sylvestre'' (''Cap d'Any'' in Northern Catalonia).
Most Russians celebrate New Year's Eve with their families and close friends.
Bali is another popular destination for New Year's Eve, with many locals and tourists gathering at the beach at Kuta.
New Year is often considered a "pre-celebration" for Greek Catholics and Eastern Orthodox living in Eastern Europe, primarily in Ukraine, since Christmas is celebrated on January 7.
There are many traditions across the country.
Included among these traditions are: a family dinner with special dishes, fireworks, popular music, wearing special or new clothes, eating empanadas and different parties.
It is a tradition that at 00:00 people call each other on the phone to greet one another or send SMS to all their friends.
Parties are common in the evening.
People start exchanging hugs and wishes for the new year.
Children sing "Pluguşorul" and "Sorcova", traditional carols that wish goodwill, happiness and success.
After the dinner, individuals light fireworks and continue partying outside.
Unlike ''Year of the Farce'', ''Bye Bye'' has been presented by various comedians; originally running from 1968 to 1998, it was revived in 2006 by the Québécois troupe Rock et Belles Oreilles.
After the clock strikes, they drink champagne and have rich dinner, watching TV concerts and having fun.
In some areas, such as in rural Quebec, people ice fish in the old days.
Serbs decorate trees, ''Novogodišnja jelka'', at New Year's Eve, rather than at Christmas Eve.
The New Year's Concert is held at the CCB (Centro Cultural de Belém) on the evening of 1 January, featuring the prestigious Lisbon Metropolitan Orchestra.
After Lombardo's death in 1977, prominence shifted towards ABC's  ''New Year's Rockin' Eve'', which was originally intended by its creator and host Dick Clark to be a modern and youthful alternative to Lombardo's big band music.
People do a get-together as well as enjoy with their families.
The city of São Paulo hosts the Saint Silvester Marathon () which traverses streets between Paulista Avenue and the downtown area.
Robbie Williams enjoyed a similar success with his 1998 single "Millennium", as did Pulp for their 1995 song "Disco 2000".
Since changing the time zone from UTC-11 to UTC+13 in winter and UTC+14 in summer (including new year), Samoa is the first country to receive the New Year as a whole, sharing it with some parts of Kiribati.
Those spending New Year's Eve at the beach usually dress in white, to bring good luck into the new year.
The event is broadcast live on government as well as private TV stations.
Many people light fireworks or go into the street to watch them.
However, expensive cuts of beef as well as sushi have become increasingly popular.
Traditional New Year food includes pork with sauerkraut or Estonian sauerkraut (''mulgikapsad''), baked potatoes and swedes with hog's head, and white and blood sausage.
In Caracas, the bells of the Cathedral of Caracas ring twelve times.
Edinburgh, the Scottish capital, hosts one of the world's most famous New Year celebrations.
Fireworks are set off by both municipal governments and individuals.
* "Auld Lang Syne" by Robert Burns.
Following tradition, they put a coin wrapped in aluminium foil inside the pie.
The accompanying beverage is traditionally beer (commonly either Christmas beer or lager beer).
Other auspicious actions are to touch a chimney sweep or have him rub some ash on your forehead for good luck and health.
The decorations remain until way into January due to the influence of the Julian calendar.
Just before midnight, people flock to the streets to enjoy fireworks and light firecrackers.
Edinburgh hosts a festival of four or five days, beginning on 28 December, and lasting until New Year's Day or January 2, which is also a bank holiday in Scotland.
The celebrations generally go on past midnight into January 1 (New Year's Day).
During New Year's Eve in Suriname, the Surinamese population goes into cities' commercial districts to watch fireworks shows.
Following the finale of the television series, the original cast continued to participate in New Year's Eve specials in the years following.
It starts with the Christmas tree which in Albania is known as "New Year's Tree" or "New Year's Pine".
The unofficial hymn for the first minutes of the New Year is "Año Nuevo, Vida Nueva" ("New Year, New Life"), by the band Billo's Caracas Boys.
Many Christian congregations have New Year's Eve watchnight services.
The origin of this holiday in Russia derives from Christmas.
A large open-air concert is held in the Main Square in Kraków.
Belgian farmers also wish their animals a happy New Year.
The biggest New Year's Eve celebration in Singapore takes place in the Marina Bay area.
Accordingly, most Norwegian cities, and many towns, host a large, public fireworks display in order to discourage private use of fireworks in built-up areas.
Restaurants, clubs, cafes and hotels are usually full of guests and they organize New Year's Eve parties.
They say if one dares to not eat the soup on New Year's Day, then he or she will lose luck.
As a modern tradition, New Year's Eve as well as New Year's Day are public holidays, and are two of the biggest holidays of the year.
Youth of Islamabad enjoy the eve with bike-riding and visiting restaurants in posh areas.
During the day-time celebration children get gifts.
Gloucester Park, a racecourse in central Perth, is the largest and most recognized display in the Western Australian city.
Due to the general use of fireworks, more fires occur on New Year's Eve than on any other day if the year in Norway.
At the same time, they are expressed for all the good things during the year that is ending so that they will continue in the new year.
