Albuquerque has the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, the National Hispanic Cultural Center, and the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History, as well as hosts the famed annual Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta every fall.
The trains connect Albuquerque's population base and central business district to downtown Santa Fe with up to eight roundtrips in a day.
During World War II, the first atomic bombs were designed and manufactured at Los Alamos, a site developed by the federal government specifically to support a high-intensity scientific effort to rapidly complete research and testing of this weapon.
Religions in New Mexico
New Mexico, or '''' in Spanish, is often incorrectly believed to have taken its name from the nation of Mexico.
Drilled to 4,330 feet and completed a few months later, the well produced 700 barrels of oil per day on state land.
Phase II of Rail Runner extended the line northward to Santa Fe from the Sandoval County station, the northernmost station under Phase I service.
'''51%''' ''261,617''
For the state, 23.9% of people over 25 years of age have gone to college but not earned a degree.
The settlement of Santa Fe was established at the foot of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the southernmost subrange of the Rocky Mountains, around 1608.
The City of Las Cruces, in southern New Mexico, has a museum system that is affiliated with the Smithsonian Institution Affiliations Program.
Art is also a frequent theme in Albuquerque, New Mexico's largest city.
The automobile changed the character of New Mexico, marking the start of large scale immigration to the state from elsewhere in the United States.
Cobarrubias and Fishman therefore argue that New Mexico cannot be considered a bilingual state as not all laws are published in both languages.
The pre-Columbian trade with Mesoamerican cultures included northbound exotic birds, seashells and copper.
The number of New Mexicans of different single races were: White, 1,375,334 (70.1%); Black, 43,931 (2.2%); American Indian or Alaskan Native, 182,136 (9.3%); Asian, 26,767 (1.4%), Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 854 (0.1%), and 273,778 (14.0%) of some other race.
'''53.29%''' ''321,219
All with termini in Northern New Mexico, the Camino Real, the Santa Fe Trail and the Old Spanish Trail are all recognized as National Historic Trails.
Judge Phillips wrote:
Both residents and businesses moved to the state; some northerners came at first for the mild winters; others for retirement.
Native Americans from New Mexico fought for the United States in both the First and Second World Wars.
The former number has increased with the upgrading of roads near Pojoaque, Santa Fe and Las Cruces to freeways.
Named trains often reflected the territory they traveled: ''Super Chief'', the streamlined successor to the ''Chief''; ''Navajo'', an early transcontinental tourist train; and ''Cavern'', a through car operation connecting Clovis and Carlsbad (by the early 1950s as train 23–24), were some of the named passenger trains of the ATSF that connoted New Mexico.
New Mexico imposes a Gross Receipts Tax (GRT) on many transactions, which may even include some governmental receipts.
Olympic gold medalist Tom Jager, who is an advocate of controversial high-altitude training for swimming, has conducted training camps in Albuquerque (elevation 5,312&nbsp;ft&nbsp;(1,619.1&nbsp;m)) and Los Alamos (7,320&nbsp;ft&nbsp;(2,231&nbsp;m)).
It wanted to control lands needed for the right-of-way in order to encourage construction of a transcontinental railroad.
This is compared with 21.0% of the nation as a whole according to United States Census Bureau 2014 American Community Survey estimates.
Creosote bush, mesquite, cacti, yucca, and desert grasses, including black grama, purple three-awn, tobosa, and burrograss, cover the broad, semiarid plains of the southern portion of the state.
While Spanish was permitted in the legislature until 1935, all state officials are required to have a good knowledge of English.
+ '''New Mexico Racial Breakdown of Population'''
* Rio Grande del Norte National Monument near Taos
Mexico, formerly a part of New Spain, adopted its name centuries later in 1821, after winning independence from Spanish rule.
* Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument near Silver City
The most important of New Mexico's rivers are the Rio Grande, Pecos, Canadian, San Juan, and Gila.
'''52.99%''' ''415,335''
Later, it was part of independent Mexico before becoming a U.S. territory and eventually a U.S. state.
Many examples of this work can be seen at the Deming Luna Mimbres Museum and at the Western New Mexico University Museum.
A commuter rail operation, the New Mexico Rail Runner Express, connects the state's capital, its largest city, and other communities.
With a Native American population of 134,000 in 1990, New Mexico still ranks as an important center of Native American culture.
The New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources called it "the most important single discovery of oil in New Mexico's history".
Chaco Canyon's trade function shifted to Casas Grandes in the present-day Mexican state of Chihuahua, however, north-south trade continued.
New Mexico is considered a swing state, whose population has favored both Democratic and Republican presidential candidates in the past.
The latest available estimates for 2014 estimate the number of persons in poverty at 420,388 (20.6% of the population).
It included most of the present-day states of Arizona and New Mexico, and part of Colorado.
On the southern border, Texas makes up the eastern two-thirds, while the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora make up the western third, with Chihuahua making up about 90% of that.
The BNSF Railway's entire line from Belen to Raton, New Mexico was sold to the state, partially for the construction of phase II of this operation, which opened in December 2008.
Following the victory of the United States in the Mexican–American War (1846–48), under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, Mexico ceded its mostly unsettled northern holdings, today known as the American Southwest and California, to the United States of America.
The climate of New Mexico is generally semiarid to arid, though areas of continental and alpine climates exist, and its territory is mostly covered by mountains, high plains, and desert.
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, 28.76% of the population aged 5 and older speak Spanish at home, while 4.07% speak Navajo.
, 703 highway bridges, or one percent, were declared "structurally deficient" or "structurally obsolete".
On gun control, New Mexico arguably has some of the least restrictive firearms laws in the country.
It was admitted to the union as the 47th state on January 6, 1912.
According to the 2000 United States Census,
See Mimbres culture.
'''New Mexico''' ( ;  ) is a state located in the southwestern region of the United States of America.
Popejoy Hall hosts singers, dancers, Broadway shows, other types of acts, and Shakespeare.
* Spanish (9.3%) and
Narrow gauge railroads once connected many communities in the northern part of the state, from Farmington to Santa Fe.
'''59%''' ''307,101''
Tourists visiting these sites bring significant money to the state.
In 2008, New Mexico had the highest percentage (47%) of Hispanics (of any race) of any state, with 83% native-born and 17% foreign-born.
Johnson served as a Republican, but in 2012 he ran for President from the Libertarian Party.
The Anglo minority was "outnumbered, but well-organized and growing."
The New Mexico Legislature consists of the House of Representatives and Senate.
Currently, the New Mexico State Legislature has split majorities, with Democrats controlling the Senate and the House of Representatives being controlled by Republicans.
Francisco Vásquez de Coronado assembled an enormous expedition at Compostela in 1540–1542 to explore and find the mystical Seven Golden Cities of Cibola as described by Fray Marcos de Niza.
There are many New Mexicans who also speak a unique dialect of Spanish.
A May 2005 estimate by New Mexico State University is that 11.65% of the state's total employment arises directly or indirectly from military spending.
Resurrection of passenger rail service from Denver to El Paso, a route once plied in part by the ATSF's ''El Pasoan'', has been proposed over the years.
Confederate power in the New Mexico Territory was effectively broken after the Battle of Glorieta Pass in 1862.
The Duke City Gladiators of the CIF are an indoor football team that plays their home games at the  Tingley Coliseum, while the New Mexico Stars are members of the AIF.
The original state constitution of 1912 provided for a bilingual government with laws being published in both English and Spanish; this requirement was renewed twice, in 1931 and 1943.
In the 2005 tax year the average millage was about 26.47 for residential property and 29.80 for non-residential property.
This means individuals currently on New Mexico's Death Row can still be executed, and those convicted of capital crimes before July 1, 2009 may still be sentenced to capital punishment under the pre-existing death penalty statute.
New Mexico's latitude and low passes made it an attractive east-west transportation corridor.
Before Richardson, Gary Johnson served as governor from 1995 to 2003.
The Anglo-Americans tended to have more ties to the territorial governor and judges, who were appointed by officials out of the region.
Native birds include the greater roadrunner (''Geococcyx californianus'', the state bird of New Mexico) and wild turkey (''Meleagris gallopavo'').
New Mexico's strong Spanish, Native American, and Wild West frontier motifs have provided material for many authors in the state including internationally recognized Rudolfo Anaya and Tony Hillerman.
The section of the line running south to Belen is served less frequently.
With regard to the judiciary, witnesses have the right to testify in either of the two languages, and monolingual speakers of Spanish have the same right to be considered for jury-duty as do speakers of English.
Almost half of New Mexicans claim Hispanic origin; many are descendants of colonial settlers.
'''54.61%''' ''224,564
The New Mexico Tourism Department estimates that in Fiscal Year 2006 the travel industry in New Mexico generated expenditures of $6.5 billion.
New Mexico's members of the United States Senate are Democrats Martin Heinrich and Tom Udall.
The New Mexico Rail Runner Express is a commuter rail system serving the metropolitan area of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
An Indian, and only an Indian, in
'''60%''' ''235,606''
There is also the  Festival Flamenco Internacional de Alburquerque held each year in which both native Spanish and New Mexican flamenco dancers perform at the University of New Mexico.
Politically, they still controlled most of the town and county offices through area elections, and wealthy sheepherder families commanded considerable influence.
New Mexico was a part of the independent Mexican Empire and Federal Republic of Mexico for 27 years, 1821 through 1848.
* 2.6% Black or African American
State government has an elaborate system of tax credits and technical assistance to promote job growth and business investment, especially in new technologies.
In 2006 New Mexico accounted for 3.4% of the crude oil, 8.5% of the dry natural gas, and 10.2% of the natural gas liquids produced in the United States.
Because of the historical isolation of New Mexico from other speakers of the Spanish language adopts numerous Native American words for local features, and contains much Anglicized vocabulary for American concepts and modern inventions.
Despite New Mexico's arid image, heavily forested mountain wildernesses cover a significant portion of the state, especially towards the north.
The KiMo presents live theater and concerts as well as movies and simulcast operas.
As a part of New Spain, the claims for the province of New Mexico passed to independent Mexico in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence.
The U.S. government protects millions of acres of New Mexico as national forests, including:
New Mexico is served by two class I railroads, the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad.
Also 10-15% of the population, mainly in the north, may contain Hispanic Jewish ancestry.
* Bandelier National Monument in Los Alamos
The Southern Pacific Railroad entered the territory from the Territory of Arizona in 1880.
'''49%''' ''273,495''
* Petroglyph National Monument near Albuquerque
The eastern border of New Mexico lies along 103° W longitude with the state of Oklahoma, and 2.2 miles (3.5&nbsp;km) west of 103° W longitude with Texas.
In 1853, the United States acquired the mostly desert southwestern boot heel of the state and southern Arizona below the Gila River in the  Gadsden Purchase.
The National Hispanic Cultural Center has held hundreds of performing arts events, art showcases, and other events related to Spanish culture in New Mexico and worldwide in the centerpiece Roy E Disney Center for the Performing Arts or in other venues at the 53 acre facility.
The Santa Fe Trail was the 19th century US territory's vital commercial and military highway link to the Eastern United States.
* Carson National Forest
No fewer than 100 railroads of various names and lineage have operated in the jurisdiction at some point.
In 2005 the federal government spent $2.03 on New Mexico for every dollar of tax revenue collected from the state.
New Mexico has long been an important corridor for trade and migration.
The name ''Nuevo México'' was first used by a seeker of gold mines named Francisco de Ibarra, who explored far to the north of Mexico in 1563 and reported his findings as being in "a New Mexico".
According to Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), the largest denominations in 2010 were the Catholic Church with 684,941; the Southern Baptist Convention with 113,452; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 67,637, and the United Methodist Church with 36,424 adherents.
Most of the Mexican immigrants reside in the southern part of the state.
It is usually considered one of the Mountain States.
'''56.91%''' ''472,422''
+ '''Presidential elections results'''
+Gubernatorial election results
Voter Registration and Party Enrollment
Aside from the aforementioned ''Wild Hogs'', other movies filmed in New Mexico include ''Sunshine Cleaning'' and ''Vampires.
* El Malpais National Monument in Grants
New Mexican Spanish is an archaic form of 17th century Castilian Spanish.
Railroads were later supplemented or replaced by a system of highways and airports.
World-renowned flamenco dancer and native New Mexican María Benítez founded the  Maria Benítez Institute for Spanish Arts "to present programs of the highest quality of the rich artistic heritage of Spain as expressed through music, dance, visual arts and other art forms."
While registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans by nearly 200,000, New Mexico voters have historically favored moderate to conservative candidates of both parties at the state and federal levels.
* Cibola National Forest (headquartered in Albuquerque)
Passenger train service once connected nine of New Mexico's present ten most populous cities (the exception is Rio Rancho), while today passenger train service connects two: Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
Oñate extended El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro, Royal Road of the Interior, by  from Santa Bárbara, Chihuahua, to his remote colony.
According to the United States Census Bureau, 1.5% of the population identifies as multiracial/mixed-race, a population larger than both the Asian and NHPI population groups.
In previous presidential elections, Al Gore carried the state (by 366 votes) in 2000; George W. Bush won New Mexico's five electoral votes in 2004, and the state's electoral votes were won by Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012.
Republicans have traditionally had their strongholds in the eastern and southern parts of the state, the Farmington area, Rio Rancho, and Albuquerque's Northeast Heights and the newly developed areas in the Northwest mesa.
Other fauna present in New Mexico include black bears, cougars, jaguars, coyotes, porcupines, skunks, Mexican gray wolves, deer, elk, Plains bison, collared peccary, bighorn sheep, squirrels, chipmunks, pronghorns, western diamondbacks, kangaroo rats, jackrabbits, and a multitude of other birds, reptiles, and rodents.
Among the more notable authors were: Angélico Chávez, Nina Otero-Warren, Fabiola Cabeza de Baca, Aurelio Espinosa, Cleofas Jaramillo, Juan Bautista Rael, and Aurora Lucero-White Lea.
When the boundary was fixed, a surveyor's error awarded the Permian Basin, which included the city of El Paso, to the State of Texas.
Turquoise, pottery, and salt were some of the goods transported south along the Rio Grande.
* Capulin Volcano National Monument near Capulin
The Denver & Rio Grande Railway, who would generally use narrow gauge equipment in New Mexico, entered the territory from Colorado and began service to Española on December 31, 1880.
Additionally, New Mexico allows open carry of a loaded firearm without a permit, and is "shall-issue" for concealed carry permits.
Such facilities have helped tribes close to population centers to generate revenues for reinvestment in economic development and welfare of their peoples.
The north-south trade route later became a path for colonists with horses arriving from New Spain as well as trade and communication.
Nonetheless, the constitution does not declare any language as "official."
* 2.5% Two or more races
According to estimates from the United States Census Bureau's 2006–2008 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimate, New Mexico's population was 1,962,226.
In either case, Hawaii is the only state that remains officially bilingual in the 21st century.
The weekend after Labor Day boasts the burning of Zozobra, a 50&nbsp;ft (15 m) marionette, during Fiestas de Santa Fe.
The prehistorically agricultural Pueblo Indians live in pueblos scattered throughout the state.
The first bomb was tested at Trinity site in the desert between Socorro and Alamogordo on what is now White Sands Missile Range.
The ''Southwest Chief'' is the successor to the ''Super Chief'' and ''El Capitan''.
The 2015 racial composition of the population was estimated to be:
In 1861, the Confederacy claimed the southern tract as its own Arizona Territory and waged the ambitious New Mexico Campaign in an attempt to control the American Southwest and open up access to Union California.
As a territory, the Gadsden Purchase increased New Mexico's land area for the purpose of the construction of a southern transcontinental railroad, that of the Southern Pacific Railroad.
Texas' only attempt to establish a presence or control in the claimed territory was the failed Texan Santa Fe Expedition.
New Mexico's rail transportation system reached its height in terms of length following admission as a state; in 1914 eleven railroads operated 3124 route miles.
The northern portion of the state is home to many tree species such as ponderosa pine, aspen, cottonwood, spruce, fir, and Russian olive, which is an invasive species.
It is perhaps better known now as the home of and/or exhibition center for large numbers of artists, visual and otherwise.
Collegiate athletics in New Mexico involve various University of New Mexico Lobos and New Mexico State Aggies teams in many sports.
In August, the city hosts the annual Santa Fe Indian Market, which is the oldest and largest juried Native American art showcase in the world.
Policy concerning the issuance of marriage licenses to same-sex couples was determined at the county level; that is, some county clerks issued marriage licenses to same-sex couples, while others did not.
The state's population grew rapidly after World War II, growing from 531,818 in 1940 to 1,819,046 in 2000.
They believed it contained wealthy Indian cultures similar to those of the Aztec Empire, and the names of both regions derive from its dominant people, the Mexica.
* Valles Caldera National Preserve
The first railroads incorporated in 1869.
'''49.8%''' ''376,930''
Another transcontinental railroad was completed by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway.
At the turn of the 19th century, the extreme northeastern part of New Mexico, north of the Canadian River and east of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, was still ruled by France, which sold it in 1803 to the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase.
Their entire army was captured and jailed by Hispanic New Mexico militia.
The route was called ''El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro''.
During the colonial period, the two had developed as neighboring Spanish-speaking communities under Spanish rule and with relatively independent histories.
New Mexico contains extensive habitat for many plants and animals, especially in desert areas and piñon-juniper woodlands.
As of July 1, 2013 the combined tax rate ranged from 5.125% to 8.6875%.
The state provides financial incentives for film production.
However, Spanish explorers recorded this region as New Mexico in 1563, and again in 1581.
The ''Sunset Limited'' is the successor to the Southern Pacific Railroad's train of the same name and operates exclusively on Union Pacific trackage in New Mexico.
A large artistic community thrives in Santa Fe, and has included such people as Bruce Nauman, Richard Tuttle, John Connell and Steina Vasulka.
New Mexico is home to several baseball teams of the Pecos League: Santa Fe Fuego, Roswell Aliens, Taos Blizzard, White Sands Pupfish and Las Vegas Train Robbers.
The same year, he founded the San Juan de los Caballeros colony, the first permanent European settlement in the future state of New Mexico, on the Rio Grande near Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo.
The judiciary is composed of the New Mexico Supreme Court and lower courts.
* 0.2% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
Another former mining town turned art haven is Madrid, New Mexico.
Assessed values of residences cannot be increased by more than 3% per year unless the residence is remodeled or sold.
In public education, the state has the constitutional obligation to provide for bilingual education and Spanish-speaking instructors in school districts where the majority of students are hispanophone.
By 1800, the Spanish population had reached 25,000, but Apache and Comanche raids on Hispanic settlers were common until well into the period of U.S. occupation.
Declines in passenger revenue, but not necessarily ridership, prompted many railroads to turn over their passenger services in truncated form to Amtrak, a state owned enterprise.
There were 59,415 (3.0%) of two or more races.
Other areas of geographical and scenic interest include Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument and the Gila Wilderness in the southwest of the state.
Veterans were disappointed to return and find their civil rights limited by state discrimination.
order to meet the qualifications to vote must have paid a tax.
Their constitution said that Indians who did not pay taxes could not vote, in their interpretation disqualifying those Native Americans who lived on reservations (but only the land was tax free.)
Notable bridges include the Rio Grande Gorge Bridge near Taos.
The two groups struggled for power and the future of the territory.
Today, the automobile is heavily relied upon in New Mexico for transportation.
Governors in New Mexico are limited to two terms.
They speak New Mexican Spanish and/or English at home.
* 9.4% American Indian and Alaska Native
New Mexico still holds strong to its Spanish heritage.
Albuquerque also has the unique and memorable KiMo Theater built in 1927 in the Pueblo Revival Style architecture.
The ''Southwest Chief'' is a fast Amtrak long distance train, being permitted a maximum speed of  in various places on the tracks of the BNSF Railway.
Governors serve a term of four years and may seek re-election for one additional term (limit of two terms).
