Another estimate, based on data on utility usage from July 2007, estimated the population to be approximately 274,000 or 60% of the pre-Katrina population.
By the 21st century, there were 10,000 Jews in New Orleans.
A constitutional amendment passed on November 7, 2006, will consolidate the seven assessors into one by 2010.
The city's music was later significantly influenced by Acadiana, home of Cajun and Zydeco music, and by Delta blues.
All of this amounted to tens of billions of dollars (2005 dollars, adjusted for inflation) during the antebellum period, with New Orleans as a prime beneficiary.
In June 2007, one study stated that the Hispanic population had risen from 15,000, pre-Katrina, to over 50,000.
He also came to be called "Spoons" Butler because of the alleged looting that his troops did while occupying New Orleans.
Several major tourist events and other forms of revenue for the city have returned.
The French colony was ceded to the Spanish Empire in the Treaty of Paris (1763).
The design for the new building was undertaken by the New Orleans architect Thomas Sully.
It is home to the Audubon Nature Institute (which consists of Audubon Park, the Audubon Zoo, the Aquarium of the Americas, and the Audubon Insectarium), and home to gardens which include Longue Vue House and Gardens and the New Orleans Botanical Garden.
Then its own Memorial Hall was added to Howard Library.
In the future, New Orleans will have another interstate highway, Interstate 49, which will be extended from its current terminus in Lafayette to the city.
Close to the Quarter is the Tremé community, which contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park and the New Orleans African American Museum &mdash; a site which is listed on the Louisiana African American Heritage Trail.
The center city possesses a rapidly growing, entrepreneurial creative industries sector, and is renowned for its cultural tourism.
In 1860, the city had 13,000 free people of color (''gens de couleur libres''), the class of free, mostly mixed-race people that developed during French and Spanish rule.
A local group of investors began conducting a study in 2007 to see if the city could support a Major League Soccer team.
A cousin of bounce, New Orleans hip hop has seen commercial success locally and internationally, producing Lil Wayne, Master P, Birdman, Juvenile, Cash Money Records, and No Limit Records.
The Supreme Court ruling contributed to this period as the nadir of race relations in the United States.
This longstanding pattern is changing, however, as the NOPS system is engaged in the most promising and far-reaching public school reforms in the nation, reforms aimed at decentralizing power away from the pre-Katrina school board central bureaucracy to individual school principals and independent public charter school boards, monitoring charter school performance by granting renewable, five-year operating contracts permitting the closure of those not succeeding, and vesting choice in parents of public schools students, allowing them to enroll their children in almost any school in the district.
(The Picayune has not returned to daily delivery.)
Also, an entirely new annual festival, "The Running of the Bulls New Orleans", was created in 2007.
are considered, an overall school district performance score of 70.6 results.
Louisiana ranks fifth among states in oil production and eighth in reserves in the United States.
This economic and population decline is linked to high levels of poverty, which in 1960 was the fifth highest of all US cities, and was almost twice the national average in 2005, at 24.5%.
When combined with the Port of New Orleans, it forms the 4th-largest port system in volume handled.
697&nbsp;ft (212&nbsp;m)
The New Orleans metropolitan area continued expanding in population, however, just not as rapidly as other major cities in the Sun Belt.
Nearly 90 percent of these immigrants settled in New Orleans.
New Orleans was originally settled on the natural levees or high ground, along the Mississippi River.
From 1868, elections in Louisiana were marked by violence, as white insurgents tried to suppress black voting and disrupt Republican gatherings.
The Port of New Orleans is the 5th-largest port in the United States based on volume of cargo handled, and second-largest in the state after the Port of South Louisiana.
More recently, the Census Bureau revised upward its 2008 population estimate for the city, to 336,644 inhabitants.
Together, these resulted in the most far-reaching changes in New Orleans' 20th century history.
Offenders in New Orleans are almost exclusively black men, with 97% of the offenders being black and 95% being male.
The paper made headlines of its own in 2012 when owner Advance Publications cut its print schedule to three days each week, instead focusing its efforts on its website, NOLA.com.
By 2008 many small churches, shops, and restaurants catering to Brazilians in the New Orleans area opened.
It serves as New Orleans' major bridge across the Mississippi River, providing a connection between the city's downtown on the eastbank and its westbank suburbs.
New Orleans' government is now largely centralized in the city council and mayor's office, but it maintains a number of relics from earlier systems when various sections of the city ran much of their affairs separately.
Other major districts within the city include Bayou St. John, Mid-City, Gentilly, Lakeview, Lakefront, New Orleans East, and Algiers.
The disputed 1872 gubernatorial election resulted in conflicts that ran for years.
The U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals operates at the US Courthouse downtown.
Developments in engineering throughout the twentieth century eventually made it possible to build sturdy foundations to support high rise structures in the city, and in the 1960s, the World Trade Center New Orleans and Plaza Tower were built, demonstrating the viability of tall skyscrapers in New Orleans.
On February 18, 2010, Errol Williams was elected as the first citywide assessor.
In the post-war period, other Sun Belt cities in the South and West surpassed New Orleans in population.
For much of its history, New Orleans' skyline consisted of only low- and mid- rise structures.
Levees and floodwalls should be viewed as a way to reduce risks from hurricanes and storm surges, not as measures that completely eliminate risk.
In 2008, the Census Bureau revised its population estimate for the city upward, to 336,644.
As the middle class and wealthier members of both races left the center city, its population's income level dropped, and it became proportionately more African American.
Other major festivals held in the city include Southern Decadence, the French Quarter Festival, and the Tennessee Williams/ New Orleans Literary Festival.
New Orleans is a center for higher learning, with over 50,000 students enrolled in the region's eleven two- and four-year degree granting institutions.
Thousands of refugees from the revolution, both whites and free people of color (''affranchis'' or ''gens de couleur libres''), arrived in New Orleans, often bringing African slaves with them.
This downtown ferry terminal also serves the Canal Street/Gretna Ferry, connecting Gretna, Louisiana.
Thereafter, the city grew rapidly with influxes of Americans, French, Creoles, and Africans.
In 1862, following the occupation by the Navy after the Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip, Northern forces under Gen. Benjamin F. Butler, a respected state lawyer of the Massachusetts militia, occupied the city.
It was ruled by a white Democratic Party.
That compares with about 198,000 households in July 2005, representing about 70% of pre-Katrina population.
One of the strongest varieties of the New Orleans accent is sometimes identified as the Yat dialect, from the greeting "Where y'at?"
The Louis Armstrong Park area, near the French Quarter in Tremé, contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park.
Most streets in this area fan out from a central point in the city.
of Energy, Locap); Product (TEPPCO Partners, Colonial, Plantation, Explorer, Texaco, Collins); and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Dixie, TEPPCO, Black Lake, Koch, Chevron, Dynegy, Kinder Morgan Energy Partners, Dow Chemical Company, Bridgeline, FMP, Tejas, Texaco, UTP).
New Orleans is world-famous for its food.
The first theatre in New Orleans was the French-language Theatre de la Rue Saint Pierre, which opened in 1792.
First Bank and Trust Tower
The murder rate climbed 14% higher in 2011 to 57.88 per 100,000 retaining its status as the 'Murder Capital of the United States' and rising to 21 in the world.
Wartime damage to levees and cities along the Mississippi River adversely affected southern crops and trade for the port city for some time.
Many of them moved from Brazilian communities in the Northeastern United States, Florida, and Georgia, and Brazilians settled throughout the New Orleans metropolitan area.
The city is located in the Mississippi River Delta on the east and west banks of the Mississippi River and south of Lake Pontchartrain.
Other bridges that cross the Mississippi River in the New Orleans area are the Huey P. Long Bridge, over which U.S. 90 travels, and the Hale Boggs Memorial Bridge, which carries Interstate 310.
In 2009, Tulane University contributed to these efforts by converting the main street through its Uptown campus, McAlister Place, into a pedestrian mall opened to bicycle traffic.
The New Orleans Public Library includes 13 locations, most of which were damaged by Hurricane Katrina.
New Orleans was vulnerable to flooding even before the city's footprint departed from the natural high ground near the Mississippi River.
Louisiana was eventually readmitted to the Union in 1868; its Constitution of 1868 granted universal manhood suffrage and established universal public education.
Today, most of New Orleans' tallest buildings are clustered along Canal Street and Poydras Street in the Central Business District.
The New Orleans Hornets (now named the Pelicans) returned to the city fully for the 2007–2008 season, having partially spent the 2006–2007 season in Oklahoma City.
The Canal Street Ferry (or Algiers Ferry) connects downtown New Orleans at the foot of Canal Street with the National Historic Landmark District of Algiers Point on the other side of the Mississippi River ("West Bank" in local parlance) and is popular with tourists and locals alike.
The Census Bureau in July 2006 estimated the population of New Orleans to be 223,000; a subsequent study estimated that 32,000 additional residents had moved to the city as of March 2007, bringing the estimated population to 255,000, approximately 56% of the pre-Katrina population level.
The influence of Catholicism is reflected in many of the city's French and Spanish cultural traditions, including its many parochial schools, street names, architecture, and festivals, including Mardi Gras.
In 2002, Louisiana began offering tax incentives for film and television production.
According to the historian Paul Lachance,
The Louisiana Historical Association was founded in New Orleans in 1889.
In the nineteenth century the city was the home of two of America's most important venues for the performance of French opera, the Théâtre d'Orléans and later the French Opera House.
In 1870, Jefferson City, including Faubourg Bouligny and much of the Audubon and University areas, was annexed as the 12th, 13th, and 14th wards.
A recent article released by ''The Times-Picayune'' indicated that the metropolitan area had undergone a recent influx of 5,300 households in the later half of 2008, bringing the population to around 469,605 households or 88.1% of its pre-Katrina levels.
In June 2013, the ''Times-Picayune'' resumed daily printing with a condensed newsstand tabloid edition, nicknamed ''TP Street'', which is published on the three days each week that its namesake broadsheet edition is not printed.
Because of the scale of damage, many people settled permanently outside the city in other areas where they had evacuated, as in Houston.
The armies had not learned of the Treaty of Ghent which had been signed on December 24, 1814 however the treaty did not call for cessation of hostilities until after both governments had ratified the treaty and the US government did not ratify it until February 16, 1815.
The nationwide financial recession and Panic of 1873 also adversely affected businesses and slowed economic recovery.
Although the tourism industry has strongly associated Voodoo with the city, only a small number of people are serious adherents to the religion.
In 2004, the hospitality industry employed 85,000 people, making it New Orleans' top economic sector as measured by employment totals.
In this period, the state legislature passed more restrictions on manumissions of slaves, and virtually ended it in 1852.
Officially, as measured at New Orleans International Airport, temperature records range from  on December 23, 1989 and August 22, 1980, respectively; Audubon Park has recorded temperatures ranging from  on February 13, 1899 up to  on June 24, 2009.
Louisiana and Texas were put under the authority of the "Fifth Military District" of the United States during Reconstruction.
The New Orleans area is home to numerous celebrations, the most popular of which is Carnival, often referred to as Mardi Gras.
With the strategic benefits of both a major international port and one of the few double-track Mississippi River crossings, the city is served by six of the seven Class I railroads in North America: Union Pacific Railroad, BNSF Railway, Norfolk Southern Railway, Kansas City Southern Railway, CSX Transportation and Canadian National Railway.
Hurricane Katrina destroyed the power lines supplying the St. Charles Avenue line.
It had grown in wealth, with a "per capita income that was second in the nation and the highest in the South."
The first  of the path, through Destrehan, is paved with a smooth macadam surface.
Carnival officially begins on the Feast of the Epiphany, also known as the "Twelfth Night".
The current mayor, Mitch Landrieu, was elected on February 6, 2010 and assumed office on May 3, 2010.
In the 20th century, New Orleans' government and business leaders believed they needed to drain and develop outlying areas to provide for the city's expansion.
Examples include Intermarine, Bisso Towboat, Northrop Grumman Ship Systems, Trinity Yachts, Expeditors International, Bollinger Shipyards, IMTT, International Coffee Corp, Boasso America, Transoceanic Shipping, Transportation Consultants Inc., Dupuy Storage & Forwarding and Silocaf.
Orleans Parish is the smallest parish by land area in Louisiana.
Before that, the last White Christmas was in 1964 and brought .
College football events such as the Bayou Classic, New Orleans Bowl, and Sugar Bowl returned for the 2006–2007 season.
City Park, one of the country's most expansive and visited urban parks, has one of the largest stands (if not ''the'' largest stand) of oak trees in the world.
According to current travel guides, New Orleans is one of the top ten most-visited cities in the United States; 10.1 million visitors came to New Orleans in 2004.
There are proposals to revive a Desire streetcar line, running along the neutral grounds of North Rampart and St. Claude, as far downriver as Poland Avenue, near the Industrial Canal.
Its McMoRan Exploration affiliate remains headquartered in New Orleans.
By the time the hurricane approached the city at the end of August 2005, most residents had evacuated.
New Orleans has also been recognized as a place with an abundance of uniquely decorated and uniquely designed bicycles.
In the 1850s, white Francophones remained an intact and vibrant community; they maintained instruction in French in two of the city's four school districts (all were white).
The violent crime rate was also a key issue in the city's 2010 mayoral race.
A 2009 ''Travel + Leisure'' poll of "America's Favorite Cities" ranked New Orleans first in ten categories, the most first-place rankings of the 30 cities included.
According to the poll, New Orleans is the best U.S. city as a spring break destination and for "wild weekends", stylish boutique hotels, cocktail hours, singles/bar scenes, live music/concerts and bands, antique and vintage shops, cafés/coffee bars, neighborhood restaurants, and people watching.
It had occurred over several years in what was then the French colony of Saint-Domingue.
Unlike most other places in the United States, New Orleans has become widely known for its element of elegant decay.
After the Flood Control Act of 1965, the US Army Corps of Engineers built floodwalls and man-made levees around a much larger geographic footprint that included previous marshland and swamp.
WTUL, a local college radio station (Tulane University), broadcasts a wide array of programming, including 20th century classical, reggae, jazz, showtunes, indie rock, electronic music, soul/funk, goth, punk, hip hop, New Orleans music, opera, folk, hardcore, Americana, country, blues, Latin, cheese, techno, local, world, ska, swing and big band, kids shows, and even news programming from DemocracyNow.
In addition to the daily newspapers, weekly publications include ''The Louisiana Weekly'' and ''Gambit Weekly''.
From 1980, the African-American majority has elected officials from its own community.
Much later in its musical development, New Orleans was home to a distinctive brand of rhythm and blues that contributed greatly to the growth of rock and roll.
In practice, African-American public schools and facilities were underfunded in Louisiana and across the South.
Soon, brass bands formed, gaining popular attraction which continues today.
For a time, New Orleans operated a racially integrated public school system.
In the far eastern part of the city, New Orleans East, it is known as the Eastern Expressway.
For example, St. Charles Avenue, known for its street car line, is called Royal Street below Canal Street, though where it traverses the Central Business District between Canal and Lee Circle, it is properly called St. Charles Street.
The federal government contributed to restoring infrastructure, but it took time.
The Port of South Louisiana, also based in the New Orleans area, is the world's busiest in terms of bulk tonnage.
A 2006 study by researchers at Tulane University and the University of California, Berkeley determined that there are as many as 10,000 to 14,000 illegal immigrants, many from Mexico, currently residing in New Orleans.
The approach of Hurricane Rita in September 2005 caused repopulation efforts to be postponed, and the Lower Ninth Ward was reflooded by Rita's storm surge.
The fame of the voodoo practitioner Marie Laveau contributed to this, as did New Orleans' distinctly Caribbean cultural influences.
From the late 1800s, most U.S. censuses recorded New Orleans' slipping rank among American cities.
In 2005, storm surge from Hurricane Katrina caused catastrophic failure of the federally designed and built levees, flooding 80% of the city.
New Orleans was catastrophically affected by what the University of California Berkeley's Dr. Raymond B.
When six-year-old Ruby Bridges integrated William Frantz Elementary School in the city's Ninth Ward, she was the first child of color to attend a previously all-white school in the South.
Its mansions are in various styles, such as Greek Revival, American Colonial and the Victorian styles of Queen Anne and Italianate architecture.
Louisiana began to offer similar tax incentives for music and theater productions in 2007, leading many to begin referring to New Orleans as "Broadway South."
The fighting in Louisiana had begun in December 1814 and did not end until late January, after the Americans held off the British Navy during a ten-day siege of Fort St. Philip.
As more refugees were allowed in Louisiana, Haitian émigrés who had first gone to Cuba also arrived.
An ordinance in 2006 established an Office of Inspector General for city government.
A population analysis released in August 2007 estimated the population to be 273,000, 60% of the pre-Katrina population and an increase of about 50,000 since July 2006.
Floodwalls and levees constructed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers failed below design specifications and 80% of the city flooded.
Chalmette Battlefield and National Cemetery, located just south of the city, is the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans.
The largest coffee-roasting plant in the world, operated by Folgers, is located in New Orleans East.
Downtown neighborhoods include the French Quarter, Tremé, the 7th Ward, Faubourg Marigny, Bywater (the Upper Ninth Ward), and the Lower Ninth Ward.
The city and '''Orleans Parish''' () are coterminous.
After the Louisiana Purchase, numerous Anglo-Americans migrated to the city.
Commonly referred to simply as "Jazz Fest", it is one of the largest music festivals in the nation, featuring crowds of people from all over the world, coming to experience music, food, arts, and crafts.
The negative effects of these socioeconomic conditions contrasted with the changes to the economy of the United States, which were based on a post-industrial, knowledge-based paradigm in which mental skills and education were far more important to advancement than manual skills.
The city also hosts the World Cultural Economic Forum (WCEF).
New Orleans' economy had always been based more on trade and financial services than on manufacturing, but the city's relatively small manufacturing sector also shrank in the post–World War II period.
Major commodity crops of sugar and cotton were cultivated with slave labor on large plantations outside the city.
Many Brazilians worked in skilled trades such as tile and flooring, with fewer day laborers.
By the mid-20th century, New Orleanians recognized that their city was being surpassed as the leading urban area in the South.
Major streets of the area include Canal Street, Poydras Street, Tulane Avenue and Loyola Avenue.
New Orleans is also home to two NCAA Division I athletic programs, the Tulane Green Wave of the American Athletic Conference and the UNO Privateers of the Southland Conference.
Uptown neighborhoods include the Warehouse District, the Lower Garden District, the Garden District, the Irish Channel, the University District, Carrollton, Gert Town, Fontainebleau, and Broadmoor.
Pre-Katrina, NOPS was one of the area's largest systems (along with the Jefferson Parish public school system).
They have struggled to narrow the gap by creating conditions conducive to the economic uplift of the African-American community.
In addition to the interstate highways, U.S. 90 travels through the city, while U.S. 61 terminates in the city's downtown center.
However, only four libraries remained closed in 2007.
The next African American to serve as governor was Douglas Wilder, elected in Virginia in 1989.
It now ranks third in population, trailing neighboring Jefferson Parish, and East Baton Rouge Parish.
New Orleans' colonial history of French and Spanish settlement has resulted in a strong Catholic tradition.
The Mercedes-Benz Superdome is the home of the Saints, the Sugar Bowl, and other prominent events.
At first (until late October 2005) it was truncated to a San Antonio-to-Los Angeles service; since then (from late October 2005 on) it has been truncated to a New Orleans-to-Los Angeles service.
New Orleans has developed a distinctive local dialect of American English over the years that is neither Cajun nor the stereotypical Southern accent, so often misportrayed by film and television actors.
Other infrastructure includes 17 petroleum refineries, with a combined crude oil distillation capacity of nearly , the second highest in the nation after Texas.
Large numbers of rural ex-slaves and some free people of color from the city volunteered for the first regiments of Black troops in the War.
The city of New Orleans and the parish of Orleans operate as a merged city-parish government.
New Orleans is also famous for its cuisine, music (particularly as the birthplace of jazz), and its annual celebrations and festivals, most notably ''Mardi Gras'', dating to French colonial times.
The first WCEF took place in October 2008.
New Orleans became a hotbed for funk music in the 1960s and 1970s, and by the late 1980s, it had developed its own localized variant of hip hop, called bounce music.
Every street crossing Canal Street between the Mississippi River and Rampart Street, which is the northern edge of the French Quarter, has a different name for the "uptown" and "downtown" portions.
Other large governmental installations include the U.S. Navy's Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR) Systems Command, located within the University of New Orleans Research and Technology Park in Gentilly, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans; and the headquarters for the Marine Force Reserves in Federal City in Algiers.
Today, opera is performed by the New Orleans Opera.
Large conventions are being held again, such as those held by the American Library Association and American College of Cardiology.
Public transportation in the city is operated by the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority ("RTA").
New Orleans has always had to consider the risk of hurricanes, but the risks are dramatically greater today due to coastal erosion from human interference.
Later immigrants were Irish, Germans, and Italians.
After that event, measures were undertaken to dramatically upgrade pumping capacity.
New Orleans experiences snowfall only on rare occasions.
* The '''Canal Streetcar Line''' uses the Riverfront line tracks from the intersection of Canal Street and Poydras Street, down Canal Street, then branches off and ends at the cemeteries at City Park Avenue, with a spur running from the intersection of Canal and Carrollton Avenue to the entrance of City Park at Esplanade, near the entrance to the New Orleans Museum of Art.
New Orleans also has several regional airports located throughout the metropolitan area.
According to the 2010 Census, 343,829 people and 189,896 households were in New Orleans.
For example, New Orleans has seven elected tax assessors, each with their own staff, representing various districts of the city, rather than one centralized office.
These estimates are somewhat smaller than a third estimate, based on mail delivery records, from the Greater New Orleans Community Data Center in June 2007, which indicated that the city had regained approximately two-thirds of its pre-Katrina population.
After his troops had been assaulted and harassed in the streets by Southern women, his order warned that future such occurrences would result in his men treating such "ladies" as those "plying their avocation in the streets", implying that they would treat the women like prostitutes.
New Orleans is located at  (29.964722, −90.070556) on the banks of the Mississippi River, approximately  upriver from the Gulf of Mexico.
481&nbsp;ft (147&nbsp;m)
As the city was captured and occupied early in the war, it was spared the destruction through warfare suffered by many other cities of the American South.
New Orleans is located in southeastern Louisiana, straddling the Mississippi River.
Catholic missions administered to slaves and free people of color, establishing schools for them.
While that name had been used by a militia before the war, that group was composed of free people of color.
The Twin Span Bridge, a five-mile (8&nbsp;km) causeway in eastern New Orleans, carries I-10 across Lake Pontchartrain.
On the other hand, a report by the American Society of Civil Engineers claims that "New Orleans is subsiding (sinking)":
The Michoud facility lies within the enormous New Orleans Regional Business Park, also home to the National Finance Center, operated by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Crescent Crown distribution center.
Wood's pump system allowed the city to drain huge tracts of swamp and marshland and expand into low-lying areas.
The city's unique musical heritage was born in its colonial and early American days from a unique blending of European musical instruments with African rhythms.
