Customized newspapers online have been offered by MyYahoo, I-Google, CRAYON, ICurrent.com, Kibboko.com, Twitter.times and many others.
In small newspapers, the owner of the publication (or the largest shareholder in the corporation that owns the publication) is usually the publisher.
For example, someone might want only a Sunday paper, or perhaps only Sunday and Saturday, or maybe only a workweek subscription, or perhaps a daily subscription.
Newspapers have, in the modern world, played an important role in the exercise of freedom of expression.
Newspapers in countries with easy access to the web have been hurt by the decline of many traditional advertisers.
As English became the international language of business and technology, many newspapers formerly published only in non-English languages have also developed English-language editions.
In India, ''The Times of India'' is the largest-circulation English newspaper, with 3.14 million copies daily.
The online versions are called online newspapers or news sites.
However, there have been many circumstances of the political autonomy of newspapers being curtailed.
Germany's ''Bild'', with a circulation of 3.8 million, was the only other paper in that category.
Many newspapers, besides employing journalists on their own payrolls, also subscribe to news agencies (wire services) (such as the Associated Press, Reuters, or Agence France-Presse), which employ journalists to find, assemble, and report the news, then sell the content to the various newspapers.
In the United States, in addition to national newspapers as such, ''The New York Times'' is available throughout the country.
Revenue has plunged while competition from internet media has squeezed older print publishers.
In 1783, the ''Pennsylvania Evening Post'' became the first American daily.
The editor-in-chief and founder is Joe Shea.
He used it as a means to criticize the British rule through journalism.
Penny press papers cost about one sixth the price of other newspapers and appealed to a wider audience.
To help their titles stand out on newsstands, some newspapers are printed on coloured newsprint.
The debate has become more urgent lately, as the 2008-2009 recession shaved profits, and as once-explosive growth in newspaper web revenues has leveled off, forestalling what the industry hoped would become an important source of revenue.
In Boston in 1690, Benjamin Harris published ''Publick Occurrences Both Forreign and Domestick''.
The previous edition is always copied to maintain a Newspaper of Record and to fall back on if a quick correction is needed for the press.
Besides remodeling advertising, the internet (especially the web) has also challenged the business models of the print-only era by democratizing and crowdsourcing both publishing in general (sharing information with others) and, more specifically, journalism (the work of finding, assembling, and reporting the news).
A wide variety of material has been published in newspapers.
In recent years, the advertorial emerged.
Printers and press operators physically print the newspaper.
Columnists are journalists who write regular articles recounting their personal opinions and experiences.
The advertising is usually the same in each edition (with the exception of zoned regionals, in which it is often the 'B' section of local news that undergoes advertising changes).
While paid readership of print newspapers has been steadily declining in the developed OECD nations, it has been rising in the chief developing nations (Brazil, India, Indonesia, China and South Africa), whose paid daily circulation exceeded those of the developed nations for the first time in 2008.
Saturday and, where they exist, Sunday editions of daily newspapers tend to be larger, include more specialized sections and advertising inserts, and cost more.
In the United Kingdom, ''The Sun'' is the top seller, with around 3.24 million copies distributed daily.
In some cases, free access is available only for a matter of days or weeks, or for a certain number of viewed articles, after which readers must register and provide personal data.
''Post- och Inrikes Tidningar'' (founded as ''Ordinari Post Tijdender'') was first published in Sweden in 1645, and is the oldest newspaper still in existence, though it now publishes solely online.
Additionally, newspapers are seeing traditional advertisers shift to new media platforms.
Editioning occurs in the main sections as news is updated throughout the night.
Soon after, weekly papers began publishing in New York and Philadelphia.
They mostly carried news from Britain and content depended on the editor's interests.
''Opregte Haarlemsche Courant'' from Haarlem, first published in 1656, is the oldest paper still printed.
Between 713 and 734, the ''Kaiyuan Za Bao'' ("Bulletin of the Court") of the Chinese Tang Dynasty published government news; it was handwritten on silk and read by government officials.
The classified category is shifting to sites including Craigslist, employment websites, and auto sites.
Soon, it was adapted to print on both sides of a page at once.
The first newspaper in Peru was ''El Peruano'', established in October 1825 and still published today, but with several name changes.
The news includes political events and personalities, business and finance, crime, severe weather, and natural disasters; health and medicine, science, and technology; sports; and entertainment, society, food and cooking, clothing and home fashion, and the arts.
Many newspapers around the world launched online editions in an attempt to follow or stay ahead of their audience.
(generally thought to be either Nathaniel Butter or Nicholas Bourne) and Thomas Archer.
In China, early government-produced news-sheets, called Dibao, circulated among court officials during the late Han dynasty (second and third centuries AD).
The equivalent position in the film industry and television news shows is the executive producer.
Opinions of other writers and readers are expressed in the ''op-ed'' ("opposite the editorial page") and ''letters to the editors'' sections of the paper.
By 2000, it was 53 percent and still falling.
In the UK, unlike most other countries, "daily" newspapers do not publish on Sundays.
Whistle-blowers, and those who "leak" stories of corruption in political circles often choose to inform newspapers before other mediums of communication, relying on the perceived willingness of newspaper editors to expose the secrets and lies of those who would rather cover them.
There are many national newspapers in the UK, but only a few in the United States and Canada.
Variations on this title such as editor-in-chief, executive editor, and so on are common.
''See also Los Angeles Times suburban sections.''
In the U.S., ''The Wall Street Journal'' has a daily circulation of approximately 2.02 million, making it the most widely distributed paper in the country.
Weekly newspapers are published once a week, and tend to be smaller than daily papers.
Most newspaper editors copy edit the stories for their part of the newspaper, but they may share their workload with proofreaders and fact checkers.
For centuries newspapers were printed on paper and supplied physically to readers either by local distribution, or in some cases by mail.
Photographers and graphic artists provide images and illustrations to support articles.
As other media began to compete with newspapers, and as printing became easier and less expensive giving rise to a greater diversity of publications, market penetration began to decline.
Almost every market has one or two newspapers that dominate the area.
In the past there were independent Sunday newspapers; nowadays the same publisher often produces a Sunday newspaper, distinct in many ways from the daily, usually with a related name; e.g., ''The Times'' and ''The Sunday Times'' are distinct newspapers owned by the same company, and an article published in the latter would never be credited to ''The Times''.
In Early modern Europe the increased cross-border interaction created a rising need for information which was met by concise handwritten news-sheets, called avvisi.
The first Spanish newspaper, Gaceta de Madrid, was published in 1661.
The first newspaper in France was published in 1631, ''La Gazette'' (originally published as ''Gazette de France'').
Rather than charging 6 cents per copy, the price of a typical New York daily at the time, they charged 1-cent, and depended on advertising to make up the difference.
This is considered the first newspaper in the American colonies even though only one edition was published before the paper was suppressed by the government.
Since the 1980s, the newspaper industry has largely moved away from lower-quality letterpress printing to higher-quality, four-color process, offset printing.
A '''daily newspaper''' is issued every day, sometimes with the exception of Sundays and occasionally Saturdays, and often of some national holidays.
Newspapers are typically published daily or weekly.
Typically, the majority of these newspapers' staff members work Monday to Friday, so the Sunday and Monday editions largely depend on content done in advance or content that is syndicated.
Some publications are published, for example, fortnightly (or bimonthly in American parlance).
According to the ''Guinness Book of Records'', the daily circulation of the Soviet newspaper ''Trud'' exceeded 21,500,000 in 1990, while the Soviet weekly ''Argumenty i Fakty'' boasted a circulation of 33,500,000 in 1991.
Circa 2005, there were approximately 6,580 daily newspaper titles in the world selling 395 million print copies a day (in the U.S., 1,450 titles selling 55 million copies).
Besides the aforementioned news and opinions, they include weather forecasts; criticism and reviews of the arts (including literature, film, television, theater, fine arts, and architecture) and of local services such as restaurants; obituaries; entertainment features such as crosswords, horoscopes, editorial cartoons, gag cartoons, and comic strips; advice, food, and other columns; and radio and television listings (program schedules).
According to United Nations data from 1995 Japan has three daily papers—the ''Yomiuri Shimbun'', ''Asahi Shimbun'', and ''Mainichi Shimbun''—with circulations well above 5.5 million.
of 1618 was the first to appear in folio- rather than quarto-size.
Advances in printing technology related to the Industrial Revolution enabled newspapers to become an even more widely circulated means of communication.
Some newspapers are government-run or at least government-funded; their reliance on advertising revenue and on profitability is less critical to their survival.
In 1650, the first daily newspaper appeared,  ''Leipziger Einkommenden Nachrichten'', published by Timotheus Ritzsch in Leipzig, Germany.
However, its official descendant, the ''Royal Gazette'', is a government publication for legal notices and proclamations rather than a proper newspaper;
The Journal's global advertising rate card provides a good example of editioning.
At issue is whether the newspaper industry faces a cyclical trough, or whether new technology has rendered obsolete newspapers in their traditional format.
In 1752, John Bushell published the ''Halifax Gazette'', which claims to be "Canada's first newspaper."
As the content can vary widely, zoned editions are often produced in parallel.
Most daily newspapers are sold in the morning.
The site is owned by 400 journalists.
Typically the paper is divided into sections for each of those major groupings (labeled A, B, C, and so on, with pagination prefixes yielding page numbers A1-A20, B1-B20, C1-C20, and so on).
The staff of the circulation department liaise with retailers who sell the newspaper; sell subscriptions; and supervise distribution of the printed newspapers through the mail, by newspaper carriers, at retailers, and through vending machines.
Both the latter promoted major cycling races and their newsprint colours were reflected in the colours of the jerseys used to denote the race leader; for example the leader in the Giro d'Italia wears a pink jersey.
Zoning occurs when advertising and editorial content change to reflect the location to which the product is delivered.
There is also a small group of newspapers which may be characterized as '''international newspapers'''.
The future of newspapers in countries with easy internet access has been widely debated as the industry has faced down soaring newsprint prices, slumping ad sales, the loss of much classified advertising and precipitous drops in circulation.
Large metropolitan newspapers often have large distribution networks, and can be found outside their normal area, sometimes widely, sometimes from fewer sources.
There are publications covering exclusively sports, or certain sports, horse-racing, theatre, and so on, although they may no longer be called newspapers.
The late 2000s–early 2010s global recession, combined with the rapid growth of free web-based alternatives, has helped cause a decline in advertising and circulation, as many papers had to retrench operations to increase profitability.
In other cases, free archives are provided.
For example, newspapers and magazines from many countries, and locally published newspapers in many languages, are readily to be found on news-stands in central London.
News magazines are also weekly, but they have a magazine format.
Similarly, the ''Guardian'' publishes six days a week but also owns the formerly independent Sunday ''Observer''.
In addition, desktop computers, word processing software, graphics software, digital cameras and digital prepress and typesetting technologies have revolutionized the newspaper production process.
If the newspaper offers information online, webmasters and web designers may be employed to upload stories to the newspaper's website.
In the 1920s, on a national basis in the U.S., daily newspapers achieved market penetration of 123 percent (meaning the average U.S. household received 1.23 newspapers).
''Merkuriusz Polski Ordynaryjny'' was published in Kraków, Poland in 1661.
Most newspapers are now published online as well as in print.
While at least mentioning all topics, some might have good coverage of international events of importance; others might concentrate more on national or local entertainment or sports.
Circulation is not necessarily the same as copies sold, since some copies or newspapers are distributed without cost.
However, there has been growing concern over the blurring of the line between editorial and advertorial content.
However, none of these publications fully met the classical criteria for proper newspapers, as they were typically not intended for the general public and restricted to a certain range of topics.
In 1808, the Gazeta do Rio de Janeiro had his first edition, printed in devices brought from England, publishing news favourable for the government of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves since it was produced by the official press service of the Portuguese crown.
This title is less common outside the U.S.
National advertisers are shifting to many types of digital content including websites, rich media platforms, and mobile.
But as some publishers find their print-based models increasingly unsustainable, Web-based "newspapers" have also started to appear, such as the ''Southport Reporter'' in the UK and the ''Seattle Post-Intelligencer'', which stopped publishing in print after 149 years in March 2009 and went online only.
General-interest newspapers typically publish news articles and feature articles on national and international news as well as local news.
A newspaper is usually but not exclusively printed on relatively inexpensive, low-grade paper such as newsprint.
More specialist still are some weekly newspapers, usually free and distributed within limited areas; these may serve communities as specific as certain immigrant populations, or the local gay community.
Amsterdam, a center of world trade, quickly became home to newspapers in many languages, often before they were published in their own country.
The news organizations that publish newspapers are themselves often metonymically called newspapers.
Many paid-for newspapers offer a variety of subscription plans.
Most newspapers have four main departments devoted to publishing the newspaper itself—editorial, production/printing, circulation, and advertising, although they are frequently referred to by a variety of other names—as well as the non-newspaper-specific departments also found in other businesses of comparable size, such as accounting, marketing, human resources, and IT.
Other members of the advertising department may include graphic designers, who design ads according to the customers' specifications and the department's policies.
was published in England by an "N.B."
Similarly, in many countries with a large foreign-language-speaking population or many tourists, newspapers in languages other than the national language are both published locally and imported.
Reporters are journalists who primarily report facts that they have gathered and those who write longer, less news-oriented articles may be called feature writers.
Readership figures may be higher than circulation figures because many copies are read by more than one person, although this is offset by the number of copies distributed but not read (especially for those distributed free).
In 1848, August Zang, an Austrian who knew Girardin in Paris, returned to Vienna to introduce the same methods with "Die Presse" (which was named for and frankly copied Girardin's publication).
In France, Émile de Girardin started "La Presse" in 1836, introducing cheap, advertising-supported dailies to France.
However, in the rest of the world, cheaper printing and distribution, increased literacy, the growing middle class and other factors have more than compensated for the emergence of electronic media and newspapers continue to grow.
Some national newspapers, such as ''The Financial Times'' and ''The Wall Street Journal'', are specialised (in these examples, on financial matters).
The Italian sports newspaper ''La Gazzetta dello Sport'' is also printed on pink paper while ''L'Équipe'' (formerly ''L'Auto'') is printed on yellow paper.
The editorial independence of a newspaper is thus always subject to the interests of someone, whether owners, advertisers, or a government.
On 10 April 1995, ''The American Reporter'' became the first daily newspaper, with its own paid reporters around the world and all-original content, to start on the Internet.
A common measure of a newspaper's health is market penetration, expressed as a percentage of households that receive a copy of the newspaper against the total number of households in the paper's market area.
The business model of having advertising subsidize the cost of printing and distributing newspapers (and, it is always hoped, the making of a profit) rather than having subscribers cover the full cost was first done, it seems, in 1833 by ''The Sun'', a daily paper that was published in New York City.
In places as varied as Jerusalem and Mumbai, newspapers are printed for a local and international English-speaking public, and for tourists.
Newspapers are usually printed on cheap, off-white paper known as newsprint.
The editorial content often may change merely to reflect changes in advertising—the quantity and layout of which affects the space available for editorial—or may contain region-specific news.
The portion of the newspaper that is not advertising is called ''editorial content'', ''editorial matter'', or simply ''editorial'', although the last term is also used to refer specifically to those articles in which the newspaper and its guest writers express their opinions.
Specialised newspapers might concentrate more specifically on, for example, financial matters.
Some newspapers are published two or three times a week and are known as biweekly publications.
In rare instances, the advertising may not change from one zone to another, but there will be different region-specific editorial content.
A new trend in newspaper publishing is the introduction of personalization through on-demand printing technologies.
This is a way to avoid duplicating the expense of reporting.
Newspapers often refine distribution of ads and news through zoning and editioning.
(This distinction, however, developed over time&nbsp;– early publishers like Girardin (France) and Zang (Austria) did not always distinguish paid items from editorial content.)
This innovation made newspapers cheaper and thus available to a larger part of the population.
As each edition represents the latest news available for the next press run, these editions are produced linearly, with one completed edition being copied and updated for the next edition.
A few years later, the first newsprint from this region - ''Hicky's Bengal Gazette- ''was published by an Irishman James Augustus Hicky.
In 1704, the governor allowed ''The Boston News-Letter'' to be published and it became the first continuously published newspaper in the colonies.
The decline in advertising revenues affected both the print and online media as well as all other mediums; print advertising was once lucrative but has greatly declined, and the prices of online advertising are often lower than those of their print precursors.
In recent years the number of newspapers slated for closure, bankruptcy or severe cutbacks has risen—especially in the United States, where the industry has shed a fifth of its journalists since 2001.
The first recorded attempt to found a modern-day newspaper in South Asia was by William Bolts, a Dutchman in the employ of the British East India Company in September 1768 in Calcutta.
Most nations have at least one newspaper that circulates throughout the whole country: a '''national newspaper'''.
Some ways newspapers have tried to improve their credibility are: appointing ombudsmen, developing ethics policies and training, using more stringent corrections policies, communicating their processes and rationale with readers, and asking sources to review articles after publication.
Some newspapers with high editorial independence, high journalism quality, and large circulation are viewed as newspapers of record.
Since then the ''Haarlems Dagblad'' has appeared with the subtitle ''Oprechte Haerlemse Courant 1656''.
Journalists often specialize in a subject area, called a beat, such as sports, religion, or science.
In 1582, there was the first reference to privately published newssheets in Beijing, during the late Ming Dynasty.
'', was published in Amsterdam in 1620.
A year and a half later, ''Corante, or weekely newes from Italy, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, France and the Low Countreys.''
These avvisi were handwritten newsletters and used to convey political, military, and economic news quickly and efficiently to Italian cities (1500–1700)—sharing some characteristics of newspapers though usually not considered true newspapers.
Such articles are often clearly distinguished from editorial content through either the design and layout of the page or with a label declaring the article as an advertisement.
In an advertising-free newspaper, there is no advertising department.
By the early 19th century, many cities in Europe, as well as North and South America, published newspaper-type publications though not all of them developed in the same way; content was vastly shaped by regional and cultural preferences.
In 1814, ''The Times'' (London) acquired a printing press capable of making 1,100 impressions per hour.
These early newspapers followed the British format and were usually four pages long.
In 1764, the ''Quebec Gazette'' was first printed 21 June 1764 and remains the oldest continuously published newspaper in North America as the ''Quebec Chronicle-Telegraph''.
Advertorials commonly advertise new products or techniques, such as a new design for golf equipment, a new form of laser surgery, or weight-loss drugs.
According to Tom Standage of ''The Economist'', India currently has daily newspaper circulation of 110 million copies.
It was forced to merge with the newspaper ''Haarlems Dagblad'' in 1942 when Germany occupied the Netherlands.
Printing is outsourced by many newspapers, partly because of the cost of an offset web press (the most common kind of press used to print newspapers) and also because a small newspaper's print run might require less than an hour of operation, meaning that if the newspaper had its own press it would sit idle most of the time.
Some, such as ''The International Herald Tribune'', have always had that focus, while others are repackaged national newspapers or "international editions" of national or large metropolitan newspapers.
While most newspapers are aimed at a broad spectrum of readers, usually geographically defined, some focus on groups of readers defined more by their interests than their location: for example, there are daily and weekly business newspapers and sports newspapers.
According to the 2009 Indian Readership Survey, the ''Dainik Jagran'' is the most-read, local-language (Hindi) newspaper, with 55.7 million readers.
In the United States, the Alliance for Audited Media maintains historical and current data on average circulation of daily and weekly newspapers and other periodicals.
Most newspapers provide some or all of their content on the Internet, either at no cost or for a fee.
In addition, the rise of news aggregators, which bundle linked articles from many online newspapers and other sources, influences the flow of web traffic.
Free newspapers do not sell subscriptions, but they still have a circulation department responsible for distributing the newspapers.
By the late 1990s, the availability of news via 24-hour television channels and then the Internet posed an ongoing challenge to the business model of most newspapers in developed countries.
In practice (though this may vary according to country), a morning newspaper is available in early editions from before midnight on the night before its cover date, further editions being printed and distributed during the night.
At large newspapers, the most senior editor is in overall charge of the publication, while less senior editors may each focus on one subject area, such as local news or sports.
Most traditional papers also feature an editorial page containing editorials written by an editor, op-eds written by guest writers, and columns that express the personal opinions of columnists, usually offering analysis and synthesis that attempts to translate the raw data of the news into information telling the reader "what it all means" and persuading them to concur.
These technologies have enabled newspapers to publish color photographs and graphics, as well as innovative layouts and better design.
For example, both ''The New York Times'' and ''The Wall Street Journal'' offer a regional edition, printed through a local contractor, and featuring locale specific content.
Virtually all printed newspapers have online editions distributed over the Internet which, depending on the country may be regulated by journalism organizations such as the Press Complaints Commission in the UK.
Previews of tomorrow's newspapers are often a feature of late night news programmes, such as Newsnight in the United Kingdom.
It wasn't until the early 1970s, however, that market penetration dipped below 100 percent.
The first English-language newspaper, ''Corrant out of Italy, Germany, etc.
Department stores and supermarkets could be relied upon in the past to buy pages of newspaper advertisements, but due to industry consolidation are much less likely to do so now.
In 1556, the government of Venice first published the monthly ''Notizie scritte'', which cost one gazetta, a small coin.
For example, the ''Financial Times'' is printed on a distinctive salmon pink paper, and Sheffield's weekly sports publication derives its name, the ''Green 'Un'', from the traditional colour of its paper.
Advertorials are most commonly recognized as an opposite-editorial which third parties pay a fee to have included in the paper.
Customized newspapers allow the reader to create their individual newspaper through the selection of individual pages from multiple publications.
Increasing paywalling of online newspapers may be counteracting those effects.
The number of copies distributed, either on an average day or on particular days (typically Sunday), is called the newspaper's circulation and is one of the principal factors used to set advertising rates.
General newspapers cover all topics, with different emphasis.
The advent of the Internet has also allowed non-English-language newspapers to put out a scaled-down English version to give their newspaper a global outreach.
A '''newspaper''' is a serial publication containing news, other informative articles (listed below), and advertising.
Sales staff in the advertising department not only sell space to clients such as local businesses, but also help advertisers design and plan their advertising campaigns.
Paid circulation has declined, while advertising revenue—which makes up the bulk of most newspapers' income—has been shifting from print to the new media, resulting in a general decline in profits.
It is currently published as an English-language weekly from its offices at 1040 Belvédère, suite 218, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
