Because internet does not have the “column inches” limitation of print media, online news stories can, but don't always, come bundled with supplementary material.
This model aims to focus on particular events and provide accuracy in reporting.
These two major agencies have agreements to exchange video news with ABC, NBC, CBS, CNN, and Eurovision—itself a sizeable video news exchange.
The system depended on ''hikyaku'', runners, and regularly spaced relay stations.
These norms held the most sway in American and British journalism, and were scorned by some other countries.
News values are the professional norms of journalism.
Online journalism is news that is reported on the Internet.
By 1939, 58% of Americans surveyed by ''Fortune'' considered radio news more accurate than newspapers, and 70% chose radio as their main news source.
News is also sometimes said to portray the truth, but this relationship is elusive and qualified.
It requires no more than a reporter and a laptop.
These connections undergirded an extensive system of news circulation, with handwritten items bearing dates and places of origin.
In other words, to ask why and how certain representations of reality make their way from news producers to news consumers.
The policy of developing Third World media gave way to a global regime of free trade institutions like the World Trade Organization, which also protected the free flow of information across borders.
American propaganda broadcasters include Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, set up during the Cold War and still operating today.
By 1880, San Francisco rivaled New York in number of different newspapers and in printed newspaper copies per capita.
Millions of people in countries such as the United States and South Korea have taken up blogging.
Online news has also changed the geographic reach of individual news stories, diffusing readership from city-by-city markets to a potentially global audience.
Social media sites, especially Twitter and Facebook, have become an important source of breaking news information and for disseminating links to news websites.
A news agency supplies this resource “wholesale” and publishers enhance it for retail.
The ''Oklahoma City Daily'' posted news to its site within hours.
In 1556, the government of Venice first published the monthly ''Notizie scritte'', which cost one gazetta.
The first newspaper published in a native African language was the ''Muigwithania'', published in Kikuyu by the Kenyan Central Association.
News thus plays a role in nation-building, the construction of a national identity.
According to agenda-setting theory, the general public will identify as its priorities those issues which are highlighted on the news.
The agenda-setting power becomes even stronger in practice because of the correspondence in news topics promulgated by different media channels.
Ted Turner's creation of the Cable News Network (CNN) in 1980 inaugurated a new era of 24-hour satellite news broadcasting.
Other major international broadcasters include the People's Republic of China, Taiwan, Germany, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, North Korea, India, Cuba, and Australia.
Some liberalization and diversification took place in the 1990s.
At this point, the World Bank took an active role in the governance of many countries, and its authority extended to communications policy.
As the technological means for disseminating news grew more powerful, news became an experience which millions of people could undergo simultaneously.
It focuses on influencing various news organizations by applying pressures to governmental processes.
News conspicuously describes the world in the present or immediate past, even when the impost important aspects of a news story have occurred long in the past—or are expected to occur in the future.
In 1840 he began using pigeons for communications to Paris, London, and Brussels.
Newspapers were slow to spread to the Arab world, which had a stronger tradition of oral communication, and mistrust of the European approach to news reporting.
Technological and social developments, often driven by government communication and espionage networks, have increased the speed with which news can spread, as well as influenced its content.
Because each individual has a particular point of view, it is recognized that there can be no absolute objectivity in news reporting.
The Zulu Kingdom used runners to quickly disseminate news.
One type of news event, the media event, is a scripted pageant organized for mass live broadcast.
CNN International leads the world in live broadcasting in times of crisis.
At first, news websites were mostly archives of print publications.
Jessica Garretson Finch is credited with coining the phrase "current events" while teaching at Barnard College in the 1890s.
The driving force of this new development was the commercial advantage provided by up-to-date news.
Al Jazeera hired many news workers conveniently laid off by BBC Arabic Television, which closed in April 1996.
Along these lines, the 1980 MacBride report, “Many Voices, One World”, called for an interdependent global news system with more participation from different governments.
In 1991, the BBC introduced a competitor, BBC World Service Television.
In 1904, the big three wire services opened relations with ''Vestnik'', the news agency of Czarist Russia, to their group, though they maintained their own reporters in Moscow.
Under the Ottoman Empire, official messages were regularly distributed at mosques, by traveling holy men, and by secular criers.
The British government used BBC radio as a diplomatic tool, setting up Arabic, Spanish and Portuguese services in 1937.
As distinct from advertising, which deals with marketing distinct from news, public relations involves the techniques of influencing news in order to give a certain impression to the public.
"The boundaries of journalism, which just a few years ago seemed relatively clear, and permanent, have become less distinct, and this blurring, while potentially the foundation of progress even as it is the source of risk, has given rise to a new set of journalistic principles and practices", Schudson puts it.
The first documented use of an organized courier service for the diffusion of written documents is in Egypt, where Pharaohs used couriers for the diffusion of their decrees in the territory of the State (2400 BC).This practice almost certainly has roots in the much older practice of oral messaging and may have been built on a pre-existing infrastructure.
The telegraph ushered in a new global communications regime, accompanied by a restructuring of the national postal systems, and closely followed by the advent of telephone lines.
Just before insulated telegraph line crossed the English Channel in 1851, Reuter won the right to transmit stock exchange prices between Paris and London.
In modern times, printed news had to be phoned into a newsroom or brought there by a reporter, where it was typed and either transmitted over wire services or edited and manually set in type along with other news stories for a specific edition.
From a commercial perspective, news is simply one input, along with paper (or an electronic server) necessary to prepare a final product for distribution.
In the United States, the Associated Press wire service developed a “bilateral monopoly” with the Western Union telegraph company.
Critics have accused the global news system of perpetuating cultural imperialism.
With the addition of new communications media, afternoon newspapers have shut down and morning newspapers have lost circulation.
The world's first written news may have originated in eighth century B.C.
The early internet, known as ARPANET, was controlled by the U.S. Department of Defense and used mostly by academics.
* The distinction among tweet, blog post, Facebook, newspaper story, magazine article, and book has blurred.
Michael Schudson, professor at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, has said that "everything we thought we once knew about journalism needs to be rethought in the Digital Age."
Journalists themselves also experience trauma and guilt.
Economic newspapers also became promoters of economic ideologies, such as Keynesianism in the mid-1900s.
On the day of the Oklahoma City bombing in April 1995, people flocked to newsgroups and chatrooms to discuss the situation and share information.
Therefore, news organizations have covert but unshakeable policies about how to cover certain topics.
As in previous eras, the news agencies provided special services to political and business clients, and these services constituted a significant portion of their operations and income.
News reporting has also tended to discuss women differently, usually in terms of appearance and relationship to men.
Travelers on pilgrimages to Mecca traditionally stay at caravanserais, roadside inns, along the way, and these places have naturally served as hubs for gaining news of the world.
This operation was financed mostly with advertising and public relations money.
CNN, said an executive, would bring a “town crier to the global village”.
The internet era has transformed the understanding of news.
Feminist critiques argue that discourse defined as objective by news organizations reflects a male-centered perspective.
Children tend to find the news boring, too serious, or emotionally disturbing.
The agenda-setting model has been well-supported by research, which indicate that the public's self-reported concerns respond to changes in news coverage rather than changes in the underlying issue itself.
At 33 kilometers per day, a runner would take two months to bring a message across the Hanseatic League from Bruges to Riga.
These agencies touted their ability to distill events into “minute globules of news”, 20–30 word summaries which conveyed the essence of new developments.
The Japanese shogunates were less tolerant than the Chinese government of news circulation.
Listeners followed along with developments throughout the day.
Speed of news transmission, of course, still varies wildly on the basis of where and how one lives.
Newspapers have struggled to maintain revenue given declining circulation and the free flow of information over the internet; some have implemented paywalls for their websites.
In other parts of the world, such as Kenya—especially rural areas without much electricity—television is rare.
Bloomberg LP, a private company founded by Michael Bloomberg in 1981, made rapid advances with computerized stock market reporting updated in real time.
As its name implies, “news” typically connotes the presentation of new information.
Even after the advent of international newspapers, business owners still valued correspondence highly as a source of reliable news that would affect their enterprise.
''Muigwithania'' and other newspapers published by indigenous Africans took strong opposition stances, agitating strongly for African independence.
Town criers were a common means of conveying information to citydwellers.
By the turn of the century (i.e., circa 1900), Wolff, Havas, and Reuters formed a news cartel, dividing up the global market into three sections, in which each had more-or-less exclusive distribution rights and relationships with national agencies.
In that way, journalistic authority seems to have become more individual- and less institution-based.
* Within commercial news organizations, the line between the news room and the business office has blurred.
This system was initially used only by the government, taking private communications only at exhorbitant prices.
China, where reports gathered by officials were eventually compiled as the ''Spring and Autumn Annals''.
Five of these models are the Professional Model, Mirror Model, Organizational Model, Political Model, and Civic Journalism Model.
News for public consumption was at first tightly controlled by governments.
News making is the act of making the news or doing something that is considered to be newsworthy.
The 1830s American, wrote de Tocquevile, was “a very civilized man prepared for a time to face life in the forest, plunging into the wilderness of the New World with his Bible, ax, and newspapers.” In France, the Revolution brought forth an abundance of newspapers and a new climate of press freedom, followed by a return to repression under Napoleon.
In China, too, newspapers have gained exclusive status, city-by-city, and pooled into large associations such as Chengdu Business News.
Transmitting On 11 May 1857, a young British telegraph operator in Delhi signaled home to alert the authorities of the Indian Uprising of 1857.
With the new interconnectedness of global media, the experience of receiving news along with a world audience reinforces the social cohesion effect on a larger scale.
Studies of tabloid readers found that many of them gain pleasure from seeing through the obviously fake or poorly constructed stories—and get their “real news” from television.
Journalists comply with these rules for various reasons, including job security.
When in 1987 the U.S. media reported on a riot in the Dominican Republic—the first major news item regarding that country in years—the resulting decline in tourism lasted for years and had a noticeable effect on the economy.
Further, newsrooms tend to divide journalists by gender, assigning men to “hard” topics like military, crime, and economics, and women to “soft”, “humanised” topics.
The news agencies which rose to power in the mid-1800s all had support from their respective governments, and in turn served their political interests to some degree.
Broadly speaking, therefore, news tends to normalize and reflect the interests of the power structure dominant in its social context.
The wire services maintained close relationships with their respective national governments, which provided both press releases and payments.
The journalist relies on appearances of autonomy and even opposition to established interests—but the public relations agent seek to conceal their client's influence on the news,.
Businesspeople also wanted to know about events related to shipping, the affairs of other businesses, and political developments.
The annals, whose compilation is attributed to Confucius, were available to a sizeable reading public and dealt with common news themes—though they straddle the line between news and history.
Among Zulus, Mongolians, Polynesians, and American Southerners, anthropologists have documented the practice of questioning travelers for news as a matter of priority.
In 1620, the English system linked with Thurn-und-Taxis.
Another corollary of the newness of news is that, as new technology enable new media to disseminate news more quickly, 'slower' forms of communication may move away from 'news' towards 'analysis'.
Quantitatively, the internet has massively expanded the sheer volume of news items available to one person.
These two networks, which supplied news broadcasts to subsidiaries and affiliates, dominated the airwaves throughout the period of radio's hegemony as a news source.
Many news items, which revolve around press conferences or other scheduled events, are predictable in advance.
The genre of news as we know it today is closely associated with the newspaper, which originated in China as a court bulletin and spread, with paper and printing press, to Europe.
Twitter declared in 2012: “It’s like being delivered a newspaper whose headlines you’ll always find interesting – you can discover news as it’s happening, learn more about topics that are important to you, and get the inside scoop in real time.” Cell phone cameras have normalized citizen photojournalism.
Indeed, personal correspondence sometimes acted only as a convenient channel through which news could flow across a larger network.
Beginning in the 1850s and 1860s, the private press began to develop in the multireligious country of Lebanon.
IPS has the most subscribers in Latin America and southern Africa.
The new format, which mashed together numerous unrelated and perhaps dubious reports from far-flung locations, created a radically new and jarring experience for its readers.
Due to the high cost of maintaining infrastructure, political goodwill, and global reach, newcomers found it virtually impossible to challenge the big three European agencies or the American Associated Press.
In late medieval Britain, reports (“tidings”) of major events were a topic of great public interest, as chronicled in Chaucer's 1380 ''The House of Fame'' and other works.
The world's top three most circulated newspapers all publish from Japan.
In the United Kingdom, the government agency Ofcom (Office of Communications) enforces a legal requirement of “impartiality” on news broadcasters.
Postal services enabled merchants and monarchs to stay abreast of important information.
Another Havas disciple, Paul Julius Reuter began collecting news from Germany and France in 1849, and in 1851 immigrated to London, where he established the Reuters news agency—specializing in news from the continent.
BBC radio marketed itself as a news by and for social elites, and hired only broadcasters who spoke with upper-class accents.
About one-third of newspaper revenue comes from sales; the majority comes from advertising.
The global news system is dominated by agencies from Europe and the United States, and reflects their interests and priorities in its coverage.
The Civic Journalism Model is when the press discovers the concerns of the people and uses that to write stories.
In order to send goods to another area, merchants needed to know first whether in fact to send off the goods and to what place.
It is owned by the Unification Church company News World Communications.
A common scholarly frame for understanding news production is to examine the role of gatekeepers in the flow of information.
In 2011, Thomson Reuters employed more than 55,000 people in 100 countries, and posted an annual revenue of $12.9 billion.
In a 20 September 1918 ''Pravda'' editorial, Lenin instructed the Soviet press to cut back on their political rambling and produce many short anticapitalist news items in “telegraph style”.
Examples such as Alfred Eisenstaedt's photograph ''V-J Day in Times Square'', Nick Ut's photograph of Phan Thi Kim Phuc and other children running from a napalm blast in Vietnam; Kevin Carter's photograph of a starving child being stalked by a vulture; etc.
The English language predominates in global news exchanges.
The reaction of the audience is influential because it can determine the impact that the particular article or newspaper has on the readers.
Models of news making help define what the news is and how it influences readers.
In 2010, Google News redesigned its front page with automatic geotargeting, which generated a selection of local news items for every viewer.
The perception that an ongoing crisis is taking place further increases the significance of live news.
Radio broadcasters in the United States negotiated a similar arrangement with the press in 1933, when they agreed to use only news from the Press–Radio Bureau and eschew advertising; this agreement soon collapsed and radio stations began reporting their own news (with advertising).
In 1937, the Party renamed the agency ''Xinhua'', New China.
A variety of styles emerged, from single-story tales, to compilations, overviews, and personal and impersonal types of news analysis.
Under the Licensing Act, publication was restricted to approved presses—as exemplified by The London Gazette, which prominently bore the words: "Published By Authority".
News agencies are services which compile news and disseminate it in bulk.
Reporters, making up a larger group near the bottom of the structure, are given significant autonomy in researching and preparing reports.
(During this era, the Stamp Act limited newspaper distribution simply by making them expensive to sell and buy.)
Public relations releases offer valuable newsworthy information to increasingly overworked journalists on deadline.
Havas began in 1832, using the French government's optical telegraph network.
By the 1980s, much of the Third World had succumbed to a debt crisis resulting from unrepayably large loans accumulated since the 1960s.
Handwritten newsletters, which could be produced quickly for a limited clientele, also continued into the 1600s.
Research also suggest that constant representations of violence in the news lead people to overestimate the frequency of its occurrence in the real world, thus increasing their level of fear in everyday situations.
Occasionally, decision-makers higher in the structure may intervene.
The sparse telegraphic writing style spilled over into newspapers, which often reprinted stories from the wire with little embellishment.
The wire services brought forth the “inverted pyramid” model of news copy, in which key facts appear at the start of the text, and more and more details included as it goes along.
Obvious gatekeepers include journalists, news agency staff, and wire editors of newspapers.
The less an issue obviously affects people's lives, the bigger an influence media agenda-setting can have on their opinion of it.
A study of Israeli news coverage leading up to the media event of the nation's 60th birthday found that news coverage of events like the Holocaust, World War Two, and subsequent Israeli wars increased the perceived importance of these events in the minds of citizens.
Most large cities in the United States historically had morning and afternoon newspapers.
The British Broadcasting Company began transmitting radio news from London in 1922, dependent entirely, by law, on the British news agencies.
Owners at the top of the news hierarchy influence the content of news indirectly but substantially.
In this regard news serves to unify its receivers under the banner of a culture, or a society, as well as into the sub-demographics of a society targeted by their favorite kind of news.
Xinhua became the official news agency of the People's Republic of China in 1949.
Economically oriented newspapers published new types of data enabled the advent of statistics, especially economic statistics which could inform sophisticated investment decisions.
The Chinese Communist Party created its news agency, the Red China News Agency, in 1931; its primary responsibilities were the ''Red China'' newspaper and the internal ''Reference News''.
Despite these changes, some studies have concluded that internet news coverage remains fairly homogenous and dominated by news agencies.
It operates 123 foreign bureaus and produces 300 news stories each day.
Both newspapers and broadcast news programs in the United States are generally expected to remain neutral and avoid bias except for clearly indicated editorial articles or segments.
In 1307 and 1322–1325, laws were established governing their appointment, conduct, and salary.
In countries with less telecommunications infrastructure, people, especially youth, tend today to get their news predominantly from mobile phones and, less so, from the internet.
Newspapers came to sub-Saharan Africa via colonization.
In thirteenth-century Florence, criers known as ''banditori'' arrived in the market regularly, to announce political news, to convoke public meetings, and to call the populace to arms.
Investigation into the Central Intelligence Agency pursued in the 1970s found that it owned hundreds of news organizations (wire services, newspapers, magazines) outright.
A story that is timely will receive more coverage because it is a current event.
The rise of a global news system goes hand in hand with the advent of terrorism and other sensational acts, which have power in proportion to the audience they capture.
News production is routinized in several ways.
Reuters and the Australian national news service had an agreement to exchange news only with each other.
They began with a communications line between Innsbruck and Mechelen and grew from there.
These riders could travel 180 kilometers in a day.
Public relations companies can participate in these events as well.
In addition to major declarations, ''bandi'' (announcements) might concern petty crimes, requests for information, and notices about missing slaves.
Some newspapers published in the 1800s and after retained the commercial orientation characteristic of the private newsletters of the Renaissance.
Because the internet allows communication which is not only instantaneous, but also bi- or multi-directional, it has blurred the boundaries of who is a legitimate news producer.
Since the 1960s, a significant amount of news reporting from the Third World has been characterized by some form “development journalism”, a paradigm which focuses on long-term development projects, social change, and nation-building.
In 1792 the Revolutionaries set up a news ministry called the ''Bureau d'Esprit''.
Viewed from a sociological perspective, news for mass consumption is produced in hierarchically structured organizations.
Because they disseminate information to a wide variety of clients, who repackage the material as news for public consumption, news agencies tend to use less controversial language in their reports.
For the Holy Roman Empire, Emperor Maximillian I in 1490 authorized two brothers from the Italian Tasso family, Francesco and Janettto, to create a network of courier stations linked by riders.
Beginning in the 1960s, the United States Agency for International Development, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and UNESCO developed the use of satellite television for international broadcasting.
This lemma dates back to the early history of public news reporting, as exemplified by an English printer who on 12 March 1624 published news from Brussels in the form of letters, with the prefacing comment: “Now because you shall not say, that either out of my owne conceit I misliked a phrase, or presumptuously tooke upon me to reforme any thing amisse, I will truly set you downe their owne words.”
Bloomberg linked with Agence France Presse in the 1990s.
In 1866, an undersea telegraph cable successfully connected Ireland to Newfoundland (and thus the Western Union network) cutting trans-Atlantic transmission time from days to hours.
The dominance of celebrity and social news, the blurring of the boundary between news and reality shows and other popular culture, and the advent of citizen journalism may suggest that the nature of 'news' and news values are evolving and that traditional models of the news process are now only partially relevant.
Although social media have changed the structure of news dissemination, gatekeeper effects may obtain in this case also due to the role of a few extremely well-connected nodes in the social network.
War is a common news topic, partly because it involves unknown events that could pose personal danger.
They became even faster, and created an effective optical telegraphy system using flags by day and lanterns and mirrors by night.
“It was the decrease in information costs and the increasing communication speed that stood at the roots of increased market integration, rather than falling transport costs by itself.
Visible chains of long distance signaling, known as optical telegraphy, have also been used throughout history to convey limited types of information.
