Preservationists continue to strive to strike a balance between Olmsted's idyllic vision and the realities of administering a popular scenic attraction.
The enormous energy of Niagara Falls has long been recognized as a potential source of power.
There are commemorative plaques on both sides of the falls recognising the poem.
The government of Ontario eventually brought power transmission operations under public control in 1906, distributing Niagara's energy to various parts of the Canadian province.
According to George R. Stewart, it comes from the name of an Iroquois town called "Ongniaahra", meaning "point of land cut in two".
Commercial interests have continued to encroach on the land surrounding the state park, including the construction of several tall buildings (most of them hotels) on the Canadian side.
The falls, or more particularly, the tourist-supported complex near the falls, was the setting of the short-lived Canadian-shot US television show ''Wonderfalls'' in early 2004.
On the Canadian side, Queen Victoria Park features manicured gardens, platforms offering views of both the American and Horseshoe Falls, and underground walkways leading into observation rooms that yield the illusion of being within the falling waters.
A casino and luxury hotel was opened in Niagara Falls, New York, by the Seneca Indian tribe.
Water flow was restored on November 25, 1969.
The Bulgarian writer Aleko Konstantinov beautifully portrays the impressiveness of the Niagara Falls in his book, "To Chicago and back".
The act sought, in cooperation with the Canadian government, to restrict diversion of water, and a treaty resulted in 1909 that limited the total amount of water diverted from the falls by both nations to approximately 56,000 cubic feet (1,600&nbsp;m3) per second.
Many poets have been inspired to write about the falls.
The Horseshoe Falls lie mostly on the Canadian side and the American Falls entirely on the American side, separated by Goat Island.
Minutes later, Woodward was plucked from the roiling plunge pool beneath the Horseshoe Falls after grabbing a life ring thrown to him by the crew of the ''Maid of the Mist'' boat.
William Dorsheimer, moved by the scene from the island, brought Olmsted to Buffalo in 1868 to design a city park system and helped promote Olmsted's career.
While it is still not known whether Jones was determined to commit suicide, he survived the 16-story fall with only battered ribs, scrapes, and bruises.
The story of Niagara Falls in the 20th century is largely that of efforts to harness the energy of the falls for hydroelectric power, and to control the development on both sides that threaten the area's natural beauty.
The same forces also created the North American Great Lakes and the Niagara River.
When electricity demand is low, the Lewiston units can operate as pumps to transport water from the lower bay back up to the plant's reservoir, allowing this water to be used again during the daytime when electricity use peaks.
In 1912 much of the water coming over the American Falls froze, though there was still a trickle and the falls ran at the other two sites.
The aerial photo on the right clearly shows the hard caprock, the Lockport Formation (Middle Silurian), which underlies the rapids above the falls, and approximately the upper third of the high gorge wall.
The top rock formation was composed of erosion-resistant limestone and Lockport dolostone.
In 1879, the New York state legislature commissioned Olmsted and James T. Gardner to survey the falls and to create the single most important document in the Niagara preservation movement, a Special Report on the preservation of Niagara Falls.
By referring to Mr. Elliott's vocabulary, (chapter xi) it will be seen that the human neck, that is, according to the concrete vocabulary, ''his'' neck, is ''onyara''.
According to Iroquoian scholar Bruce Trigger, "Niagara" is derived from the name given to a branch of the local native Neutral Confederacy, who are described as being called the "Niagagarega" people on several late-17th-century French maps of the area.
The result is a significant alteration and urbanisation of the landscape.
Water diversion is regulated by the 1950 Niagara Treaty and is administered by the International Niagara Board of Control (IJC).
Most of these attractions lie within the Niagara Falls State Park.
The larger Horseshoe Falls are about  wide, while the American Falls are  wide.
In October 1829, Sam Patch, who called himself "the Yankee Leapster", jumped from a high tower into the gorge below the falls and survived; this began a long tradition of daredevils trying to go over the falls.
This was supplanted by German-born John Augustus Roebling's Niagara Falls Suspension Bridge in 1855.
In March 1848, ice blockage caused the falls to stop; no water (or at best a trickle) fell for as much as 40 hours.
Niagara Falls were formed when glaciers receded at the end of the Wisconsin glaciation (the last ice age), and water from the newly formed Great Lakes carved a path through the Niagara Escarpment en route to the Atlantic Ocean.
Peak visitor traffic occurs in the summertime, when Niagara Falls are both a daytime and evening attraction.
Church approached Lord Dufferin, governor-general of Canada, with a proposal for international discussions on the establishment of a public park.
The Journey Behind the Falls consists of an observation platform and series of tunnels near the bottom of the Horseshoe Falls on the Canadian side.
The pair emerged shortly after going over with minor injuries and were charged with performing an illegal stunt under the Niagara Parks Act.
In 1881, under the leadership of Jacob F. Schoellkopf, the Niagara River's first hydroelectric generating station was built.
In 1955, the area between the rocks and Goat Island was filled in, creating Terrapin Point.
Their wires ran across the gorge, near the current Rainbow Bridge, not over the waterfall itself.
Altogether  of the Horseshoe Falls was eliminated, including  on the Canadian side.
Later that year demand for passage over the Niagara River led to the building of a footbridge and then Charles Ellet's Niagara Suspension Bridge.
In the same year, the province of Ontario established the Queen Victoria Niagara Falls Park for the same purpose.
The Niagara Scenic Trolley offers guided trips along the American Falls and around Goat Island.
Private companies on the Canadian side also began to harness the energy of the falls.
Other hydropower plants were also being built along the Niagara River.
In 1853, the Niagara Falls Hydraulic Power and Mining Company was chartered, which eventually constructed the canals that would be used to generate electricity.
Englishman Captain Matthew Webb, the first man to swim the English Channel, drowned in 1883 trying to swim the rapids downriver from the falls.
The stunt was conceived by DeBenardi, who wanted to discourage youth from following in his path of addictive drug use.
The cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada, and Niagara Falls, New York, United States, are connected by two international bridges.
By 1896, financing from moguls including J.P. Morgan, John Jacob Astor IV, and the Vanderbilts had fueled the construction of giant underground conduits leading to turbines generating upwards of , sent as far as Buffalo,  away.
The treaty allows higher summertime diversion at night when tourists are fewer and during the winter months when there are even fewer tourists.
The observation deck of the nearby Skylon Tower offers the highest view of the falls, and in the opposite direction gives views as far as Toronto.
Red Jacket pronounced the word Niagara to me, in the spring of 1820, as if written O-ne-au-ga-rah.
He carried his passport on the trip and was required to present it upon arrival on the Canadian side of the falls.
After the American Civil War, the New York Central Railroad publicized Niagara Falls as a focus of pleasure and honeymoon visits.
A team from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers dammed the American Falls in June 1969 to clear rock from the base of the falls.
The Niagara Falls Power Company, a descendant of Schoellkopf's firm, formed the Cataract Company headed by Edward Dean Adams, with the intent of expanding Niagara Falls' power capacity.
That hard layer of stone eroded more slowly than the underlying materials.
Contrary to rumours at the time, the cat survived the plunge unharmed and later posed with Taylor in photographs.
One of their joint efforts is an  ice boom, which prevents the buildup of ice, yet allows water to continue flowing downstream.
The water fell  and generated direct current electricity, which ran the machinery of local mills and lit up some of the village streets.
Along the Niagara River, the Niagara River Recreational Trail runs  from Fort Erie to Fort George, and includes many historical sites from the War of 1812.
Other industrial encroachments and lack of public access led to a conservation movement in the U.S. known as Free Niagara, led by such notables as Hudson River School artist Frederic Edwin Church, landscape designer Frederick Law Olmsted, and architect Henry Hobson Richardson.
J. Horace McFarland, the Sierra Club, and the Appalachian Mountain Club persuaded the United States Congress in 1906 to enact legislation to preserve the falls by regulating the waters of the Niagara River.
Together, Niagara's generating stations can produce about 4.4 gigawatts of power.
The falls are  north-northwest of Buffalo, New York, and  south-southeast of Toronto, between the twin cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario, and Niagara Falls, New York.
This name is Mohawk.
The Rainbow Bridge, just downriver from the falls, affords the closest view of the falls and is open to non-commercial vehicle traffic and pedestrians.
Panoramic and aerial views of the falls can also be viewed from the Flight of Angels helium balloon ride, or by helicopter.
In time, the river cut a gorge through the north-facing cliff, or cuesta.
The falls' flow is further halved at night, and, during the low tourist season in the winter, remains a minimum of  per second.
Up to  of water a second is diverted from the Niagara River through conduits under the city of Niagara Falls to the Lewiston and Robert Moses power plants.
Also on Goat Island are the Three Sisters Islands, the Power Portal where a huge statue of Nikola Tesla (the inventor whose patents for the AC induction motor and other devices for AC power transmission helped make the harnessing of the falls possible) can be seen, and a walking path that enables views of the rapids, the Niagara River, the gorge, and all of the falls.
The de-watering is envisioned to occur in a few years, and will last at least four months, depending on what plan is adopted.
On the Canadian side, the Niagara Parks Commission governs land usage along the entire course of the Niagara River, from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario.
Preservation efforts continued well into the 20th century.
Because of the interactions of three major rock formations, the rocky bed did not erode evenly.
Napoleon Bonaparte's brother Jérôme visited with his bride in the early 19th century.
It means, according to Mrs. Kerr, the neck; the term being first applied to the portage or neck of land, between lakes Erie and Ontario.
A plan to remove the huge mound of talus deposited in 1954 was abandoned owing to cost, and in November 1969, the temporary dam was dynamited, restoring flow to the American Falls.
Kirk Jones of Canton, Michigan, became the first known person to survive a plunge over the Horseshoe Falls without a flotation device on October 20, 2003.
Composer Ferde Grofé was commissioned by the Niagara Falls Power Generation project in 1960 to compose the Niagara Falls Suite in honor of the completion of the first stage of hydroelectric work at the falls.
After his barrel released prematurely, it hit the side of the tank and he died the next day from his injuries.
In January 2016, it was announced the American Falls would again be de-watered to repair two bridges that are near collapse.
Other sources say "most of" Horseshoe Falls is in Canada.
Ten years later, Trotter went over the falls again, becoming the second person to go over the falls twice and survive.
On May 21, 2012, an unidentified man in his early 40s became the third person to survive an unprotected trip over the Horseshoe Falls.
On three occasions Blondin carried his manager, Harry Colcord, on his back—on the final time being watched by the Prince of Wales.
In 1941 the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission completed the third current crossing in the immediate area of Niagara Falls with the Rainbow Bridge, carrying both pedestrian and vehicular traffic between the two countries and Canadian and U.S. customs for each country.
Only one man fell to his death, at night and under mysterious circumstances, at the anchoring place for his wire.
With increased railroad traffic, in 1886, Leffert Buck replaced Roebling's wood and stone bridge with the predominantly steel bridge that still carries trains over the Niagara River today.
The oldest and best known tourist attraction at Niagara Falls is the ''Maid of the Mist'' boat cruise, named for an ancient Ongiara Indian mythical character, which has carried passengers into the rapids immediately below the falls since 1846.
Each movement is dedicated to the falls, or to the history of the greater Buffalo region.
Among the many was Ontario's William Hunt, who billed himself as "The Great Farini" and competed with Blondin in performing outrageous stunts over the gorge.
Eyewitness reports show he "deliberately jumped" into the Niagara River after climbing over a railing.
On September 27, 1993, John "David" Munday, of Caistor Centre, Ontario, completed his second journey over the falls.
Niagara Falls have long been a source of inspiration for explorers, travelers, artists, authors, filmmakers, residents and visitors, few of whom realize the falls were nearly to be solely devoted to industrial and commercial use.
Since Taylor's historic ride, 14 people have intentionally gone over the falls in or on a device, despite her advice.
All three formations were laid down in an ancient sea, their differences of character deriving from changing conditions within that sea.
Students at the University of Guelph demonstrated, using scale models, that as air passes over the top of the new hotels it causes a breeze to roll down the south sides of the buildings and spill into the gorge below the falls, where it feeds into a whirlpool of moisture and air.
In the 1870s, sightseers had limited access to Niagara Falls and often had to pay for a glimpse, and industrialization threatened to carve up Goat Island to further expand commercial development.
The full length of his tightrope was .
There are differing theories as to the origin of the name of the falls.
Wallenda crossed near the brink of the Horseshoe Falls, unlike walkers who had crossed farther downstream.
But in 1956, disaster struck when the region's largest hydropower station was partially destroyed in a landslide.
Balancing recreational, commercial, and industrial uses has been a challenge for the stewards of the falls since the 19th century.
The first known effort to harness the waters was in 1759, when Daniel Joncaire built a small canal above the falls to power his sawmill.
Their intent was "to restore and conserve the natural surroundings of the Falls of Niagara, rather than to attempt to add anything thereto," and the report anticipated fundamental questions.
In 1997, composer Michael Daugherty composed ''Niagara Falls'', a piece for concert band inspired by the falls.
There are two casinos on the Canadian side of Niagara Falls, the Niagara Fallsview Casino Resort and Casino Niagara.
About 10,900 years ago, the Niagara Falls was between present-day Queenston, Ontario, and Lewiston, New York, but erosion of their crest has caused the waterfalls to retreat approximately  southward.
New York State began to purchase land from developers, under the charter of the Niagara Reservation State Park.
Already a huge tourist attraction and favorite spot for honeymooners, Niagara Falls visits rose sharply in 1953 after the release of ''Niagara'', a movie starring Marilyn Monroe and Joseph Cotten.
Theodosia Burr Alston, daughter of Vice-President Aaron Burr and her husband Joseph Alston were the first recorded couple to honeymoon there in 1801.
To preserve Niagara Falls' natural beauty, a 1950 treaty signed by the U.S. and Canada limited water usage by the power plants.
Tightrope crossings of the falls ended—by law—in 1896, when James Hardy crossed.
The Horseshoe Falls, which are approximately  wide, have also changed their shape through the process of erosion; evolving from a small arch, to a horseshoe bend, to the present day gigantic V. Just upstream from the falls' current location, Goat Island splits the course of the Niagara River, resulting in the separation of the mostly Canadian Horseshoe Falls to the west from the American and Bridal Veil Falls to the east.
Immediately below the hard-rock formation, comprising about two thirds of the cliff, lay the weaker, softer, sloping Rochester Formation (Lower Silurian).
While the seaway diverted water traffic from nearby Buffalo and led to the demise of its steel and grain mills, other industries in the Niagara River valley flourished with the help of the electric power produced by the river.
During the summer months, at least  per second of water traverses the falls, some 90% of which goes over the Horseshoe Falls, while the balance is diverted to hydroelectric facilities.
Among them was the Cuban poet José Maria Heredia, who wrote the poem "Niagara".
The Whirlpool Rapids Bridge lies  north of the Rainbow Bridge and is the oldest bridge over the Niagara River.
The international boundary line was originally drawn through Horseshoe Falls in 1819, but the boundary has long been in dispute due to natural erosion and construction.
Other daredevils have made crossing the gorge their goal, starting with the successful passage by Jean François "Blondin" Gravelet, who crossed Niagara Gorge in 1859.
In August 2005 Ontario Power Generation, which is responsible for the Sir Adam Beck stations, started a major civil engineering project, called the Niagara Tunnel Project, to increase power production by building a new  diameter,  water diversion tunnel.
When the ice melted, the upper Great Lakes emptied into the Niagara River, which followed the rearranged topography across the Niagara Escarpment.
The average annual flow rate is  per second.
In 1837 during the Caroline affair a rebel supply ship, the ''Caroline'', was burned and sent over the falls.
In 1961, when the Niagara Falls hydroelectric project went online, it was the largest hydropower facility in the Western world.
It was also the second-ever "duo"; Lori Martin joined Trotter for the barrel ride over the falls.
After the First World War, tourism boomed again as automobiles made getting to the falls much easier.
New York State used funds from the re-licensing of the New York Power Authority hydroelectric plant downriver in Lewiston, New York, to rebuild walking paths on the Three Sisters Islands and to plant native vegetation on the islands.
Goat Island was one of the inspirations for the American side of the effort.
Goat Island offers more views of the falls and is accessible by foot and automobile traffic by bridge above the American Falls.
During winter, the Power Authority of New York works with Ontario Power Generation to prevent ice on the Niagara River from interfering with power production or causing flooding of shoreline property.
Some have survived unharmed, but others have drowned or been severely injured.
The features that became Niagara Falls were created by the Wisconsin glaciation about 10,000 years ago.
In 1890, a five-member International Niagara Commission headed by Sir William Thomson among other distinguished scientists deliberated on the expansion of Niagara hydroelectric capacity based on seventeen proposals, but could not select any as the best combined project for hydraulic development and distribution.
Professor Charles Eliot Norton and Olmsted were among the leaders of the public campaign, while New York Governor Alonzo Cornell opposed.
His aim was to climb into a barrel hoisted to the rafters of the Astrodome and to drop  into a water tank on the floor.
They survived the fall but their barrel became stuck at the bottom of the falls, requiring a rescue.
While the Horseshoe Falls absorbed the extra flow, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers studied the riverbed and mechanically bolted and strengthened any faults they found; faults that would, if left untreated, have hastened the retreat of the American Falls.
Preservationists' efforts were rewarded on April 30, 1885, when Governor David B. Hill signed legislation creating the Niagara Reservation, New York's first state park.
The distance between the American extremity of the Niagara Falls and the Canadian extremity is .
On October 24, 1901, 63-year-old Michigan school teacher Annie Edson Taylor became the first person to go over the falls in a barrel as a publicity stunt; she survived, bleeding, but otherwise unharmed.
On June 15, 2012, high wire artist Nik Wallenda became the first person to walk across the falls in 116 years, after receiving special permission from both governments.
In 1893, Westinghouse Electric (which had built the smaller-scale Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant near Ophir, Colorado, two years earlier) was hired to design a system to generate alternating current on Niagara Falls, and three years after that this large-scale AC power system was created (activated on August 26, 1895).
Restoring the former beauty of the falls was described in the report as a "sacred obligation to mankind."
During peak electrical demand, the same Lewiston pumps are reversed and actually become generators, similar to those at the Moses plant.
Erosion control efforts have always been of extreme importance.
The Whirlpool Aero Car, built in 1916 from a design by Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres y Quevedo, is a cable car that takes passengers over the Niagara Whirlpool on the Canadian side.
A temporary dam was built to divert the flow of water to the Canadian side; the dam measured  across and was made of nearly 30,000 tons of rock.
On September 28, 1989, Niagara natives Peter DeBernardi (age 42) and Jeffery James Petkovich (age 25) became the first "team" to make it over the falls in a two-person barrel.
In the early 1980s the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers filled in more land and built diversion dams and retaining walls to force the water away from Terrapin Point.
Before the late 20th century the northeastern end of the Horseshoe Falls was in the United States, flowing around the Terrapin Rocks, which was once connected to Goat Island by a series of bridges.
According to Wallenda, it was the longest unsupported tightrope walk in history.
The volume of water approaching the falls during peak flow season may sometimes be as much as  per second.
Rockslides caused a significant buildup of rock at the bottom of the American side of the falls, and the engineers were to clean up the rock and repair some faults to prevent eventual erosion of the American side of the waterfall.
Another study has discounted this opinion and linked mist production to the difference in air and water temperature at the falls.
The Niagara Falls are renowned both for their beauty and as a valuable source of hydroelectric power.
While not exceptionally high, the Niagara Falls are very wide.
Fortunately, the two workers on board saved themselves by grounding the vessel on rocks just short of the falls.
Engineering has slowed erosion and recession.
It is estimated that 50,000 years from now, even at this reduced rate of erosion, the remaining  to Lake Erie will have been undermined and the falls will cease to exist.
The water then passes through hydroelectric turbines that supply power to nearby areas of Canada and the United States before returning to the river well past the falls.
However, since the 1970s the region has declined economically.
How would preservationists provide access without destroying the beauty of the falls?
Cruise boats operate from boat docks on both sides of the falls.
The state also renovated the area around Prospect Point at the brink of the American Falls in the state park.
These tightrope walkers drew huge crowds to witness their exploits.
In 1957, Congress passed the Niagara Redevelopment Act, which granted the New York Power Authority the right to fully develop the United States' share of the Niagara River's hydroelectric potential.
Along with the Minolta Tower (formerly the Seagrams Tower and the Konica Minolta Tower, now called the Tower Hotel), it is one of two towers in Canada with a view of the falls.
The verdant green colour of the water flowing over the Niagara Falls is a byproduct of the estimated 60 tonnes/minute of dissolved salts and "rock flour" (very finely ground rock) generated by the erosive force of the Niagara River itself.
Currently between 50% and 75% of the Niagara River's flow is diverted via four huge tunnels that arise far upstream from the waterfalls.
The Niagara Gorge Discovery Center showcases the natural and local history of Niagara Falls and the Niagara Gorge.
More than six million cubic feet (168,000&nbsp;m3) of water falls over the crest line every minute in high flow, and almost four million cubic feet (110,000&nbsp;m3) on average.
This water spins turbines that power generators, converting mechanical energy into electrical energy.
Before Taylor's attempt, on October 19 a domestic cat named Iagara was sent over the Horseshoe Falls in her barrel to test its strength.
Illusionist David Copperfield performed a trick in which he appeared to travel over the Horseshoe Falls in 1990.
This formation was composed mainly of shale, though it has some thin limestone layers.
During the 19th century, tourism became popular, and by mid-century, it was the area's main industry.
On July 2, 1984, Canadian Karel Soucek from Hamilton, Ontario, plunged over the Horseshoe Falls in a barrel with only minor injuries.
During this time, two bodies were removed from under the falls, including a man who had been seen jumping over the falls, and the body of a woman, which was discovered once the falls dried.
The engineers cleared the rock debris and tested for safety, finishing the project in November of that year.
The Finnish-Swedish naturalist Pehr Kalm explored the area in the early 18th century and is credited with the first scientific description of the falls.
In 1876, 23-year-old Italian Maria Spelterini was the only woman ever to cross the Niagara Gorge on a tightrope, making four crossings over 18 days.
Even after these undertakings, Luna Island, the small piece of land between the main waterfall and the Bridal Veil, remained off limits to the public for years owing to fears that it was unstable and could collapse into the gorge.
However, this study does not offer opinion as to why mist days have been increasing, just that the hotel breezes are an unlikely cause.
Ships can bypass Niagara Falls by means of the Welland Canal, which was improved and incorporated into the Saint Lawrence Seaway in the mid-1950s.
The most powerful hydroelectric stations on the Niagara River are the Sir Adam Beck 1 and 2 on the Canadian side and the Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant and the Lewiston Pump Generating Plant on the American side.
Underwater weirs redirect the most damaging currents, and the top of the falls have also been strengthened.
From Goat Island, the Cave of the Winds is accessible by elevator and leads hikers to a point beneath Bridal Veil Falls.
From largest to smallest, the three waterfalls are the Horseshoe Falls, the American Falls and the Bridal Veil Falls.
In 1996 there were 29 mist days recorded, but by 2003 that number had risen to 68.
Some of the original designs for the power transmission plants were created by the Swiss firm Faesch & Piccard, which also constructed the original 5,000&nbsp;HP waterwheels.
From the U.S. side, the American Falls can be viewed from walkways along Prospect Point Park, which also features the Prospect Point Park observation tower and a boat dock for the ''Maid of the Mist''.
The current rate of erosion is approximately  per year, down from a historical average of  per year.
How would they restore natural landscapes damaged by man?
