Through the ages, the town has changed hands many times.
It is lined with palm trees and stone pines, instead of being the rectangular roundabout of sorts it had become over the years.
Nice is one of the oldest human settlements in the world.
Concerts, films, and other major public events frequently occur in this space.
* ''Tourte de blettes''
With typical buildings in red and yellow ochres surrounding the square, the ''cathédrale Sainte-Réparate'' and the fountain in the centre, ''place Rossetti'' is a must-see spot in the old town.
Electrified in 1900, the combined length of the network reached  by 1930.
In keeping with the conventions of the time, when the Negresco first opened in 1913 its front opened on the side opposite the Mediterranean.
In February 2001, European leaders met in Nice to negotiate and sign what is now the Treaty of Nice, amending the institutions of the European Union.
The first known hominid settlements in the Nice area date back about 400,000 years; the ''Terra Amata'' archeological site shows one of the earliest uses of fire, construction of houses, and flint findings dated to around 230,000 years ago.
The city rises from the flat beach into gentle rising hills, then is bounded by surrounding mountains that represent the Southern and nearly the Western extent of the Ligurian Alps range.
The Hotel Negresco on the Promenade des Anglais was named after Henri Negresco (1868–1920) who had the palatial hotel constructed in 1912.
After the First World War, the city had a strong increase in population.
Summer temperatures, therefore, are often higher in the city.
Located in the Côte d'Azur area on the south east coast of France on the Mediterranean Sea, Nice is the second-largest French city on the Mediterranean coast and the second-largest city in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region after Marseille.
Since the 1970s, the number of inhabitants has not changed significantly; the relatively high migration to Nice is compensated by a natural negative growth of the population.
Marseille is reached in 2.5 hours.
It is also a large crossroads between several of the main streets of the city: ''avenue Jean Médecin'', ''avenue Félix Faure'', ''boulevard Jean Jaurès'', ''avenue de Verdun'' and ''rue Gioffredo''.
The port is the first port cement manufacturer in France, linked to the treatment plants of the rollers of the valley of Paillon.
Nice is the seat of the Chambre de commerce et d'industrie Nice Côte d'Azur.
After the annexation of Nice by France in 1860 it was rechristened ''La Promenade des Anglais'', replacing the former Nissart name with its French translation.
For centuries it was a dominion of Savoy, and was then part of France between 1792 and 1815, when it was returned to Piedmont-Sardinia until its re-annexation by France in 1860.
There are good restaurants serving typical Nicois cuisine, markets and many pubs.
The Place Masséna is a two-minute walk from the Promenade des Anglais, old town, town centre, and Albert I Garden (''Jardin Albert Ier'').
Today this is the principal harbour installation of Nice – there is also a small port in the Carras district.
Two men dominated this period: Jean Médecin, mayor for 33 years from 1928 to 1943 and from 1947 to 1965, and his son Jacques, mayor for 24 years from 1966 to 1990.
The first houses were located on higher ground well away from the sea, as wealthy tourists visiting Nice in the 18th century did not come for the beach, but for the gentle winter weather.
The main railway station is Nice-Ville, served both by high speed TGV trains connecting Paris and Nice in less than 6 hours and by local commuter TER services.
In the past, Nice welcomed many immigrants from Italy (who continue to make up a large proportion of the population), as well as Spanish and Portuguese immigrants.
The eagle standing over the three hills is a depiction of Savoy, referring to its domination over the country around Nice.
Engravings suggest that the port area was also defended by walls.
Rainfall is rare in this season, and a typical July month only records one or two days with measurable rainfall.
The city of Nice, intrigued by the prospect of a pleasant promenade, greatly increased the scope of the work.
Due to its proximity to the Principality of Monaco, it also serves as that city–state's airport.
Nice (Nicaea) was probably founded around 350 BC by the Greeks of Massalia (Marseille), and was given the name of ''Nikaia'' (Νίκαια) in honour of a victory over the neighbouring Ligurians; Nike (Νίκη)  was the Greek goddess of victory.
Another 202 were injured, with 52 in critical care and 25 in intensive care, according to the Paris prosecutor.
This section of the city is referred to as the "Zone Pietonne", or "Pedestrian Zone".
A metro-like suburban service is also provided on the southern part of the line.
As war broke out in September 1939, Nice became a city of refuge for many displaced foreigners, notably Jews fleeing the Nazi progression into Eastern Europe.
Nice inspired many composers and intellectuals in different countries e.g.
Local fish, such as mullets, bream, sea urchins, and anchovies (alevins) are used to a great extent, so much so that it has given birth to a proverb: "fish are born in the sea and die in oil".
Many introduced species grow in parks and gardens.
It is used for concerts, and particularly during the summer festivals, the ''Corso carnavalesque'' (carnival parade) in February, the military procession of 14 July (Bastille Day) or other traditional celebrations and banquets.
Its director is Hervé de Place, director of the Côte d'Azur airports, which includes Cannes - Mandelieu Airport.
It took several names between 1780 and 1870 (Plaça Pairoulièra, Place de la République, Place Napoléon, Place d'Armes, Place Saint-Augustin, Piazza Vittorio) and finally Place Garibaldi in September 1870.
It is run by the Chamber of Commerce and the Nice Côte d'Azur industry.
During the 13th and 14th centuries the city fell more than once into the hands of the Counts of Provence, but it regained its independence even though related to Genoa.
The 76-cm (30-inch) refractor telescope that became operational in 1888 was at that time the world's largest telescope.
'''Nice''' (, ; Niçard , classical norm, or '''', nonstandard, ;  ; ; ) is the fifth most populous city in France and the capital of the Alpes-Maritimes ''département''.
The architecture is in line with the Turin model, which was the norm of urban renewal throughout the entire realm of the House of Savoy.
Often, groups of youths will hangout on the steps leading to the ''Palais de la Justice''.
Under their leadership, there was extensive urban renewal, including many new constructions.
Winters are characterised by mild days (), cool nights () and variable weather.
The current mayor of Nice is Christian Estrosi who was elected in 2008.
In 2007, the new Tramway de Nice linked the northern and eastern suburbs via the city centre.
In the 1930s Nice hosted international car racing in the Formula Libre (predecessor to Formula One) on the so-called Circuit Nice.
A statue of Garibaldi, who was fiercely in favour of the union of Nice with Italy, stands in the centre of the square.
The square is also notable due to the presence of the city clock.
It is named after Giuseppe Garibaldi, hero of the Italian unification (born in Nice in 1807 when Nice was part of the Napoleonic Empire, before reverting to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia).
The most famous dance is the farandole.
The average maximum temperature in the warmest months of July and August is about .
The city's main seaside promenade, the Promenade des Anglais ("Walkway of the English') owes its name to visitors to the resort.
Later arrested in Uruguay in 1993, he was extradited back to France in 1994, convicted of several counts of corruption and associated crimes and sentenced to imprisonment.
Before the Paillon River was covered over, the Pont-Neuf was the only practicable way between the old town and the modern one.
''Farcis niçois'' is a dish made from vegetables stuffed with a mixture of breadcrumbs, meat (generally sausage and ground beef), and herbs; and ''salade niçoise'' is a tomato salad with green peppers of the "Corne" variety, baked eggs, tuna or anchovies, and olives.
In the peaceful years which followed, the "new town" was built.
In addition, the city features several shopping centres such as Nicetoile, Nice TNL, Nice Lingostière, Northern Forum, St-Isidore, the Trinity (around the Auchan hypermarket) and Cap3000 in Saint-Laurent-du-Var.
Currently, the population of the city is growing again, the most likely reason of which is a preference for the climate.
It is probably the most traditional square of the town, with its daily flower market.
By the late 1980s, rumors of political corruption in the city government surfaced; and eventually formal accusations against Jacques Médecin forced him to flee France in 1990.
The 20th century saw the arrival of modern transportation.
Palms, eucalyptus and citrus fruits are among the trees which give Nice a subtropical appearance.
Its strategic location and port significantly contributed to its maritime strength.
There was also an independent Roman city, Cemenelum, near Nice, where the hill of Cimiez is located.
In the second half of the 20th century, Nice enjoyed an economic boom primarily driven by tourism and construction.
It is on the Promenade des Anglais, near l'Arénas and has two terminals.
The park is named after Sophie Glikman-Toumarkine, the wife of French Senator Pierre Laffitte, founder of the park, and incidentally, Sophia, the goddess of wisdom.
Located in front of the port, the Place Cassini has been renamed Place of Corsica.
Nice has a few local dishes.
The Promenade des Anglais ("Promenade of the English") is a promenade along the Baie des Anges ("Bay of the Angels"), which is a bay of the Mediterranean, in Nice.
Spring starts mild and rainy in late March, and is increasingly warm and sunny towards June.
As a scientific institution, the Nice Observatory was merged with CERGA in 1988 to form the Observatoire de la Côte d'Azur.
The city is the namesake for the Nice model, which was developed at the observatory in 2005.
The observatory was established in 1879 by the banker Raphaël Bischoffsheim.
By the 1930s more bus connections were added in the area.
Nice Côte d'Azur Airport is the third most important airport in France after Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport, both in Paris.
The Cours Saleya is situated parallel to the ''Quai des États-Unis''.
Italian irredentists considered the acquisition of Nice to be one of their main nationalist goals, along with Istria, Dalmatia, Corsica and Trentino.
The arrival of the Pieds-Noirs, refugees from Algeria after 1962 independence, also gave the city a boost and somewhat changed the make-up of its population and traditional views.
However, it is also the largest city in France that is not a regional capital; the much larger Marseille is its regional capital.
The arms have only undergone minor changes: the eagle has become more and more stylised, it now "wears" a coronet for the County of Nice, and the three mountains are now surrounded by a stylised sea.
With the demolition of the Masséna Casino in 1979, the Place Masséna became more spacious and less dense and is now bordered by red ochre buildings of Italian architecture.
A certain ambivalence remained among the population, many of whom were recent immigrants of Italian ancestry.
The local language ''Niçard (Nissart)'' is an Occitan dialect (but some Italian scholars argue that it is a Ligurian dialect).
Among tourists, Nice is the second most popular French city after Paris, a fact which, combined with the difficulties of land travel at long distance (partly because of the Alps), allows it to have the third busiest airport in France in terms of passenger numbers (close to 10,000,000 passengers in 2005).
Place Rossetti is in the centre of the old town, streets ''Jesus'', ''Rossetti'', ''Mascoïnat'' and the ''Pont-vieux'' (old bridge)
There is a local tart made with onions and anchovies (or anchovy paste), named "Pissaladière".
Located in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region, Nice is a commune and the prefecture (administrative capital) of the Alpes-Maritimes département.
* ''Jardin botanique de la Ville de Nice'' (botanical garden)
It is a crossroads between the ''Vieux Nice'' (old town) and the town centre.
Today, it is open to the public and provides a regular program of performances.
Before Nice was urbanised, the coastline at Nice was just bordered by a deserted stretch of beach covered with large pebbles.
The recent rebuilding of the area to accommodate the new tramway line gave mostly the entire square to pedestrians.
Nice has the second largest hotel capacity in the country and it is one of its most visited cities, receiving 4&nbsp;million tourists every year.
The areas close to the water were home to Nice's dockworkers and fishermen.
Nice itself was established by the ancient Greeks.
The cession was ratified by a regional referendum: over 25,000 electors out of a total of 30,700 were in favour of the attachment to France.
After the Treaty of Turin was signed in 1860 between the Sardinian king and Napoleon III, the County was again and definitively ceded to France as a territorial reward for French assistance in the Second Italian War of Independence against Austria, which saw Lombardy united with Piedmont-Sardinia.
The average minimum temperature in January is around .
Many scientific activities still take place on the Nice Observatory site on Mount Gross above the city including gravity-wave and high-energy astrophysics, astrometric and interferometric astronomy and planetary science.
Examples of Niçois specialties include:
The A8 autoroute and the Route nationale 7 pass through the Nice agglomeration, linking Marseille with Italy.
The ''Place Masséna'' is the main square of the city.
* ''Soupe au pistou''
Reprisals intensified between December 1943 and July 1944, when many partisans were tortured and executed by the local Gestapo and the French Milice.
In 1900, the Tramway de Nice electrified its horse-drawn streetcars and spread its network to the entire ''département'' from Menton to Cagnes-sur-Mer.
Due to the activity of the Jewish banker Angelo Donati and of the Capuchin friar Père Marie-Benoît the local authorities hindered the application of anti-Jewish Vichy laws.
''Socca'' is a type of pancake made from chickpea flour.
The city also has several business parks, including l'Arenas, Nice the Plain, Nice Méridia, Saint Isidore, and the Northern Forum.
Autumn generally starts sunny in September and becomes more cloudy and rainy towards October, while temperatures usually remain above  until November where days start to cool down to around .
Much of the park is within the commune of Valbonne.
Place Garibaldi is close to the eastern districts of Nice, ''Port Lympia'' (Lympia Harbour), and the TNL commercial centre.
Fishing activities remain but the number of professional fishermen is now less than 10.
Their work is commemorated in many of the city's museums, including ''Musée Marc Chagall'', Musée Matisse and Musée des Beaux-Arts.
Nice also has numerous museums of all kinds: Musée Marc Chagall, Musée Matisse (arenas of Cimiez containing Roman ruins), Musée des Beaux-Arts, Musée international d'Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky, Musée Terra-Amata, Museum of Asian Art, Musée d'art moderne et d'art contemporain which devotes much space to the well-known '' École of Nice ''”), Museum of Natural History, Musée Masséna, Naval Museum and ''Galerie des Ponchettes''.
This square is also a junction of several important streets: the ''boulevard Jean-Jaurès'', the ''avenue de la République'', the ''rue Cassini'' and the ''rue Catherine-Ségurane''.
Savoy was also transferred to the French crown by similar means.
From 1744 until the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748) the French and Spaniards were again in possession.
From Nice many sought further shelter in the French colonies, Morocco and North and South America.
The ''Observatoire de Nice'' (Nice Observatory) is located on the summit of Mont Gros.
This tradition goes back to Sir Thomas Coventry, who intended to remind the citizens of having lunch on time.
Two other lines are currently in the planning stage.
On 26 August 1942, 655 Jews of foreign origin were rounded up by the Laval government and interned in the Auvare barracks.
Nice was projected to have 360,000 citizens in 2008, and will have 370,000 by 2012.
Nice has a high proportion of elderly people., and as such has one of the highest median ages in France.
("Upon argent a red eagle is displayed, posed upon three mounds.")
It was constructed at the end of the 19th century under the design of François Aune, to replace King Charles Félix's Maccarani Theater.
Entirely enclosed and pedestrianised, this square is located in the heart of the old town.
The square was thus divided into two parts (North and South) in 1824.
It is no doubt one of the most active spots in Nice.
Another place worth mentioning is the small street parallel to the Promenade des Anglais, leading from Nice's downtown, beginning at Place Masséna and running parallel to the promenade in the direction of the airport for a short distance of about 4 blocks.
* ''Marché aux fleurs''
It is the historical capital city of the County of Nice (''Comté de Nice'').
He was reelected for a second term in April 2014 ( that will end in 2020).
The square was built at the end of the 18th century and served as the entry gate to the city and end of the road to Turin.
It is one of the warmest Mediterranean climates for its latitude.
Today, the ''Place du Palais'' is alive day and night.
Old Nice is also home to the Opéra de Nice.
In the past, it belonged to the upper classes.
Here, tourists can find a fine selection of restaurants, specializing in various types of cuisine, including Niçoise, French, Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, Spanish and Italian.
The highest recorded temperature  was  on 1 August 2006.
He resigned in June 2016.
Geographically, Nice consists of two large bays.
The Promenade was first called the ''Camin dei Anglès'' (the English Way) by the Niçois in their native dialect, Nissart.
Nice has one conference centre: the Palais des Congrès Acropolis.
Under Monoprix in Place de Garibaldi are excavated remains of a well-defended city gate on the main road from Turin.
The area of today's Nice contains Terra Amata, an archaeological site which displays evidence of a very early use of fire.
The architect was Charles Garnier, and Gustave Eiffel designed the main dome.
During the Middle Ages, Nice participated in the wars and history of Italy.
The combination of white and red (argent and gules) is a reference to the colours of the flag of Savoy.
These included the convention centre, theatres, new thoroughfares and expressways.
It was outperformed one year later by the 36-inch (91-cm) refractor at the Lick Observatory at University of California, Santa Cruz.
In the second half of the 18th century, many wealthy English people took to spending the winter in Nice, enjoying the panorama along the coast.
The second half of the park's name is derived from Antipolis, the ancient Greek name of Antibes.
But there are also species familiar to temperate areas around the world; examples include horse chestnut, linden and even Norway spruce.
There is also a large selection of cafés where one can sit and enjoy an apéritif, as well as several bakeries with coffee, cake, and a terrace.
The natural beauty of the Nice area and its mild Mediterranean climate came to the attention of the English upper classes in the second half of the 18th century, when an increasing number of aristocratic families took to spending their winters there.
However, in the past few decades immigration has been opened to include immigrants from all over the world, particularly those from former Northern and Western African colonies, as well as southeast Asia.
By night, the environment changes radically, with tourists and youths flocking to the square, where music reverberates on the walls of the small square.
When a particularly harsh winter up north brought an influx of beggars to Nice, some of the rich Englishmen proposed a useful project for them: the construction of a walkway (''chemin de promenade'') along the sea.
In 2009, 9,830,987 passengers travelled through the airport.
The climate data is recorded from the airport, located just metres from the sea.
The excavated site includes thermal baths, arenas and Roman road.
The city is nicknamed ''Nice la Belle'' (''Nissa La Bella'' in Niçard), which means ''Nice the Beautiful'', which is also the title of the unofficial anthem of Nice, written by Menica Rondelly in 1912.
The Nice metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $47.7 billion, and $34,480 per capita, slightly lower than the French average.
Conquered in 1792 by the armies of the First French Republic, the County of Nice continued to be part of France until 1814; but after that date it reverted to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia.
The city soon became one of the busiest trading ports on the Ligurian coast; but it had an important rival in the Roman town of Cemenelum, which continued to exist as a separate city until the time of the Lombard invasions.
Sophia Antipolis is a technology park northwest of Antibes.
It is easily accessible, being less than 6 hours from Paris by train, and the airport is located just minutes away from the city.
The hotel industry and that of the construction industry, in full strength in the 1920s, attracted the world more and more and thus made it possible for Nice to become a town of national importance.
The first ''résistants'' to the new regime were a group of High School seniors of the Lycée de Nice, now Lycée Masséna, in September 1940, later arrested and executed in 1944 near Castellane.
Terra-Amata, an archaeological site dating from the Lower Palaeolithic age, is situated near Nice.
Tramway de Nice began operating horse-drawn trams in 1879.
The circuit started along the waterfront just south of the Jardin Albert I, then headed westward along the Promenade des Anglais followed by a hairpin turn at the Hotel Negresco to come back eastward and around the Jardin Albert I before heading again east along the beach on the Quai des Etats-Unis.
In the present, the ''court'' is mostly a place of entertainment.
American paratroopers entered the city on 30 August 1944 and Nice was finally liberated.
Villefranche-sur-Mer sits on an enclosed bay, while the main expanse of the city lies between the old port city and the Aeroport de Côte d'Azur, across a gently curving bay.
Immigration was again the reason of this growth.
It manages the Nice - Côte d'Azur Airport and the Cannes - Mandelieu Airport, as well as the Port of Nice.
The square's lighting at night gives it a magical aspect.
The temperature is typically above  and frequently reaches .
As an ally of Pisa it was the enemy of Genoa, and both the King of France and the Holy Roman Emperor endeavoured to subjugate it; but in spite of this it maintained its municipal liberties.
Several institutions of higher learning are also located here, along with the European headquarters of W3C.
There are also plenty of small shops selling clothing, shoes, and souvenirs.
The recent rebuilding of the tramline gave the square back to the pedestrians, restoring its status as a real Mediterranean square.
Another river flowed into the port on the east side of Castle Hill.
Being a vacation resort, Nice hosts many festivals throughout the year, such as the Carnaval de Nice and the Nice Jazz Festival.
The second line will run east-west from Place Masséna to the Nice Côte d'Azur Airport, extending to Cagnes-sur-Mer and Le Port, while the third line will provide a connection to the future TGV Nice Saint-Augustin Lingostière rail station.
In 1921, Nice then became the eleventh most populous town of France, then in 1931, the eighth, before being ranked sixth in 1946; thereafter the city reached its current demographic level due to the arrival of sixty thousand people including French citizens from Algeria.
* ''Salade niçoise''
