The Mali Empire was a Mandinka empire founded by Sundiata Keita around 1230 that existed up to 1600.
Interfaith relations are deemed very good, and the forms of Islam traditionally practiced in most of the country are marked by tolerance of other faiths and lack of restrictions on personal freedom.
The U.S. also is a major partner in policy coordination in such areas as food security and HIV/AIDS.
Presidential campaigns were organized in the months that followed.
Radio is the most important medium, as television sets are beyond the buying power of many of the rural poor, and illiteracy prevents print media from becoming a mass medium.
As recently as the late 19th century, much of the south center of the nation was unreached by Islam, and the conversion of some rural areas has been only partial.
On 27 January 1996, Col. Ibrahim Baré Maïnassara led a military coup that deposed President Ousmane and ended the Third Republic.
Other airports in Niger include the Mano Dayak International Airport in Agadez city and Zinder Airport in Zinder city but as of January 2015, they were not regularly serviced by any carriers.
From 1000 to 1325, The Songhai Empire prospered and managed to maintain peace with its neighboring empires including the Mali Empire.
About 60 percent of children who finish primary schools are boys, as the majority of girls rarely attend school for more than a few years.
In addition to the national and regional radio services of the state broadcaster ORTN, there are four privately owned radio networks which total more than 100 stations.
In the extreme south there is a tropical climate on the edges of the Niger River basin.
While political prisoners of the Diori regime were released after the coup and the country was stabilized, political and individual freedom deteriorated in general during this period.
Niger has ten official national languages, namely Arabic, Buduma, Fulfulde, Gourmanchéma, Hausa, Kanuri, Zarma & Songhai, Tamasheq, Tassawaq, Tebu.
The terrain is predominantly desert plains and sand dunes, with flat to rolling savanna in the south and hills in the north.
The southern parts of Niger are naturally dominated savannahs.
This began a political struggle between Tandja, trying to extend his term-limited authority beyond 2009 through the establishment of a Sixth Republic, and his opponents who demanded that he step down at the end of his second term in December 2009.
In recent years, the Government of Niger drafted revisions to the investment code (1997 and 2000), petroleum code (1992), and mining code (1993), all with attractive terms for investors.
At its peak around 1350, the empire extended as far west as Senegal and Guinee Conkary and as far east as western Niger.
In 2009, President Tandja Mamadou decided to organize a constitutional referendum seeking to extend his presidency claiming to respond to the desire of the people of Niger.
Niger is a developing country, and is consistently one of the lowest-ranked in the United Nations' Human Development Index (HDI); it was ranked last at 188th for 2014.
The opposition boycotted the referendum and the new constitution was adopted with 92.5% of voters and a 68% turnout, according to official results.
Recent rains remain variable.
Islam, widespread in the region since the 10th century, has greatly shaped the culture and morals of the people of Niger.
His presidency started during the Second Republic largely following his efforts at the end of the previous military regime with attempts at normalizing the political situation in the country with the release of political prisoners, liberalization of laws and policies.
This trade has made Agadez a pivotal place of the trans-Saharan trade.
Niger is bordered by Libya to the northeast, Chad to the east, Nigeria and Benin to the south, Burkina Faso and Mali to the west, and Algeria to the northwest.
Other urban Christian expatriate communities from Europe and West Africa are also presented.
Religious persecution is rare in Niger which is ranked last (#50) on the World Watch List for severity of persecution that Christians face for actively pursuing their faith.
The chief administrator (Governor) in each department is appointed by the government and functions primarily as the local agent of the central authorities.
For three days, the festival features a parade of Tuareg camel riders followed with camel and horse races, songs, dances, and storytelling.
This mobility, which would continue in waves for several centuries, was accompanied with further migration to the south and interbreeding between southern black and northern white populations.
For its first fourteen years as an independent state, Niger was run by a single-party civilian regime under the presidency of Diori.
At the same time the plurality of the population, in the Hausa borderlands between Birni-N'Konni and Maine-Soroa, have often looked culturally more to Hausaland in Nigeria than Niamey.
Niger began developing diverse media in the late 1990s.
General Mainassara entered the campaign as an independent candidate and won the election on 8 July 1996.
The government paralysis and the political tension was used as a motivation for a second military coup.
Despite relative freedom at the national level, Nigerien journalists say they are often pressured by local authorities.
Following this, presidential elections were held and Mahamane Ousmane became the first president of the Third Republic on 27 March 1993.
Soils that have become degraded, for example by intensive cereal production, cover 50 per cent of Niger's land.
In peace time their duties are mostly policing duties.
General Saibou became the first president of the Second Republic after winning the presidential election on 10 December 1989.
Islam was spread into what is now Niger beginning in the 15th century, by both the expansion of the Songhai Empire in the west, and the influence of the Trans-Saharan trade traveling from the Maghreb and Egypt.
The end of the colonial era was characterized by a transformation of the political environment in French West Africa and Niger.
The military kept their promise to return the country to democratic civilian rule.
His efforts to justify questionable elections failed to convince donors to restore multilateral and bilateral economic assistance; a desperate Maïnassara ignored an international embargo against Libya and sought Libyan funds to aid Niger's economy.
Uranium prices have recovered somewhat in the last few years.
While the economy deteriorated over the course of the transition, there were certain notable accomplishments, including the successful conduct of a constitutional referendum; the adoption of key legislation such as the electoral and rural codes; and the holding of several free, fair, and non-violent nationwide elections.
In 2014, following nearly a year long negotiation with the government of Niger, Areva agreed to the application of 2006 Mining Law of Niger, which would increase the government's uranium revenues from 5 to 12%.
The West African giraffe is currently not found in the W National Park, but further north in Niger, where it has its last relict population.
In 1974, a combination of devastating drought and accusations of rampant corruption resulted in a coup d'état that overthrew the Diori regime.
No railways were constructed in the colonial period.
This has been especially true in the 20th century, with the most severe drought on record beginning in the late 1960s and lasting, with one break, well into the 1980s.
The parliamentary election forced cohabitation between a rival president and prime minister and ultimately led to governmental paralysis.
It is a charter member of the African Union and the West African Monetary Union and also belongs to the Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Economic Community of West African States, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).
By 2007, the relationship between President Tandja Mamadou and his prime minister had deteriorated, leading to the replacement of the latter in June 2007 by Seyni Oumarou following a successful vote of no confidence at the Assembly.
Previously, Niger was divided into 7 Departments, 36 Arrondissements, and Communes.
The Saibou regime acquiesced to these demands by the end of 1990 and organized the National Conference of 1991, which heralded a new era of multi-party democracy in Niger.
On 26 May 2009, President Tandja dissolved parliament after the country's constitutional court ruled against plans to hold a referendum on whether to allow him a third term in office.
During this ceremony, young men dressed in elaborate ornamentation and made up in traditional face painting gather in lines to dance and sing, vying for the attention of marriageable young women.
The government agreed to absorb some of the former rebels into the military and, with French assistance, to help others return to a productive civilian life.
Niger's only international airport is Diori Hamani International Airport, is located in the capital, Niamey.
By 1922, all resistance to colonial rule was eliminated and Niger became a French colony.
Cowpeas and onions are grown for commercial export, as are small quantities of garlic, peppers, potatoes, and wheat.
The National Sovereign Conference of 1991 marked a turning point in the post-independence era of Niger and brought about multi-party democracy.
In the 7th century, Songhai tribes settled down north of modern-day Niamey and founded the Songhai city-states of Koukia and Gao.
Niger's subtropical climate is mainly very hot and very dry, with much desert area.
Following the adoption of the newest constitution of 2010 and the presidential elections, Mahamadou Issoufou was elected as the first president of the Seventh Republic.
Large portions of the northwest and far east of the nation, while within the Sahara desert, see just enough seasonal rainfall to support semi-nomadic animal husbandry.
In August 2002, serious unrest within military camps occurred in Niamey, Diffa, and Nguigmi, but the government was able to restore order within several days.
Irrigated rice for internal consumption is grown in parts of the Niger River valley in the west.
The country is currently divided into 8 regions, which are subdivided into 36 districts (departments).
The long-term effect of this, especially to pastoralist populations, remains in the 21st century, with those communities which rely upon cattle, sheep, and camels husbandry losing entire herds more than once during this period.
Additional education occurs through madrasas.
Other principal donors include the United States, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, Canada, and Saudi Arabia.
The Kandadji Dam on the Niger River, whose construction started in August 2008, is expected to improve agricultural production in the Tillaberi Department by providing water for the irrigation of 6,000 hectares initially and of 45,000 hectares by 2034.
It is an annual traditional courtship ritual practiced by the Wodaabe (Fula) people of Niger.
It is based on the Code Napoleon "''Inquisitorial system''", established in Niger during French colonial rule and the 1960 Constitution of Niger.
Hausa and Zarma-Sonrai, the two most spoken languages, are widely spoken throughout the country as first or second languages.
Col. Maïnassara created the National Salvation Council composed of military officials, which he headed.
The north of Niger is covered by large deserts and semi deserts.
Illegal hunting, bush fires in some areas and human encroachment upon the flood plains of the Niger River for paddy cultivation are environmental issues.
It was declared illegal by the Constitutional Court but the President dissolved the Court and assumed emergency powers.
From 2007 to 2008, the Second Tuareg Rebellion took place in northern Niger, worsening economic prospects at a time of political limited progress.
Niger's colonial history and development parallel that of other French West African territories.
But for the most part, rural residents engaged in crop tending are clustered in the south centre and south west of the nation, in those areas (the Sahel) which can expect to receive between  of rainfall annually.
Between the Niger River and the Lake Chad lay a fertile area and Hausa kingdoms.
These offices will be replaced in the future by democratically elected councils at each level.
It has the most important population of the rare West African lion and one of the last populations of the Northwest African cheetah.
, many licences have been sold to other companies from countries such as India, China, Canada and Australia in order to exploit new deposits.
According to the constitution, a new parliament was elected within three months.
The reserves at the location were estimated at 10,073,626 tons at an average grade of  per ton from which  will be recovered over a six-year mine life.
French military expeditions met great resistance from several ethnic groups, especially Hausa and Tuareg groups.
French, inherited from the colonial period, is the official language.
It was also aided by the introduction of Islam to the region at the end of the 7th century.
The seven original hausa states were: Daoura (state of queen Daurama), Kano, Rano, Zaria, Gobir, Katsena and Biram.
Three of them—the Anfani Group, Sarounia and Tenere—are urban-based commercial-format FM networks in the major towns.
International human rights groups have criticised the government since at least 1996 as using regulation and police to punish criticism of the state.
The adoption of the new constitution created a Sixth Republic, with a presidential system, as well as the suspension of the 1999 Constitution and a three-year interim government with Tandja Mamadou as president.
Freedom of the press flourished, with the appearance of several new independent newspapers.
The independent-sector radio networks are collectively estimated by CPRP officials to cover some 7.6&nbsp;million people, or about 73% of the population (2005).
From the mid-15th to the late 16th century, Songhai was one of the largest Islamic empires in history.
Niger's transport system was little developed during the colonial period (1899–1960), relying upon animal transport, human transport, and limited river transport in the far south west and south east.
Other wildlife includes elephants, buffaloes, roan antelopes, kob antelopes and warthogs.
In repeated violations of basic civil liberties by the regime, opposition leaders were imprisoned and journalists often arrested, and deported by an unofficial militia composed of police and military.
The state ORTN network depends financially on the government, partly through a surcharge on electricity bills, and partly through direct subsidy.
Political and social unrest spiraled before, during and after the referendum project and ultimately led to a military coup in 2010 that ended the brief existence of the 6th Republic.
Nomadic children in the north of the country often do not have access to schools.
The evidence along with remains of animals that do not typically live in desert are among the strongest evidence of the 'green' Sahara in Niger.
This has included the privatization of water distribution and telecommunications and the removal of price protections for petroleum products, allowing prices to be set by world market prices.
The elections were viewed nationally and internationally as irregular since the electoral commission was replaced during the campaign.
Niger's agricultural and livestock sectors are the mainstay of all but 18% of the population.
It is possible to rehabilitate such soils, using a system called the Bioreclamation of Degraded Lands.
There is also a network of over 80 community radio stations spread across all seven regions of the country, governed by the Comité de Pilotage de Radios de Proximité (CPRP), a civil society organisation.
The French authorities also abolished the widespread slavery among Tuareg communities.
This makes it slightly less than twice the size of France, and the world's twenty-second largest country.
The lowest point is the Niger River, with an elevation of .
Niger has the 11th highest maternal mortality rate in the world at 820 deaths/100,000 live births.
Niger covers a land area of almost 1,270,000&nbsp;km2, making it the largest country in West Africa, with over 80 percent of its land area covered by the Sahara Desert.
In 1997, the gross primary enrollment rate was 29.3 percent, and in 1996, the net primary enrollment rate was 24.5 percent.
In addition to conferring a limited form of French citizenship on the inhabitants of the territories, the 1946 French constitution provided for decentralization of power and limited participation in political life for local advisory assemblies.
Camel caravan transport was historically important in the Sahara desert and Sahel regions which cover most of the north.
Nearly half of the government's budget is derived from foreign donor resources.
He introduced political reforms and drafted a new constitution, with the creation of a single party.
After winning the election in November 1999, President Tandja Mamadou was sworn in office on 22 December 1999 as the first president of the Fifth Republic.
The persistent uranium price slump has brought lower revenues for Niger's uranium sector, although it still provides 72% of national export proceeds.
These groups claimed they lacked attention and resources from the central government.
The 2014 budget was 1.867 trillion CFA which is distributed as follows according to: public debt (76,703,692,000 CFA), personnel expenditures (210,979,633,960 CFA), operating expenditures (128,988,777,711 CFA); subsidies and transfers: 308,379,641,366 CFA) and Investment (1,142,513,658,712 CFA).
The Supreme Council for the Restoration of Democracy led by General Salou Djibo carried out a one-year transition plan, drafted a new constitution and held elections in 2011 that were judged internationally as free and fair.
The capital city is Niamey, located in the far-southwest corner of Niger.
He went on to rule the country as the Chief of the Supreme Military Council.
Thus 53% of the population is actively involved in crop production.
The empire first existed and prospered as the Kanem Empire as early as the 9th century and later as the kingdom of Bornu until 1900.
Niger also has small borders in its far southwest with Burkina Faso at  and Benin at  and to the north-northeast Libya at .
Primary or paved road systems are limited to bigger cities or connection between major cities.
Niger announced that in exchange for the US$5&nbsp;billion investment, the Chinese company would build wells, 11 of which would open by 2012, a  refinery near Zinder and a pipeline out of the nation.
The Songhai Empire was an empire bearing the name of its main ethnic group, Songhai or Sonrai, and located in western Africa on the bend of the Niger River in present-day Niger, Mali and Burkina Faso.
This transitional government was installed in November 1991 to manage the affairs of state until the institutions of the Third Republic were put into place in April 1993.
The longest border is with Nigeria to the south ().
With the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), it has undertaken a concerted effort to revitalize the private sector.
'''Niger''' ( or ; ), officially the '''Republic of Niger''', is a landlocked country in Western Africa, named after the Niger River.
there were 265 communes, including communes urbaines (Urban Communes: as subdivisions of major cities), communes rurales (Rural Communes), in sparsely populated areas and postes administratifs (Administrative Posts) for largely uninhabited desert areas or military zones.
The border dispute with Benin, inherited from colonial times and concerning inter alia Lété Island in the Niger River, was solved by the International Court of Justice in 2005 to Niger's advantage.
The literacy rate of Niger is among the lowest in the world; in 2005 it was estimated to be only 28.7% (42.9% male and 15.1% female).
The economy is concentrated around subsistence and some export agriculture clustered in the more fertile south, and the export of raw materials, especially uranium ore. Niger faces serious challenges to development due to its landlocked position, desert terrain, high fertility rates and resulting overpopulation without birth control, poor education and poverty of its people, lack of infrastructure, poor health care, and environmental degradation.
The Hausa Kingdoms began as seven states founded according to the Bayajidda legend by the six sons of Bawo.
These kingdoms flourished from the mid-14th century up until the early 19th century when they were conquered by Usman dan Fodio, founder of the Sokoto Empire.
A new electoral code was adopted to reflect the decentralization context.
, Niamey is home to a U.S. drone base.
The highest point is Mont Idoukal-n-Taghès in the Aïr Mountains at .
The Hausa kingdoms were not a compact entity but several federations of kingdoms more or less independent of each other.
Niger is divided into 7 Regions and one capital district.
See 2009 Nigerien constitutional crisis.
The military court provides the same rights as civil criminal courts; however, customary courts do not.
The conference was presided over by Prof. André Salifou and developed a plan for a transitional government.
The Guérewol festival is an internationally attraction and was featured in films and magazines as prominent as  the National Geographic.
In 2014, construction for the railway extension connecting Niamey (Niger) to Cotonou via Parakou (Benin) began and is expected to be completed by 2016.
Christianity was established earlier in the country by missionaries during the French colonial years.
The justice system also includes civil criminal courts, customary courts, traditional mediation, and a military court.
Much of the non-desert portions of the country are threatened by periodic drought and desertification.
Niger has been a uranium exporter since the 1960s and has had substantial export earnings and rapid economic growth during the 1960s and 1970s.
These elections were followed by presidential elections.
The Council carried out a six-month transition period during which a new constitution was drafted and adopted on 12 May 1996.
Proponents of the extended presidency, rallied behind the Tazartche movement, were countered by opponents (anti-Tazartche) composed of opposition party militants and civil society activists.
The history of oil prospecting and discovery goes back to the independence era with the first discovery of Tintouma oil field in Madama in 1975.
His team discovered 5,000-year-old remains of a woman and two children in the Tenere Desert.
In 2013, the government of Niger sought to increase its uranium revenue by subjecting the two mining companies to a 2006 Mining Law.
In alliance with progressive French elements and other independence African movements, the movements acquired the suppression of forced labor and arbitrary requisitions as well as legal equality between the African and the French citizens.
Tuareg expansion from the north, culminating in their seizure of the far eastern oases from the Kanem-Bornu Empire in the 17th centuries, spread distinctively Berber practices.
This is followed by Chad to the east, at , Algeria to the north-northwest (), and Mali at .
Despite the restriction in freedom, the country had improved economic development with the creation of new companies, the construction of major infrastructure (building and new roads, schools, health centers) and minimal corruption in government agencies, which Kountché did not hesitate to punish severely.
This includes a series of droughts in the 1970s and 1980s and more recently in 2005–2006 and again in 2010.
Outside big cities and in rural areas, this responsibility falls on the National Gendarmerie and the National Guard.
When the uranium-led boom ended in the early 1980s the economy stagnated, and new investment since then has been limited.
These small groups, linked to similar groups in Jos, Nigeria, came to public prominence in the 1990s during a series of religious riots.
They consist of the Niger Army (Armée de Terre), the Niger Air Force (Armée de l'Air) and the auxiliary paramilitary forces, such as the National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie nationale) and the National Guard (Garde Nationale).
Niger's two uranium mines—SOMAIR's open pit mine and COMINAK's underground mine—are owned by a French-led consortium and operated by French company Areva.
On 18 December 1958, the Republic of Niger was officially created with Hamani Diori as the head of the Counsel of Ministers of the Republic of Niger.
The military court cannot try civilians.
On 8 May 1899, in retaliation for the resistance of queen Sarraounia, captain Voulet and his men murdered all the inhabitants of the village of Birni-N'Konni in what is regarded as one of the worst massacres in French colonial history.
There are additional coal deposits to the south and west that are of a higher quality and may be exploitable.
The current Judiciary of Niger was established with the creation of the Fourth Republic in 1999.
The W National Park, situated in the bordering area to Burkina Faso and Benin, belongs to one of the most important areas for wildlife in Western Africa, which is called the WAP (W–Arli–Pendjari) Complex.
Northern areas which support crops, such as the southern portions of the Aïr Massif and the Kaouar oasis, rely upon oases and a slight increase in rainfall due to mountain effects.
In the past, foreign aid has contributed to large percentages of the budget.
Niger is a secular country and separation of state and religion is guaranteed by Article 3 of the 2010 Constitution as well as Article 175 which dictate that future amendments or revisions may not modify the secular nature of the republic of Niger.
Religious freedom is protected by Article 30 of the same constitution.
It belongs to the UN and its main specialized agencies and in 1980–81 served on the UN Security Council.
Rains, as in much of the Sahel, have been marked by annual variability.
The most notable Tuareg revolt was the Kaocen Revolt.
In 2012, there was  of road network throughout Niger, of which  were paved.
Alcohol, such as the locally produced Bière Niger, is sold openly in most of the country.
The first mandate of Tandja Mamadou brought about many administrative and economic reforms that had been halted due to the military coups since the Third Republic.
But the economy stagnated due to the sharp reduction in foreign aid in 1999 (which gradually resumed in 2000) and poor rains in 2000.
The 15% of Niger's land that is arable is found mainly along its southern border with Nigeria.
On 24 July 2004, the first municipal elections in the history of Niger were held to elect local representatives, previously appointed by the government.
Niger also has the highest fertility rate in the world (7.03 births per woman according to 2013 estimates); this means that nearly half (49%) of the Nigerien population is under age 15.
SONITEL, the nation's telephone operator which was separated from the post office and privatised in 2001, was renationalised in 2009.
While USAID does not have an office in Niger, the United States is a major donor, contributing nearly $10 million each year to Niger's development.
Oasis farming in small patches of the north of the country produces onions, dates, and some market vegetables for export.
