It has since alternated between democratically-elected civilian governments and military dictatorships, until it achieved a stable democracy in 1999, with the 2011 presidential elections considered the first to be reasonably free and fair.
Prior to the Nigerian civil war, Nigeria was self-sufficient in food.
The Nigerian government has commissioned the overseas production and launch of four satellites.
Kin-selective altruism has made its way into Nigerian politics, resulting in tribalist efforts to concentrate Federal power to a particular region of their interests.
Lawsuits under the American Alien Tort Statute against Royal Dutch Shell and Brian Anderson, the head of Shell's Nigerian operation, settled out of court with Shell continuing to deny liability.
Nigeria made history in April 2006 by becoming the first African country to completely pay off its debt (estimated $30&nbsp;billion) owed to the Paris Club.
Internationally, Nigeria is infamous for a form of bank fraud dubbed ''419'', a type of advance fee fraud (named after Section 419 of the Nigerian Penal Code) along with the "Nigerian scam", a form of confidence trick practised by individuals and criminal syndicates.
The United States accounts for the largest portion of official remittances, followed by the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Spain and France.
A minority of the population practise religions indigenous to Nigeria, such as those native to Igbo and Yoruba peoples.
Nigeria's national basketball team made the headlines internationally when it qualified for the 2012 Summer Olympics as it beat heavily favoured world elite teams such as Greece and Lithuania.
The areas surrounding Calabar, Cross River State, also in this forest, are believed to contain the world's largest diversity of butterflies.
Babangida's tenure was marked by a flurry of political activity: he instituted the International Monetary Fund's Structural Adjustment Program (SAP) to aid in the repayment of the country's crushing international debt.
Nigeria is the 50th-largest export market for US goods and the 14th-largest exporter of goods to the US.
The House contains 360 seats, with the number of seats per state is determined by population.
Nigeria is a founding member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the African Union, OPEC, and the United Nations amongst other international organisations.
Witnesses or anyone who helps gay couples marry will be sentenced to 10 years behind bars.
Major crops include beans,  sesame, cashew nuts, cassava,  cocoa beans, groundnuts,  gum arabic,  kolanut, maize (corn),  melon,  millet,  palm kernels,  palm oil,  plantains,  rice,  rubber,  sorghum,  soybeans and yams.
Guinean forest-savanna mosaic is plains of tall grass interrupted by trees.
Azikiwe became Nigeria's maiden Governor-General in 1960.
Nigerian feasts are colourful and lavish, while aromatic market and roadside snacks cooked on barbecues or fried in oil are plentiful and varied.
Despite its vast government revenue from the mining of petroleum, Nigeria is faced by a number of societal issues, owing primarily to a history of inefficiency in its governance.
Babangida finally kept his promise to relinquish office to a civilian government, but not before appointing Ernest Shonekan head of an interim government.
Nigeria lies between latitudes 4° and 14°N, and longitudes 2° and 15°E.
Football is largely considered the Nigeria's national sport and the country has its own Premier League of football.
The Yoruba area contains a large Anglican population, while Igboland is predominantly Roman Catholic and the Edo area is composed predominantly of members of the Pentecostal Assemblies of God, which was introduced into Nigeria by Augustus Ehurie Wogu and his associates at Old Umuahia.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected economic growth of 9% in 2008 and 8.3% in 2009.
The middle belt of Nigeria contains the largest number of minority ethnic groups in Nigeria, who were found to be mostly Christians and members of traditional religions, with a small proportion of Muslims.
Coastal plains are found in both the southwest and the southeast.
Some northern states have incorporated Sharia law into their previously secular legal systems, which has brought about some controversy.
When elections were held in 1965, the Nigerian National Democratic Party came to power in Nigeria's Western Region.
Imbalances between North and South were expressed in Nigeria's political life as well.
The various Nigerian Confraternities or "campus cults" are active in both organised crime and in political violence as well as providing a network of corruption within Nigeria.
Nigeria used Egyptian pilots for their air force.
Nigeria's population increased by 57 million from 1990 to 2008, a 60% growth rate in less than two decades.
However, these estimates should be taken with caution because sample data is mostly collected from major urban areas in the south, which are predominantly Christian.
68% of the Nigerian population is literate, and the rate for men (75.7%) is higher than that for women (60.6%).
A changing legal imperative (transatlantic slave trade outlawed by Britain in 1807) and economic imperative (a desire for political and social stability) led most European powers to support widespread cultivation of agricultural products, such as the palm, for use in European industry.
Nri was ruled by the Eze Nri, and the city of Nri is considered to be the foundation of Igbo culture.
Nigeria became the second African country to have successfully carried out this surgery.
In the March 2015 election, Muhammadu Buhari defeated Goodluck Jonathan by roughly 2 million votes.
JuJu music which is percussion music fused with traditional music from the Yoruba nation and made famous by King Sunny Adé, is also from Nigeria.
Waste management including sewage treatment, the linked processes of deforestation and soil degradation, and climate change or global warming are the major environmental problems in Nigeria.
Nigeria has been reorganising its health system since the Bamako Initiative of 1987, which formally promoted community-based methods of increasing accessibility of drugs and health care services to the population, in part by implementing user fees.
Tension rose between North and South; Igbos in Northern cities suffered persecution and many fled to the Eastern Region.
A significant Shia minority exists (''see Shia in Nigeria'').
According to the United Nations, Nigeria has been undergoing explosive population growth and has one of the highest growth and fertility rates in the world.
The only breakdown available was by gender: males numbered 71,709,859, females numbered 68,293,08.
Colonel Yakubu Gowon to head of state.
Many different spices, herbs and flavourings are used in conjunction with palm oil or groundnut oil to create deeply flavoured sauces and soups often made very hot with chili peppers.
Another portion of the bill mandates 10 years in prison for those found guilty of organising, operating or supporting gay clubs, organisations and meetings.
According to official statistics, gang violence in Lagos resulted in 273 civilians and 84 policemen killed in the period of August 2000 to May 2001.
Their dominance reached as far as the city of Eko (an Edo name later changed to Lagos by the Portuguese) and further.
An imbalance was created in the polity by the result of the 1961 plebiscite.
The 2010 census of Association of Religion Data Archives has also reported that 46.5% of the total population was Christian, slightly larger than the Muslim population of 45.5%, while 7.7% were members of other religions.
Dr. Goodluck Jonathan was sworn in as Yar'Adua's replacement on 6 May 2010, becoming Nigeria's 14th Head of State, while his vice-president, Namadi Sambo, an architect and former Kaduna State governor, was chosen on 18 May 2010, by the National Assembly.
, Nigeria has eight cities with a population of over 1&nbsp;million people (from largest to smallest: Lagos, Kano, Ibadan, Benin City and Port Harcourt.
The oldest signs of human settlement at Ife's current site date back to the 9th century, and its material culture includes terracotta and bronze figures.
In 2012, a new bone marrow donor program was launched by the University of Nigeria to help people with leukaemia, lymphoma, or sickle cell disease to find a compatible donor for a life-saving bone marrow transplant, which cures them of their conditions.
The opposition comprised the comparatively liberal Action Group (AG), which was largely dominated by the Yoruba and led by Obafemi Awolowo.
Jonathan of the PDP was declared the winner on 19 April 2011, having won the election with a total of 22,495,187 of the 39,469,484 votes cast, to stand ahead of Muhammadu Buhari from the main opposition party, the Congress for Progressive Change (CPC), which won 12,214,853 of the total votes cast.
Between 1990 and 2000, Nigeria lost an average of 409,700 hectares of forest every year equal to an average annual deforestation rate of 2.38%.
Benin's power lasted between the 15th and 19th centuries.
Christianity is practised by 58% of the population (among them 74% are Protestant, 25% Roman Catholic, 1% other Christian).
There is also the Afan Music invented and popularised by the Ewuborn poet and musician Umuobuarie Igberaese.
According to Nigerian Communications Satellite Limited, it was put into "emergency mode operation in order to effect mitigation and repairs".
Nigeria is the United States' largest trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa and supplies a fifth of its oil (11% of oil imports).
In the Nigerian general election, 2015, the victorious All Progressives Congress has 225 House seats and 60 in the Senate while the defeated People's Democratic Party of Nigeria became the opposition with 125 seats in the House and 49 in the Senate.
The majority of those  enslaved and taken to these ports were captured in raids and wars.
These scams involve a complicit Nigerian bank (the laws being set up loosely to allow it) and a scammer who claims to have money he needs to obtain from that bank.
North of this is fresh water swamp, containing different vegetation from the salt water swamp, and north of that is rain forest.
Nigeria retains membership in the Non-Aligned Movement.
Nigeria is divided roughly in half between Christians, who live mostly in the southern part of the country, and Muslims in the northern part.
The area near the border with Cameroon close to the coast is rich rainforest and part of the Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests ecoregion, an important centre for biodiversity.
Nigeria is a member of the MINT group of countries, which are widely seen as the globe's next "BRIC-like" economies.
Nigeria became a formally independent federation in 1960, and plunged into a civil war from 1967 to 1970.
Members of the clan trace their lineages back to the patriarchal king-figure Eri.
Since 2002, the country has seen sectarian violence by Boko Haram, an Islamist movement that seeks to abolish the secular system of government and establish Sharia law in the country.
The port of Calabar on the historical Bight of Biafra (now commonly referred to as the Bight of Bonny) become one of the largest slave trading posts in West Africa in the era of the transatlantic slave trade.
The country is viewed as a multinational state, as it is inhabited by over 500 ethnic groups, of which the three largest are the Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba; these ethnic groups speak over 500 different languages, and are identified with wide variety of cultures.
In a national television address in 2007, he added that if Nigerians did not like the victory of his handpicked successor, they would have an opportunity to vote again in four years.
It was temporarily expelled from the latter in 1995 when ruled by the Abacha regime.
(The country joined OPEC in 1971).
This name was allegedly coined in the late 19th century by British journalist Flora Shaw, who later married Baron Frederick Lugard, a British colonial administrator.
During the oil boom of the 1970s, Nigeria accumulated a significant foreign debt to finance major infrastructural investments.
Nigeria used part of its oil profits to pay the residual 40%, freeing up at least $1.15&nbsp;billion annually for poverty reduction programmes.
Some of the more prolific slave traders were linked with the Oyo Empire in the southwest, the Aro Confederacy in the southeast and the Sokoto Caliphate in the north.
Southern Cameroon opted to join the Republic of Cameroon while Northern Cameroons chose to remain in Nigeria.
Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and accounts for about 18% of the continent's total population, however, exactly how populous is a subject of speculation.
On the African continent, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Chad, Libya and South Africa are important source countries of remittance flows to Nigeria, while China is the biggest remittance-sending country in Asia.
With the majority of Nigeria's populace in the rural areas, the major languages of communication in the country remain indigenous languages.
On 1 January 1901, Nigeria became a British protectorate, and part of the British Empire, the foremost world power at the time.
The French spoken in Nigeria may be mixed with some native languages but is mostly spoken like the French spoken in Benin.
In 1885, British claims to a West African sphere of influence received recognition from other European nations at the Berlin Conference.
After negotiations by the Nigeria authorities, in October 2005 Nigeria and its Paris Club creditors reached an agreement under which Nigeria repurchased its debt at a discount of approximately 60%.
Rainfall is more limited, to between  per year.
The origin of the name ''Niger'', which originally applied only to the middle reaches of the Niger River, is uncertain.
The savannah zone's three categories are Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, Sudan savannah, and Sahel savannah.
NigComSat-1, a Nigerian satellite built in 2004, was Nigeria's third satellite and Africa's first communication satellite.
The Edo's Benin Empire is located in southwestern Nigeria.
Nigerian cinema is Africa's largest movie industry in terms of both value and the number of movies produced per year.
Nigeria has a highly developed financial services sector, with a mix of local and international banks, asset management companies, brokerage houses, insurance companies and brokers, private equity funds and investment banks.
In the Sahel region, rain is less than  per year and the Sahara Desert is encroaching.
As oil revenues fueled the rise of federal subsidies to states, the federal government became the centre of political struggle and the threshold of power in the country.
Even though most ethnic groups prefer to communicate in their own languages, English as the official language is widely used for education, business transactions and for official purposes.
Goodluck Jonathan served as Nigeria's president until 16 April 2011, when a new presidential election in Nigeria was conducted.
Since the end of the civil war in 1970, some ethnic violence has persisted.
The far south is defined by its tropical rainforest climate, where annual rainfall is  a year.
The cultural and political differences between Nigeria's dominant ethnic groups – the Hausa ('Northerners'), Igbo ('Easterners') and Yoruba ('Westerners') – were sharp.
By war, the British conquered Benin in 1897, and, in the Anglo-Aro War (1901–1902), defeated other opponents.
Nationalism has also led to active secessionist movements such as MASSOB, Nationalist movements such as Oodua Peoples Congress, Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta and a civil war.
In April 2016, over 500 people in ten villages in predominantly Christian areas in Agatu were murdered by Fulani herdsmen.
The new head of state, Ibrahim Babangida, declared himself president and commander in chief of the armed forces and of the ruling Supreme Military Council.
The United States is the country's largest foreign investor.
Usually the captives were taken back to the conquerors' territory as forced labour; after time, they were sometimes acculturated and absorbed into the conquerors' society.
The spacecraft was operated by NigComSat and the Nigerian Space Agency, NASRDA.
The latter nation sponsored and oversaw the construction of Nigeria's parliament buildings.
It was designed to provide coverage to many parts of Africa, and the Ka-band transponders would also cover Italy.
Critically acclaimed writers of a younger generation include Chris Abani, Sefi Atta, Helon Habila, Helen Oyeyemi, Nnedi Okorafor, Kachi A. Ozumba, Sarah Ladipo Manyika, and Chika Unigwe.
It shares a  border with Benin (773&nbsp;km), Niger (1497&nbsp;km), Chad (87&nbsp;km), Cameroon (1690&nbsp;km), and has a coastline of at least 853&nbsp;km.
The education system consists of six years of primary school, three years of junior secondary school, three years of senior secondary school, and four, five or six years of university education leading to a bachelor's degree.
In 2003, the Nigerian Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (or EFCC) was created, ostensibly to combat this and other forms of organised financial crime.
In late November 2006, it organised an Africa-South America Summit in Abuja to promote what some attendees termed "South-South" linkages on a variety of fronts.
The United Nations estimates that the population in 2009 was at 154,729,000, distributed as 51.7% rural and 48.3% urban, and with a population density of 167.5 people per square kilometre.
The military in Nigeria have played a major role in the country's history since independence.
To the southwest of the Niger is "rugged" highland.
A large number of Sunni Muslims are members of Sufi brotherhoods.
Local authorities take responsibility for implementing policy for state-controlled public education and state schools at a regional level.
Nigeria has one of the fastest growing telecommunications markets in the world, major emerging market operators (like MTN, Etisalat, Zain and Globacom) basing their largest and most profitable centres in the country.
It is influenced by the Westminster System model in the composition and management of the upper and lower houses of the bicameral legislature.
In West Africa, the oldest bronzes made using the lost-wax process were from Igbo Ukwu, a city under Nri influence.
Additionally, the very first music video played on MTV Base Africa (the 100th station in the MTV network) was Tuface Idibia's pan-African hit "African Queen".
February 2011: According to Citigroup, Nigeria will have the highest average GDP growth in the world between 2010–2050.
The Nigerian Military consist of an army, a navy, and an air force.
Health care delivery in Nigeria is a concurrent responsibility of the three tiers of government in the country, and the private sector.
Umaru Yar'Adua of the People's Democratic Party (PDP) came into power in the general election of 2007.
Nigeria is a religiously diverse society, with Islam and Christianity being the most widely professed religions.
On 24 March 2009, the Nigerian Federal Ministry of Science and Technology, NigComSat Ltd. and CGWIC signed another contract for the in-orbit delivery of the NigComSat-1R satellite.
The international media reported the elections as having run smoothly with relatively little violence or voter fraud, in contrast to previous elections.
Some of the 'solutions' have been disastrous to the environment, resulting in untreated waste being dumped in places where it can pollute waterways and groundwater.
On 11 November 2008, NigComSat-1 failed in orbit after running out of power because of an anomaly in its solar array.
In 2005 Nigeria had the highest rate of deforestation in the world, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Consistent with the rise of Nigeria as an increasingly dangerous hot spot, 28 of the 30 seafarers kidnapped as of January–June 2013 were in Nigeria.
It did not develop alternate revenue sources in the economy for economic stability.
Inhabitants of the southern region sustained more interaction, economic and cultural, with the British and other Europeans owing to the coastal economy.
In 1963, the nation established a Federal Republic, with Azikiwe as its first president.
Joshua's Emmanuel TV, originating from Nigeria, is one of the most viewed television stations across Africa.
it is the largest economy in Africa, having overtaken South Africa.
Several hundred million dollars in accounts traced to Abacha were discovered in 1999.
The first coup was in January 1966 and was led by Igbo soldiers under Majors Emmanuel Ifeajuna and Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu.
Ogun is considered to be the current Nigeria's industrial hub, as most factories are located in Ogun and more companies are moving there, followed by Lagos.
Upon gaining independence in 1960, Nigeria made African unity the centrepiece of its foreign policy and played a leading role in the fight against the apartheid government in South Africa.
Under a law signed early 2014, same-sex couples who marry face up to 14 years each in prison.
The Nok civilisation of Northern Nigeria flourished between 500 BC and AD 200, producing life-sized terracotta figures which are some of the earliest known sculptures in Sub-Saharan Africa.
However, a major breakthrough came in December 2014, when it was reported that Nigeria hadn't recorded a polio case in 6 months, and on its way to be declared Polio free.
Nigeria has a varied landscape.
Hausa is the most widely spoken of the 3 main languages spoken in Nigeria itself (Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba) but unlike the Yorubas and Igbos, the Hausas tend not to travel far outside Nigeria itself.
With this African-centred stance, Nigeria readily sent troops to the Congo at the behest of the United Nations shortly after independence (and has maintained membership since that time).
Under an African Union mandate, it has stationed forces in Sudan's Darfur region to try to establish peace.
At the beginning of the 19th century, Usman dan Fodio directed a successful ''jihad'' and created and led the centralised Fulani Empire (also known as the Sokoto Caliphate).
Nigeria also supported several Pan African and pro-self government causes in the 1970s, including garnering support for Angola's MPLA, SWAPO in Namibia, and aiding opposition to the minority governments of Portuguese Mozambique, and Rhodesia.
In May 2014 Benin, Chad, Cameroon and Niger joined Nigeria in a united effort to combat Boko Haram in the aftermath of the 2014 Chibok kidnapping of 276 schoolgirls.
The highest point in Nigeria is Chappal Waddi at .
A number of slave routes were established throughout Nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports.
These include the Redeemed Christian Church of God, Winners' Chapel, Christ Apostolic Church (the first Aladura Movement in Nigeria), Deeper Christian Life Ministry, Evangelical Church of West Africa, Mountain of Fire and Miracles, Christ Embassy and The Synagogue Church Of All Nations.
In 1950, Nigeria had only 33 million people.
Among Christians, the Pew Research survey found that 74% were Protestant, 25% were Catholic, and 1% belonged to other Christian denominations, including a small Orthodox Christian community.
The satellite according to then-Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan which was paid for by the insurance policy on NigComSat-1 which de-orbited in 2009, would have a positive impact on national development in various sectors such as communications, internet services, health, agriculture, environmental protection and national security.
Cocoa is the leading non-oil foreign exchange earner.
The education system is divided into Kindergarten, primary education, secondary education and tertiary education.
Many French speakers from surrounding countries have influenced the English spoken in the border regions of Nigeria and some Nigerian citizens have become fluent enough in French to work in the surrounding countries.
This plateau extends through the border with Cameroon, where the montane land is part of the Bamenda Highlands of Cameroon.
It has the seventh-largest trade surplus with the US of any country worldwide.
Government officials have not taken official action to reach this.
Kano State has sought to incorporate Sharia law into its constitution.
Nigeria has remained a key player in the international oil industry since the 1970s, and maintains membership in Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), which it joined in July 1971.
But in some recent report, the Christian population is now sightly larger than the Muslim population.
The international community has been observing Nigerian elections to encourage a free and fair process, and condemned this one as being severely flawed.
These minorities mostly reside in major cities such as Lagos and Abuja, or in the Niger Delta as employees for the major oil companies.
A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost.
Petroleum plays a large role in the Nigerian economy, accounting for 40% of GDP and 80% of Government earnings.
, life expectancy in Nigeria is 52.62 years on average according to CIA, and just over half the population have access to potable water and appropriate sanitation; , the Infant mortality is 8.4 deaths per 1000 live births.
With rising anti-slavery sentiment at home and changing economic realities, Great Britain outlawed the international slave trade in 1807.
There has subsequently been a period of relative harmony since the Federal Government introduced tough new measures against religious violence in all affected parts of the country.
He set 1990 as the official deadline for a return to democratic governance.
Nigeria's three largest ethnic groups (Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba) have maintained historical preeminence in Nigerian politics; competition amongst these three groups has fuelled corruption and graft.
Additionally, the single death to date in 2013 occurred in Nigeria.
Lagos has grown from about 300,000 in 1950 to an estimated 15 million today.
Yar'Adua died on 5 May 2010.
Nigeria in recent years has been embracing industrialisation.
The IMF further projects an 8% growth in the Nigerian economy in 2011.
Immigrants also include those from other West African or East African nations.
The restoration of democracy and subsequent economic reforms have successfully put Nigeria back on track towards achieving its full economic potential.
The pidgin English or Nigerian English is widely spoken within the Niger Delta Regions, predominately in Warri, Sapele, Port Harcourt, Agenebode, Ewu, and Benin City.
Nigeria backed the African National Congress (ANC) by taking a committed tough line with regard to the South African government and their military actions in southern Africa.
Although Nigerian films have been produced since the 1960s, the country's film industry has been aided by the rise of affordable digital filming and editing technologies.
Nri and Aguleri, where the Igbo creation myth originates, are in the territory of the Umeuri clan.
its scope was broadest towards the end of the 19th century.
It comprises 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, where the capital, Abuja is located.
A visiting Nigerian Senator reported all the primary and post-primary schools, health centres, worship centres as well as the police station in the area were destroyed.
Millions of Nigerians have emigrated at times of economic hardship, primarily to Europe, North America and Australia.
