In late 1937, Stalin appointed Khrushchev as head of the Communist Party in Ukraine, and Khrushchev duly left Moscow for Kiev, again the Ukrainian capital, in January 1938.
He accompanied Soviet troops as they took Kiev in November 1943, entering the shattered city as Soviet forces drove out German troops.
However, Khrushchev's children remembered their father as having been seriously ill. Once Khrushchev was able to get out of bed, he and his family took their first vacation since before the war, to a beachfront resort in Latvia.
Khrushchev recalled in his memoirs, "It's nice to live in Moscow and work at the Timiryazev Agricultural Academy.
Once he did so, Khrushchev ordered a halt to the attacks on Pasternak.
However, Stalin was not publicly denounced, and his portrait remained widespread through the USSR, from airports to Khrushchev's Kremlin office.
It was all so sudden and unexpected."
A mass demonstration in Budapest on October 23 turned into a popular uprising.
The Manezh Gallery exhibit remained open for some time after Khrushchev's visit, and experienced a considerable rise in attendance after the article in ''Pravda''.
In Poland, a worker's strike in Poznań developed into disturbances which left more than 50 dead in October 1956.
Faced with an already-announced opening date of November 7, 1934, Khrushchev took considerable risks in the construction and spent much of his time down in the tunnels.
He then resigned the Ukrainian premiership in favor of Demyan Korotchenko, Khrushchev's protégé.
Another, which was not, was to release East Germany into a united, neutral Germany in exchange for compensation from the West—a proposal considered by Khrushchev to be anti-communist.
After the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II in 1917, the new Russian Provisional Government in Petrograd had little influence over Ukraine.
Khrushchev biographer William Tompson related the former premier's reforms to those which occurred later:
Though Khrushchev's strategy failed to achieve the major goals he sought, Aleksandr Fursenko, who wrote a book analyzing Khrushchev's foreign and military policies, argued that the strategy did coerce the West in a limited manner.
But whatever he was, however he came across, he was more human than his predecessor or even than most of his foreign counterparts, and for much of the world that was enough to make the USSR seem less mysterious or menacing.
The U.S. President offered no apology, but stated that the flights had been suspended and would not resume, and renewed his Open Skies proposal for mutual overflight rights.
One visitor whom Khrushchev regretted not seeing was former U.S. Vice President Nixon, then in his "wilderness years" before his election to the presidency, who came to Khrushchev's Moscow apartment while the former premier was at his ''dacha''.
In January 1960, Khrushchev told the Presidium that Soviet ICBMs made an agreement with the U.S. possible because "main-street Americans have begun to shake from fear for the first times in their lives".
Even though millions of Ukrainians had been taken to Germany as workers or prisoners of war, there was insufficient housing for those who remained.
Mikhail Gorbachev, then a Komsomol official, recalled that though young and well-educated Soviets in his district were excited by the speech, many others decried it, either defending Stalin or seeing little point in digging up the past.
Khrushchev viewed this policy as very effective, and recommended its adoption elsewhere to Stalin.
Damage to Soviet foreign relations was severe, and would have been greater were it not for the fortuitous timing of the Suez crisis, which distracted world attention.
The refusal of the western world to acknowledge East Germany was gradually eroded, and, in 1975, the United States and other NATO members signed the Helsinki Agreement with the USSR and Warsaw Pact nations, including East Germany, setting human rights standards in Europe.
Despite this, collective and state farms were required to turn over 52% of the harvest to the government.
However, despite the premier's rage, none of the artists were arrested or exiled.
Khrushchev did what he could to assist his hometown.
As word leaked of the power struggle, members of the Central Committee, which Khrushchev controlled, streamed to Moscow, many flown there aboard military planes, and demanded to be admitted to the meeting.
Marshal Zhukov was rewarded for his support with full membership in the Presidium, but Khrushchev feared his popularity and power.
Fearing demonstrations, the authorities did not announce Khrushchev's death until the hour of his wake, and surrounded the cemetery with troops.
During the first half of 1957, Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich worked to quietly build support to dismiss Khrushchev.
Khrushchev arranged for the Kremlin grounds to be opened to the public, an act with "great public resonance".
Soviet forces in the city clashed with Hungarians and even fired on demonstrators, with hundreds of both Hungarians and Soviets killed.
The new U.S. President, Lyndon Johnson, hoped for continued improved relations but was distracted by other issues and had little opportunity to develop a relationship with Khrushchev before the premier was ousted.
He completed only one such town before his December 1949 return to Moscow; he dedicated it to Stalin as a 70th birthday present.
Khrushchev carefully cultivated high Party officials, and was able to appoint supporters as local Party bosses, who then took seats on the Central Committee.
When Moscow blamed the disturbances on Western agitators, Polish leaders ignored the claim, and instead made concessions to the workers.
He instructed Komsomol officials to "smother foreign guests in our embrace".
Khrushchev did so, later stating, "When Stalin says dance, a wise man dances."
At that meeting, the three main conspirators were dubbed the Anti-Party Group, accused of factionalism and complicity in Stalin's crimes.
On May 1, a U-2 was shot down, its pilot, Francis Gary Powers, captured alive.
Upon completing that apprenticeship, the teenage Khrushchev was hired by a factory.
Brezhnev was elected First Secretary (later General Secretary), while Alexei Kosygin succeeded Khrushchev as premier.
He was appointed Premier of the Ukrainian SSR in addition to his earlier party post, one of the rare instances in which the Ukrainian party and civil leader posts were held by one person.
Khrushchev biographer Taubman speculates that this omission was most likely to avoid the possibility of being seen as complicit in the death of the son of a Politburo member.
His biographer, William Taubman, suggests that Khrushchev's delay in affiliating himself with the Bolsheviks was because he felt closer to the Mensheviks who prioritized economic progress, whereas the Bolsheviks sought political power.
Molotov was sent as Ambassador to Mongolia; the others were sent to head industrial facilities and institutes far from Moscow.
Khrushchev led a Soviet delegation to Belgrade in 1955.
He said that they wanted to restore the old order, and for this purpose, "the enemies of the people" had linked up with the forces of reaction internationally.
His domestic policies, aimed at bettering the lives of ordinary citizens, were often ineffective, especially in agriculture.
Hoping eventually to rely on missiles for national defense, Khrushchev ordered major cuts in conventional forces.
They had three children together: daughter Rada was born in 1929, son Sergei in 1935 and daughter Elena in 1937.
Forty years later, after the fall of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev applauded Khrushchev for his courage in taking a huge political risk and showing himself to be "a moral man after all".
Brezhnev was given ample time for his conspiracy; Khrushchev was absent from Moscow for a total of five months between January and September 1964.
Khrushchev's U.S. visit resulted in an informal agreement with U.S. president Dwight Eisenhower that there would be no firm deadline over Berlin, but that there would be a four-power summit to try to resolve the issue, and the premier left the U.S. to general good feelings.
Instead, much of the high-level work of government took place at dinners hosted by Stalin.
Kalinovka was a peasant village; Khrushchev's teacher, Lydia Shevchenko, later stated that she had never seen a village as poor as Kalinovka had been.
Hoping to torpedo Khrushchev's efforts at détente with the U.S., Mao soon thereafter provoked the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis, describing the Taiwanese islands shelled in the crisis as "batons that keep Eisenhower and Khrushchev dancing, scurrying this way and that.
Corn became so unpopular in 1965 that its planting fell to the lowest level in the postwar period, as even ''kolkhozes'' which had been successful with it in Ukraine and other southern portions of the USSR refused to plant it.
Khrushchev also ordered that one-third of the membership of each committee, from low-level councils to the Central Committee itself, be replaced at each election.
This would leave East Germany, which was not a party to treaties giving the Western Powers access to Berlin, in control of the routes to the city.
All but one member of the Ukrainian Politburo Organizational Bureau and Secretariat were arrested.
At a June 18 Presidium meeting at which two Khrushchev supporters were absent, the plotters moved that Bulganin, who had joined the scheme, take the chair, and proposed other moves which would effectively demote Khrushchev and put themselves in control.
After Khrushchev's arrival, the pace of arrests accelerated.
Almost 60,000,000&nbsp;residents of the former Soviet republics still live in these buildings.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev noted that almost everyone who worked with him was arrested.
Khrushchev had prefabricated reinforced concrete used, greatly speeding up construction.
The first visit by a Soviet premier to the United States resulted in an extended media circus.
Khrushchev sought to find a lasting solution to the problem of a divided Germany and of the enclave of West Berlin deep within East German territory.
The depression continued.
However, Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that he and Marshal Semyon Budyonny proposed redeploying Soviet forces to avoid the encirclement until Marshal Semyon Timoshenko arrived from Moscow with orders for the troops to hold their positions.
He was employed as a metalworker in his youth, and during the Russian Civil War was a political commissar.
In the fall of 1965, he and his wife were ordered to leave their house and ''dacha'' to move to an apartment and to a smaller ''dacha''.
On November 3, two members of the Nagy government appeared in Ukraine as the self-proclaimed heads of a provisional government and demanded Soviet intervention, which was forthcoming.
However, he refused the offer, seeking to be assigned to the newly established technical college (''tekhnikum'') in Yuzovka, though his superiors were reluctant to let him go.
Stolen from the West, they lacked subtitles.
''Pravda'' ran a one-sentence announcement of the former premier's death; Western newspapers contained considerable coverage.
He finally decided, in consultation with his advisers on the plane and Presidium members in Moscow, to demand an apology from Eisenhower and a promise that there would be no further U-2 flights in Soviet airspace.
In June 1937, the Politburo set a quota of 35,000&nbsp;enemies to be arrested in Moscow province; 5,000 of these were to be executed.
Lysenko was stripped of his policy-making positions.
Khrushchev was relieved of his duties as Party head for Moscow to concentrate on unspecified duties in the Party's Central Committee.
When new housing was built, much of it was in the form of high rises rather than Khrushchev's low-rise structures, which lacked elevators or balconies.
Ambassador to Moscow Charles E. Bohlen and United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Chairman J. William Fulbright that East Germany had every right to close its borders, which were not disavowed by the Kennedy Administration, Khrushchev authorized East German leader Walter Ulbricht to begin construction of what became known as the Berlin Wall, which would surround West Berlin.
He sought to duplicate those conditions in the Soviet Union.
Early Khrushchev biographer Mark Frankland suggested that Khrushchev's faith in his leader was first shaken by the Red Army's setbacks.
After Khrushchev attacked China in his speech to the congress, Chinese leader Peng Zhen mocked Khrushchev, stating that the premier's foreign policy was to blow hot and cold towards the West.
This was unpopular among Party ''apparatchiks'', and led to confusions in the chain of command, as neither committee secretary had precedence over the other.
As the new rulers made their conservatism in artistic matters known, Khrushchev came to be more favorably viewed by artists and writers, some of whom visited him.
At the time, the main agricultural college in the USSR was in Moscow, and students did not do the manual labor of farming.
He had no stomach for a fight, and put up little resistance.
Zhukov learned what was happening, and hurried back to Moscow, only to be formally notified of his dismissal.
The revolt was put down by the military.
When Soviet troops, pursuant to the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, invaded the eastern portion of Poland on September 17, 1939, Khrushchev accompanied the troops at Stalin's direction.
Later that year, he was selected as First Secretary of the Moscow Regional Committee which was responsible for Moscow ''oblast'', a province with a population of 11&nbsp;million.
In 1936, as the trials proceeded, Khrushchev expressed his vehement support:
At a meeting of the mostly ceremonial Supreme Soviet the following month, Malenkov was demoted in favor of Bulganin, to the surprise of Western observers.
His vocational education program for high school students was also dropped, and his plan for sending existing agricultural institutions out to the land was ended.
The premier believed that Western science flourished because many scientists lived in university towns such as Oxford, isolated from big city distractions, and had pleasant living conditions and good pay.
In 1957, Khrushchev authorized the 6th World Festival of Youth and Students to be held in Moscow that summer.
When it became clear that the launch was real, and Sputnik 1 was in orbit, Western governments concluded that the Soviet ICBM program was further along than it actually was.
Its students aren't yearning to work on the collective farms because to do that they'd have to go out in the provinces and live in the sticks."
While head of the Moscow city organization, Khrushchev superintended construction of the Moscow Metro, a highly expensive undertaking, with Kaganovich in overall charge.
The Secret Speech, combined with the death of Polish communist leader Boleslaw Bierut, who suffered a heart attack while reading the Speech, sparked considerable liberalization in Poland and Hungary.
In 1921, the civil war ended, and Khrushchev was demobilized and assigned as commissar to a labor brigade in the Donbas, where he and his men lived in poor conditions.
Khrushchev allied with Malenkov to block many of Beria's proposals, while the two slowly picked up support from other Presidium members.
Ukraine's industry had been destroyed, and agriculture faced critical shortages.
In 1959, during Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union, Khrushchev took part in what later became known as the Kitchen Debate, as Nixon and Khrushchev had an impassioned argument in a model kitchen at the American National Exhibition in Moscow, with each defending the economic system of his country.
In later years, Leonid Khrushchev's wingmate stated that he saw his plane disintegrate, but did not report it.
The Secret Speech, while it did not fundamentally change Soviet society, had wide-ranging effects.
Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and Cuba were officially restored in May 1960.
On March 6, 1953, Stalin's death was announced, as was the new leadership.
On March 5, Stalin died.
Leonid's daughter, Yulia, was raised by Nikita Khrushchev and his wife.
As the saying goes, you could have heard a pin drop.
This decree created tension between Khrushchev and the Central Committee and upset the party leaders upon whose support Khrushchev had risen to power.
In February 1955, Khrushchev gave a speech in which he advocated an Iowa-style corn belt in the Soviet Union, and a Soviet delegation visited the U.S. state that summer.
That renewed thaw ended on December 1, 1962, when Khrushchev was taken to the Manezh Gallery to view an exhibit which included a number of avant-garde works.
Though Khrushchev was now preeminent, he did not enjoy Stalin's absolute power.
Castro had urged Khrushchev to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack on the U.S. in the event of any invasion of Cuba, and was angered by the outcome, referring to Khrushchev in profane terms;
Content in what he thought was a strong personal relationship with Eisenhower, Khrushchev was confused and angered by the flights' resumption, and concluded that they had been ordered by CIA Director Allen Dulles without the U.S. President's knowledge.
Rather than agricultural workers living in villages close to farms, they would live further away in larger towns which would offer municipal services such as utilities and libraries, which were not present in villages.
Soon after the abortive marriage, Khrushchev met Nina Petrovna Kukharchuk, a well-educated Party organizer and daughter of well-to-do Ukrainian peasants.
This assistance was described by historian William Kirby as "the greatest transfer of technology in world history".
While enrolled in the ''rabfak'', Khrushchev continued his work at the Rutchenkovo mine.
Short, heavyset, and wearing ill-fitting suits, he "radiated energy but not intellect", and was dismissed by many as a buffoon who would not last long.
That night, after his ouster, Khrushchev called his friend and Presidium colleague Anastas Mikoyan, and told him:
After the war, he returned to Ukraine before being recalled to Moscow as one of Stalin's close advisers.
When Soviet state radio carried the announcement of Khrushchev's statement, it was the first time in six years he had been mentioned in that medium.
Though he visited Stalin in Moscow on occasion, he remained in Stalingrad for much of the battle, and was nearly killed at least once.
Beginning in October 1955, Khrushchev fought to tell the delegates to the upcoming 20th Party Congress about Stalin's crimes.
While the high schools provided a college preparatory curriculum, in fact few Soviet youths went on to university.
Under Khrushchev, the special tribunals operated by security agencies were abolished.
Semichastny informed Khrushchev of his ouster and told him not to resist.
The agreement that the United States would not invade Cuba has been adhered to.
The peripatetic premier visited New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco (visiting a supermarket), Coon Rapids, Iowa (visiting Roswell Garst's farm), Pittsburgh, and Washington, concluding with a meeting with U.S. President Eisenhower at Camp David.
Since the 1940s, Khrushchev had advocated the cultivation of corn (maize) in the Soviet Union.
If one was not signed, Khrushchev stated, the Soviet Union would conclude a peace treaty with East Germany.
Biographer William Taubman suggests that, since Khrushchev was again unsuccessfully denounced while in Kiev, he must have known that some of the denunciations were not true and that innocent people were suffering.
While the boundary between the two German states had elsewhere been fortified, Berlin, administered by the four Allied powers, remained open.
Even before Kennedy's speech, they ordered Soviet commanders in Cuba that they could use all weapons against an attack—except atomic weapons.
When the school's Party cell elected a number of rightists to an upcoming district Party conference, the cell was attacked in ''Pravda''.
Khrushchev attributed his recall to Moscow to mental disorder on the part of Stalin, who feared conspiracies in Moscow matching those which the ruler believed to have occurred in the fabricated Leningrad case, in which many of that city's Party officials had been falsely accused of treason.
As the crisis unfolded, tensions were high in the U.S.; less so in the Soviet Union, where Khrushchev made several public appearances, and went to the Bolshoi Theatre to hear American opera singer Jerome Hines, who was then performing in Moscow.
Stalin finally gave Ukraine limited food aid, and money to set up free soup kitchens.
His name appeared atop a revised list of secretaries—indicating that he was now in charge of the party.
Khrushchev feared that Stalin would remove him from office, but the leader mocked Khrushchev, then allowed the episode to pass.
When World War I broke out in 1914, Khrushchev, as a skilled metal worker, was exempt from conscription.
I'm Russian myself, and I don't want to offend the Russians.
Beginning in 1966, Khrushchev began his memoirs.
In his opening words in his initial address, Khrushchev denigrated Stalin by asking delegates to rise in honor of the communist leaders who had died since the last congress, whom he named, equating Stalin with Klement Gottwald and the little-known Kyuichi Tokuda.
Tompson suggests that these favorable mentions indicate that military officers held Khrushchev in high regard.
Khrushchev biographer Tompson described the mercurial leader:
While the scheme eventually became a tremendous disaster for Soviet agriculture, it was initially successful.
Khrushchev's party colleagues removed him from power in 1964, replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygin as Premier.
Other such schools were soon established in Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev.
At that time, the movement was split by Lenin's New Economic Policy, which allowed for some measure of private enterprise and was seen as an ideological retreat by some Bolsheviks.
On June 26, 1953 Beria was arrested at a Presidium meeting, following extensive military preparations by Khrushchev and his allies.
Following his removal from power, Khrushchev fell into deep depression.
The next day, Soviet troops crushed the Hungarian uprising, with a death toll of 4,000 Hungarians and several hundred Soviet troops.
Khrushchev was present at the bloody defense of Stalingrad, a fact he took great pride in throughout his life.
About 600,000&nbsp;Western Ukrainians were arrested between 1944 and 1952, with one-third executed and the remainder imprisoned or exiled to the east.
Without the MTS, the market for Soviet agricultural equipment fell apart, as the ''kolkhozes'' now had neither the money nor skilled buyers to purchase new equipment.
Beginning in March 1964, Supreme Soviet presidium chairman and nominal head of state Leonid Brezhnev began discussing Khrushchev's removal with his colleagues.
Of 38&nbsp;top Party officials in Moscow city and province, 35 were killed—the three survivors were transferred to other parts of the USSR.
Through a combination of propaganda, deception as to what was being voted for, and outright fraud, the Soviets ensured that their new territories would elect assemblies which would unanimously petition for union with the USSR.
Collectivization advanced in Western Ukraine, and Khrushchev implemented more policies that encouraged collectivization and discouraged private farms.
Despite the cuts, Khrushchev's rule saw the most tense years of the Cold War, culminating in the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Khrushchev arrived at the VIP hall of Vnukovo Airport; KGB Chairman Semichastny waited for him there, flanked by KGB security guards.
She urged Nikita to seek further education, but family finances did not permit this.
If you include their relatives, friends, and acquaintances, you could say that the entire country became familiar with the speech&nbsp;... Spring had barely begun when the speech began circulating around the world."
Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that the "congress listened to me in silence.
However, on March 14, Malenkov resigned from the secretariat of the Central Committee.
Relations continued to deteriorate in 1960, as both the USSR and China used a Romanian Communist Party congress as an opportunity to attack the other.
The Soviet space program, which Khrushchev firmly supported, appeared to confirm his claims when the Soviets launched Sputnik 1 into orbit, a launch many westerners, including United States Vice President Richard Nixon were convinced was a hoax.
Stalin called everyone who didn't agree with him an "enemy of the people."
This was not enough for Khrushchev, who left the summit.
In November 1958, calling West Berlin a "malignant tumor", he gave the United States, United Kingdom and France six months to conclude a peace treaty with both German states and the Soviet Union.
The Iowan visited the Soviet Union in September, where he became great friends with Khrushchev, and Garst sold the USSR  of seed corn.
Malenkov was the new Chairman of the Council of Ministers, with Beria (who consolidated his hold over the security agencies), Kaganovich, Bulganin, and former Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov as first vice-chairmen.
The Soviets agreed to allow the new Polish leadership to take office, on the assurance there would be no change to the Soviet-Polish relationship.
He could be charming or vulgar, ebullient or sullen, he was given to public displays of rage (often contrived) and to soaring hyperbole in his rhetoric.
Some of Khrushchev's agricultural projects were also easily overturned.
He pushed for an immediate summit, but was frustrated by French President Charles de Gaulle, who postponed it until 1960, a year in which Eisenhower was scheduled to pay a return visit to the Soviet Union.
In 1958, Khrushchev opened a Central Committee meeting to hundreds of Soviet officials; some were even allowed to address the meeting.
Of the arrestees, according to Khrushchev, 8,500 deserved execution.
Nagy called for a cease-fire and a withdrawal of Soviet troops, which a Khrushchev-led majority in the Presidium decided to obey, choosing to give the new Hungarian government a chance.
Lysenko managed to maintain his influence under Khrushchev despite repeated failures; as each proposal failed, he advocated another.
Khrushchev's final years in Ukraine were generally peaceful, with industry recovering, Soviet forces overcoming the partisans, and 1947 and 1948 seeing better-than-expected harvests.
Nonetheless, Khrushchev became a candidate member of the Politburo in January 1938 and a full member in March 1939.
I should have read it myself.
Malenkov's power was in the central state apparatus, which he sought to extend through reorganizing the government, giving it additional power at the expense of the Party.
Vladimir Dudintsev's ''Not by Bread Alone'', about an idealistic engineer opposed by rigid bureaucrats, was allowed to be published in 1956, though Khrushchev called the novel "false at its base".
During Khrushchev's rule, forced hospitalization for the "socially dangerous" was introduced.
Khrushchev greatly improved relations with Yugoslavia, which had been entirely sundered in 1948 when Stalin realized he could not control Yugoslav leader Josip Tito.
As Khrushchev and other high officials stood weeping by Stalin's bedside, Beria raced from the room, shouting for his car.
Khrushchev's son, Sergei, later wrote, "learly, Father tried to ensure it would reach as many ears as possible.
Khrushchev was then taken to the Kremlin, to be verbally attacked by Brezhnev, Suslov and Shelepin.
He was made a nonperson to such an extent that the thirty-volume ''Soviet Encyclopedia'' omitted his name from the list of prominent political commissars during the Great Patriotic War.
Khrushchev attributed his rapid rise to his acquaintance with fellow Academy student Nadezhda Alliluyeva, Stalin's wife.
