In 1881 Tesla moved to Budapest to work under Ferenc Puskás at a telegraph company, the Budapest Telephone Exchange.
In June 1884, he emigrated to New York City in the United States.
The press variably referred to it as a "peace ray" or death ray.
He had an older brother, Dane, and three sisters, Milka, Angelina and Marica.
At the end of his second year, Tesla lost his scholarship and became addicted to gambling.
and a well-known electrical engineer serving as a technical aide to the National Defense Research Committee, was called in to analyze the Tesla items in OAP custody.
The 1978 book ''Colorado Springs Notes, 1899–1900'' contains descriptions of Tesla's experiments.
The company installed electrical arc light-based illumination systems designed by Tesla.
Tesla was the fourth of five children.
Tesla was bedridden for some months and was unable to continue feeding pigeons from his window; soon, they failed to come.
He spent his spare time playing cards with local men on the streets.
The ashes are displayed in a gold-plated sphere on a marble pedestal in the Nikola Tesla Museum.
In an interview with newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane Tesla said that he did not believe in telepathy, stating, "Suppose I made up my mind to murder you," he said, "In a second you would know it.
Tesla was asocial and prone to seclude himself with his work.
On Tesla's 75th birthday, in 1931, ''Time'' magazine put him on its cover.
Horses in a livery stable bolted from their stalls after receiving shocks through their metal shoes.
Tesla would later write that he became interested in demonstrations of electricity by his physics professor.
Now, isn't that wonderful?
This would be the projector, or gun, of the invention.
On 6 November 1915 a Reuters news agency report from London had the 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla; however, on 15 November, a Reuters story from Stockholm stated the prize that year was being awarded to Sir William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg "for their services in the analysis of crystal structure by means of X-rays."
Two days later the Federal Bureau of Investigation ordered the Alien Property Custodian to seize Tesla's belongings, even though Tesla was an American citizen.
On 7 January 1943, at the age of 86, Tesla died alone in room 3327 of the New Yorker Hotel.
During his early life, Tesla was repeatedly stricken with illness.
Tesla gained experience in telephony and electrical engineering before emigrating to the United States in 1884 to work for Thomas Edison in New York City.
In a box purported to contain a part of Tesla's "death ray", Trump found a 45-year-old multidecade resistance box.
During his second year, Tesla came into conflict with Professor Poeschl over the Gramme dynamo, when Tesla suggested that commutators were not necessary.
Tesla may have inadvertently captured an X-ray image—predating, by a few weeks, Wilhelm Röntgen's December 1895 announcement of the discovery of x-rays—when he tried to photograph Mark Twain illuminated by a Geissler tube, an earlier type of gas discharge tube.
In 1928 Tesla received his last patent, , for a biplane capable of taking off vertically (VTOL aircraft) and then be "''gradually tilted through manipulation of the elevator devices''" in flight until it was flying like a conventional plane.
On 7 January 1900 Tesla left Colorado Springs.
Tesla was born on  1856 into a Serb family in the village of Smiljan, Austrian Empire (modern-day Croatia).
In the mid-1890s the conglomerate General Electric, backed by financier J. P. Morgan, was involved in takeover attempts and patent battles with Westinghouse Electric.
The classes were held in German, as it was a school within the Austro-Hungarian Military Frontier.
In the late 1920s, Tesla also befriended George Sylvester Viereck, a poet, writer, mystic, and later, a Nazi propagandist.
In July 1888, Brown and Peck negotiated a licensing deal with George Westinghouse for Tesla's polyphase induction motor and transformer designs for $60,000 in cash and stock and a royalty of $2.50 per AC horsepower produced by each motor.
In December 1878 Tesla left Graz and severed all relations with his family to hide the fact that he dropped out of school.
Tesla tried to interest the US War Department, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia in the device.
His work in the formative years of electric-power development was involved in a corporate alternating current/direct current "War of Currents" as well as various patent battles.
They were more interested in developing an electrical utility than inventing new systems.
Later in life Tesla would recount the winter of 1886/1887 as a time of hardship, writing “My high education in various branches of science, mechanics and literature seemed to me like a mockery".
Soon after, much of Tesla's early research—hundreds of invention models, plans, notes, laboratory data, tools, photographs, valued at $50,000—was lost in the 5th Avenue laboratory fire of March 1895.
The Nobel Foundation said, "Any rumor that a person has not been given a Nobel Prize because he has made known his intention to refuse the reward is ridiculous"; a recipient could only decline a Nobel Prize after he is announced a winner.
When asked where all the money had gone, Tesla responded by saying that he was affected by the Panic of 1901, which he (Morgan) had caused.
Tesla also explained the principles of the rotating magnetic field in an induction motor by demonstrating how to make a copper egg stand on end, using a device that he constructed known as the ''Egg of Columbus''.
On 24 March 1879 Tesla was returned to Gospić under police guard for not having a residence permit.
But Émile Girardeau, who helped develop France's first radar system in the 1930s, noted in 1953 that Tesla's general speculation that a very strong high-frequency signal would be needed was correct.
Arthur Brisbane, a newspaper editor for the ''New York World'', described Tesla's appearance:
Based on Tesla's patents and other ideas, they agreed to back him financially and handle his patents.
His opinion had started to sway in later years when he felt that women were trying to outdo men and make themselves more dominant.
According to Tesla, Edison remarked, "There's fifty thousand dollars in it for you—if you can do it.
This innovative electric motor patented in May 1888 was a simple self-starting design that did not need a commutator, thus avoiding sparking and the high maintenance of constantly servicing and replacing mechanical brushes.
Đuka had never received a formal education.
While experimenting, Tesla inadvertently faulted a power station generator, causing a power outage.
He said that there was no danger that his invention could be stolen, for he had at no time committed any part of it to paper; the blueprint for the teleforce weapon was all in his mind.
I have built, demonstrated and used it.
Together they formed the Tesla Electric Company in April 1887, with an agreement that profits from generated patents would go 1/3 to Tesla, 1/3 to Peck and Brown, and 1/3 to fund development.
Further elucidation of his theory was never found in his writings.
* A new method for producing a tremendous electrical repelling force.
Tesla's demonstrations and principles were written about widely through various media outlets.
His patents earned him a considerable amount of money, much of which was used to finance his own projects with varying degrees of success.
They ended up using a DC traction motor instead.
Tesla claimed that he worked from 3&nbsp;a.m. to 11&nbsp;p.m., no Sundays or holidays excepted.
On 17 April 1879 Milutin Tesla died at the age of 60 after contracting an unspecified illness (although some sources say that he died of a stroke).
Tesla held that, with his circuits, the "instrument will&nbsp;... enable one to generate Roentgen rays of much greater power than obtainable with ordinary apparatus."
A patent-sharing agreement was signed between the two companies in 1896, but Westinghouse was still cash-strapped from the financial warfare.
Tesla was renowned for his achievements and showmanship, eventually earning him a reputation in popular culture as an archetypal "mad scientist".
In June 1902 Tesla moved his lab operations from Houston Street to Wardenclyffe.
On his 50th birthday, in 1906, Tesla demonstrated his  16,000&nbsp;rpm bladeless turbine.
He once said in earlier years that he felt he could never be worthy enough for a woman, considering woman superior in every way.
Dane was killed in a horse-riding accident when Nikola was aged five.
In the same interview, Tesla said that he believed that all fundamental laws could be reduced to one.
It was a key event in the history of AC power, as Westinghouse demonstrated to the American public the safety, reliability, and efficiency of a fully integrated alternating current system.
In 1952, following pressure from Tesla's nephew, Sava Kosanović, Tesla's entire estate was shipped to Belgrade in 80 trunks marked N.T.
His opinion stemmed from the belief that humans' "pity" had interfered with the natural "ruthless workings of nature," rather than from conceptions of a "master race" or inherent superiority of one person over another.
with a transmitter, illuminating a light near the bottom of the picture.
He suffered a peculiar affliction in which blinding flashes of light would appear before his eyes, often accompanied by visions.
His room had been entered and his papers had been scrutinized, but the thieves, or spies, left empty-handed.
He mentioned them in a letter to reporter Julian Hawthorne at the Philadelphia North American on 8 December 1899 and in a December 1900 letter about possible discoveries in the new century to the Red Cross Society where he referred to messages "from another world" that read "1... 2... 3...".
Nikola credited his eidetic memory and creative abilities to his mother's genetics and influence.
His early experiments were with Crookes tubes, a cold cathode electrical discharge tube.
"The meal was required to be ready at eight o'clock&nbsp;...
Many devices such as the Tesla Coil were used in the further development of radio.
It describes an open-ended vacuum tube with a gas jet seal that allows particles to exit, a method of charging particles to millions of volts, and a method of creating and directing non-dispersive particle streams (through electrostatic repulsion).
Just by hearing the name of an item, he would be able to envision it in realistic detail.
In a 1937 interview, he stated:
He had to work at various electrical repair jobs and as a ditch digger for $2 per day.
Before World War I Tesla sought overseas investors.
Tesla demonstrated a series of electrical effects at the Columbian Exposition under a banner announcing the "Tesla Polyphase System", which had previously been performed throughout America and Europe; these included using high-voltage, high-frequency alternating current to light a wireless gas-discharge lamp.
In the same year, he patented the Tesla coil.
Nikola completed "lower" or "primary" school, followed by the "lower real gymnasium" or "normal school".
Tesla claimed to have worked on plans for a directed-energy weapon from the early 1900s until his death.
Tesla was raised an Orthodox Christian.
In 1912, he crafted "a plan to make dull students bright by saturating them unconsciously with electricity," wiring the walls of a schoolroom and, "saturating the schoolroom with infinitesimal electric waves vibrating at high frequency.
After the funeral, Tesla's body was taken to the Ferncliff Cemetery in Ardsley, New York, where it was later cremated.
Tesla did not disclose how far away the transmitter was.
The only thing captured in the image was the metal locking screw on the camera lens.
In 1899 John Jacob Astor IV invested $100,000 for Tesla to further develop and produce a new lighting system.
Assistant medical examiner H.W.
The following day, a second service was conducted by prominent priests in the Trinity Chapel (today's Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of Saint Sava) in New York City.
The acquisition of a feasible AC motor gave Westinghouse a key patent in building a completely integrated AC system, but the financial strain of buying up patents and hiring the engineers needed to build it meant development of Tesla's motor had to be put on hold for a while.
Within a few months, the Budapest Telephone Exchange became functional, and Tesla was allocated the chief electrician position.
"Tesla said he could feel a sharp stinging pain where it entered his body, and again at the place where it passed out."
He was also critical of Einstein's theory of relativity, saying:
In 1957, Kosanović's secretary Charlotte Muzar transported Tesla's ashes from the United States to Belgrade.
The whole room will thus, Mr. Tesla claims, be converted into a health-giving and stimulating electromagnetic field or 'bath.'"
Tesla claimed to have developed his own physical principle regarding matter and energy that he started working on in 1892, and in 1937, at age 81, claimed in a letter to have completed a "dynamic theory of gravity" that ''"would put an end to idle speculations and false conceptions, as that of curved space."''
Tesla occasionally attended dinner parties held by Viereck and his wife.
After a three-day investigation, Trump's report concluded that there was nothing which would constitute a hazard in unfriendly hands, stating:
The two men were experienced in setting up companies and promoting inventions and patents for financial gain.
Tesla said that he "conquered his passion then and there," but later in the US he was again known to play billiards.
In 1873 Tesla returned to his birth town, Smiljan.
He at once resumed the pigeon-feeding walks on a much more limited scale, but frequently had a messenger act for him.
Tesla was offered the task of completely redesigning the Edison Company's direct current generators.
Tesla said that this contact with nature made him stronger, both physically and mentally.
For exercise, Tesla walked between 8 and 10 miles per day.
Tesla noted that these demonstrations of this "mysterious phenomena" made him  want "to know more of this wonderful force".
In his research, Tesla devised several experimental setups to produce X-rays.
On 10 January 1943 New York City mayor Fiorello La Guardia read a eulogy written by Slovene-American author Louis Adamic live over the WNYC radio while violin pieces "Ave Maria" and "Tamo daleko" were played in the background.
Eventually, he sold Wardenclyffe for $20,000 ($ in today's dollars).
He was a polyglot, speaking eight languages: Serbo-Croatian, Czech, English, French, German, Hungarian, Italian, and Latin.
Nikola suffered a nervous breakdown at around the same time.
In the August 1917 edition of the magazine ''Electrical Experimenter'' Tesla postulated that electricity could be used to locate submarines via using the reflection of an "electric ray" of "tremendous frequency," with the signal being viewed on a fluorescent screen (a system that has been noted to have a superficial resemblance to modern radar).
Accounts on how this came about vary.
In 1861 Tesla attended the "Lower" or "primary" school in Smiljan, where he studied German, arithmetic, and religion.
Among the systems proposed by several US and European companies were two-phase and three-phase AC, high-voltage DC, and compressed air.
Tesla's father, in a moment of despair, promised to send him to the best engineering school if he recovered from the illness (his father had originally wanted him to enter the priesthood).
Upon arrival, Tesla realized that the company, then under construction, was not functional, so he worked as a draftsman in the Central Telegraph Office instead.
Tesla's friend, Julian Hawthorne, wrote, "seldom did one meet a scientist or engineer who was also a poet, a philosopher, an appreciator of fine music, a linguist, and a connoisseur of food and drink."
During his time at his laboratory Tesla observed unusual signals from his receiver which he concluded may be communications from another planet.
"&nbsp; This has been noted as an odd statement from Edison, whose company was stingy with pay and who did not have that sort of cash on hand.
He received congratulatory letters from more than 70 pioneers in science and engineering, including Albert Einstein.
In 1900 Tesla was granted patents for a "system of transmitting electrical energy" and "an electrical transmitter."
Tesla's back was severely wrenched and three of his ribs were broken in the accident (the full extent of his injuries will never be known; Tesla refused to consult a doctor — an almost lifelong custom).
During 1910–1911 at the ''Waterside Power Station'' in New York, several of his bladeless turbine engines were tested at 100–5,000&nbsp;hp.
This provided Westinghouse a break from what had turned out to be an overly generous $2.50 per AC horsepower royalty, due to alternating current's rapid gain in popularity.
In 1937, at a luncheon in his honor concerning the death ray, Tesla stated, "But it is not an experiment&nbsp;...
Tesla spent over $2,000, including building a device that comfortably supported her so her bones could heal, to fix her broken wing and leg.
Tesla made predictions about the relevant issues of a post-World War I environment in a printed article, "Science and Discovery are the great Forces which will lead to the Consummation of the War" (20 December 1914).
As the speed grew, it is said that the machine oscillated at the resonance frequency of his own building and, belatedly realizing the danger, he was forced to use a sledge hammer to terminate the experiment, just as the police arrived.
Tesla was generally antagonistic towards theories about the conversion of matter into energy.
Between them, they settled on a 60-cycle AC current system that Tesla proposed (to match the working frequency of Tesla's motor), but they soon found that it would not work for streetcars, since Tesla's induction motor could run only at a constant speed.
He stated that he observed stationary waves during this time.
He read many books while in Tomingaj and later said that Mark Twain's works had helped him to miraculously recover from his earlier illness.
Only a little time will pass before I can give it to the world."
In 1887 Tesla developed an induction motor that ran on alternating current, a power system format that was starting to be built in Europe and the United States because of its advantages in long-distance, high-voltage transmission.
In 1897, Westinghouse explained his financial difficulties to Tesla in stark terms, saying that, if things continued the way they were, he would no longer be in control of Westinghouse Electric and Tesla would have to "deal with the bankers" to try to collect future royalties.
A further contract was awarded to General Electric to build the AC distribution system.
The tendency of women to push aside man, supplanting the old spirit of cooperation with him in all the affairs of life, is very disappointing to me".
Tesla would then resume his work, often until 3:00a.m."
Tesla wrote another plea to Morgan, but it was fruitless.
On 17 May 1899 Tesla moved to Colorado Springs, where he would have room for his high-voltage, high-frequency experiments; his lab was located near Foote Ave. and Kiowa St.
While experimenting with mechanical oscillators at his Houston Street lab, Tesla allegedly generated a resonance of several buildings.
In his lab, he also conducted a range of experiments with mechanical oscillators/generators, electrical discharge tubes, and early X-ray imaging.
Often, the visions were linked to a word or idea he might have come across; at other times they would provide the solution to a particular problem he had encountered.
In July 1903, Tesla wrote to Morgan that in addition to wireless communication, Wardenclyffe would be capable of wireless transmission of electric power.
In 1893 Edward Dean Adams headed up the Niagara Falls Cataract Construction Company, and he sought Tesla's opinion on what system would be best to transmit power generated at the falls.
In 1874 Tesla evaded conscription into the Austro-Hungarian Army in Smiljan by running away to Tomingaj, near Gračac.
During his employment, Tesla made many improvements to the Central Station equipment and claimed to have perfected a telephone repeater or amplifier, which was never patented nor publicly described.
He squished his toes one hundred times for each foot every night, saying that it stimulated his brain cells.
In early 1938, Tesla was able to get up.
For example, in his article, "A Machine to End War", published in 1937, Tesla stated:
Tesla is widely considered by his biographers as a humanist regarding his worldview.
It has been hypothesized that he may have intercepted Marconi's European experiments in July 1899—Marconi may have transmitted the letter S (dot/dot/dot) in a naval demonstration, the same three impulses that Tesla hinted at hearing in Colorado—or signals from another experimenter in wireless transmission.
On 30 July 1891, aged 35, Tesla became a naturalized citizen of the United States.
Despite this, he had a profound respect for both Buddhism and Christianity.
"&nbsp; Instead, Edison offered a US$10-a-week raise over Tesla's US$18 per week salary; Tesla refused the offer and immediately resigned.
The plan was at least provisionally approved by then superintendent of New York City schools, William H. Maxwell.
There has been a resurgence in popular interest in Tesla since the 1990s.
Edison, saying that he was only joking, replied, "Tesla, you don't understand our American humor.
On 11 July 1934 the ''New York Herald Tribune'' published an article on Tesla, in which he recalled an event that would occasionally take place while experimenting with his single-electrode vacuum tubes; a minute particle would break off the cathode, pass out of the tube, and physically strike him.
Sparks sprang from water line taps when touched.
* A mechanism for generating tremendous electrical force.
In 1870 Tesla moved to Karlovac to attend school at the Higher Real Gymnasium.
Tesla's mother, Đuka Tesla (''née'' Mandić; 1822–1892), whose father was also an Orthodox priest, had a talent for making home craft tools and mechanical appliances and the ability to memorize Serbian epic poems.
He found it a frustrating period because of conflicts with the other Westinghouse engineers over how best to implement AC power.
These plasma waves can occur in force-free magnetic fields.
Later in life Tesla made claims concerning a "teleforce" weapon, after studying the Van de Graaff generator.
In March 1896, after hearing of Wilhelm Röntgen's discovery of X-ray and X-ray imaging (radiography), Tesla proceeded to do his own experiments in X-ray imaging, developing a high energy single terminal vacuum tube of his own design that had no target electrode and that worked from the output of the Tesla Coil (the modern term for the phenomenon produced by this device is ''bremsstrahlung'' or ''braking radiation'').
It has been described as being couched in the form of a "consulting fee" to get around Tesla's aversion to accept charity, or by one biographer (Marc Seifer), as a type of unspecified settlement.
After his father's death in 1879, Tesla found a package of letters from his professors to his father, warning that unless he were removed from the school, Tesla would die through overwork.
Thunder from the released energy was heard 15 miles away in Cripple Creek, Colorado.
Tesla continued the project for another nine months into 1902.
Starting in 1894, Tesla began investigating what he referred to as radiant energy of "invisible" kinds after he had noticed damaged film in his laboratory in previous experiments (later identified as "''Roentgen rays''" or "X-Rays").
After the war started, Tesla lost the funding he was receiving from his patents in European countries.
In comparing these particles with the bits of metal projected by his "electric gun," Tesla said, "The particles in the beam of force&nbsp;... will travel much faster than such particles ... and they will travel in concentrations."
This was the beginning of years of patent battles over radio with Tesla's patents being upheld in 1903, followed by a reverse decision in favor of Marconi in 1904.
Although the aircraft was probably impractical, it may be the earliest known design for what became the tiltrotor/tilt-wing concept as well as the earliest proposal for the use of turbine engines in rotor aircraft.
Tesla believed that the League of Nations was not a remedy for the times and issues.
It also designed dynamo electric machine commutators, the first patents issued to Tesla in the US.
He soon struck out on his own with financial backers, setting up laboratories and companies to develop a range of electrical devices.
Tesla read many works, memorizing complete books, and supposedly possessed a photographic memory.
Tesla went to Maribor (now in Slovenia), where he worked as a draftsman for 60 florins a month.
Tesla advised Adams that a two-phased system would be the most reliable, and that there was a Westinghouse system to light incandescent bulbs using two-phase alternating current.
Several sources say Westinghouse was worried about potential bad publicity surrounding the impoverished conditions their former star inventor was living under.
The crowd that witnessed the demonstration made outrageous claims about the workings of the boat, such as magic, telepathy, and being piloted by a trained monkey hidden inside.
Near the end of his life Tesla walked to the park every day to feed the pigeons and even brought injured ones into his hotel room to nurse back to health.
In 1898 Tesla demonstrated a radio-controlled boat—which he dubbed "teleautomaton"—to the public during an electrical exhibition at Madison Square Garden.
In 1882 Tesla moved to France, where he began working for the Continental Edison Company, designing and making improvements to electrical equipment.
After months of work, Tesla fulfilled the task and inquired about payment.
The competition resulted in Edison Machine Works pursuing AC development in 1890; by 1892, Thomas Edison was no longer in control of his own company, which was consolidated into the conglomerate General Electric and converting to an AC delivery system at that point.
* An apparatus for producing manifestations of energy in free air instead of in a high vacuum as in the past.
