Once a female has been attracted, the pair warble and rub the undersides of their jaws together.
at least , are apex predators.
Living in the rich biosphere of Africa south of the Sahara, the Nile crocodile may come into contact with multiple other large predators.
In that study, more than a hundred species and genera (i.e.
However, larger skulls may exist as this study largely focused on crocodilians from Asia.
The enlarged 4th lower tooth fits into the socket on the upper jaw and is visible when the jaws are closed, as is the case with all true crocodiles.
The Nile crocodile is one of the most dangerous species of crocodile and is responsible for hundreds of human deaths every year.
Opportunistic mammals who attack Nile crocodile nests have included wild pigs, medium-sized wild cats and baboon troops.
In one case, an adult crocodile charged from the water up a bank to kill a bushbuck (''Tragelaphus scriptus'') and instead of drag it into the water, was observed to pull the kill further on land into the cover of the bush.
Many victims are caught while crouching and people in jobs that may require heavy usage of water such as laundry workers, fisherman, game wardens and regional guides are more likely to be attacked.
Extremely large fish, such as Nile perch (''Lates niloticus''), goliath tigerfish (''Hydrocynus goliath'') and even sharks, are taken on occasion, in addition to big catfish, such as ''Bagrus'' ssp.
In some areas, some number of baboons are taken, such as in Okavango Delta where chacma baboons (''Papio ursinus'') are eaten and Uganda where olive baboons (''Papio anubis'') are taken.
In comparison, lions, in the years from 1990 to 2006, were responsible for an estimated one-eighth as many fatal attacks on humans in Africa as were Nile crocodiles.
The two-year-and-younger crocodiles may spend a surprising amount of time on land, as evidenced by the range of terrestrial insects found in their stomachs, and their lifestyle may resemble a semi-aquatic mid-sized lizard more so than the very aquatic lives of older crocodiles.
A smaller population from Mali, the Sahara Desert and elsewhere in West Africa reaches only  in length, but it is now largely recognized as a separate species, the West African crocodile.
The bite force exerted by an adult Nile crocodile has been shown by Dr. Brady Barr to measure .
*In 1903, Hans Besser reported that he had killed a specimen in Zambia measuring  despite missing "part of its tail", providing details that the body was  high at the highest point on the back, girth at the belly of  and a (mandibular?)
On average, according to Cott (1961), female sexual maturity occurs when they reach  in length.
However, compared to the narrow-snouted, streamlined gharial and false gharial, the Nile crocodile is rather more robust and ranks second only to the saltwater crocodile in total average body mass amongst living crocodilians and third amongst all living reptiles - the massive leatherback turtle (''Dermochelys coriacea'') has a mean body mass slightly less than that of an average mature male saltwater crocodiles.
As is the saltwater crocodile, the Nile crocodile is considered a species with medium-width snout relative to other extant crocodilian species.
Nile crocodiles are relatively social crocodiles.
Young crocodiles feed more actively than their elders according to studies in Uganda and Zambia.
This predator can destroy about 50% of studied Nile crocodile eggs on its own, often being successful (as are other nest predators) in light of the trance-like state that the mother crocodile enters while brooding or taking advantage of moments where she is distracted or needs to leave the nest.
The diet of young crocodiles is made up largely of insects and other invertebrates since this is the only prey the same animals can easily take.
Most conflicts over food occur near the water and can literally lead to a tug-of-war over a carcass that can end either way, although seldom is there any serious fighting or bloodshed between the large carnivores.
The detached head of an exceptional big (and man-eating) Nile crocodile (killed in 1968 and measuring  in length) was found to have weighed , including the large tendons used to shut the jaw.
The Nile crocodile is an ambush predator that can wait for hours, days and even weeks for the suitable moment to attack.
South Africa or Tanzania) is in August through December.
*A specimen, considered authentic by Guinness Records, killed by Erich Novotony in 1948 in the Emin Pasha Gulf of Lake Victoria, Tanzania was measured at .
The stomachs of brooding females are always empty, meaning that they can survive several months without food.
In "stunted" newly mature females from Lake Turkana measuring , the average clutch size was only 15.
Although predators of hippopotamus calves, even large adult crocodile rarely attack because of the aggressive defense by mother hippos, and the close protection of the herd, which poses a serious threat.
However, for such large animals, their stomachs are relatively small, not much larger than a basketball in an average-sized adult, so as a rule they are anything but voracious eaters.
At Lake St. Lucia in South Africa, many Nile crocodile congregate to feed on striped mullet (''Mugil cephalus'') as they make their seaward migration for spawning.
The CITES lists the Nile crocodile under Appendix I (threatened with extinction) in most of its range; and under Appendix II (not threatened, but trade must be controlled) in the remainder, which either allows ranching or sets an annual quota of skins taken from the wild.
n. suchus'' (now widely perceived by crocodilian biologists as a separate species).
Among crocodilians, the Nile Crocodile possesses a relatively long snout, which is approximately 1.6 to 2 times as long as broad at the level of the front corners of the eyes.
Their ability to lie concealed with most of their bodies underwater, combined with their speed over short distances, makes them effective opportunistic hunters of larger prey.
Intimidation displays may also resolve these conflicts.
During the mating season, males attract females by bellowing, slapping their snouts in the water, blowing water out of their noses, and making a variety of other noises.
Adult Nile crocodiles have a dark bronze colouration above, with faded blackish spots and stripes variably appearing across the back and a dingy off-yellow on the belly, although mud can often obscure the crocodile’s actual colour.
Like Nile monitors, mammalian predators probably locate crocodile nests by scent as the padded-down mound is easy to miss visually.
As it matures, the Nile crocodiles becomes darker and the cross-bands fade, especially those on the upper-body.
Breeding females along the Olifants were overall larger than those in Zimbabwe.
National laws, and international trade regulations have resulted in a resurgence in many areas, and the species as a whole is no longer wholly threatened with extinction.
It is likely that the animals were either brought there to be released, or that they are escapees.
Graham and Beard (1968) hypothesized that, while females do continue to grow as do males throughout life, that past a certain age and size that females much over  in length in Lake Turkana no longer breed (supported by the physiology of the females examined here); however, subsequent studies in Botswana and South Africa have found evidence of nesting females at least  in length.
For most of a crocodile's life, broken teeth can be replaced.
This is largely because herpetologists that have tried to study him in detail and hunters to kill him have both been unsuccessful since the late 1990s.
The bulk and mass of individual crocodiles can be fairly variable, some animals being relatively slender, while others being very robust; females are often bulkier than males of a similar length.
The immense bite force, which may be as high as  in large adults, ensures that the prey item can't escape through the grip.
Like all crocodiles they are sexually dimorphic, with the males up to 30% larger than the females, though the difference is considerably less compared to some species, like the saltwater crocodile.
In the water, this species is an agile and rapid hunter relying on both movement and pressure sensors to catch any prey unfortunate enough to present itself inside or near the waterfront.
These have consisted of: ''C.
The mother will sometimes carry her young on her back to avoid the natural predators of the small crocodiles, which can be surprisingly bold even with the mother around.
Despite the attentive care of both parents, the nests are often raided by humans and monitor lizards or other animals while she is temporarily absent.
The species, however, also has small oval osteoderms on the sides of the body as well as the throat.
*Another notable giant, caught alive by J.G.
The hatchlings start to make a high-pitched chirping noise before hatching, which is the signal for the mother to rip open the nest.
Herodotus claimed that Nile crocodiles have a symbiotic relationship with certain birds, such as the Egyptian plover (''Pluvianus aegyptius''), which enter the crocodile's mouth and pick leeches feeding on the crocodile's blood, but there is no evidence of this interaction actually occurring in any crocodile species, and it is most likely mythical or allegorical fiction.
In general, reptiles become relatively common only in the diet in larger juvenile specimens and subadults.
Large mammalian predators in Africa are often social animals and obligated to feed almost exclusively on terrestrial zones.
Crocodiles in aestivation are totally lethargic, entering a state similar to animals who hibernate.
A more contemporary study claimed the number of attacks by Nile crocodiles per year as 275 to 745, of which 63% are fatal, as opposed to an estimated 30 attacks per year by saltwater crocodiles, of which 50% are fatal.
Arachnids such as ''Dolomedes'' water-spiders are taken but always secondarily to insects in Uganda and Zambia.
*In the Okavango Swamp of Botswana, in November 1968, hunter Bobby Wilmot killed a monstrously-sized crocodile reported as a man-eater.
Elsewhere, the waterbuck appears to be the most significant mammalian prey for large adult crocodiles, such as in Uganda and Zambia (although due to more sporadic general ungulate populations in those countries, ungulates are less common as prey than in some other countries) as well as in Hluhluwe–iMfolozi Park, South Africa.
In Lake Sibaya, South Africa, it was determined that in the 21st century, persecution continues as the direct cause for the inability of Nile crocodiles to recover after the leather trade last century.
This specimen measured .
*A game warden shot a specimen in 1950 on the Semliki River, Kenya that measured .
Although Guggisberg (1972) considered her account believable, Guinness Records notably does not mention this specimen in compiling the largest known Nile crocodiles.
At the end of the two years, the hatchlings will be about  long, and will naturally depart the nest area, avoiding the territories of older and larger crocodiles.
The only frequently recorded lizard prey are the large Nile monitor (''Varanus niloticus''), although this mesopredator may be eaten fairly regularly as they often share similar habitat preferences, whenever a crocodile is able to ambush the stealthy monitor, which is more agile on land than the bulkier crocodile.
Crocodiles of less than  may take a variety of medium–sized mammals of up to equal their own mass, including various monkeys, duikers, rodents, hares, pangolins, bats, dik-dik, suni (''Neotragus moschatus''), oribi (''Ourebia ourebi'') and other small ungulates up to the size of a Thomson's gazelle (''Eudorcas thomsonii'').
Cape porcupines (''Hystrix africaeaustralis'') are known to have been preyed on several times in Kruger National Park, their quills apparently being an insufficient defense against the tough jaws and digestive system of crocodiles, although they’re capable of deterring lions at times.
Additional factors are a loss of wetland habitats, which is addition to direct dredging, damming and irrigation by humans, has retracted in the east, south and north of the crocodile’s range, possibly in correlation with global warming.
They were found as far north as the Mediterranean coast in the Nile delta and across the Red Sea in Israel and Syria.
checchiai'' was about the same size as the larger modern Nile crocodiles, and shared similar physical characteristics to the modern species, ''C.
The largest accurately measured male, shot near Mwanza, Tanzania, measured  and weighed about .
Such predators that can find themselves victim to crocodiles include hyenas (3 out of 4 species reported as prey for Nile crocodiles, only the desert-dwelling brown (''Hyaena brunnea'') being excluded), African wild dogs, and cheetahs (''Acinonyx jubatus'').
In Kruger National Park, over the course of 22 years of discontinuous observation, 60% of the large game kills observed as perpetrated by crocodiles consisted of impala, while more than 15% of observed kills were made up of waterbuck (''Kobus ellipsiprymnus''), the largest of the ''Kobus'' genus at more than  in weight.
They have been known to enter the sea in some areas, with one specimen having been recorded  off St. Lucia Bay in 1917.
This crocodile’s stomach contents consisted of 2 goats, half a donkey and the clothed torso of a woman.
However, felines are usually more intelligent and wary of their surroundings than prey species and are more difficult to catch since they usually avoid waters infested with crocodiles.
On the contrary, there are several records of them capturing wading birds.
In yet another historic crocodile stronghold, the Olifants River, which flows through Kruger National Park, numerous crocodile deaths have been reported.
The underbelly of young crocodiles is yellowish green.
*Yet another giant reported from the Semliki River, although actually on the Ugandan side, was killed in September 1951 by a ranger from the Uganda Game and Fisheries Department.
largely insufficient to produce sustainable populations of young crocodiles, on par with times prior to the peak of leather trading.
A bull giraffe who lost his footing on a river bank in Kruger National Park was seen to be killed by a large crocodile, while in another case there a healthy bull buffalo was seen to be overpowered and killed by an average sized adult male crocodile measuring  after a massive struggle, an incident less commonly seen at this size.
The Nile crocodile's current range of distribution extends from the regional tributaries of the Nile in Sudan and Lake Nasser in Egypt to the Cunene of Angola, the Okavango Delta of Botswana and the Olifants River in South Africa.
African fish eagles can take crocodile hatchlings up to a few months of age and honey badgers can prey on yearlings.
The Nile crocodile is quite widespread throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, occurring mostly in the central, eastern, and southern regions of the continent and lives in different types of aquatic environments such as lakes, rivers and marshlands.
The crocodile mainly hunts land animals by almost fully submerging its body underwater.
This giant is considered truly exceptional because it was verified that it was a female, making it almost a metre longer than any other known female and possibly the largest female crocodilian of any extant species.
Evidence exists of Nile crocodiles from cooler climates, like the southern tip of Africa, being smaller, and may reach maximum lengths of only .
Other non-ungulate prey known to be attacked by Nile crocodiles includes aardvarks (''Orycteropus afer'') and African manatees (''Trichechus senegalensis'').
Most observed fishing by crocodiles takes place in waters less than  deep and fish are often caught when they swim into contact with the crocodile’s head, even literally right into the reptile’s mouth.
Other large carnivores that dwell in Africa near the top of the food chain can also on occasion fall prey to crocodiles.
Again, this somewhat outlandish proportioned crocodile was not mentioned by Guinness Records and can firmly be considered unverified and perhaps dubious since typically no voucher remains are known.
The arid land surrounding Lake Turkana is a relatively barren region for diverse or numerous prey other than fish, so therefore fish are an exceptionally important food source to crocodiles there.
An exception to this is in Uganda and Zambia where sub-adults and adults of even large sizes, up to , may eat very large numbers of snails.
Since a majority of fatal attacks are believed to be predatory in nature, the Nile crocodile can be considered the most prolific predator of humans among wild animals.
Especially fish become significant around this age and size.
Genetic studies of captured Nile crocodiles in Florida have revealed that wild captured specimens are all closely related to each other but are not from known locations where Nile crocodiles have been licensed for exhibit in zoos and theme parks.
Although no subspecies are currently formally recognized, as many as seven have been proposed, mostly due to variations in appearance and size noted in various populations through Africa.
As a whole, birds are quite secondary prey, rarely comprising more than 10–15% of crocodile’s diets although are taken fairly evenly across all crocodile size ranges excluding juveniles of less than .
Frogs are regionally significant prey for small, young crocodiles in many regions, mainly those in the  size range.
For example, a  black caiman (''Melanosuchus niger'') was found to have skull that was notably broader and heavier than that of a Nile crocodile measuring .
The most dominant crocodile eats first.
In East Africa, they are found mostly in rivers, lakes, marshes, and dams, favoring open, broad bodies of water over smaller ones.
They may also get the necessary leverage by lodging their prey under branches or stones, before rolling and ripping.
While not as extensively aquatic as the ''Kobus'' genus, the reedbucks and the impala (''Aepyceros melampus'') have both shown a partiality for grasslands adjoining wetlands and riparian zones and so are also very commonly recorded prey items.
An estimated 250,000 to 500,000 individuals occur in the wild today.
Unlike American alligator flesh, Nile crocodile meat is generally considered unappetizing although edible as tribes such as the Turkana may opportunistically feed on them.
If their jaws are bound together in the extreme midday heat, Nile crocodiles may easily die from overheating.
The crocodile population in this area is much more sparse, and has not been adequately surveyed.
Preferred nesting locations are sandy shores, dry stream beds, or riverbanks.
Though the Nile crocodile has been hunted since ancient times, the advent of the readily available firearm made it much easier to kill these potential dangerous reptiles.
Hatchlings quickly lose a hardened piece of skin on the top of their mouths called the egg tooth, which they use to break through their eggshells at birth.
The nostrils, eyes, and ears are situated on the top of the head, so the rest of the body can remain concealed underwater.
Nile crocodiles have green eyes.
This enormous crocodile reportedly weighed about .
In the Okavango Delta, Botswana, the African pikes (''Hepsetus'' sp.)
After burying the eggs, the female then guards them for the three-month incubation period.
Considering the fact that crocodiles defecate in water, making it impossible for scat analysis, and that the examination of stomach contents is fairly difficult for which capturing of the animals individually is required for analysis, it is hard to say anything about the percentage of any specific food item in a crocodile's diet.
However, Cott (1961) found that the only size range where fish were numerically dominant over other types of food was from .
Large, old males are at the top of this hierarchy and have primary access to food and the best basking spots.
Since their speed and agility on land is rather outmatched by most terrestrial animals, they must use obscuring vegetation or terrain in order to have a chance of succeeding during land-based hunts.
In other areas, the nesting female may disappear upon potential disturbance which may allow the presence of both the female and her buried nest to escape unwanted detection by predators.
As a whole, giants are rarer today; before the heavy hunting of the 1940s and 1950s, a larger population base and more extensive wetland habitats meant more giants, as well as possibly diminishing of the genetic lines that fostered enormous sizes.
In comparison, piscivorous water birds from Africa eat far more daily despite being a fraction of the body size of a crocodile, for example a cormorant eats up to  per day (about 70% of its own body weight) while a pelican consumes up to  per day (about 35% of its own weight).
Beyond their ready availability and respectable size, turtles are favored by big crocodiles due to their slowness which allows the cumbersome crocodiles to capture them more easily than swifter vertebrates.
Similarly, in Lake Baringo in Kenya, the lungfish is the crocodile’s main prey and the crocodile is the lungfish’s primary predator.
In 1993, 80,000 Nile crocodile skins were produced, the majority from ranches in Zimbabwe and South Africa.
This species may particularly dangerous to their own kind considering the aggressive disposition they tend to bear.
Very old, mature ones can grow to  or more in length (all specimens over  from 1900 onward are cataloged later).
Interestingly, in the largest size range studied by Cott, , they were the second most likely to either have full stomachs (10%) or empty stomachs (20%).
Although Nile crocodiles are more than a dozen times more numerous than lions in the wild, probably fewer than a quarter of living Nile crocodiles are old and large enough to pose a danger to humans.
The Nile crocodile is an opportunistic apex predator and a very aggressive species of crocodile that is capable of taking almost any animal within its range.
However, exertion by crocodilians can lead to death due to increasing lactic acid to lethal levels, which in turn leads to failure of the animal’s internal organs.
In South Africa, Nile crocodiles are more easily observed in winter because of the extensive amount of time they spend basking at this time of year.
Most of the predators of eggs also opportunistically eat young crocodiles, including monitors and marabous, plus almost all co-existing raptorial birds, including vultures, eagles, and large owls and buzzards.
This size range consists of subadult males and a mixture of subadult and adult females.
In some cases in Kruger National Park, antelope have been driven into water while being pursued by packs of African wild dogs (''Lycaon pictus''), who hunt by endurance engaging prey in a grueling chase until it is exhausted (a very successful hunting style), only to be killed by opportunistic crocodiles.
Sub-adult and smaller adult Nile crocodiles use their bodies and tails to herd groups of fish toward a bank, and eat them with quick sideways jerks of their heads.
The only exception is "Gustave", a male crocodile mentioned due to his notoriety.
Since crocodiles are solitary hunters, the Nile crocodile is the only predator in Africa known to attack full grown buffaloes alone, compared to the preferred pride attack method of lions.
Retraction of wetlands due both to direct habitat destruction by humans and environmental factor possibly related to global warming is perhaps linked to the extinction of Nile crocodiles in the last few centuries in Syria, Israel and Tunisia.
At a reported incubation period of about 90 days, the stage is notably shorter than that of the American alligator (110–120 days) but slightly longer than that of the mugger crocodile.
This species’ historic range however, was even wider.
Among crocodilians today, only the saltwater crocodile occurs over a broader geographic area, although other species, especially the spectacled caiman (''Caiman crocodilus'') (due to its small size and extreme adaptability in habitat and flexibility in diet), seem to actually be more abundant.
In Uganda and Zambia, the latter species are the leading overall mammalian prey type for crocodiles and one Kenyan crocodile of  in length had 40 greater cane rats in its stomach.
However, mouth-gaping (while essential to thermoregulation) may also serve as a threat display to other crocodiles, for example when specimens have been observed mouth-gaping at night when overheating is not a risk.
The Nile crocodile has historically been recorded in areas where they are now regionally extinct.
The benefits of this are presumably that nest flooding risk is considerably reduced at this time and the stage at which hatchlings begin their lives out of the egg falls roughly at the beginning of the rainy season, when water levels are still relatively low but insect prey is in recovery.
However, in the Ugandan portion of Lake Victoria, true bugs and dragonflies both seem to outnumber beetles notably and up to a length of  crocodiles had stomach contents that were made up 70–75% of insects.
Most fatal attacks occur when a person is standing a few feet away from water on a non-steep bank, are wading in shallow waters, actively swimming or have limbs dangling off of a boat or pier.
In general, big cats and crocodiles have a relationship of mutual avoidance.
Some crocodiles of the species may habitually use their tails to sweep terrestrial prey off-balance, sometimes forcing the prey specimen into the water where it can be more easily drowned.
After this stage, crocodiles may loosely associate with similarly sized crocodiles and many assuredly enter feeding congregations of crocodiles once they attain , at which size predators and cannibal crocodiles become much less of a concern.
Giant water bugs were also frequently recorded, although several largely terrestrial varieties were also found in young crocodile’s stomachs, presumably having been caught in riparian vegetation by night, including Orthoptera, such as crickets, and Odonata, such as dragonflies.
Under normal circumstances, Nile crocodiles are relatively inert creatures as are most crocodilians and other large cold-blooded creatures.
In the Zambezi River and Lake St. Lucia, Nile crocodiles have been known to prey on bull sharks (''Carcharhinus leucas'') and sand tiger sharks (''Carcharias taurus'').
For example, in Lake Turkana, Kenya, 48.4% of crocodiles had empty stomachs.
At this time of plenty (before irrigation operations by humans led St. Lucia to have dangerously high saline levels), a  crocodile could expect to eat  of mullet daily, an exceptionally large daily amount for a crocodile.
In crocodiles between these distributions egg-laying is in intermediate months, often focused between April and July.
In some regions, males have reportedly mated with several females, perhaps any female that enters his claimed territory, though in most regions annual monogamy appears to be most common in this species.
The population was severely depleted, and the species faced extinction.
When the male hippo returned to the water, it was drowned and killed by the group of crocodile amid a "a truly terrifying commotion".
Like other crocodiles, Nile crocodiles have an extremely powerful bite that is unique amongst all animals and sharp conical teeth that sink into flesh allowing for a grip that is almost impossible to loosen.
A similar tendency is coloration change during maturation has been noted in most crocodile species.
According to Graham and Beard (1968), Nile crocodile meat has an "indescribable" and unpleasant taste, greasy texture and a "repellent" smell.
*Yet another unverified monster (also not considered inclusive in the Guinness Records run-down of largest crocodiles), possibly the largest Nile crocodile reported in literature from after 1900, was a specimen killed by Captain Riddick in Lake Kyoga, Uganda.
checchiai'' from Miocene in Kenya, ''C.
They also cooperate, blocking migrating fish by forming a semicircle across the river.
Cott (1961) studied the food of hatchlings and juveniles very extensively in Uganda and Zambia (then called Rhodesia).
The binomial name ''Crocodylus niloticus'' is derived from the Greek κροκό, ''kroko'' ("pebble"), δειλος, ''deilos'' ("worm", or "man"), referring to its rough skin; and ''niloticus'', meaning "from the Nile River".
In Limpopo, South Africa, males reportedly average .
An additional case of predation on an adult black rhino was reportedly observed in northern Zambia.
n. niloticus'' (would be the nominate subspecies, or the Ethiopian Nile crocodile), ''C.
It is thought to be either difficult to impossible for hatchlings to escape the nest burrow without assistance, as the surface may become very heavy and packed above them.
Many fisherman and other workers who are not poverty-stricken will go out of their way to avoid waterways known to harbor large crocodile populations.
Both species may be attracted to carrion, and may occasional fight over both kills or carrion.
Crocodiles as small as  are capable of overpowering and successfully preying on small apes and hominids, presumably including children and smaller adult humans, but a majority of fatal attacks on humans are by crocodiles reportedly exceeding  in length.
The colouration also helps to camouflage it; juveniles are grey, multicoloured, or brown, with dark cross-bands on the tail and body.
Mollusks may occasionally be taken by young crocodiles but are perhaps surprisingly taken in larger numbers later in life in parts of Uganda and Zambia.
*Douglas Jones reportedly killed an outsized Nile crocodile in the Juba River of Somalia that measured in a straight-line at just over .
They take more or less much the same small prey as smaller crocodiles, including insects and arachnids, but also take many small to medium-sized vertebrates and quickly become capable taking down prey of up to their own weight.
A variety of snakes have been preyed on from relatively small innocuous species such as the common egg-eating snake (''Dasypeltis scabra'') to the largest African snakes species, the African rock python (''Python sebae''), which can exceed  in length and weigh over .
In addition, as an animal that feeds rarely, sometimes only a couple of times in a year, even the individual stomach content examinations sometimes prove to be unsuccessful.
They can apply high levels of force for extended periods of time, a great advantage for holding down large prey underwater to drown.
However, large specimens can have a large number of gastroliths.
Unfortunately most details are lacking for this report.
During the time from when they’re roughly  long (roughly 5 to 9 years old), Nile crocodiles seem to have the broadest diet of any age range.
Crocodile 'protection programs' are artificial environments where crocodiles exist safely and without the threat of extermination from hunters.
Below is a break-down by prey time and their significance to Nile crocodiles through their lives.
During this time, the mothers may pick up their offspring either in their mouths or gular fold (throat pouch), to keep the babies safe.
While, like all crocodilians, the Nile crocodile digs out a hole for a nest site, unlike most other modern crocodilians, female Nile crocodiles bury their eggs in sand or soil rather than incubate them in rotting vegetation.
Other turtle species commonly recorded among Nile crocodile prey include the Speke's hinge-back tortoise (''Kinixys spekii'') and east African black mud turtle (''Pelusios subniger'').
