* ''Tanuki-gakure'' – The practice of climbing a tree and camouflaging oneself within the foliage.
Despite many popular folktales, historical accounts of the ninja are scarce.
Modern schools that claim to train ''ninjutsu'' arose from the 1970s, including that of Masaaki Hatsumi (Bujinkan), Stephen K. Hayes (To-Shin Do), and Jinichi Kawakami (Banke Shinobinoden).
From ancient Japan to modern world media, popular depictions range from realistic to the fantastically exaggerated, both fundamentally and aesthetically.
The loose robes of Buddhist priests also allowed concealed weapons, such as the ''tantō''.
Most ''ninjutsu'' techniques recorded in scrolls and manuals revolve around ways to avoid detection, and methods of escape.
Their primary roles were those of espionage and sabotage, although assassinations were also attributed to ninja.
This weapon consisted of a weight on one end of a chain, and a sickle (''kama'') on the other.
Suspecting that the castle's supplies might be running low, the siege commander Matsudaira Nobutsuna ordered a raid on the castle's provisions.
Chiyome created a school for girls, which taught skills required of geisha, as well as espionage skills.
With the fall of Hara Castle, the Shimabara Rebellion came to an end, and Christianity in Japan was forced underground.
While historical records showed that Kenshin suffered abdominal problems, modern historians have usually attributed his death to stomach cancer, esophageal cancer or cerebrovascular disease.
Simple gardening tools such as kunai and sickles were used as weaponry so that, if discovered, a ninja could claim they are his tools and not weapons, despite their ability to be used in battle.
An assassination attempt on Toyotomi Hideyoshi was also thwarted.
In dark places, the scabbard could be extended out of the sword, and used as a long probing device.
Despite the large array of tools available to the ninja, the ''Bansenshukai'' warns one not to be overburdened with equipment, stating "...a successful ninja is one who uses but one tool for multiple tasks".
Uesugi Kenshin, the famous daimyo of Echigo province, was rumored to have been killed by a ninja.
The ''shinobi'' was considered a real profession, as demonstrated in the bakufu's 1649 law on military service, which declared that only daimyos with an income of over 10,000 ''koku'' were allowed to retain ''shinobi''.
The Kōga would later take part in conquering the castle:
Some legendary abilities purported to be in the province of ninja training include invisibility, walking on water and control over the natural elements.
It could be used to cover the face, form a belt, or assist in climbing.
Using two arquebuses, he fired two consecutive shots at Nobunaga, but was unable to inflict mortal injury through Nobunaga's armor.
Fujibayashi's descendents wrote and edited the ''Bansenshukai''.
A diary kept by a member of the Matsudaira clan, the ''Amakusa Gunki'', relates: "Men from Kōga in Omi Province who concealed their appearance would steal up to the castle every night and go inside as they pleased."
The remoteness and inaccessibility of the surrounding mountains may have had a role in the ninja's secretive development.
From these regions, villages devoted to the training of ninja first appeared.
Evidence for this can be seen in historical documents, which began to refer to stealthy soldiers as ''shinobi'' during the Sengoku period.
In the ''Kojiki'', the young Yamato Takeru disguised himself as a charming maiden, and assassinated two chiefs of the Kumaso people.
Most were tools used in the infiltration of castles.
At the bottom was the ''genin'' ("lower man"), field agents drawn from the lower class and assigned to carry out actual missions.
The ''yamabushi'' ascetics of Shugendō adopted this practice, using the hand gestures in spiritual, healing, and exorcism rituals.
The fictional weapon ''Fūma shuriken'' is named after him.
Although it is often portrayed in popular culture as a weapon, the ''kunai'' was primarily used for gouging holes in walls.
The katana had several uses beyond normal combat.
Clothing used was similar to that of the samurai, but loose garments (such as leggings) were tucked into trousers or secured with belts.
* ''Hitsuke'' – The practice of distracting guards by starting a fire away from the ninja's planned point of entry.
Historically, the word ''ninja'' was not in common use, and a variety of regional colloquialisms evolved to describe what would later be dubbed ninja.
In battle, the ninja could also be used to cause confusion amongst the enemy.
The legend credits his death to an assassin who is said to have hidden in Kenshin's lavatory, and fatally injured Kenshin by thrusting a blade or spear into his anus.
The first recorded use of espionage was under the employment of Prince Shōtoku in the 6th century.
Unlike their counterparts, the Iga and Kōga clans produced professional ninja, specifically trained for their roles.
While the image of a ninja clad in black garb (''shinobi shōzoku'') is prevalent in popular media, there is no written evidence for such a costume.
Many famous people in Japanese history have been associated or identified as ninja, but their status as ninja are difficult to prove and may be the product of later imagination.
The account of this assault is given in the ''Mikawa Go Fudoki'', where it was written that Kōga ninja infiltrated the castle, set fire to its towers, and killed the castellan along with 200 of the garrison.
Following the Battle of Okehazama in 1560, Tokugawa employed a group of eighty Kōga ninja, led by Tomo Sukesada.
Disguises as a ''komusō'', a mendicant monk known for playing the ''shakuhachi'', were also effective, as the large "basket" hats traditionally worn by them concealed the head completely.
Survivors were forced to flee, some to the mountains of Kii, but others arrived before Tokugawa Ieyasu, where they were well treated.
Following the unification of Japan under the Tokugawa shogunate (17th century), the ninja faded into obscurity.
In English, the plural of ''ninja'' can be either unchanged as ''ninja'', reflecting the Japanese language's lack of grammatical number, or the regular English plural ''ninjas''.
Perceived control over the elements may be grounded in real tactics, which were categorized by association with forces of nature.
Unfortunately, the veracity of this account has been clouded by later fictional publications depicting Saizō as one of the legendary Sanada Ten Braves.
A mountain ascetic (''yamabushi'') attire facilitated travel, as they were common and could travel freely between political boundaries.
The mercenary nature of the ''shinobi'' is demonstrated in another arson attack soon after the burning of Sawayama Castle.
The ninja's adaption of kites in espionage and warfare is another subject of legends.
Despite the lack of hard evidence, it has been put forward by some authorities that black robes, perhaps slightly tainted with red to hide bloodstains, was indeed the sensible garment of choice for infiltration.
His ancestry in Iga province, along with ''ninjutsu'' manuals published by his descendants have led some sources to define him as a ninja.
Members of this office, the ''oniwaban'' ("garden keeper"), were agents involved in collecting information on daimyos and government officials.
During the later "summer campaign", these hired ninja fought alongside regular troops at the Battle of Tennōji.
Stories about the ninja are usually based on historical figures.
Rumors surrounding famous warriors, such as Kusunoki Masashige or Minamoto no Yoshitsune sometimes describe them as ninja, but there is little evidence for these claims.
In 1573, Manabe Rokurō, a vassal of daimyo Hatano Hideharu, attempted to infiltrate Azuchi Castle and assassinate the sleeping Nobunaga.
Some evidence of medical training can be derived from one account, where an Iga ninja provided first-aid to Ii Naomasa, who was injured by gunfire in the Battle of Sekigahara.
Muneyoshi's grandson, Jubei Muneyoshi, told tales of his grandfather's status as a ninja.
Some examples include poison, ''makibishi'' (caltrops), cane swords (''shikomizue''), land mines, fukiya (blowguns), poisoned darts, acid-spurting tubes, and firearms.
While straight swords were used before the invention of the katana, the straight ''ninjatō'' has no historical precedent and is likely a modern invention.
Later in history, the Kōga ninja would become regarded as agents of the Tokugawa ''bakufu'', at a time when the ''bakufu'' used the ninja in an intelligence network to monitor regional daimyos as well as the Imperial court.
Teamwork techniques exist: for example, in order to scale a wall, a group of ninja may carry each other on their backs, or provide a human platform to assist an individual in reaching greater heights.
The account also gives a case of deception, where the attackers dressed in the same clothes as the defenders, causing much confusion.
Espionage was the chief role of the ninja.
The historicity of armor specifically made for ninja cannot be ascertained.
Inflatable skins and breathing tubes allowed the ninja to stay underwater for longer periods of time.
Later, the 14th century war chronicle ''Taiheiki'' contained many references to ''shinobi'', and credited the destruction of a castle by fire to an unnamed but "highly skilled ''shinobi''".
Historical documents regarding the ninja's origins in these mountainous regions are considered generally correct.
* Kumawakamaru (13th–14th centuries) – A youth whose exiled father was ordered to death by the monk Homma Saburō.
''Kunoichi'', meaning a female ninja, supposedly came from the characters くノ一 (pronounced ''ku'', ''no'' and ''ichi''), which make up the three strokes that form the kanji for "woman" (女).
Disguises came in the form of priests, entertainers, fortune tellers, merchants, ''rōnin'', and monks.
A portable listening device (''saoto hikigane'') was used to eavesdrop on conversations and detect sounds.
While pieces of light armor purportedly worn by ninja exist and date to the right time, there is no hard evidence of their use in ninja operations.
In 1614, the initial "winter campaign" at the Siege of Osaka saw the ninja in use once again.
Hiding in the shadow of a tree, he avoided being seen under the moonlight, and later concealed himself in a hole he had prepared beforehand, thus escaping capture.
Although shorter swords and daggers were used, the ''katana'' was probably the ninja's weapon of choice, and was sometimes carried on the back.
The ''kuji'' ("nine characters") is a concept originating from Taoism, where it was a string of nine words used in charms and incantations.
Sugitani managed to escape, but was caught four years later and put to death by torture.
This depiction is also common in popular culture.
With the aid of disguises, the ninja gathered information on enemy terrain and building specifications, as well as obtaining passwords and communiques.
However, there is no written link between the earlier ''shinobi'' and the later ''oniwabanshū''.
The title ''ninja'' has sometimes been attributed retrospectively to the semi-legendary 4th-century prince Yamato Takeru.
In the early 18th century, shogun Tokugawa Yoshimune founded the ''oniwaban'', an intelligence agency and secret service.
Some legends include flight, invisibility, shapeshifting, the ability to "split" into multiple bodies, the summoning of animals, and control over the five classical elements.
The Kōga ninja were recruited by shogun Tokugawa Iemitsu against Christian rebels led by Amakusa Shirō, who made a final stand at Hara Castle, in Hizen Province.
It was around this time that the word ''shinobi'' appeared to define and clearly identify ninja as a secretive group of agents.
Fictional figures such as Sarutobi Sasuke would eventually make way into comics and television, where they have come to enjoy a culture hero status outside of their original mediums.
The chronicle ''Go Kagami Furoku'' writes, of the two clans' origins:
According to a document, the ''Iranki'', when Nobunaga was inspecting Iga province — which his army had devastated — a group of three ninja shot at him with large-caliber firearms.
Momochi is also a branch of the Hattori clan.
Minstrel or ''sarugaku'' outfits could have allowed the ninja to spy in enemy buildings without rousing suspicion.
By the time of the Meiji Restoration (1868), the tradition of the ''shinobi'' had become a topic of popular imagination and mystery in Japan.
A volley of shots was fired into the sky, causing the defenders to extinguish the castle lights in preparation.
A collapsible ladder is illustrated in the ''Bansenshukai'', featuring spikes at both ends to anchor the ladder.
A system of rank existed.
A variety of countermeasures were taken to prevent the activities of the ninja.
Turnbull suggests that kites lifting a man into midair might have been technically feasible, but states that the use of kites to form a human "hang glider" falls squarely in the realm of fantasy.
They were tasked to raid an outpost of the Imagawa clan.
Instead, it was much more common for the ninja to be disguised as civilians.
Instead, war epics such as the ''Tale of Hōgen'' ''(Hōgen Monogatari)'' and the ''Tale of the Heike'' ''(Heike Monogatari)'' focus mainly on the aristocratic samurai, whose deeds were apparently more appealing to the audience.
Other implements include chisels, hammers, drills, picks and so forth.
Under the cloak of darkness, ninja disguised as defenders infiltrated the castle, capturing a banner of the Christian cross.
A final but detailed record of ninja employed in open warfare occurred during the Shimabara Rebellion (1637–1638).
For instance, many similar tales exist about a daimyo challenging a ninja to prove his worth, usually by stealing his pillow or weapon while he slept.
A ninja named Kirigakure Saizō (possibly Kirigakure Shikaemon) thrust a spear through the floorboards to kill Hideyoshi, but was unsuccessful.
The functions of the ninja included espionage, sabotage, infiltration, assassination and guerrilla warfare.
The ''happō'', a small eggshell filled with blinding powder (''metsubushi''), was also used to facilitate escape.
However, this also ended in failure, and Manabe was forced to commit suicide, after which his body was openly displayed in public.
Falls under "fire techniques" (''katon-no-jutsu'').
* ''Uzura-gakure'' – The practice of curling into a ball and remaining motionless in order to appear like a stone.
The Kōga ninja are said to have played a role in the later Battle of Sekigahara (1600), where several hundred Kōga assisted soldiers under Torii Mototada in the defence of Fushimi Castle.
The use of disguises is common and well documented.
Nijō Castle in Kyoto is constructed with long "nightingale" floors, which rested on metal hinges (''uguisu-bari'') specifically designed to squeak loudly when walked over.
For example, Nakagawa Shoshujin, the 17th century founder of Nakagawa-ryū, claimed in his own writings (''Okufuji Monogatari'') that he had the ability to transform into birds and animals.
The ninja did not always work alone.
''Mono'' (者) means "a person".
The weight was swung to injure or disable an opponent, and the sickle used to kill at close range.
Tools used for infiltration and espionage are some of the most abundant artifacts related to the ninja.
The ''Buke Myōmokushō'' states,
The best-known cases of assassination attempts involve famous historical figures.
The Ukai diary, written by a descendant of Ukai Kanemon, has several entries describing the reconnaissance actions taken by the Kōga.
Such tactics were considered unsavory even in early times, when, according to the 10th century ''Shōmonki'', the boy spy Koharumaru was killed for spying against the insurgent Taira no Masakado.
Likewise, a supplement to the ''Nochi Kagami'', a record of the Ashikaga shogunate, confirms the same Iga origin:
The ''mizugumo'' was a set of wooden shoes supposedly allowing the ninja to walk on water.
A number of  ''shinobi'' manuals, often based on Chinese military philosophy, were written in the 17th and 18th centuries, most notably the ''Bansenshukai'' (1676).
They were meant to work by distributing the wearer's weight over the shoes' wide bottom surface.
Here the ninja reportedly gave Naomasa a "black medicine" meant to stop bleeding.
Magical powers were sometimes rooted in the ninja's own efforts to disseminate fanciful information.
The lineage and authenticity of these schools are a matter of controversy.
Soft-cased bombs were designed to release smoke or poison gas, along with fragmentation explosives packed with iron or pottery shrapnel.
Miura Yoemon, a ninja in Tokugawa's service, recruited ''shinobi'' from the Iga region, and sent 10 ninja into Osaka Castle in an effort to foster antagonism between enemy commanders.
The underlying connotation of ''shinobi'' (忍) means "to steal away; to hide" and — by extension — "to forbear", hence its association with stealth and invisibility.
The ninja families were organized into larger guilds, each with their own territories.
After Tokugawa's victory at Sekigahara, the Iga acted as guards for the inner compounds of Edo Castle, while the Kōga acted as a police force and assisted in guarding the outer gate.
As a consequence, their perception in western popular culture in the 20th century is often based more on such legend and folklore than on the spies of the Sengoku period.
Even in portrayals forgoing the mystical aspect, there is a tendency to depict the ninja as a medieval equivalent to modern special forces.
This includes mythologizing the ninja in a similar manner; showing them as emotionless living weapons with nearly superhuman abilities derived from extreme training, a vast folk knowledge of subjects such as toxicology, physiology, and psychology, access to advanced secret technology, and possessing inhuman self-discipline.
With the fall of the Iga and Kōga clans, daimyos could no longer recruit professional ninja, and were forced to train their own ''shinobi''.
The ninja were stealth soldiers and mercenaries hired mostly by daimyos.
An array of darts, spikes, knives, and sharp, star-shaped discs were known collectively as ''shuriken''.
By wielding these lanterns, they were allowed to enter the castle without a fight.
When the fire attack did not begin as scheduled, the Iga men told the commanders, who were not from the region, that they could not possibly understand the tactics of the ''shinobi''.
Rokakku Yoshitaka, the same man who had hired Iga ninja just years earlier, was the fortress holder – and target of attack.
However, the mercenary ''shinobi'' were unwilling to take commands.
Depictions of famous persons later deemed ninja often show them in samurai armor.
The first specialized training began in the mid-15th century, when certain samurai families started to focus on covert warfare, including espionage and assassination.
The application of ''kuji'' to produce a desired effect was called "cutting" (''kiri'') the ''kuji''.
There is some belief that he escaped death and lived as a farmer in Kii Province.
They then threatened to abandon the operation if they were not allowed to act on their own strategy.
Falls under "wood techniques" (''mokuton-no-jutsu'').
In 1561, commanders acting under Kizawa Nagamasa hired three Iga ninja of ''genin'' rank to assist the conquest of a fortress in Maibara.
Blind spots and holes in walls provided constant surveillance of these labyrinthine paths, as exemplified in Himeji Castle.
For example, the practice of starting fires in order to cover a ninja's trail falls under ''katon-no-jutsu'' ("fire techniques").
The Iga and Kōga clans have come to describe families living in the province of Iga (modern Mie Prefecture) and the adjacent region of Kōka (later written as ''Kōga''), named after a village in what is now Shiga Prefecture.
In historical documents, ''shinobi'' is almost always used.
The ''shinobi'' proper, a specially trained group of spies and mercenaries, appeared in the Sengoku or "warring states" period, in the 15th century, but antecedents may have existed in the 14th century, and possibly in the 12th century (Heian or early Kamakura era).
This tactic was used again later on as a method of crowd dispersal.
The ''mudrā'', a series of hand symbols representing different Buddhas, was applied to the ''kuji'' by Buddhists, possibly through the esoteric ''Mikkyō'' teachings.
* Fujibayashi Nagato (16th century) – Considered to be one of three "greatest" Iga ''jōnin'', the other two being Hattori Hanzō and Momochi Sandayū.
Major examples include the ''Ninpiden'' (1655), the ''Bansenshukai'' (1675), and the ''Shōninki'' (1681).
Shin and arm guards, along with metal-reinforced hoods are also speculated to make up the ninja's armor.
The fire was eventually set, allowing Nagamasa's army to capture the fortress in a chaotic rush.
Physical training was also important, which involved long distance runs, climbing, stealth methods of walking and swimming.
However, these records take place at a very early stage of Japanese history, and they are unlikely to be connected to the ''shinobi'' of later accounts.
Here, the Kōga captured bags of enemy provisions, and infiltrated the castle by night, obtaining secret passwords.
Knives and small saws (''hamagari'') were also used to create holes in buildings, where they served as a foothold or a passage of entry.
Accounts exist of ninja being lifted into the air by kites, where they flew over hostile terrain and descended into, or dropped bombs on enemy territory.
The sword could also be laid against the wall, where the ninja could use the sword guard (''tsuba'') to gain a higher foothold.
Here too, each word in the ''kuji'' was associated with Buddhist deities, animals from Taoist mythology, and later, Shinto kami.
The popular notion of black clothing is likely rooted in artistic convention; early drawings of ninja showed them dressed in black in order to portray a sense of invisibility.
* ''Ukigusa-gakure'' – The practice of throwing duckweed over water in order to conceal underwater movement.
Ninja in espionage tried to avoid open battlefield with a numerically superior enemy forces, therefore their technique was adapted to stun the enemy and escape in case of failure.
In China, this tradition mixed with Buddhist beliefs, assigning each of the nine words to a Buddhist deity.
These written accounts are the last mention of ninja in war.
The ''mizugumo'' was featured on the show MythBusters, where it was demonstrated unfit for walking on water.
The ''ukidari'', a similar footwear for walking on water, also existed in the form of a round bucket, but was probably quite unstable.
In a technique dubbed ''bakemono-jutsu'' ("ghost technique"), his men stole a lantern bearing the enemy's family crest (''mon''), and proceeded to make replicas with the same ''mon''.
* Ishikawa Goemon (1558–1594) – Goemon reputedly tried to drip poison from a thread into Oda Nobunaga's mouth through a hiding spot in the ceiling, but many fanciful tales exist about Goemon, and this story cannot be confirmed.
Outside the expected martial art disciplines, a youth studied survival and scouting techniques, as well as information regarding poisons and explosives.
By the Sengoku period, the ''shinobi'' had several roles, including spy (''kanchō''), scout (''teisatsu''), surprise attacker (''kishu''), and agitator (''konran'').
He was "smoked out" of his hiding place by another ninja working for Hideyoshi, who apparently used a sort of primitive "flamethrower".
The ''kunai'' was a heavy pointed tool, possibly derived from the Japanese masonry trowel, which it closely resembles.
Kites were indeed used in Japanese warfare, but mostly for the purpose of sending messages and relaying signals.
The ''Asai Sandaiki'' writes of their plans: "We employed ''shinobi-no-mono'' of Iga.
It was not until the 15th century that spies were specially trained for their purpose.
Some former Iga clan members, including Hattori Hanzō, would later serve as Tokugawa's bodyguards.
The warlord Oda Nobunaga's notorious reputation led to several attempts on his life.
Historian Stephen Turnbull asserts that the ninja were mostly recruited from the lower class, and therefore little literary interest was taken in them.
In 1571, a Kōga ninja and sharpshooter by the name of Sugitani Zenjubō was hired to assassinate Nobunaga.
The word ''shinobi'' appears in the written record as far back as the late 8th century in poems in the ''Man'yōshū''.
Novels were written about the ninja, such as ''Jiraiya Gōketsu Monogatari'', which was also made into a kabuki play.
These often portray ninja in non-factual, sometimes incredibly flamboyant ways, for humor or entertainment.
Days later, Nobutsuna ordered an intelligence gathering mission to determine the castle's supplies.
Falls under "water techniques" (''suiton-no-jutsu'').
Tactics martial arts ninja in sabotage and assassination was adaptation for surprise attacks (night, ambush, in the back) and for small space (thicket bush in the forest, low corridors and small room Japanese locks, which requires short and small weapons and short strikes).
