Nitroglycerin, made by nitration of glycerin, is the dangerously unstable explosive ingredient of dynamite.
Molecular nitrogen is released into the atmosphere in the process of decay, in dead plant and animal tissues.
Various other nitrated organic compounds, such as nitroglycerin, trinitrotoluene, and nitrocellulose, are used as explosives and propellants for modern firearms.
When nitrogen reacts spontaneously with a reagent, the net transformation is often called nitrogen fixation.
The fact that there was a component of air that does not support combustion was clear to Rutherford.
Plants are able to assimilate nitrogen directly in the form of nitrates that may be present in soil from natural mineral deposits, artificial fertilizers, animal waste, or organic decay (as the product of bacteria, but not bacteria specifically associated with the plant).
Soluble nitrate is an important limiting factor in the growth of certain bacteria in ocean waters.
Bubbles from other "inert" gases (gases other than carbon dioxide and oxygen) cause the same effects, so replacement of nitrogen in breathing gases may prevent nitrogen narcosis, but does not prevent decompression sickness.
Nitric acid is used as an oxidizing agent in liquid fueled rockets.
There are two stable isotopes of nitrogen: 14N and 15N.
Unstable allotropes of nitrogen consisting of more than two nitrogen atoms, such as  and , have been produced in the laboratory.
When inhaled at high partial pressures (more than about 4 bar, encountered at depths below about 30 m in scuba diving), nitrogen is an anesthetic agent, causing nitrogen narcosis, a temporary state of mental impairment similar to nitrous oxide intoxication.
The extra surface area provided by nitrogen-soaked materials is also important, with soaked clothing or cotton causing far more rapid damage than a spill of direct liquid to skin.
Nitrogen is estimated at 31st element in crustal abundance.
Nitrogen was also studied at about the same time by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, Henry Cavendish, and Joseph Priestley, who referred to it as ''burnt air'' or ''phlogisticated air''.
The existence of nitrogen is formally considered to have been discovered by Scottish physician Daniel Rutherford in 1772, who called it ''noxious air''.
On Earth, the element forms about 78% of Earth's atmosphere and is the most abundant uncombined element.
Nitric oxide (nitrogen monoxide, NO), is a natural free radical used in signal transduction in both plants and animals.
It typically makes up around 4% of the dry weight of plant matter, and around 3% of the weight of the human body.
Elemental nitrogen in the atmosphere cannot be used directly by either plants or animals, and must be converted to a reduced (or 'fixed') state to be useful for higher plants and animals.
Also, held by gravity at colder temperatures, nitrogen and its compounds occur in variable amounts in the planetary atmospheres of the gas giant planets.
The starting point for industrial production of nitrogen compounds is the Haber process, in which nitrogen is fixed by reacting  and  over an iron(II, III) oxide () catalyst at about 500&nbsp;°C and 200 atmospheres pressure.
Rapid decompression (as when divers ascend too quickly or astronauts decompress too quickly from cabin pressure to spacesuit pressure) can lead to a potentially fatal condition called decompression sickness (formerly known as caisson sickness or ''the bends''), when nitrogen bubbles form in the bloodstream, nerves, joints, and other sensitive or vital areas.
Singly, doubly, triply and quadruply substituted alkyl compounds of ammonia are called amines (four substitutions, to form commercially and biologically important quaternary amines, results in a positively charged nitrogen, and thus a water-soluble, or at least amphiphilic, compound).
Such bacteria may live freely in soil (e.g., ''Azotobacter'') but normally exist in a symbiotic relationship in the root nodules of leguminous plants (e.g.
Other classes of nitrogen anions (negatively charged ions) are the poisonous azides (), which are linear and isoelectronic to carbon dioxide, but which bind to important iron-containing enzymes in the body in a manner more resembling cyanide.
Molecular nitrogen and nitrogen compounds have been detected in interstellar space by astronomers using the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer.
Nitrogen is a constituent of every major pharmacological drug class, including antibiotics.
This process can result in eutrophication of the water, as nitrogen-driven bacterial growth depletes water oxygen to the point that all higher organisms die.
The human body contains about 3% by mass of nitrogen, the fourth most abundant element in the body after oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen.
Directing a pressurized stream of nitrogen gas perpendicular to the surface of the liquid causes the solvent to evaporate while leaving the solute(s) and un-evaporated solvent behind.
Nitrogen dissolves in the blood and body fats.
At the same time, use of the Ostwald process (1902) to produce nitrates from industrial nitrogen fixation allowed the large-scale industrial production of nitrates as feedstock in the manufacture of explosives in the World Wars of the 20th century.
Nitrogen fixation by industrial processes like the Frank–Caro process (1895–1899) and Haber–Bosch process (1908–1913) eased this shortage of nitrogen compounds, to the extent that half of global food production (see Applications) now relies on synthetic nitrogen fertilizers.
For similar reasons, pure molecular nitrogen lasers typically emit light in the ultraviolet range.
Other notable nitrogen-containing drugs are drugs derived from plant alkaloids, such as morphine (there exist many alkaloids known to have pharmacological effects; in some cases, they appear as natural chemical defenses of plants against predation).
The reddish and poisonous nitrogen dioxide  contains an unpaired electron and is an important component of smog.
This may happen almost instantly on contact, or after a second or more, depending on the form of liquid nitrogen.
N2 reacts spontaneously with few reagents, being resilient to acids and bases as well as oxidants and most reductants.
Another molecule of the same structure is the colorless and relatively inert anesthetic gas Nitrous oxide (dinitrogen monoxide, ), also known as laughing gas.
Plant alkaloids (often defense chemicals) contain nitrogen by definition, and many notable nitrogen-containing drugs, such as caffeine and morphine, are either alkaloids or synthetic mimics that act (as many plant alkaloids do) on receptors of animal neurotransmitters (for example, synthetic amphetamines).
Elemental lithium reacts ("burns") in an atmosphere of N2 to give lithium nitride:
Notably, N2 ligand was obtained by the decomposition of hydrazine, and not coordination of free dinitrogen.
Although nitrogen is non-toxic, when released into an enclosed space it can displace oxygen, and therefore presents an asphyxiation hazard.
16N is a sensitive and immediate indicator of leaks from the primary coolant system to the secondary steam cycle, and is the primary means of detection for such leaks.
Other (theoretical but not yet synthesized) allotropes include hexazine (, a benzene analog) and octaazacubane (, a cubane-type cluster).
Biologically mediated reactions (e.g., assimilation, nitrification, and denitrification) strongly control nitrogen dynamics in the soil.
is nicknamed "nitrogen diamond".
Well-known "dead zone" areas in the U.S. Gulf Coast and the Black Sea are due to this important polluting process.
Synthetically produced ammonia and nitrates are key industrial fertilizers, and fertilizer nitrates are key pollutants in the eutrophication of water systems.
Nitrates absorbed in this fashion are converted to nitrites by the enzyme ''nitrate'' reductase, and then converted to ammonia by another enzyme called ''nitrite'' reductase.
Soil nitrate is preferentially assimilated by tree roots relative to soil ammonium, however this is not the case for all species.
Nitrogen molecules containing unpaired electrons show a tendency to dimerize (thus pairing the electrons), and are, in general, highly reactive.
Chaptal's meaning was that nitrogen gas is the essential part of nitric acid, which in turn was produced from niter.
Even at the low temperatures of solid nitrogen it is fairly volatile and can sublime to form an atmosphere, or condense back into nitrogen frost.
The main neutral hydride of nitrogen is ammonia (), although hydrazine () is also commonly used.
A catalytic process to reduce N2 to ammonia with the use of a molybdenum complex in the presence of a proton source was published in 2005.
It is a large component of animal waste (for example, guano), usually in the form of urea, uric acid, ammonium compounds, and derivatives of these nitrogenous products, which are essential nutrients for all plants that cannot fix atmospheric nitrogen.
Drugs that contain nitrogen include all major classes of antibiotics and organic nitrate drugs like nitroglycerin and nitroprusside that regulate blood pressure and heart action by mimicking the action of nitric oxide.
In 1910, Lord Rayleigh discovered that an electrical discharge in nitrogen gas produced "active nitrogen", a monatomic allotrope of nitrogen.
Such non-molecular forms of solid nitrogen are of interest as they possess a higher energy density than any other non-nuclear material.
The impurities can be removed by passing the gas through aqueous sulfuric acid containing potassium dichromate.
The radioisotope 16N is the dominant radionuclide in the coolant of pressurized water reactors or boiling water reactors during normal operation.
Animal metabolism of nitrogen in proteins, in general, results in excretion of urea, while animal metabolism of nucleic acids results in excretion of urea and uric acid.
Lavoisier's name for nitrogen is used in many languages (French, Italian, Portuguese, Polish, Russian, Albanian, Turkish, etc.)
Specific bacteria (e.g., ''Rhizobium trifolium'') possess nitrogenase enzymes that can fix atmospheric nitrogen (see nitrogen fixation) into a form (ammonium ion) that is chemically useful to higher organisms.
In many places in the world, artificial fertilizers applied to crop-lands to increase yields result in run-off delivery of soluble nitrogen to oceans at river mouths.
Nitrogen can be used as a replacement, or in combination with, carbon dioxide to pressurize kegs of some beers, particularly stouts and British ales, due to the smaller bubbles it produces, which makes the dispensed beer smoother and headier.
Liquid nitrogen, a fluid resembling water in appearance, but with 80.8% of the density (the density of liquid nitrogen at its boiling point is 0.808 g/mL), is a common cryogen.
The reaction, which is the source of the bulk of nitrogen in the biosphere, is catalyzed by the nitrogenase enzyme complex that contains Fe and Mo atoms, using energy derived from hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) into adenosine diphosphate and inorganic phosphate (−20.5 kJ/mol).
In an atmosphere of pure nitrogen, animals died and flames were extinguished.
The extremely strong triple bond in elemental nitrogen (N≡N) dominates nitrogen chemistry, causing difficulty for both organisms and industry in converting the N2 into useful compounds, but at the same time causing release of large amounts of often useful energy when the compounds burn, explode, or decay back into nitrogen gas.
Significant absorption occurs at extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, beginning around 100 nanometres.
clover, ''Trifolium'', or soybean plant, ''Glycine max'') and fertilizer trees.
'''Nitrogen''' is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''N''' and atomic number&nbsp;7.
According to physical cosmology theory, it was originally created by fusion processes from carbon and hydrogen in supernovas.
The amount of nitrogen in a chemical substance can be determined by the Kjeldahl method.
:NH4Cl(aq) + NaNO2(aq) → N2(g) + NaCl(aq) + 2 H2O (l)
Nitrogen is commonly used during sample preparation in chemical analysis.
Common nitrogen functional groups include: amines, amides, nitro groups, imines, and enamines.
The "whirling cloud of brilliant yellow light" produced by his apparatus reacted with quicksilver to produce explosive mercury nitride.
Precipitation often contains substantial quantities of ammonium and nitrate, thought to result from nitrogen fixation by lightning and other atmospheric electric phenomena.
Small amounts of impurities NO and HNO3 are also formed in this reaction.
Due to the volatility of elemental nitrogen and its common compounds with hydrogen and oxygen, nitrogen was driven out of the planetesimals in the early Solar System by the heat of the Sun and lost to the rocky planets of the inner Solar System.
This is one of a variety of nitrogen oxides that form a family often abbreviated as '''NOx'''.
Oxygen sensors are sometimes used as a safety precaution when working with liquid nitrogen to alert workers of gas spills into a confined space.
This structure is similar to that of diamond, and both have extremely strong covalent bonds.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) was discovered early in the 19th century to be a partial anesthetic, though it was not used as a surgical anesthetic until later.
Many such compounds are now known, including IrCl(N2)(PPh3)2, W(N2)2(Ph2PCH2CH2PPh2)2, and (η5-C5Me4H)2Zr2(μ2, η2,η2-N2).
A similar process occurred with the water-soluble compounds of the uncommon light element boron.
Below 35.4&nbsp;K (−237.6&nbsp;°C) nitrogen assumes the cubic crystal allotropic form (called the alpha phase).
Nitrogen compounds are basic building blocks in animal biology as well.
Nitrogen is promoted by euthanasia advocate Philip Nitschke to end life in a "peaceful, reliable and totally legal" manner.
An example occurred shortly before the launch of the first Space Shuttle mission in 1981, when two technicians died from asphyxiation after they walked into a space located in the Shuttle's Mobile Launcher Platform that was pressurized with pure nitrogen as a precaution against fire.
Nearly every hypergolic rocket engine uses  as the oxidizer; the fuels, one of the various forms of hydrazine, are also nitrogen compounds.
Some launch vehicles such as the Titan II and Ariane 1 through 4 also use hypergolic fuels, although the trend is away from such engines for cost and safety reasons.
There are a variety of crystalline forms of solid nitrogen known, not all with discrete dinitrogen molecular structures.
These engines are extensively used on spacecraft such as the space shuttle and those of the Apollo Program because their propellants are liquids at room temperature and ignition occurs spontaneously without an ignition system, allowing many precisely controlled burns.
Full "contact" between naked skin and large collected-droplets or pools of liquid nitrogen may be prevented for a second or two, by a layer of insulating gas from the Leidenfrost effect.
This may give the skin a second of protection from nitrogen bulk liquid.
The higher oxides dinitrogen trioxide , dinitrogen tetroxide  and dinitrogen pentoxide , are unstable and explosive, a consequence of the low energy state of .
It is used in cold traps for certain laboratory equipment and to cool infrared detectors or X-ray detectors.
Nitrogen absorption leads to significant absorption of ultraviolet radiation in the Earth's upper atmosphere and the atmospheres of other planetary bodies.
It is produced from 16O (in water) via (n,p) reaction.
Nitrogen is consequently a relatively rare element on these inner planets, including Earth.
Nitrogen compounds were well known by the Middle Ages.
The nitrogen cycle describes movement of the element from the air, into the biosphere and organic compounds, then back into the atmosphere.
At atmospheric pressure, it boils at .
When insulated in proper containers such as Dewar flasks, it can be transported without much evaporative loss.
This process requires a large amount of energy and anoxic conditions.
These reactions typically result in 15N enrichment of the substrate and depletion of the product.
Nitrogen is a common element in the universe, estimated at about seventh in total abundance in the Milky Way and the Solar System.
Historically, such compounds included important compounds such as potassium nitrate, used in gunpowder which was often produced by biological means (bacterial fermentation) before natural mineral sources were discovered.
Nitrogen gas was inert enough that Antoine Lavoisier referred to it as "mephitic air" or ''azote'', from the Greek word  ''azotos'', "lifeless".
In nature, nitrogen is converted into biologically (and industrially) useful compounds by lightning, and by some living organisms, notably certain bacteria (i.e., nitrogen-fixing bacteria—see ''Biological role'' below).
Nitrogen is a nonmetal, with an electronegativity of 3.04.
In a chemical laboratory, it is prepared by treating an aqueous solution of ammonium chloride with sodium nitrite.
Later, all such sources were displaced by industrial production, in the early 1900s.
It is used to concentrate and reduce the volume of liquid samples.
The circulation of nitrogen from atmosphere, to organic compounds, then back to the atmosphere, is referred to as the nitrogen cycle.
By far the most common is 14N (99.634%), which is produced in the CNO cycle in stars.
Nitrogen is a constituent of molecules in every major drug class in pharmacology and medicine.
Nitrogen is present in all known living organisms, in proteins, nucleic acids, and other molecules.
Larger chains, rings and structures of nitrogen hydrides are also known, but are generally unstable.
It is very weak and flows in the form of glaciers and on Triton geysers of nitrogen gas come from the polar ice cap region.
The English word nitrogen (1794) entered the language from the French ''nitrogène'', coined in 1790 by French chemist Jean-Antoine Chaptal (1756–1832), from the French ''nitre'' (potassium nitrate, also called saltpeter) and the French ''-gène'', "producing", from the Greek -γενής (''-genes'', "producer, begetter").
Among other things, it is used in the cryopreservation of blood, reproductive cells (sperm and egg), and other biological samples and materials.
The triple bond in molecular nitrogen () is one of the strongest.
The comparatively stable, but less powerful explosive trinitrotoluene (TNT) is the standard explosive against which the power of nuclear explosions are measured.
Nitrogen that evaporates from liquid is still colder and heavier than (oxygenated) air, therefore any spill of liquid nitrogen tends to stay at the bottom of a closed space, expelling oxygen.
Plant-feeding insects are dependent on nitrogen in their diet, such that varying the amount of nitrogen fertilizer applied to a plant can affect the reproduction rate of insects feeding on fertilized plants.
When nitrates burn or explode, the formation of the powerful triple bond in the N2 produces most of the energy of the reaction.
Nitric oxide's rapid reaction with water in animals results in production of its metabolite nitrite.
It has a short half-life of about 7.1 s, but during its decay back to 16O produces high-energy gamma radiation (5 to 7 MeV).
In most of these compounds, the basic instability and tendency to burn or explode is derived from the fact that nitrogen is present as an oxide, and not as the far more stable nitrogen molecule (N2), which is a product of the compounds' thermal decomposition.
The element nitrogen was discovered as a separable component of air by Scottish physician Daniel Rutherford in 1772.
Legumes maintain an anaerobic (oxygen free) environment for their nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Nitrogen gas generators using membranes or PSA are typically more cost and energy efficient than bulk delivered nitrogen.
The ability to combine, or fix, molecular nitrogen is a key feature of modern industrial chemistry.
These complexes illustrate how N2 might bind to the metal(s) in nitrogenase and the catalyst for the Haber process.
Like dry ice, the main use of liquid nitrogen is as a refrigerant.
Nitrogen gas also exhibits scintillation.
Molecular nitrogen is a major constituent of not only Earth's atmosphere, but also the Saturnian moon Titan's thick atmosphere.
Under extremely high pressures (1.1&nbsp;million&nbsp;atm) and high temperatures (2000&nbsp;K), as produced in a diamond anvil cell, nitrogen polymerizes into the single-bonded cubic gauche crystal structure.
: 3 Mg + N2 → Mg3N2
Many drugs are mimics or prodrugs of natural nitrogen-containing signal molecules: for example, the organic nitrates nitroglycerin and nitroprusside control blood pressure by metabolizing into nitric oxide.
The characteristic odor of animal flesh decay is caused by the creation of long-chain, nitrogen-containing amines, such as putrescine and cadaverine, which are breakdown products of the amino acids ornithine and lysine, respectively, in decaying proteins.
Condensate is typically retained for 10 minutes to allow for decay of 16N to radioactive depletion.
The organic and inorganic salts of nitric acid have been important historically as convenient stores of chemical energy for warfare and rocket fuels.
Nitrogen is notable for the range of explosively unstable compounds.
This may happen with few warning symptoms, since the human carotid body is a relatively poor and slow low-oxygen (hypoxia) sensing system.
However, first the Frank–Caro process for producing cyanamide, and then the Haber–Bosch process for producing ammonia from air and natural gas (developed just before the first world war) eased this shortage of nitrogen compounds, to the extent that half of global food production now relies on synthetic nitrogen fertilizers.
This is associated with electronic transitions in the molecule to states in which charge is not distributed evenly between nitrogen atoms.
However, liquid nitrogen applied to skin in mists, and on fabrics, bypasses this effect, and causes local frostbite immediately.
Ammonium nitrate has been used as both fertilizer and explosive (see ANFO).
Nitrogen can also be found in many organic compounds.
A pressure-sensitive nitrogen capsule known commonly as a "widget" allows nitrogen-charged beers to be packaged in cans and bottles.
Neon, which occurs in equal abundance in the universe, is rare in the inner Solar System for the same reason.
Nitrogen and its compounds occur far more commonly as gases in the atmospheres of planets and moons that are large enough to have atmospheres.
is an intermediate in the manufacture of nitric acid , a strong acid and a fairly strong oxidizing agent.
Many industrially important compounds, such as ammonia, nitric acid, organic nitrates (propellants and explosives), and cyanides, contain nitrogen.
Molecular nitrogen (14N2) is largely transparent to infrared and visible radiation because it is a homonuclear molecule and has no dipole moment to couple to electromagnetic radiation at these wavelengths.
Alchemists knew nitric acid as ''aqua fortis'' (strong water).
A closed space, initially filled with air, will ultimately contain only nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and trace gases if some oxidative process, such as the rusting of iron, consumes all the oxygen.
The solid form of the element nitrogen forms a significant dynamic surface coverage on Pluto and outer moons of the Solar System such as Triton.
This was first proposed by Liebig in 1827 and later confirmed.
Though he did not recognize it as an entirely different chemical substance, he clearly distinguished it from Joseph Black's "fixed air", or carbon dioxide.
Nitrogen gas is an industrial gas produced by the fractional distillation of liquid air, or by mechanical means using gaseous air (i.e., pressurized reverse osmosis membrane or pressure swing adsorption).
The mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids was known as ''aqua regia'' (royal water), celebrated for its ability to dissolve gold (the ''king'' of metals).
Natural sources originated either from biology or deposits of nitrates produced by atmospheric reactions.
The corresponding acids are nitrous  and nitric acid , with the corresponding salts called nitrites and nitrates.
Similarly, access to any of the steam cycle components in a boiling water reactor nuclear power plant must be restricted during operation.
Nitrocellulose, produced by nitration of cellulose with nitric acid, is also known as guncotton.
In animals, free radical nitric oxide ('''NO''') (derived from an amino acid), serves as an important regulatory molecule for circulation.
Biological nitrogen fixation in free-living cyanobacteria and in the root nodules of plants also produces ammonia from molecular nitrogen.
Decay of organisms and their waste products may produce small amounts of nitrate, but most decay eventually returns nitrogen content to the atmosphere, as molecular nitrogen.
Bulk liquid nitrogen causes less rapid freezing than a spray of nitrogen mist (such as is used to freeze certain skin growths in the practice of dermatology).
Very pure nitrogen can be prepared by the thermal decomposition of barium azide or sodium azide.
At atmospheric pressure, molecular nitrogen condenses (liquefies) at 77&nbsp;K (−195.79&nbsp;°C) and freezes at 63&nbsp;K (−210.01&nbsp;°C) into the beta hexagonal close-packed crystal allotropic form.
: 6 Li + N2 → 2 Li3N
The former is predicted to be highly unstable, while the latter is predicted to be kinetically stable, by reason of its orbital symmetry.
Ammonia is more basic than water by 6 orders of magnitude.
Liquid nitrogen is a cryogenic liquid.
Nitrogen occurs in all organisms, primarily in amino acids (and thus proteins), in the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and in the energy transfer molecule adenosine triphosphate.
Previously to the 20th century, access to nitrogen compounds for fertilizers and gunpowder had been through deposits of natural nitrates, such as Chilean saltpeter.
Nitrogen is a common element in the universe, and is considered the seventh most abundant chemical element by mass in the universe, the Milky Way, and the Solar System.
Animals use nitrogen-containing amino acids from plant sources as starting materials for all nitrogen-compound animal biochemistry, including the manufacture of proteins and nucleic acids.
In solution, ammonia forms the ammonium ion ().
It has five electrons in its outer shell and is, therefore, trivalent in most compounds.
:2 NaN3 → 2 Na + 3 N2
It has also been used to cool central processing units and other devices in computers that are overclocked, and that produce more heat than during normal operation.
Magnesium also burns in nitrogen, forming magnesium nitride.
For a long time, sources of nitrogen compounds were limited.
This "mephitic air" consisted mostly of N2, but might have included more than 1% argon.
Nitrogen also makes a contribution to visible air glow from the Earth's upper atmosphere, through electron impact excitation followed by emission.
Commercial nitrogen is often a byproduct of air-processing for industrial concentration of oxygen for steelmaking and other purposes.
The resulting difficulty of converting  into other compounds, and the ease (and associated high energy release) of converting nitrogen compounds into elemental , have dominated the role of nitrogen in both nature and human economic activities.
However, because ammonium is preferentially retained by the forest canopy relative to atmospheric nitrate, most fixed nitrogen reaches the soil surface under trees as nitrate.
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are also symbiotic with a number of unrelated plant species such as alders (''Alnus'') spp., lichens, ''Casuarina'', ''Myrica'', liverworts, and ''Gunnera''.
Of the ten isotopes produced synthetically, 13N has a half-life of ten minutes and the remaining isotopes have half-lives on the order of seconds or less.
