In New Zealand, the Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine, and its sale or possession without a prescription is an offence under the Medicines Act.
When Joseph Thomas Clover invented the "gas-ether inhaler" in 1876, it however became a common practice at hospitals to initiate all anaesthetic treatments with a mild flow of nitrous oxide, and then gradually increase the anaesthesia with the stronger ether/chloroform.
It has a minimum alveolar concentration of 105% and a blood/gas partition coefficient of 0.46.
Its use for acute coronary syndrome is of unknown benefit.
The use of nitrous oxide as a recreational drug at "laughing gas parties", primarily arranged for the British upper class, became an immediate success beginning in 1799.
Nitrous oxide can be used as an oxidizer in a rocket motor.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 25 ppm (46&nbsp;mg/m3) exposure to waste anaesthetic.
In August 2015, the London Borough of Lambeth Council banned the use of the drug for recreational purposes, making offenders liable to an on-the-spot fine of up to £1,000.
With this new equipment being engineered and produced by 1794, the way was paved for clinical trials, which began when Thomas Beddoes in 1798 established the ''"Pneumatic Institution for Relieving Diseases by Medical Airs"'' in Hotwells (Bristol).
In addition to its effects on ion channels,  may act to imitate nitric oxide (NO) in the central nervous system, and this may be related to its analgesic and anxiolytic properties.
Nitrous oxide gives rise to nitric oxide (NO) on reaction with oxygen atoms, and this NO in turn reacts with ozone.
It has been found to be as safe as carbon dioxide with better pain relief.
Nitrous oxide is stored as a compressed liquid; the evaporation and expansion of liquid nitrous oxide in the intake manifold causes a large drop in intake charge temperature, resulting in a denser charge, further allowing more air/fuel mixture to enter the cylinder.
At room temperature (20&nbsp;°C (68&nbsp;°F)) the saturated vapour pressure is 50.525 bar, rising up to 72.45&nbsp;bar at —the critical temperature.
The gas is extremely soluble in fatty compounds.
Treacting  with  and HCl has also been demonstrated:
Soil  emissions are reported to be controlled by soil chemical and physical properties such as the availability of mineral N, soil pH, organic matter availability, and soil type, and climate related soil properties such as soil temperature and soil water content (e.g., Mosier, 1994; Bouwman, 1996; Beauchamp, 1997; Yamulki et al.
Abusing nitrous oxide can lead to oxygen deprivation resulting in loss of blood pressure, fainting and even heart attacks.
In contrast, it is a positive reinforcer in squirrel monkeys, and is well known as a drug of abuse in humans.
This book was important for two reasons.
A small amount of sulfur dioxide () is added to prevent substance abuse.
In 2008, agriculture contributed 6.1% of the total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and cropland contributed nearly 69% of total direct nitrous oxide () emissions.
Priestley published his discovery in the book ''Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)'', where he described how to produce the preparation of "nitrous air diminished", by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid.
One of the earliest commercial producers was George Poe.
Agriculture is the main source of human-produced nitrous oxide: cultivating soil, the use of nitrogen fertilisers, and animal waste handling can all stimulate naturally occurring bacteria to produce more nitrous oxide.
Most problems that are associated with nitrous do not come from mechanical failure due to the power increases.
:2 + (NH4)2SO4 → Na2SO4 + 2+ 4.
However, if the hydroxylamine solution is added to the nitrite solution (nitrite is in excess), then toxic higher oxides of nitrogen are also formed.
It is also a major greenhouse gas and air pollutant.
Inhalation of nitrous oxide for recreational use, with the purpose of causing euphoria and/or slight hallucinations, began as a phenomenon for the British upper class in 1799, known as "laughing gas parties".
While the effects of the gas generally make the user appear stuporous, dreamy and sedated, some people also "get the giggles" in a state of euphoria, and frequently erupt in laughter.
In response to this agreement, the U.S. is obligated to inventory anthropogenic emissions by sources and sinks, of which agriculture is a key contributor.
This reaction can be difficult to control, resulting in detonation.
When compared to carbon dioxide (),  has 298 times the ability per molecule of gas to trap heat in the atmosphere.
Relative analgesia machines typically feature a constant-supply flowmeter, which allow the proportion of nitrous oxide and the combined gas flow rate to be individually adjusted.
Being a stronger and more potent anaesthetic, sulfuric ether was instead demonstrated and accepted for use in October 1846, along with chloroform in 1847.
For example, nitrous oxide reacts with  at  to give :
Liquid nitrous oxide acts as a good solvent for many organic compounds; liquid mixtures may form shock sensitive explosives.
As a result, it is the main naturally occurring regulator of stratospheric ozone.
Additionally, nitrous oxide depletes vitamin B12 levels.
Mirroring this, animals which have developed tolerance to the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines are partially tolerant to .
nitrous oxide) and a novel "breathing apparatus" to inhale the gas.
Apparently -induced release of endogenous opioids causes disinhibition of brain stem noradrenergic neurons, which release norepinephrine into the spinal cord and inhibit pain signalling.
Since nitrous allows a much denser charge into the cylinder it dramatically increases cylinder pressures.
Nitrous oxide also causes ozone depletion.
Nitrous oxide is emitted by bacteria in soils and oceans, and is thus a part of Earth's atmosphere.
In the United Kingdom, nitrous oxide is used by almost half a million young people at nightspots, festivals and parties.
It is also used as an oxidizer in rocket propellants, and in motor racing to increase the power output of engines.
Until at least 1863, a low availability of equipment to produce the gas, combined with a low usage of the gas for medical purposes, meant it was a relatively rare phenomenon that mainly happened among students at medical universities.
If air were used as a propellant, oxygen would accelerate rancidification of the butterfat; nitrous oxide inhibits such degradation.
This has the advantages over other oxidisers in that it is not only non-toxic, but also, due to its stability at room temperature, easy to store and relatively safe to carry on a flight.
:H2N2O2&rarr; H2O + N2O
In the basement of the building, a large-scale machine was producing the gases under the supervision of a young Humphry Davy, who was encouraged to experiment with new gases for patients to inhale.
The machine to produce "Factitious Airs" had three parts: A furnace to burn the needed material, a vessel with water where the produced gas passed through in a spiral pipe (for impurities to be "washed off"), and finally the gas cylinder with a gasometer where the gas produced, "air", could be tapped into portable air bags (made of airtight oily silk).
Today these simple and somewhat unreliable inhalers have been replaced by the more modern relative analgesia machine, which is an automated machine designed to deliver a precisely dosed and breath-actuated flow of nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen, for the patient to inhale safely.
First, James Watt had invented a novel machine to produce "Factitious Airs" (i.e.
Nitrous oxide can cause analgesia, depersonalisation, derealisation, dizziness, euphoria, and some sound distortion.
Many states have laws regulating the possession, sale, and distribution of nitrous oxide.
The reason for this was most likely that Wells, in January 1845 at his first public demonstration to the medical faculty in Boston, had been partly unsuccessful, leaving his colleagues doubtful regarding its efficacy and safety.
The production of adipic acid is the largest source to nitrous oxide.
Multiple washes through a base (such as sodium hydroxide) can remove this, decreasing the corrosive properties observed when  is further oxidised during combustion into sulfuric acid, making emissions cleaner.
Similarly, cooking spray, which is made from various types of oils combined with lecithin (an emulsifier), may use nitrous oxide as a propellant; other propellants used in cooking spray include food-grade alcohol and propane.
In Britain and Canada, Entonox and Nitronox are commonly used by ambulance crews (including unregistered practitioners) as a rapid and highly effective analgesic gas.
Long-term exposure can cause vitamin B deficiency, numbness, reproductive side effects (in pregnant females), and other problems (see ''Biological'').
Nitrous oxide is also gaining interest as a substitute gas for carbon dioxide in laparoscopic surgery.
The first important work of Davy was examination of the nitrous oxide, and the publication of his results in the book: ''Researches, Chemical and Philosophical (1800)''.
The analgesic effects of  are linked to the interaction between the endogenous opioid system and the descending noradrenergic system.
: 2  +  →  + NaOH +
People with normal vitamin B12 levels have stores to make the effects of nitrous oxide insignificant, unless exposure is repeated and prolonged (nitrous oxide abuse).
Several experiments have shown that opioid receptor antagonists applied directly to the brain block the antinociceptive effects of , but these drugs have no effect when injected into the spinal cord.
It specific arises from the degradation of the nitrolic acid intermediate derived from nitration of cyclohexanone.
Over the following three years, Colton and his associates successfully administered nitrous oxide to more than 25,000 patients.
In vehicle racing, nitrous oxide (often referred to as just "nitrous") allows the engine to burn more fuel by providing more oxygen than air alone, resulting in a more powerful combustion.
is produced naturally in the soil during the microbial processes of nitrification and denitrification.
It could sometimes be found on Luftwaffe aircraft also fitted with another engine-boost system, MW 50, a form of water injection for aviation engines that used methanol for its boost capabilities.
Nitrous oxide is the main naturally occurring regulator of stratospheric ozone.
Nitrous oxide is sometimes injected into (or prior to) the intake manifold, whereas other systems directly inject right before the cylinder (direct port injection) to increase power.
Automotive-grade liquid nitrous oxide differs slightly from medical-grade nitrous oxide.
However, it has been shown to directly modulate a broad range of ligand-gated ion channels, and this likely plays a major role in many of its effects.
As with many strong oxidisers, contamination of parts with fuels have been implicated in rocketry accidents, where small quantities of nitrous/fuel mixtures explode due to "water hammer"-like effects (sometimes called "dieseling"—heating due to adiabatic compression of gases can reach decomposition temperatures).
In the following weeks, Wells treated the first 12–15 patients with nitrous oxide in Hartford, and according to his own record only failed in two cases.
It remained in use by many hospitals until the 1930s.
Its debut as a generally accepted method, however, came in 1863, when Gardner Quincy Colton introduced it more broadly at all the Colton Dental Association clinics, that he founded in New Haven and New York City.
Nitrous oxide inactivates the cobalamin form of vitamin B12 by oxidation.
This statement would seemingly prohibit all non-medicinal uses of the chemical, though it is implied that only recreational use will be legally targeted.
Nitrous oxide has been the oxidiser of choice in several hybrid rocket designs (using solid fuel with a liquid or gaseous oxidizer).
Used in this way, it produces whipped cream four times the volume of the liquid, whereas whipping air into cream only produces twice the volume.
Because India's Food & Drug Authority (FDA-India) rules state that transferring a drug from one container to another (refilling) is equivalent to manufacturing, anyone found doing so must possess a drug manufacturing license.
The purpose of the machine allows for a simpler design, as it only delivers a mixture of nitrous oxide and oxygen for the patient to inhale, in order to depress the feeling of pain while keeping the patient in a conscious state.
Hospitals administer nitrous oxide as one of the anaesthetic drugs delivered by anaesthetic machines.
The major safety hazards of nitrous oxide come from the fact that it is a compressed liquefied gas, an asphyxiation risk, and a dissociative anaesthetic.
Control of nitrous oxide is part of efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions.
Its use during labour has been shown to be a safe and effective aid for birthing women.
Where nitrous oxide is administered, a continuous-flow fresh-air ventilation system or nitrous scavenger system is used to prevent a waste-gas buildup.
The pharmacological mechanism of action of  in medicine is not fully known.
However, it is remarkable that in mice,  blocks amphetamine-induced carrier-mediated dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens and behavioural sensitisation, abolishes the conditioned place preference (CPP) of cocaine and morphine, and does not produce reinforcing (or aversive) effects of its own.
It is not harmful in small doses, but risks due to lack of oxygen do exist (see ''Recreational use below).
Nitrous oxide reacts with ozone in the stratosphere.
Industrial sources make up only about 20% of all anthropogenic sources, and include the production of nylon, and the burning of fossil fuel in internal combustion engines.
Today, nitrous oxide is used in dentistry as an anxiolytic, as an adjunct to local anaesthetic.
Very large power increases are possible, and if the mechanical structure of the engine is not properly reinforced, the engine may be severely damaged or destroyed during this kind of operation.
A new study suggests that NO emission currently is the single most important ozone-depleting substance (ODS) emission and is expected to remain the largest throughout the 21st century.
Users of nitrous oxide often obtain it from whipped cream dispensers that use nitrous oxide as a propellant (see above section), for recreational use as a euphoria-inducing inhalant drug.
Therefore, it is often mixed with another fuel that is easier to deflagrate.
The breathing apparatus consisted of one of the portable air bags connected with a tube to a mouthpiece.
The livestock sector (primarily cows, chickens, and pigs) produces 65% of human-related nitrous oxide.
Because of the large heat release, the catalytic action rapidly becomes secondary as thermal autodecomposition becomes dominant.
Vitamin B12 levels should be checked in people with risk factors for vitamin B12 deficiency prior to using nitrous oxide anaesthesia.
However, new research has arisen suggesting that Olney's lesions do not occur in humans, and similar drugs like ketamine are now believed not to be acutely neurotoxic.
Thus, despite its low concentration, nitrous oxide is the fourth largest contributor to these greenhouse gases.
Considered over a 100-year period, it is calculated to have between 265 and 310 times more impact per unit mass (global-warming potential) than carbon dioxide.
Second, the book also presented the new medical theories by Thomas Beddoes, that tuberculosis and other lung diseases could be treated by inhalation of "Factitious Airs".
It has been argued that, because  has a very short duration under normal circumstances,  it is less likely to be neurotoxic than other NMDA antagonists.
1997; Dobbie and Smith, 2003; Smith et al.
In a vacuum thruster, this can provide a monopropellant specific impulse (''I''sp) of as much as 180 s. While noticeably less than the ''I''sp available from hydrazine thrusters (monopropellant or bipropellant with dinitrogen tetroxide), the decreased toxicity makes nitrous oxide an option worth investigating.
The United States of America signed and ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC) in 1992, agreeing to inventory and assess the various sources of greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change.
Indeed, α2B-adrenoceptor knockout mice or animals depleted in norepinephrine are nearly completely resistant to the antinociceptive effects of .
In a 1914 patent, American rocket pioneer Robert Goddard suggested nitrous oxide and gasoline as possible propellants for a liquid-fuelled rocket.
Indeed, in humans given 30% , benzodiazepine receptor antagonists reduced the subjective reports of feeling "high", but did not alter psychomotor performance, in human clinical studies.
The first time nitrous oxide was used as an anaesthetic drug in the treatment of a patient was when dentist Horace Wells, with assistance by Gardner Quincy Colton and John Mankey Riggs, demonstrated insensitivity to pain from a dental extraction on 11 December 1844.
The addition of various phosphate salts favours formation of a purer gas at slightly lower temperatures.
This is especially true of non-medical formulations such as whipped-cream chargers (also known as "whippets" or "nangs"), which are not necessarily mixed with oxygen.
Human activity is thought to account for 30%; tropical soils and oceanic release account for 70%.
Thus, the method is not suitable for decorating food that will not be immediately served.
The first devices used in dentistry to administer the gas, known as Nitrous Oxide inhalers, were designed in a very simple way with the gas stored and breathed through a breathing bag made of rubber cloth, without a scavenger system and flowmeter, and with no addition of oxygen/air.
However, a 2008 study by Nobel Laureate Paul Crutzen suggests that the amount of nitrous oxide release attributable to agricultural nitrate fertilizers has been seriously underestimated, most of which would presumably come under soil and oceanic release in the Environmental Protection Agency data.
For example, in the state of California, possession for recreational use is prohibited and qualifies as a misdemeanour.
Nitrous oxide at 75-vol% reduce ischemia-induced neuronal death induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in rodents, and decrease NMDA-induced Ca2+ influx in neuronal cell cultures, a critical event involved in excitotoxicity.
Nitrous oxide reductase is an important enzyme which limits the emission of the gas to the atmosphere.
Nitrous oxide is a weak general anaesthetic, and so is generally not used alone in general anaesthesia.
is inert at room temperature and has few reactions.
The agreement requires parties to "develop, periodically update, publish and make available... national inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of all greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal Protocol, using comparable methodologies...".
The machine used in dentistry is designed as a simplified version of the larger anaesthetic machine used by hospitals, as it doesn't feature the additional anaesthetic vaporiser and medical ventilator.
The above reaction is the route adopted by the commercial chemical industry to produce azide salts, which are used as detonators.
Exactly how  causes the release of endogenous opioid peptides is still uncertain.
is a greenhouse gas with a large global warming potential (GWP).
Exposure to nitrous oxide causes short-term decreases in mental performance, audiovisual ability, and manual dexterity.
It has also been shown to activate two-pore-domain  channels.
As a secondary benefit it can be readily decomposed to form breathing air.
:  +  →  + NaCl + 2
Nitrous oxide can be prepared by careful heating of ammonium nitrate, which decomposes into nitrous oxide and water vapour.
It is an oxide of nitrogen.
At 600&nbsp; for example, the required ignition energy is only 6&nbsp;joules, whereas  at 130&nbsp;psi a 2500-joule ignition energy input is insufficient.
While  affects quite a few ion channels, its anaesthetic, hallucinogenic, and euphoriant effects are likely caused predominantly or fully via inhibition of NMDA receptor-mediated currents.
Symptoms are treated with high doses of vitamin B12, but recovery can be slow and incomplete.
Nitrous oxide may also cause neurotoxicity after extended exposure because of hypoxia.
This can cause serious neurotoxicity with even acute use if the user has preexisting vitamin B12 deficiency.
The combination of nitrous oxide with hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene fuel has been used by SpaceShipOne and others.
It may also crack or warp the piston or head and cause pre-ignition due to uneven heating.
At elevated temperatures, its reactivity increases.
Nitrous Oxide IP is transferred from bulk cylinders ( capacity gas) to smaller pin-indexed valve cylinders ( of gas), which are then connected to the yoke assembly of Boyle's machines.
Considered over a 100-year period, it has 298 times more impact per unit weight than carbon dioxide.
Nitrous oxide has been shown to be effective in treating a number of addictions, including alcohol withdrawal.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends that workers' exposure to nitrous oxide should be controlled during the administration of anaesthetic gas in medical, dental, and veterinary operators.
In general anaesthesia it is used as a carrier gas in a 2:1 ratio with oxygen for more powerful general anaesthetic drugs such as sevoflurane or desflurane.
Carbon dioxide cannot be used for whipped cream because it is acidic in water, which would curdle the cream and give it a seltzer-like "sparkling" sensation.
In the presence of a heated catalyst,  will decompose exothermically into nitrogen and oxygen, at a temperature of approximately .
In aerosol whipped cream, it is dissolved in the fatty cream until it leaves the can, when it becomes gaseous and thus creates foam.
The gas itself is not flammable at a low pressure/temperature, but it delivers more oxygen than atmospheric air by breaking down at elevated temperatures.
It moderately blocks NMDA and β2-subunit-containing nACh channels, weakly inhibits AMPA, kainate, GABAC, and 5-HT3 receptors, and slightly potentiates GABAA and glycine receptors.
It is used in surgery and dentistry for its anaesthetic and analgesic effects.
Clover's gas-ether inhaler was designed to supply the patient with nitrous oxide and ether at the same time, with the exact mixture being controlled by the operator of the device.
In human clinical studies,  was found to produce mixed responses similarly to rats, reflecting high subjective individual variability.
Nitrous oxide is a major greenhouse gas.
It is also notably used in amateur and high power rocketry with various plastics as the fuel.
Hyponitrous acid decomposes to N2O and water with a half-life of 16 days at 25&nbsp;°C at  pH 1–3.
When animals are given morphine chronically they develop tolerance to its pain-killing effects, and this also renders the animals tolerant to the analgesic effects of .
Despite only medical staff and dentists today being legally allowed to buy the pure gas, a Consumers Union report from 1972 found that the use of the gas for recreational purpose was then still taking place, based upon reports of its use in Maryland 1971, Vancouver 1972, and a survey made by Dr. Edward J. Lynn of its non-medical use in Michigan 1970.
The gas is administered by dentists through a demand-valve inhaler over the nose, which will only release gas when the patient inhales through the nose.
However, nitrous oxide was not found to be a strong enough anaesthetic for use in major surgery in hospital settings.
'''Nitrous oxide''', commonly known as '''laughing gas''', '''nitrous''', '''nitro''', or '''NOS''' is a chemical compound with the formula .
Colton's popularization of nitrous oxide led to its adoption by a number of less than reputable quacksalvers, who touted it as a cure for consumption, scrofula, catarrh, and other diseases of the blood, throat, and lungs.
India's gas cylinder rules (1985) permit the transfer of gas from one cylinder to another for breathing purposes.
In spite of these convincing results being reported by Wells to the medical society in Boston already in December 1844, this new method was not immediately adopted by other dentists.
It is very important with nitrous oxide augmentation of petrol engines to maintain proper operating temperatures and fuel levels to prevent "pre-ignition", or "detonation" (sometimes referred to as "knock").
Accordingly, it was only used by specialized planes like high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, high-speed bombers, and high-altitude interceptor aircraft.
However, the whipped cream produced with nitrous oxide is unstable and will return to a more liquid state within half an hour to one hour.
In behavioural tests of anxiety, a low dose of  is an effective anxiolytic, and this anti-anxiety effect is associated with enhanced activity of GABAA receptors, as it is partially reversed by benzodiazepine receptor antagonists.
It ranks behind water vapour, carbon dioxide, and methane.
If the nitrite is added to the hydroxylamine solution, the only remaining by-product is salt water.
Symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency, including sensory neuropathy, myelopathy, and encephalopathy, can occur within days or weeks of exposure to nitrous oxide anaesthesia in people with subclinical vitamin B12 deficiency.
When equipment became more widely available for dentistry and hospitals, most countries also restricted the legal access to buy pure nitrous oxide gas cylinders to those sectors.
There have also been accidents where nitrous oxide decomposition in plumbing has led to the explosion of large tanks.
At room temperature, it is a colorless, non-flammable gas, with a slightly sweet odor and taste.
It is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines, the most important medications needed in a health system.
This law benefits remote hospitals, which would otherwise suffer as a result of India's geographic immensity.
One of the major problems of using nitrous oxide in a reciprocating engine is that it can produce enough power to damage or destroy the engine.
According to 2006 data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency, industrial sources make up only about 20% of all anthropogenic sources, and include the production of nylon, and the burning of fossil fuel in internal combustion engines.
In Australia, nitrous oxide bulbs are known as nangs, possibly derived from the sound distortion perceived by consumers.
Despite Davy's discovery that inhalation of nitrous oxide could relieve a conscious person from pain, another 44 years elapsed before doctors attempted to use it for anaesthesia.
Administration of antibodies which bind and block the activity of some endogenous opioids (not β-endorphin) also block the antinociceptive effects of .
Drugs which inhibit the breakdown of endogenous opioids also potentiate the antinociceptive effects of .
It is known as "laughing gas" due to the euphoric effects of inhaling it, a property that has led to its recreational use as a dissociative anaesthetic.
The technique was used during World War II by Luftwaffe aircraft with the GM-1 system to boost the power output of aircraft engines.
These discrepancies in response to  may reflect species variation or methodological differences.
Conversely, α2-adrenoceptor antagonists block the pain reducing effects of  when given directly to the spinal cord, but not when applied directly to the brain.
:2  + 8 HCl + 4  → 5  + 4  +
Research has also found that it increases suggestibility and imagination.
In that publication, Davy notes the analgesic effect of nitrous oxide at page 465 and its potential to be used for surgical operations at page 556.
Studies on CPP of  in rats is mixed, consisting of reinforcement, aversion, and no change.
