Aged 12, he moved on to secondary education at Central High School, where he joined various clubs and societies and excelled academically, but was troubled by the hierarchical and regimented method of teaching employed there.
The CIA also destroyed its files on Chomsky at some point in time, possibly in violation of federal law.
Chomsky believes that the basic principle of the foreign policy of the United States is the establishment of "open societies" which are economically and politically controlled by the U.S. and where U.S.-based businesses can prosper.
Being highly critical of the established behaviorist currents in linguistics, in 1954 he presented his ideas at lectures given at the University of Chicago and Yale University.
From 1958–59 Chomsky was a National Science Foundation fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey.
Chomsky's nativist, internalist view of language is consistent with the philosophical school of 'rationalism', and is contrasted with the anti-nativist, externalist view of language, which is consistent with the philosophical school of 'empiricism'.
Along with his writings, Chomsky also became actively involved in left-wing activism.
Both were published by Zuccotti Park Press.
Bruce Nevin cautions that such complaints could be "no more than the discontent of poor losers thwarted by a brilliant mind."
Chomsky and his brother were raised Jewish, being taught Hebrew and regularly discussing the political theories of Zionism; the family were particularly influenced by the Left Zionist writings of Ahad Ha'am.
His work seeks to reveal such manipulations and the truth that they obscure.
For example, although children are exposed to only a very small and scattered subset of the allowable syntactic variants within their first language, they somehow acquire the highly organized and systematic ability to understand and produce an infinite number of sentences, including ones that have never before been uttered.
One of Chomsky's best-known works, ''Manufacturing Consent'', dissects the media's role in reinforcing and acquiescing to state policies, across the political spectrum, while marginalizing contrary perspectives.
In early 2016, Chomsky was publicly rebuked by President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey after he signed an open letter condemning the Turkish leader for his anti-Kurdish repression and supporting terrorism.
While acknowledging that many American journalists are dedicated and well-meaning, he argues that the choice of topics and issues featured in the mass media, the unquestioned premises on which that coverage rests, and the range of opinions that are expressed are all constrained to reinforce the state's ideology.
In 1971 he partook in a televised debate with French philosopher Michel Foucault on Dutch television, entitled ''Human Nature: Justice versus Power''.
He is widely recognized as a paradigm shifter who helped spark a major revolution in the human sciences, contributing to the development of a new cognitivistic framework for the study of language and the mind.
During that trip, Chomsky visited Kurdish areas of Turkey and spoke out in favour of the Kurds' human rights.
Although largely agreeing with Foucault's ideas, he was critical of post-modernism and French philosophy generally, believing that post-modern leftist philosophers used obfuscating language which did little to aid the cause of the working-classes and lambasting France as having "a highly parochial and remarkably illiterate culture."
Linguist John Lyons remarked that within a few decades of publication, Chomskyan linguistics had become "the most dynamic and influential" school of thought in the field.
Associated with the New Left, he was arrested multiple times for his activism and placed on President Richard Nixon's Enemies List.
He went on to be appointed plenary speaker at the Ninth International Congress of Linguists, held in 1962 in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which established him as the ''de facto'' spokesperson of American linguistics.
Everett argues his discovery in two books, ''Don't Sleep, There Are Snakes: Life and Language in the Amazonian Jungle,'' and ''Language: The Cultural Tool.''
In 2005, Chomsky received an honorary fellowship from the Literary and Historical Society.
In 1961 he was awarded academic tenure, being made a full professor in the Department of Modern Languages and Linguistics.
A supporter of the World Social Forum, he attended their conferences in Brazil in both 2002 and 2003, also attending the Forum event in India.
He married fellow linguist Carol Schatz in 1949.
His hope is that by spreading awareness of the negative impact that imperialism has on the populations affected by it, he can sway the population of the U.S. and other countries into opposing government policies that are imperialist in their nature.
According to McGilvray, many of Chomsky's critics "do not bother quoting his work or quote out of context, distort, and create straw men that cannot be supported by Chomsky's text."
After East Timor's independence from Indonesia was achieved in 1999, the Australian-led International Force for East Timor arrived as a peacekeeping force; Chomsky was critical of this, believing that it was designed to secure Australian access to East Timor's oil and gas reserves under the Timor Gap Treaty.
As a Jew, Chomsky faced anti-semitism as a child, particularly from the Irish and German communities living in Philadelphia.
He asks whether General Motors would be accused of conspiracy if they deliberately selected what they would use or discard in order to sell their product.
In 1983 he published ''The Fateful Triangle'', an examination of the Israel-Palestine conflict and the place of the U.S. within it, arguing that the U.S. had continually used the conflict for its own ends.
In April 2010, Chomsky became the third scholar to receive the University of Wisconsin's A.E.
The hierarchy imposes a logical structure across different language classes and provides a basis for understanding the relationship between grammars (devices that enumerate the valid sentences within languages).
Although ''The New York Review of Books'' did publish contributions from Chomsky and other leftists from 1967 to 1973, when an editorial change put a stop to it, he was virtually ignored by the rest of the mainstream press throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s.
As a result of the international publicity generated by Chomsky, his biographer Wolfgang Sperlich opined that he did more to aid the cause of East Timorese independence than anyone but the investigative journalist John Pilger.
That year he began teaching at MIT, in 1957 emerging as a significant figure in the field of linguistics for his landmark work ''Syntactic Structures'' while from 1958 to 1959 he was a National Science Foundation fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study.
Havens Center's Award for Lifetime Contribution to Critical Scholarship.
Linguist John Lyons later asserted that it "revolutionized the scientific study of language".
In turn, Chomsky has claimed that the ADL is dominated by "Stalinist types" who oppose democracy in Israel.
As such, some have called him "the father of modern linguistics".
Chomsky explains his decision to focus on criticizing the U.S. over other countries as being because during his lifetime the country has militarily and economically dominated the world, and because its liberal democratic electoral system allows for the citizenry to exert an influence on government policy.
Although Laura J. Summers and Robin Woodsworth Carlsen replied to the article, arguing that Lukas completely misunderstood Chomsky and Herman's work, Chomsky himself did not.
He discovered that their language lacks recursion, embedded phrases that otherwise complicate the simple meaning of a sentence.
In order of increasing expressive power it includes regular (or Type-3) grammars, context-free (or Type-2) grammars, context-sensitive (or Type-1) grammars, and recursively enumerable (or Type-0) grammars.
The book was adapted into a 1992 film, ''Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media'', which was directed by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick.
On that same trip they also spent six weeks at Hashomer Hatzair's HaZore'a kibbutz in the newly established Israel; although enjoying himself, Chomsky was appalled by the Jewish nationalism and anti-Arab racism that he encountered in the country, as well as the pro-Stalinist trend that he thought pervaded the kibbutz's leftist community.
It was just perfect for someone of my idiosyncratic interests and work."
Avram Noam Chomsky was born on December 7, 1928, in the East Oak Lane neighborhood of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Chomsky had befriended two linguists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Morris Halle and Roman Jakobson, the latter of whom secured him an assistant professor position at MIT in 1955.
Chomsky's primary education was at Oak Lane Country Day School, an independent Deweyite institution that focused on allowing its pupils to pursue their own interests in a non-competitive atmosphere.
Jerry Coyne, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Chicago, believes "Everett didn’t slay universal grammar."
Chomsky's political views have changed little since his childhood, when he was influenced by the emphasis on political activism that was ingrained in Jewish working-class tradition.
Furthermore, during the early 1970s he had begun collaborating with Edward S. Herman, who had also published critiques of the U.S. war in Vietnam.
The controversy damaged his reputation, and Chomsky maintains that his critics deliberately printed lies about him in order to defame him.
Everett's claim has resulted in debates among linguists on the topic varying from the allegation that Everett falsified the nature of the language of the Piraha people, to the allegation that Chomsky's theory on Universal Grammar is dead.
Other political thinkers whose work Chomsky read included the anarchist Diego Abad de Santillán, democratic socialists George Orwell, Bertrand Russell, and Dwight Macdonald, and works by Marxists Karl Liebknecht, Karl Korsch, and Rosa Luxemburg.
In 2001 he gave the D.T.
When exposed to linguistic data, the brain of a hearer-speaker then proceeds to associate sound and meaning, and the rules of grammar that we observe are in fact only the consequences, or side effects, of the way that language works.
An intensely private person, he is uninterested in appearances and the fame that his work has brought him.
Despite their respect for his intellectual contribution, a number of linguists and philosophers have been very critical of Chomsky's approach to language.
His wife was the Belarusian-born Elsie Simonofsky (1903–1972), a teacher and activist whom William had met while working at Mikveh Israel.
He characterizes the U.S. as a ''de facto'' one-party state, viewing both the Republican Party and Democratic Party as manifestations of a single "Business Party" controlled by corporate and financial interests.
He also developed his interest in philosophy while at university, in particular under the tutelage of his teacher Nelson Goodman.
In 1989, Chomsky published ''Necessary Illusions: Thought Control in Democratic Societies,'' in which he critiqued what he sees as the pseudo-democratic nature of Western capitalist states.
Since the 1990s, much of Chomsky’s research has focused on what he calls the '''Minimalist Program''' (MP), in which he departs from much of his past research and instead attempts to simplify language into a system that relates meaning and sound using the minimum possible faculties that could be expected, given certain external conditions that are imposed on us independently.
honors thesis was titled "Morphophonemics of Modern Hebrew", and involved him applying Harris's methods to the language.
Fred Halliday stated that by the start of the 21st century, Chomsky had become a "guru" for the world's anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist movements.
Taking a particular interest in the situation in East Timor, Chomsky testified on the subject in front of the United Nations' Special Committee on Decolonization in both 1978 and 1979, and attended a conference on the occupation held in Lisbon in 1979.
As evidence, he highlights that the US mass media does not employ any socialist journalists or political commentators.
A document obtained pursuant to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request from the U.S. government revealed that the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) monitored Chomsky's activities and for years denied doing so.
In May 2007, Jamia Millia Islamia, a prestigious Indian university, named one of its complexes after Noam Chomsky.
In addition, his work in automata theory and the Chomsky hierarchy has become well known in computer science, and he is much cited within the field of computational linguistics.
By the 1970s, his work had also come to exert a considerable influence on philosophy, while a poll conducted by Minnesota State University found ''Syntactic Structures'' to be the single most important work in the field of cognitive science.
In addition to being important in linguistics, the Chomsky hierarchy is also relevant in theoretical computer science, especially in programming language theory, compiler construction, and automata theory.
He also delivered the Whidden Lectures at McMaster University, the Huizinga Lecture at Leiden University in the Netherlands, the Woodbridge Lectures at Columbia University, and the Kant Lectures at Stanford University.
Chomsky also criticized the U.S.'s close ties with Saudi Arabia and U.S. involvement in Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen, highlighting that Saudi has "one of the most grotesque human rights records in the world."
To explain this, Chomsky reasoned that the primary linguistic data (PLD) must be supplemented by an innate linguistic capacity.
After Chomsky was made a Fellow at Harvard, the couple moved to an apartment in the Allston area of Boston, remaining there until 1965, when they relocated to the city's Lexington area.
Chomsky considered Dershowitz "a complete liar" and accused him of actively misrepresenting his position on issues.
Chomsky claims that this 'free-market' version of censorship is more subtle and difficult to undermine than the equivalent propaganda system which was present in the Soviet Union.
The universal features that would result from these constraints constitute 'universal grammar'.
Retaining his commitment to the cause of East Timorese independence, in 1995 he visited Australia to talk on the issue at the behest of the East Timorese Relief Association and the National Council for East Timorese Resistance.
Sometimes described as "the father of modern linguistics", Chomsky is also a major figure in analytic philosophy, and one of the founders of the field of cognitive science.
From 1951 to 1955 he was appointed to Harvard University's Society of Fellows, where he developed the theory of transformational grammar for which he was awarded his doctorate in 1955.
McGilvray suggested that Chomsky was never motivated by a desire for fame, but that he was impelled to tell what he perceived as the truth and a desire to aid others in doing so.
He usually identifies as an anarcho-syndicalist and/or a libertarian socialist.
The ensuing debates between Chomsky and his critics came to be known as the 'Linguistics Wars', although they revolved largely around debating philosophical issues rather than linguistics proper.
There Chomsky spent half his time on a mechanical translation project, and the other half teaching a course on linguistics and philosophy.
He acknowledges that his income and the financial security that it accords him means that he lives a privileged life in comparison to the majority of the world's population.
Actor Viggo Mortensen and avant-garde guitarist Buckethead dedicated their 2003 album ''Pandemoniumfromamerica'' to Chomsky.
To remedy this situation, Chomsky calls for grassroots democratic control and involvement of the media.
Coyne also asserts that "the technical notion of “recursion” was never the totality of Chomsky’s theory anyway.
Coming to be associated with the American New Left movement, he nevertheless thought little of prominent New Left intellectuals Herbert Marcuse and Erich Fromm, and preferred the company of activists to intellectuals.
The lectures that he gave on the subject would be published as ''Powers and Prospects'' in 1996.
After the September 11 attacks in 2001, Chomsky was widely interviewed, with these interviews being collated and published by Seven Stories Press in October.
From the age of 12 or 13, he identified more fully with anarchist politics.
Also in 2011, Chomsky was inducted into IEEE Intelligent Systems' AI's Hall of Fame for "significant contributions to the field of AI and intelligent systems."
The basis to Chomsky's linguistic theory is rooted in biolinguistics, holding that the principles underlying the structure of language are biologically determined in the human mind and hence genetically transmitted.
University departments devoted to history and political science rarely include Chomsky's work on their syllabuses for undergraduate reading.
Nim Chimpsky, a chimpanzee who was the subject of a study in animal language acquisition at Columbia University, was named after Chomsky in reference to his view of language acquisition as a uniquely human ability.
He avidly read leftist journal ''politics'', remarking that it "answered to and developed" his interest in anarchism, as well as the periodical ''Living Marxism'', published by council communist Paul Mattick.
Lakdawala Memorial Lecture in New Delhi, India, and in 2003 visited Cuba at the invite of the Latin American Association of Social Scientists.
In late 2015, Chomsky announced his support for Vermont U.S. senator Bernie Sanders in the upcoming 2016 United States presidential election.
He has stated his opposition to ruling elites, among them institutions like the IMF, World Bank, and GATT.
Chomsky was drawn to the energy and activism of the Occupy movement, delivering talks at encampments and producing two works that chronicled its influence, first ''Occupy'' a pamphlet, in 2012, then, in 2013, ''Occupy: Reflections on Class War, Rebellion and Solidarity''.
Abroad, he is a member of the Utrecht Society of Arts and Sciences, the Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina, a corresponding fellow of the British Academy, an honorary member of the British Psychological Society, and a foreign member of the Department of Social Sciences of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
Thus, while much of Chomsky's prior research has focused on the rules of language, he now focuses on the mechanisms that the brain uses to ''create'' these rules.
Chomsky also played a pivotal role in the decline of behaviorism, being particularly critical of the work of B. F. Skinner.
The title of Jerne's Stockholm Nobel Lecture was "The Generative Grammar of the Immune System."
The ADL have been accused of monitoring Chomsky's activities, and have characterised him as a "dupe of intellectual pride so overweening that he is incapable of making distinctions between totalitarian and democratic societies, between oppressors and victims."
He is credited as the creator or co-creator of the universal grammar theory, the generative grammar theory, the Chomsky hierarchy, and the minimalist program.
In 1988, Chomsky then visited the Palestinian territories to witness the impact of Israeli military occupation.
In his youth, Chomsky developed a dislike of capitalism and the selfish pursuit of material advancement.
As a result of his criticisms of Israel, Chomsky was barred from entering Israel in 2010.
Noting that this economic system is firmly entrenched and difficult to overthrow, he believes that change is possible through the organized co-operation of large numbers of people who understand the problem and know how they want to re-organize the economy in a more equitable way.
Everett traveled to Brazil and lived among the Piraha people for twenty years to learn their language.
He highlighted the idea in a brief paper in 2003, but his theory always consisted of operations for merging words into bigger and bigger phrases, something no one need identification disputes."
In 1959 he published a review of B.F. Skinner's 1957 book ''Verbal Behavior'' in the journal ''Language'', in which he argued against Skinner's view of language as learned behavior.
In collaboration with Edward S. Herman, Chomsky later developed the propaganda model of media criticism, and worked to expose the Indonesian occupation of East Timor.
+ Different grammatical surface structures of a sentence
His father was the Ukrainian-born William "Zev" Chomsky, an Ashkenazi Jew who had fled to the United States in 1913.
Chomsky biographer Wolfgang B. Sperlich characterizes the linguist and activist as "one of the most notable contemporary champions of the people," while journalist John Pilger described him as a "genuine people's hero; an inspiration for struggles all over the world for that basic decency known as freedom.
One of the most cited scholars in history, Chomsky has influenced an array of academic fields.
Ideologically, he aligns with anarcho-syndicalism and libertarian socialism.
The Chomskyan approach towards linguistics studies grammar as an innate body of knowledge possessed by language users, often termed '''Universal Grammar''' (UG).
In 2003 he published ''Hegemony or Survival'', in which he articulated what he called the United States' "imperial grand strategy" and critiqued the Iraq War and other aspects of the 'War on Terror.'
By controlling their productive life, he believes that individuals can gain job satisfaction, a sense of fulfilment, and purpose to their work.
In 2004 Chomsky received the Carl-von-Ossietzky Prize from the city of Oldenburg, Germany to acknowledge his body of work as a political analyst and media critic.
Chomsky's colleague Steven Pinker has said that he "portrays people who disagree with him as stupid or evil, using withering scorn in his rhetoric," and that this contributes to the extreme reactions that he generates from his critics.
It was here that he wrote his first article, aged 10, on the spread of fascism, following the fall of Barcelona to Francisco Franco's fascist army in the Spanish Civil War.
In addition, he is a recipient of a 1971 Guggenheim Fellowship, the 1984 American Psychological Association Award for Distinguished Contributions to Psychology, 1988 the Kyoto Prize in Basic Sciences, the 1996 Helmholtz Medal, the 1999 Benjamin Franklin Medal in Computer and Cognitive Science, and the Dorothy Eldridge Peacemaker Award.
That same year, Chomsky's first child, a daughter named Aviva, was born, and he published his first book on linguistics, ''Syntactic Structures'', a work that radically opposed the dominant Harris–Bloomfield trend in the field.
In June 2011, Chomsky was awarded the Sydney Peace Prize, which cited his "unfailing courage, critical analysis of power and promotion of human rights."
His other political books of the time included ''At War with Asia'' (1971), ''The Backroom Boys'' (1973), ''For Reasons of State'' (1973), and ''Peace in the Middle East?''
He is also a two-time winner of the Gustavus Myers Center Award, receiving the honor in both 1986 and 1988, and the NCTE George Orwell Award for Distinguished Contribution to Honesty and Clarity in Public Language, receiving the honor in both 1987 and 1989.
Surface structure 'faces out' and is represented by spoken utterances, while deep structure 'faces inward' and expresses the underlying relations between words and conceptual meaning.
He also points to examples of important news stories which have been ignored by U.S. mainstream media because reporting on them would reflect badly upon the U.S. state: for instance, it ignored the murder of Black Panther Fred Hampton with possible FBI involvement, the massacres perpetrated in Nicaragua by the U.S.-funded Contras, and the constant reporting on Israeli deaths while ignoring the far larger number of Palestinian deaths in the conflict between those two nations.
Despite his academic success, his political viewpoints and activism have resulted in him being distrusted by the mainstream media apparatus, and he is regarded as being "on the outer margin of acceptability."
Chomsky was married to Carol Doris Schatz (Chomsky) from 1949 until her death in 2008.
In February 2008, he received the President's Medal from the Literary and Debating Society of the National University of Ireland, Galway.
Chomsky avoids attending academic conferences, including left-oriented ones such as the Socialist Scholars Conference, preferring to speak to activist groups or hold university seminars for mass audiences.
He does not dismiss conspiracy theories outright, but he does consider them unproductive to challenging power in a substantial way.
Born to middle-class Ashkenazi Jewish immigrants in Philadelphia, Chomsky developed an early interest in anarchism from alternative bookstores in New York City.
Living at home, he funded his undergraduate degree by teaching Hebrew.
In adopting this position, Chomsky rejects the radical behaviorist psychology of B.F. Skinner which views the mind as a ''tabula rasa'' ("blank slate") and thus treats language as learned behavior.
Chomsky's published work has focused heavily on criticising the actions of the United States.
Chomsky based his argument on observations about human language acquisition, noting that there is an enormous gap between the linguistic stimuli to which children are exposed and the rich linguistic knowledge they attain (see: "poverty of the stimulus" argument).
He was substantially influenced by his uncle, a dropout who owned a newspaper stand in New York City where Jewish leftists came to debate the issues of the day.
The election of Republican Party candidate Ronald Reagan to the U.S. Presidency in 1981 marked a period of increased military intervention in Central America.
Chomsky considers most conspiracy theories to be fruitless, distracting substitutes to thinking about  policy formation in an institutional framework, where individual manipulation is secondary to broader social imperatives.
Having studied at Johns Hopkins University, William went on to become school principal of the Congregation Mikveh Israel religious school, and in 1924 was appointed to the faculty at Gratz College in Philadelphia.
In 1957 MIT promoted him to the position of associate professor, and from 1957–58 he was also employed by Columbia University as a visiting professor.
His work in this area continued to gain international recognition; in 1967 he received honorary doctorates from both the University of London and the University of Chicago.
He has often received undercover police protection at MIT and when speaking on the Middle East, although he has refused uniformed police protection.
He urges people to criticize the motivations, decisions, and actions of their governments, to accept responsibility for one's own thoughts and actions, and to apply the same standards to others as one would apply to oneself.
In 1970, Loyola University and Swarthmore College also awarded him honorary D.H.L.
His intellectual curiosity was reawakened through conversations with the Russian-born linguist Zellig Harris, whom he first met in a political circle in 1947.
Despite having been raised Jewish, Chomsky is currently non-religious, although he has expressed approval of forms of religion such as liberation theology.
Refusing to pay half his taxes, he publicly supported students who refused the draft, and was arrested for being part of an anti-war teach-in outside the Pentagon.
In 1974 he became a corresponding fellow of the British Academy.
The '''Chomsky hierarchy''', sometimes referred to as the '''Chomsky-Schützenberger hierarchy''', is a containment hierarchy of classes of formal grammars.
He also has little interest in modern art and music.
He later described his discovery of anarchism as "a lucky accident", because it allowed him to become critical of other far-left ideologies, namely Stalinism and other forms of Marxism–Leninism.
He expanded on his argument to produce his first political book, ''American Power and the New Mandarins,'' which was published in 1969 and soon established him at the forefront of American dissent.
In 1988, Chomsky and Herman published ''Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media'', in which they outlined their propaganda model for understanding the mainstream media; there they argued that even in countries without official censorship, the news provided was censored through four filters which had a great impact on what stories are reported and how they are presented.
He continued to publish his linguistic ideas throughout the decade, including in ''Aspects of the Theory of Syntax'' (1966), ''Topics in the Theory of Generative Grammar'' (1966), and ''Cartesian Linguistics: A Chapter in the History of Rationalist Thought'' (1966).
Rather than accepting the common view among American economists that a spectrum exists between total state ownership of the economy on the one hand and total private ownership on the other, he instead suggests that a spectrum should be understood between total democratic control of the economy of the one hand and total autocratic control (whether state or private) on the other.
Chomsky's work contributed substantially to the decline of behaviorist psychology; in addition, some arguments in evolutionary psychology are derived from his research results.
He envisions an anarcho-syndicalist future in which there is direct worker control of the means of production, with society governed by workers' councils, who would select representatives to meet together at general assemblies.
American linguist, Daniel Everett, challenged Chomsky's theory of Universal Grammar.
His criticism of Israel has led to him being accused of being a traitor to the Jewish people and an anti-Semite.
He is a member of the Industrial Workers of the World international union, and sits on the interim consultative committee of the International Organization for a Participatory Society.
His readings convinced him of the desirability of an anarcho-syndicalist society, and he became fascinated by the anarcho-syndicalist communes set up during the Spanish Civil War, which were documented in Orwell's ''Homage to Catalonia'' (1938).
He believes that 'official,' sanctioned historical accounts of U.S. and British imperialism have consistently whitewashed these nations' actions in order to present them as having benevolent motives in either spreading democracy or, in older instances spreading Christianity; criticizing these accounts, he seeks to correct them.
Chomsky argued that the ensuing War on Terror was not a new development, but rather a continuation of the same U.S. foreign policy and its concomitant rhetoric that had been pursued since at least the Reagan era of the 1980s.
However, MIT — despite being under some pressure to do so — refused to fire him due to his influential standing in the field of linguistics.
Transformational grammar is a generative grammar (which dictates that the syntax, or word order, of surface structures adheres to certain principles and parameters) that consists of a limited series of rules, expressed in mathematical notation, which transform deep structures into well-formed surface structures.
Following his retirement from active teaching, he has continued his vocal political activism, including opposing the War on Terror and supporting the Occupy movement.
Chomsky's political writings have largely been focused with the two concepts of ideology and power, or the media and state policy.
His far-reaching criticisms of U.S. foreign policy and the legitimacy of U.S. power have raised controversy.
When discussing current events, he emphasises their place within a wider historical perspective.
His wife, Carol, died in December 2008.
He argues that Western capitalist nations are not really democratic, for in his view, a truly democratic society is one in which all persons have a say in public economic policy.
His public talks often generated considerable controversy, particularly when he criticized actions of the Israeli government and military, and his political views came under attack from right-wing and centrist figures, the most prominent of whom was Alan Dershowitz.
He has also received the Rabindranath Tagore Centenary Award from The Asiatic Society.
Critiquing Chomsky's position, sociologist Werner Cohn later published an analysis of the affair titled ''Partners in Hate: Noam Chomsky and the Holocaust Deniers''.
In this they compared U.S. media reactions to the Cambodian genocide and the Indonesian occupation of East Timor.
He argues that, as such an intellectual, it is his duty to use his privilege, resources, and training to aid popular democracy movements their struggles.
The response to Chomsky's ideas ranged from indifference to hostility, and his work proved divisive and caused "significant upheaval" in the discipline.
Chomsky was voted the world's leading public intellectual in The 2005 Global Intellectuals Poll jointly conducted by American magazine ''Foreign Policy'' and British magazine ''Prospect''.
An outspoken opponent of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, which he saw as an act of American imperialism, in 1967 Chomsky attracted widespread public attention for an essay on the subject.
However, he was frustrated with his experiences at the university, and considered dropping out and moving to a kibbutz in Mandatory Palestine.
He believes that "common sense" is all that is required to break through the web of falsehood and see the truth, if it is employed using both critical thinking skills and an awareness of the role that self-interest and self-deception plays on both oneself and on others.
His analysis included a critique that attributed Occupy's growth as a response to a perceived abandonment of the interests of the white working class by the Democratic Party.
(1975), published by Pantheon Books.
Chomsky accused Erdoğan of hypocrisy and added that the Turkish president supports al-Qaeda's Syrian affiliate, the al-Nusra Front.
As he argues, the mainstream press is corporate owned and thus reflects corporate priorities and interests.
The Faurisson affair had a lasting, damaging effect on Chomsky's career, and Chomsky did not visit France, where the translation of his political writings was delayed until the 2000s, for almost thirty years following the affair.
