This limited form of self-government has since been replaced by the Norfolk Island Advisory Council.
The vegetation of Phillip Island was devastated due to the introduction during the penal era of pest animals such as pigs and rabbits, giving it a red-brown colour as viewed from Norfolk; however, pest control and remediation work by park staff has recently brought some improvement to the Phillip Island environment.
Norfolk Island is located in the South Pacific Ocean, east of the Australian mainland.
The Norfuk language is decreasing in popularity as more tourists travel to the island and more young people leave for work and study reasons; however, there are efforts to keep it alive via dictionaries and the renaming of some tourist attractions to their Norfuk equivalents.
Typical ordinary congregations in any church do not exceed 30 local residents .
Consequently, stamps issued by Norfolk cannot be used in Australia, and those issued by Australia Post cannot be used on the island.
If the wind changes significantly during unloading/loading, the ship will move around to the other side.
Australian citizens and residents from other parts of the nation now have automatic right of residence on the island after meeting these criteria (Immigration (Amendment No.
N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force.
Four of the members of the Assembly formed the Executive Council, which devised policy and acted as an advisory body to the Administrator.
Native to the island, the pine is a key export for Norfolk Island, being a popular ornamental tree on mainland Australia, where two related species grow, and also worldwide.
The flag is three vertical bands of green, white, and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centred in the slightly wider white band.
The island is the eroded remnant of a basaltic volcano active around 2.3 to 3&nbsp;million years ago, with inland areas now consisting mainly of rolling plains.
However, in December 2006, citing the "significant disruption" that changes to the governance would impose on the island's economy, the Australian government ended the review leaving the existing governance arrangements unaltered.
The reforms included, to the chagrin of some of the locals of Norfolk Island, a repeal of the preambular sections of the Act which originally were 3–4 pages recognising the particular circumstances in the history of Norfolk Island.
The understory was thick with lianas and ferns covering the forest floor.
In a move that apparently surprised many islanders, the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its self-government status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.
Three local Justices of the Peace have the powers of a Magistrate to deal with minor matters.
Settlement also exists over much of the island, consisting largely of widely separated homesteads.
However, by May 2013 agreement had not been reached and islanders were having to leave to find work and welfare.
The absolute maximum recorded temperature is , while the absolute minimum is .
Visitors often gather to watch the activity when a supply ship arrives.
Sixty-two percent of islanders are Christians.
The figures showed an ageing population, with many people aged 20–34 having moved away from the island.
There is one airport, Norfolk Island Airport.
A small party remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings, so that there would be no inducement for anyone, especially from other European powers, to visit and lay claim to the place.
Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island's population continued to grow.
When the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January 1788, Governor Arthur Phillip ordered Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of 15 convicts and seven free men to take control of Norfolk Island and prepare for its commercial development.
Norfolk Island has no direct control over any marine areas but has an agreement with the Commonwealth through the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) to fish "recreationally" in a small section of the EEZ known locally as "the Box".
Religious observance remains an important part of life for some islanders, particularly the older generations, but actual attendance is about 8% of the resident population plus some tourists.
The birds have also suffered from the introduction of mammals such as rats, cats, pigs and goats, as well as from introduced competitors such as common blackbirds and crimson rosellas.
There are no active military installations or defence personnel on Norfolk Island.
In 1976 the High Court of Australia held unanimously that Norfolk Island is a part of the Commonwealth.
The largest settlement is at Burnt Pine.
The island has one ambulance, staffed by St John Ambulance Australia volunteers.
The review was completed on 20 December 2006, when it was decided that there would be no changes in the governance of Norfolk Island.
On 8 June, 194 persons arrived, a baby having been born in transit.
Other ministers included: Minister for Tourism, Industry and Development; Minister for Finance; Minister for Cultural Heritage and Community Services; and Minister for Environment.
As Norfolk Island prohibits the importation of fresh fruit and vegetables, most produce is grown locally.
The Pitcairners occupied many of the buildings remaining from the penal settlements, and gradually established traditional farming and whaling industries on the island.
Speed limits are low:  maximum in the territory,  in town and  near schools.
Helen Reddy also moved to the island for a period, and still maintains a house there.
When a supply ship arrives, it is emptied by whaleboats towed by launches, five tonnes at a time.
Local ordinances and acts apply on the island, where most laws are based on the Australian legal system.
Practically all the hemp and flax required by the Royal Navy for cordage and sailcloth was imported from Russia.
Suffrage is universal at age eighteen.
On 8 June 1856, permanent civilian residence on the island began when it was settled from Pitcairn Island.
In 2015 a company in Norfolk Island was granted a license to export medicinal cannabis.
Australian citizens can carry either a passport or a form of photo identification to travel to Norfolk Island.
The resident population of Norfolk Island in the 2011 census was 1,796, which had declined from a high of 2,601 in 2001.
Whale sharks can be encountered off the island, too.
A campaign to preserve the island's autonomy was formed, named Norfolk's Choice.
The climate is subtropical and mild, with little seasonal differentiation.
File:Norfolk-Island-Pines.jpg|Norfolk Island pines
After the death of the first chaplain Rev G. H. Nobbs in 1884, a Methodist church was formed and in 1891 a Seventh-day Adventist congregation led by one of Nobbs' sons.
Which jetty is used depends on the prevailing weather of the day; the jetty on the leeward side of the island is often used.
It was announced on 19 March 2015 that self-governance for the island would be revoked by the Commonwealth and replaced by a local council with the state of New South Wales providing services to the island.
The Judges of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island are generally appointed from among Justices of the Federal Court of Australia and may sit on the Australian mainland or convene a circuit court.
In 2015 it was reported that Norfolk Island was taking its argument for self-governance to the United Nations.
In 1824 the British government instructed the Governor of New South Wales Thomas Brisbane to occupy Norfolk Island as a place to send "the worst description of convicts".
The Supreme Court of Norfolk Island deals with more serious criminal offences, more complex civil matters, administration of deceased estates and federal laws as they apply to the Territory.
Other months receive significant amounts of precipitation as well.
On 3 May 1856, 193 persons left Pitcairn Islands aboard ''Morayshire''.
In 2004 an act of the Norfolk Island Assembly made it a co-official language of the island.
There is a strong belief on the island that some of the revenue generated from Norfolk's EEZ should be available to providing services such as health and infrastructure on the island, which the island has been responsible for, similar to how the Northern Territory is able to access revenue from their mineral resources.
The Norfolk swallowtail (''Papilio amynthor'') is a species of butterfly that is found on Norfolk Island and the Loyalty Islands.
Emily Bay, protected from the Pacific Ocean by a small coral reef, is the only safe area for recreational swimming, although surfing waves can be found at Anson and Ball Bays.
Emigration is growing as many islanders take advantage of the close ties between Norfolk and Australia and New Zealand.
These were the descendants of Tahitians and the HMS ''Bounty'' mutineers, including those of Fletcher Christian.
The major settlement on Norfolk Island is Burnt Pine, located predominantly along Taylors Road, where the shopping centre, post office, bottle shop, telephone exchange and community hall are located.
The ''Norfolk Island Act 1979'', passed by the Parliament of Australia in 1979, is the Act under which the island was governed until the passing of the ''Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act 2015''.
It meant that residents would have to start paying Australian income tax, but they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Centrelink and Medicare.
There is one locally based radio station (Radio Norfolk 89.9FM), broadcasting on both AM and FM frequencies.
The Norfolk Island Central School works in partnership with Registered Training Organisation (RTOs) and local employers to support students accessing Vocational Education and Training (VET) courses.
While there is speculation that the zone may include oil and gas deposits, this is not proven.
Loading jetties are located at Kingston and Cascade, but ships cannot get close to either of them.
Twenty four percent had no religion, and seven percent did not indicate a religion.
On the other hand, as far as Australian nationality law is concerned, Norfolk Island is a part of Australia, and any time spent by an Australian permanent resident on Norfolk Island will count as time spent in Australia for the purpose of applying for Australian citizenship.
File:Norfolk Island Emily Bay.jpg|Emily Bay
68% out of 912 voters voted in favour.
An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on 12 March 2015 to replace self-government with a local council but against the wishes of the Norfolk Island government.
File:St Barnabas Norfolk Island.jpg|St Barnabas Anglican Church
The park also includes the two smaller islands to the south of Norfolk Island, Nepean Island and Phillip Island.
From 1979 to 2015, a Legislative Assembly was elected by popular vote for terms of not more than three years, although legislation passed by the Australian Parliament could extend its laws to the territory at will, including the power to override any laws made by the assembly.
The sole school on the island, Norfolk Island Central School, provides education from kindergarten through to Year 12.
The Norfolk Island palm (''Rhopalostylis baueri'') and the smooth tree-fern (''Cyathea brownii''), the tallest tree-fern in the world, are common in the Norfolk Island National Park but rare elsewhere on the island.
Other government buildings, including the court, Legislative Assembly and Administration, are also located there.
File:Norfolk Island Gannet chick.jpg|Gannet
Literacy is not recorded officially, but can be assumed to be roughly at a par with Australia's literacy rate, as islanders attend a school which uses a New South Wales curriculum, before traditionally moving to the mainland for further study.
As is consistent with other extremely remote regions many older residents find it impossible to remain on the island when their health falters, many have to leave their homes and live in New Zealand or Australia to get medical care.
Citizens of all other nations must carry a passport to travel to Norfolk Island even if arriving from other parts of Australia.
The "language known as 'Norf'k'" is described as the language "that is spoken by descendants of the first free settlers of Norfolk Island who were descendants of the settlers of Pitcairn Island".
The Government of Australia thus holds that:
Prior to these reforms residents of Norfolk Island were not entitled to social services.
The majority of the terrain is suitable for farming and other agricultural uses.
The act recognises and protects use of the language but does not require it; in official use, it must be accompanied by an accurate translation into English.
Satellite communications services are planned.
The island is part of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Islanders speak both English and a creole language known as Norfuk, a blend of 18th-century English and Tahitian.
It was accepted as a territory of Australia, separate from any state, by the Norfolk Island Act 1913 (Cth), passed under the territories power (Constitution section 122) and made effective in 1914.
These are augmented by five local Special Members who have police powers but are not AFP employees.
In 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of England was established on the island.
There are no safe harbour facilities on Norfolk Island, with loading jetties existing at Kingston and Cascade Bay.
There are no major arable lands or permanent farmlands, though about 25 per cent of the island is a permanent pasture.
Its capital is Kingston.
For serious emergencies, medical evacuations are provided by the Royal Australian Air Force.
Before European colonization, most of Norfolk Island was covered with subtropical rain forest, the canopy of which was made of ''Araucaria heterophylla'' (Norfolk Island pine) in exposed areas, and the palm ''Rhopalostylis baueri'' and tree ferns ''Cyathea brownii'' and ''C.
Financial problems and a reduction in tourism led to Norfolk Island's administration appealing to the Australian federal government for assistance in 2010.
Norfolk Island has a marine subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: ''Cfa''), which is best characterised as mild.
In 2015 enrolment at the Norfolk Island Central School was 282 students.
From 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island legislation will be transferred to New South Wales and subject to NSW legislation.
The most important local holiday is Bounty Day, celebrated on 8 June, in memory of the arrival of the Pitcairn Islanders in 1856.
The medicinal cannabis industry has been viewed by some as a means of reinvigorating the economy of Norfolk Island.
Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of convicts sent to Norfolk Island had committed non-violent property sentences, and the average length of detention was three years.
In a move that apparently surprised many islanders the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its tax free status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.
The sooty tern (known locally as the whale bird) has traditionally been subject to seasonal egg harvesting by Norfolk Islanders.
The airstrip was constructed by Australian, New Zealand and United States servicemen during 1942.
Sir John Call argued the advantages of Norfolk Island in that it was uninhabited and that New Zealand flax grew there.
The Assembly consisted of nine seats, with electors casting nine equal votes, of which no more than two could be given to any individual candidate.
The Australian government controls the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and revenue from it extending  around Norfolk Island (roughly 428,000km2) and territorial sea claims to three nautical miles (6&nbsp;km) from the island.
Norfolk Island takes its own censuses, separate from those taken by the Australian Bureau of Statistics for the remainder of Australia.
All visitors to Norfolk Island, including Australians, are recommended to purchase travel insurance.
From that date, most Australian Commonwealth laws extend to Norfolk Island.
Residents of Norfolk Island do not pay Australian federal taxes, creating a tax haven for locals and visitors alike.
This common heritage has led to a limited number of surnames among the islanders — a limit constraining enough that the island's telephone directory also includes nicknames for many subscribers, such as Cane Toad, Dar Bizziebee, Lettuce Leaf, Goof, Paw Paw, Diddles, Rubber Duck, Carrots and Tarzan.
In 1979, Norfolk was granted limited self-government by Australia, under which the island elected a government that ran most of the island's affairs.
Most islanders are of either European-only (mostly British) or combined European-Tahitian ancestry, being descendants of the ''Bounty'' mutineers as well as more recent arrivals from Australia and New Zealand.
There is no irrigated land.
The island is subject to separate immigration controls from the remainder of Australia.
Following reforms to the status of Norfolk Island there were mass protests by the local population.
In 1786 the British government included Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, as proposed by John Call, in its plan for colonisation of New South Wales.
Cetaceans were historically abundant around the island as commercial hunts on the island was operating until 1956.
The area surrounding Mount Bates is preserved as the Norfolk Island National Park.
The Norfolk Island Chief Minister, Lisle Snell, said that "the referendum results blow a hole in Canberra's assertion that the reforms introduced before the Australian Parliament that propose abolishing the Legislative Assembly and Norfolk Island Parliament were overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island".
It is a method of voting called a "weighted first past the post system".
During the first year of the settlement, which was also called "Sydney" like its parent, more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from New South Wales.
The island was abandoned because transportation from the United Kingdom to Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania) had ceased in 1853, to be replaced by penal servitude in the UK.
The convicts detained have long been assumed to be a hardcore of recidivists, or 'doubly-convicted capital respites' – that is, men transported to Australia who committed fresh colonial crimes for which they were sentenced to death, and were spared the gallows on condition of life at Norfolk Island.
Norfolk Island was originally a colony acquired by settlement but was never within the British Settlements Act.
Norfolk Island residents will be eligible to vote in the ACT electorate of Canberra.
Civilian law enforcement and community policing is provided by the Australian Federal Police.
This forest has been infested with several introduced plants.
Although the hospital can perform minor surgery, serious medical conditions are not permitted to be treated on the island and patients are flown back to mainland Australia.
This means that taxation, social security, immigration, customs and health arrangements apply on the same basis as in mainland Australia.
A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth, by $12.5 million in 2015 alone.
On 8 June 1856, the next settlement began on Norfolk Island.
Under the more radical of two models proposed in the review, the island's legislative assembly would have been reduced to the status of a local council.
File:Norfolk Island Cathedral Rock2.jpg|Cathedral Rock (off the north coast)
All goods not domestically produced are brought in by ship, usually to Cascade Bay.
Norfolk Island is the main island of the island group the territory encompasses and is located at .
'''Norfolk Island''' (; Norfuk: ''Norf'k Ailen'') is a small island in the Pacific Ocean located between Australia, New Zealand, and New Caledonia,  directly east of mainland Australia's Evans Head, and about  from Lord Howe Island.
The island uses the Australian dollar as its currency.
From 1 July 2016, the Australian migration system replaced the immigration arrangements previously maintained by the Norfolk Island Government.
However, distribution is carried out by the Norfolk Island Postal Service.
There are  of roads on the island ( paved,  unpaved); however, local law gives cows the right of way.
Enrolment and voting for Norfolk Islanders is compulsory.
The exclusive economic zone provides the islanders with fish, its only major natural resource.
Its remoteness, previously seen as a disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of recalcitrant male prisoners.
At least 18 of the endemic species are rare or threatened.
The last Chief Minister of Norfolk Island was Lisle Snell.
This was 78 percent of the census count, with the remaining 22 percent being visitors.
The providence petrel was hunted to local extinction by the beginning of the 19th century, but has shown signs of returning to breed on Phillip Island.
In 2011, 34 percent of the ordinary residents identified as Anglican, 13 percent as Uniting Church, 12 percent as Roman Catholic and three percent as Seventh-day Adventist.
Holders of Australian visas who travel to Norfolk Island have departed the Australian Migration Zone.
They arrived on 6 March 1788.
Defence is the responsibility of the Australian Defence Force.
Kingston's role is largely a ceremonial one, however, with most of the economic impetus coming from Burnt Pine.
The Commonwealth stepped in to overturn the decision, with the island's administrator, former Liberal MP Gary Hardgrave revoking the local licence to grow the crop.
Norfolk Island has had a limited form of self-government, established by the Norfolk Island Act 1979 (Cth).
A few tracts of cliff top and seashore vegetation have been preserved.
Consistent with the Australian position, the United Nations Decolonization Committee does not include Norfolk Island on its list of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The normal deployment to the island is one sergeant and two constables.
Air charter transport can cost in the order of A$30,000.
Norfolk Island also has a botanical garden, which is home to a sizeable variety of plant species.
Norfolk Island Hospital is the only medical centre on the island.
The decision to settle Norfolk Island was taken due to Empress Catherine II of Russia's decision to restrict sales of hemp.
, 2532 telephone main lines are in use, a mix of analog (2500) and digital (32) circuits.
In return, the islanders were to pay income tax for the first time but would be eligible for greater welfare benefits.
During World War II, the island became a key airbase and refuelling depot between Australia and New Zealand, and New Zealand and the Solomon Islands.
The cliffs and steep slopes of Mount Pitt supported a community of shrubs, herbaceous plants, and climbers.
On 8 May 2015, voters were asked if Norfolk Islanders should freely determine their political status and their economic, social and cultural development, and to "be consulted at referendum or plebiscite on the future model of governance for Norfolk Island before such changes are acted upon by the Australian parliament".
A downward slope exists towards Slaughter Bay and Emily Bay, the site of the original colonial settlement of Kingston.
Non-Australian citizens who are permanent residents of Norfolk Island may apply for Australian citizenship after meeting normal residence requirements and are eligible to take up residence in mainland Australia at any time through the use of a Confirmatory (Residence) visa (subclass 808).
Appeals are to the Federal Court of Australia.
The park, covering around 10% of the land of the island, contains remnants of the forests which originally covered the island, including stands of subtropical rainforest.
Tourism, the primary economic activity, has steadily increased over the years.
The Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal.
Australian common law applies when not covered by either Australian or Norfolk Island law.
In 2006, a formal review process took place, in which the Australian government considered revising this model of government.
The small economy of the island causes many skilled workers to emigrate as well.
The evergreen Norfolk Island pine is a symbol of the island and thus pictured on its flag.
It is very rare, and may already be extinct on the island.
It forms the highest point on the Norfolk Ridge, part of the submerged continent Zealandia.
The Chief Magistrate of Norfolk Island is usually the current Chief Magistrate of the Australian Capital Territory.
The Norfolk Island Court of Petty Sessions is the equivalent of a Magistrates Court and deals with minor criminal, civil or regulatory matters.
Some islanders claim that Norfolk Island was actually granted independence at the time Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on the island.
Government House, the official residence of the Administrator, is located on Quality Row in what was the penal settlement of Kingston.
In 2013 the island's last chief minister, Lisle Snell, suggested independence, to be supported by income from fishing, offshore banking and foreign aid.
The lack of medical facilities available in most remote communities has a major impact on the health care of Norfolk Islanders.
In 2012, immigration controls were relaxed with the introduction of an Unrestricted Entry Permit for all Australian and New Zealand citizens upon arrival and the option to apply for residency; the only criteria are to pass a police check and be able to pay into the local health scheme.
