His final novel, ''The Castle in the Forest'', which focused on Hitler's childhood, reached number five on the ''Times'' best-seller list after publication in January 2007.
When asked about his war experiences, Mailer stated that "the army gave me but one lesson over and over again: when it came to taking care of myself, I had little to offer next to the practical sense of an illiterate sharecropper."
Mailer states, "The Negro has the simplest of alternatives: live a life of constant humility or ever-threatening danger.
Raised in Brooklyn, New York, Mailer graduated from Boys' High School and entered Harvard University in 1939, when he was 16 years old.
The "hipsters" African Americans to create meaning in their life through "orgasmically" surrendering to their primal urges and rejecting conformity as African Americans have historically.
This essay records the emerging trend of white appropriation of black culture, particularly with regard to the jazz musical genre.
It allowed the State to become strong and invested in the daily lives of the people.
From the mid-1950s, Mailer became known for his counter-cultural essays.
They had two daughters, Danielle and Elizabeth.
He covered the Republican and Democratic National Conventions in 1960, 1964, 1968, 1972, 1992, and 1996, although his account of the 1996 Democratic convention has never been published.
These views on sex were not light vices for Mailer.
Mailer wrote 12 novels over a 59-year span.
is a constant presence in Mailer’s work.
This, Mailer argued, stood in opposition with conservative principles like lower taxes, and smaller government.
He struck up a conversation with Leonard after recognizing her.
It received stronger reviews than any of his books since ''The Executioner's Song.''
In addition to the Pulitzer Prize, his book ''Armies of the Night'' was awarded the National Book Award.
Bodily urges are fundamental to Mailer's approach to novels and short works.
For the majority of Mailer’s career he does not delve directly into race, but chose to pursue the matter only as a side note to the larger currents of the 1960s and 1970s.
''The Castle in the Forest'' was awarded a Bad Sex in Fiction Award by the ''Literary Review'' magazine.
Looking back on the campaign, journalist and historian Theodore White called it "one of the most serious campaigns run in the United States in the last five years.
These individuals, therefore, are psychopathic: they embrace reality and reject the conformity of life in the 1950s, which tends to ignore the high probability of nuclear humiliation.
Artists, therefore, represent the only hope for post-war society.
Notions of the apocalypse pervade this essay and define Mailer's literary career up until 1980.
In addition to his experimental fiction and nonfiction novels, Mailer produced a play version of ''The Deer Park'' (staged at the Theatre De Lys in Greenwich Village in 1967), and in the late 1960s directed a number of improvisational avant-garde films in a Warhol style, including ''Maidstone'' (1970), which includes a spontaneous and brutal brawl between Norman T. Kingsley, played by Mailer, and Kingsley's brother, played by Rip Torn.
In ''Miami and the Siege of Chicago'' (1968) he explained his view of “politics-as-property” where he likened politicians to property holders who are “never ambivalent about his land, he does not mock it or see other adjacent estates as more deserving than his own.”  Thus politics is just people trading their influence as capital in an attempt to serve their own interests.
As Dershowitz recounted, Mailer grabbed his wife's arm and said: "Let's get out of here.
Joan Didion praised it in a review in ''National Review'' (April 20, 1965) and John W. Aldridge did the same in ''Life ''(March 19, 1965), while Elizabeth Hardwick panned it in ''Partisan Review'' (spring 1965).
His campaign was considered and thoughtful, the beginning of an attempt to apply ideas to a political situation."
While his work is not widely known, his drawings, which were inspired by Picasso's style, were exhibited at the Berta Walker Gallery in Provincetown in 2007, and are now displayed on the online arts community POBA - Where the Arts Live.
These urges are in tension with the themes of "apocalypse" and morality.
At the December 15, 1971, taping of ''The Dick Cavett Show'', with Janet Flanner and Gore Vidal,  Mailer, annoyed with a less-than-stellar review by Vidal of ''Prisoner of Sex'', apparently headbutted Vidal and traded insults with him backstage.
As the show began taping, a visibly belligerent Mailer, who admitted he had been drinking, goaded Vidal and Cavett into trading insults with him on air and continually referred to his "greater intellect".
Power over bodies, societies, political entities, etc.
At Harvard, he studied aeronautical engineering, and became interested in writing.
The 1986 meeting of PEN in New York City featured key speeches by then-Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Mailer.
The Shits are Killing Us demonstrates that Mailer does not subscribe to nihilist principles.
Thus, the interest of the hipster in someone born outside the protections of 'traditional society', and how such a person would be forced to face risks in order to flourish.
Moments of physical and sexual power or powerlessness are the climax of ''The Naked and the Dead, The Time of Her Time,'' and ''The Armies of the Night.''
President Johnson on the other hand, Mailer thought, was just as bad as Nixon had been, but he had had good charisma so all was forgiven.
In 1955, Mailer and three others founded ''The Village Voice'', an arts- and politics-oriented weekly newspaper distributed in Greenwich Village.
In 1999, he played Harry Houdini in Matthew Barney's ''Cremaster 2''.
Throughout his writing Mailer never presents a very clear perspective on race.
The couple had a daughter, Kate Mailer, who is an actress.
She invited Mailer to lunch and made her pitch for his services as a writer.
African Americans, who have always lived on the fringes of America's democratic society, Mailer argues, thrive in the post-war environment where the possibility of nuclear annihilation looms large in the American imagination.
He was a cultural commentator and critic, expressing his views through his novels, journalism, essays and frequent media appearances.
Mailer republished it in 1959 in a collection of essays entitled ''Advertisements for Myself''.
Mailer became even more fascinated with African Americans after meeting Baldwin, and this friendship inspired Mailer to write “The White Negro”.
Once paroled, Abbott committed a murder in New York City six weeks after his release, stabbing to death 22-year-old Richard Adan.
Inherent in the philosophy of hip exists a strain of nihilism—doing what one wants whenever one wants given the looming threat of nuclear war.
Mailer "foresaw the city, its independence secured, splintering into townships and neighborhoods, with their own school systems, police departments, housing programs, and governing philosophies."
Mailer saw politics as a sporting event: “If you played for a team, you did your best to play very well, but there was something obscene… with in starting to think there was more moral worth to Michigan than Ohio State.”  Mailer thought that Nixon lost and was demonized only because he played for the wrong team.
Mailer uses frequent allusion and direct use of body-oriented language to describe power structures in ''Miami and the Siege of Chicago'' in the form of the “military spine of the liberal party” and in the “knifelike entrance into culture” of jazz in ''The White Negro''.
Mailer's 1973 biography of Monroe (usually designated ''Marilyn: A Biography'') was particularly controversial.
The hipster psychopaths are an accurate reflection of post-war life while the conventional suburban psychotics insanely ignore reality and continue the banality of their own existence.
Mailer enjoyed drawing and drew prolifically, particularly toward the end of his life.
To assume blithely that we can export democracy into any country we choose can serve paradoxically to encourage more fascism at home and abroad.
Mailer married his second wife, Adele Morales, in 1954.
Its anachronistic use of "fug" and "fugging" in place of the real words now seems merely quaint, and the prose alternates between pedestrian and purple – little wonder that the young Mailer likened himself to Theodore Dreiser, arguably the worst prose stylist, none the less considered a major American novelist.
Kate Millett, in her ''Sexual Politics,'' critiques Mailer: “His considerable insights into the practice of sexuality as a power game never seem to affect his vivid personal enthusiasm for the fight nor his sturdy conviction that it’s kill or be killed.” This resonates with racist epithets in ''The White Negro,'' portrayals of women in ''The Naked and the Dead,'' and ''Time of Her Time'' (to mention a few).
His wife would not press charges, and he later pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of assault, and was given a suspended sentence.
He critiqued conservative politics as they, specifically Barry Goldwater, supported the Cold War which called for an increase in government spending and oversight.
Democracy is a state of grace that is attained only by those countries who have a host of individuals not only ready to enjoy freedom but to undergo the heavy labor of maintaining it."
It remained in print for decades, but was out of print in the United States .
In 1977, Abbott had read about Mailer's work on ''The Executioner's Song'' and wrote to Mailer, offering to enlighten the author about Abbott's time behind bars and the conditions he was experiencing.
Mailer, who was next to speak, responded by shouting to the crowd: "Up yours!"
", to which Cavett responded "Why don't you fold it five ways and put it where the moon don't shine?"
Personally, Mailer strived to seek out and trace racial stereotypes throughout his own personal life.
Mailer's famous essay "The White Negro" (1957) "analyzes and partly defends the moral radicalism of the outsider and hipster."
In 2003, in a speech to the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco, just before the Iraq War, Mailer said: "Fascism is more of a natural state than democracy.
The essay was an important breakthrough for the New Journalism of the 1960s, but when the magazine's editors changed the title to "Superman Comes to the Supermart," Mailer was enraged, and would not write for ''Esquire'' for years.
In light of the Second World War, humanity stares into the abyss of its own nature searching for something with which to define itself; yet the "hipsters" who live orgasmically acquire the truth of life: this truth is not Democracy of Communism, but rather the intrinsic primal urges of humanity.
Mailer’s analysis culminates in his expression that if African Americans were to achieve equality it would have violent, and chaotic affects to white society.
It was also a bestseller, although reviews were generally negative.
In 1987, he adapted and directed a film version of his novel ''Tough Guys Don't Dance'', starring Ryan O'Neal and Isabella Rossellini, which has become a minor camp classic.
He performed a huge amount of research for the novel, which is still on CIA reading lists.
The meeting was rumored to have led to a brief affair between the two.
Hoping to gain a deferment from service, Mailer argued that he was writing an "important literary work" which pertained to the war.
The book was enormously successful, selling more copies than any of Mailer's works except ''The Naked and the Dead''.
In 1956, while abroad in Paris, Mailer met James Baldwin the famous African American author.
He later expanded the article to a book, ''The Armies of the Night'' (1968), awarded a National Book Award
He believed that conservatives were pro-Cold War because that was politically relevant to them and would therefore help them win.
In 1948, while continuing his studies at the University of Paris, Mailer published his first, ''The Naked and the Dead,'' based on his military service in World War II.
In 1960, Mailer wrote "Superman Comes to the Supermarket" for ''Esquire'' magazine, an account of the emergence of John F. Kennedy during the Democratic party convention.
In December 1963, Mailer and several of the other sponsors left it.
His prose presentation of an existential struggle is frequently conveyed to the reader via references to the body.
(The magazine later apologized.
Stemming from his Freudian philosophical basis - bodily urges are integral to Mailer's work.
The project later ended due to scheduling conflicts between the two.
a hard read today, a sprawling, cumbersome saga that reads like the fusion of literary ambition and severely limited artistic experience – as indeed it was.
As an undergraduate, he was a member of the Signet Society.
Leonard then asked what his fee would be and Mailer responded with "Two-hundred fifty thousand".
Mailer uses African Americans to criticize the moon landing, as he reflects on the fact that many problems still exist on earth, and within America.
The novel received mixed reviews, but was a best seller.
Two later works co-written by Mailer presented imagined words and thoughts in Monroe's voice: the 1980 book ''Of Women and Their Elegance'' and the 1986 play ''Strawhead'', which was produced off Broadway starring his daughter Kate Mailer.
In ''Of a Fire on the Moon'' Mailer discusses that the space flight was an exclusive action on the part of white America, as they have left African Americans behind on earth.
During his time in the Philippines, Mailer worked as a cook and saw little combat.
The following difference exists for 'the hipster' as defined by Mailer: the hipster was once part of a particular society he found he could not ''remain'' part of, whereas the Negro of that time had not ever been accepted into that particular society to begin with.
In March 1965, Dial Press published a revised version.
The headbutting and later on-air altercation was described by Mailer himself in his essay "Of a Small and Modest Malignancy, Wicked and Bristling with Dots."
It is an exploration of the untold dramas of the CIA from the end of World War II to 1965.
Mailer was born to a Jewish family in Long Branch, New Jersey.
Subsequent references are to the original title.)
To Mailer, African American men reflected a challenge to his own notions of masculinity.
Living in Brooklyn, New York and Provincetown, Massachusetts with Mailer, Church worked as a model, wrote and painted.
Mailer focused on Jazz as the ultimate expression of African American bravado, and figures like Miles Davis would become represented in works like ''An American Dream''.
Dershowitz countered that he would not attend if it was a "victory party", and von Bulow assured him that it was only a dinner for "several interesting friends."
This cynical view of politicians serving only themselves perhaps explains his views on Watergate.
Mailer received a head injury when Torn struck him with a hammer.
Mailer's sister, Barbara, was born in 1927.
His 1955 novel ''The Deer Park'' drew on his experiences working as a screenwriter in Hollywood in 1949–50.
''Harlot's Ghost'' sold well.
And his often-rough understanding of race would be drawn back to his ideas on African American sexuality, and competition.
The magazine and Mailer lost the lawsuit.
Mailer took on an acting role in the 1981 Milos Forman film version of E.L. Doctorow's novel ''Ragtime'', playing Stanford White.
"God is in danger of dying", he writes.
It was not a success; at one point Mailer took out a full-page advertisement that defiantly quoted his many bad reviews.
Therefore, the responsibility for artists lies in creating a foundation upon which to construct a morality to awaken humanity to its fragile existence and guide it back from the brink of the apocalypse.
Mailer spent a longer time writing ''Ancient Evenings,'' his novel of Egypt in the Twentieth Dynasty (about 1100 BC), than any of his other books.
Mailer, impressed, helped to publish ''In the Belly of the Beast'', a book on life in the prison system consisting of Abbott's letters to Mailer.
The appearance of a government official was derided by many, and as Shultz ended his speech, the crowd seethed, with some calling to "read the protest" that had been circulated to criticize Shultz's appearance.
In 1980, ''The Executioner's Song,'' Mailer's novel of the life and death of murderer Gary Gilmore, won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction.
She is the mother of his producer son Michael Mailer and his actor son Stephen Mailer.
He worked on it for periods from 1972 until 1983.
Mailer is strikingly adept at identifying social and political phenomenon still in their cradle.
It was a surreal parable of Cold War leftist politics set in a Brooklyn rooming-house.
and a Pulitzer Prize.
Mailer does however spend some time working through the issue in “The White Negro”, ''Of a Fire on the Moon'', and in his work ''The Fight'' about the heavyweight title bout between Muhammad Ali and George Foreman.
He published his first story at the age of 18, winning ''Story'' magazine's college contest in 1941.
Over the course of his life, Mailer was connected with several women other than his wives, including Carole Mallory, who wrote a "tell all" biography, ''Loving Mailer,'' after his death.
In the late 1950s and throughout the 1960s and 1970s his work mingled autobiography, social commentary, history, fiction, and poetry in a formally original way that influenced the development of New Journalism.
From 1980 until his death in 2007, he contributed to Democratic Party candidacies for political office.
After training at Fort Bragg, Mailer was stationed in the Philippines with the 112th Cavalry.
The goal of the artist, Mailer writes, is to "intensify, even, if necessary, exacerbate the moral consciousness of people".
This lesson inspired Mailer to write his first novel, ''The Naked and the Dead''.
(some of the original twenty-nine sponsors of the group included Truman Capote, Robert Taber, James Baldwin, Robert F. Williams, Waldo Frank, Carleton Beals, Simone de Beauvoir, Robert Colodny, Donald Harrington, and Jean-Paul Sartre)
Mailer held the rare position that the Cold War was not a positive ideal for America.
I thought we were going to be having dinner with a man who actually tried to kill his wife.
But his works stood out to some critics as insensitive and overtly racist, mainly because they were based on a foundation of racist tropes, and stereotypes.
Yet even at the height of his powers, efforts to describe the experiences of women, African Americans, and other groups without typecasting from his own experiences seems outside of Mailer’s consideration.
In his own 1987 autobiography ''Timebends'', the playwright Arthur Miller, a former husband to Monroe, wrote scathingly of Mailer: "Mailer was himself in drag, acting out his own Hollywood fantasies of fame and sex unlimited and power."
Later, Leonard was approached by a group of movie distributors from the Midwest to finance what was described as "the world's first million-dollar pornographic movie."
In the 1970s Henderson filed a $1 million libel action against Mailer and ''Playboy''.
A ''New York Times'' best seller for 62 weeks, it was hailed by many as one of the best American wartime novels and named as one of the "one hundred best novels in English language" by the Modern Library.
Interrogation of the meaning of this exclusionary discourse leads the reader and critic to an eventual response to Mailer.
African Americans can only look on as whites move even farther past them in not just society, but their earthly constraints.
As Cavett made jokes comparing Mailer's intellect to his ego, Mailer stated "Why don't you look at your question sheet and ask your question?
His fifth wife was Carol Stevens, a jazz singer whom he married on November 7, 1980, and divorced in Haiti on November 8, 1980, thereby legitimating their daughter Maggie, born in 1971.
In "The White Negro" Mailer argues that African Americans are psychopaths because they live in a society that hates them, (meaning white society) which in turn causes them to hate themselves.
They had one son together, John Buffalo Mailer, a writer and actor.
The Holocaust, Hiroshima, and the Cold War led Mailer to reflect upon the lifestyles of African Americans in the African American and jazz cultures of the United States.
The twenty-eight atomic detonations between 1946 and 1958 on Bikini Atoll, which many viewed as grandstanding on behalf of the United States, served to reaffirm the nuclear anxiety which Americans felt during the "age of conformity".
Mailer often commented on Baldwin’s work, and Baldwin did the same to Mailer.
'''Norman Kingsley Mailer''' (January 31, 1923 – November 10, 2007) was an American novelist, journalist, essayist, playwright, film-maker, actor, and political activist.
His third wife, whom he married in 1962, and divorced in 1963, was the British heiress and journalist Lady Jeanne Campbell (1929–2007).
In ''Armies of the Night'' he postulates at length on "earned manhood," "onanism and sexuality," and "psychic profit derived from the existential assertion of yourself."
As a result of his anger at ''Esquire,'' Mailer sold his long article, ''On the Steps of the Pentagon'', a personal account of the massive October 1967 anti-war demonstrations in Washington, D.C., to ''Harper's'' magazine.
In October 1967, he was arrested for his involvement in an Anti-Vietnam War demonstration at the Pentagon sponsored by the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam.
with his son Stephen Mailer.
Mailer appeared in an episode of ''Gilmore Girls'' titled "Norman Mailer, I'm Pregnant!"
Artists, for Mailer, represent the only hope for post-war America.
While in the short term, Morales made a physical recovery, in 1997 she published a memoir of their marriage entitled ''The Last Party'', which recounted her husband stabbing her at a party and the aftermath.
''Castle'' was intended to be the first volume of a trilogy, but Mailer died several months after it was completed.
However, Mailer does not subscribe to the philosophy of "hip".
In 1955, he co-founded ''The Village Voice,'' for which he wrote a column  from January to April 1956.
His fourth marriage, in 1963, was to Beverly Bentley, a former model turned actress.
Mailer describes how 'the hipster' faces marginalization (self-induced to some extent, as a consequence of deliberately rejecting the society around him), and how the hipster draws inspiration from others who have already moved outside (or been forced outside) 'traditional society'.
Mailer was also known for his essays, the most renowned of which was "The White Negro."
Their slogan was "throw the rascals in".
Leonard then asked if he'd be interested in adapting his novel-biography of Marilyn Monroe, but Mailer replied that he wanted to do something original.
Jazz was a reflection of what Mailer labeled the apocalyptic orgasm: living for instant gratification.
The themes of "apocalypse" and morality pervade nearly all of Mailer's post-war work, and illuminate his beliefs regarding politics, war, and even women's liberation.
"The White Negro: Superficial Reflections on the Hipster" is a 9,000-word essay by Mailer originally published in the 1957 issue of ''Dissent''.
The drama of this psychopath for Mailer is that he or she seeks love - but love as the search for an orgasm more "apocalyptic" that the ones which preceded it.
By filling his work with graphic depictions of sex, violence, and even rock and roll, Mailer elevates the experience of the reader.
Discussing the incalculable psychic scarring that the Second World War and the Cold War have had upon the collective American psyche, Mailer writes:
It was initially rejected by seven publishers due to its purportedly sexual content before being published by Putnam's.
On one occasion Mailer stabbed her twice with a penknife, puncturing her pericardium and necessitating emergency surgery.
The Mailer-reader relationship is also integral to Mailer's literary body trope.
She was the only daughter of Ian Campbell, 11th Duke of Argyll, a Scottish aristocrat and clan chief with a notorious private life, and a granddaughter of the press baron Lord Beaverbrook.
The same newspaper described the book as:
It was the inspiration for the Emmy-nominated TV movie, ''Marilyn: The Untold Story'', which aired in 1980.
The body is an entity to be poked, prodded, broken, even snuffed into non-existence.
His editor was E. L. Doctorow.
A long laugh ensued, after which Mailer asked Cavett if he had come up with that line and Cavett replied "I have to tell you a quote from Tolstoy?".
He ended the novel with the words "To be continued," and planned to write a sequel, titled ''Harlot's Grave'', but other projects intervened and he never wrote it.
To Mailer, Baldwin was a natural point of intrigue as Baldwin was both a homosexual and an African American author, similar to Mailer’s stature.
In 1989, Mailer joined with a number of other prominent authors in publicly expressing support for colleague Salman Rushdie in the wake of the ''fatwa'' calling for Rushdie's assassination issued by Iran's Islamic government for his having authored ''The Satanic Verses''.
The "psychopath" presented in ''The White Negro'' continues to occupy the central narrative of much of Mailer's work throughout his career.
He openly taunted and mocked Vidal (who responded in kind), finally earning the ire of Flanner, who announced during the discussion that she was "becoming very, very bored", telling Mailer "You act as if you're the only people here."
Mailer was endorsed by libertarian economist Murray Rothbard, who "believed that 'smashing the urban government apparatus and fragmenting it into a myriad of constituent fragments' offered the only answer to the ills plaguing American cities," and called Mailer's campaign “the most refreshing libertarian political campaign in decades.” He came in fourth in a field of five.
His father, Isaac Barnett Mailer, was an accountant born in South Africa, and his mother, Fanny (''née'' Schneider), ran a housekeeping and nursing agency.
The culture of conformity in the 1950s, therefore, is psychotic (legally insane): 1950s society refuses to realize the brutality of the world in which it exists—men and women continue working and living as if nuclear war were not frighteningly imminent.
Norman Mailer attended the dinner where, among other things, Dershowitz explained why the evidence pointed to von Bülow's innocence.
They divorced in 1980.
Mailer wrote a ''Playboy'' article about Elmo Henderson, a boxer who had defeated Muhammad Ali in 1972.
Along with Truman Capote, Joan Didion, Hunter S. Thompson and Tom Wolfe, Mailer is considered an innovator of creative nonfiction, a genre sometimes called New Journalism, which uses the style and devices of literary fiction in fact-based journalism.
A number of Mailer's nonfiction works, such as ''The Armies of the Night'' and ''The Presidential Papers'', are political.
This nihilism, arguably, is embodied in the portrayal of Gary Gilmore in The Executioner’s Song: this man lives as he wants, often stealing, and ultimately kills simply because he can.
