The geology of Alaska is typical of that of the cordillera, while the major islands of Hawaii consist of Neogene volcanics erupted over a hot spot.
Similarly, French and French Antillean Creole is spoken in Saint Lucia and the Commonwealth of Dominica alongside English.
Panama and Costa Rica have a significantly higher Human Development Index and GDP than the rest of the Central American nations.
Alternatively, usage sometimes includes Greenland and Mexico (as in the North American Free Trade Agreement), as well as offshore islands.
Before the Central American isthmus formed, the region had been underwater.
The USGS further states that "No marked or monumented point has been established by any government agency as the geographic center of either the 50 States, the conterminous United States, or the North American continent."
From the Late Paleozoic to Early Mesozoic eras, North America was joined with the other modern-day continents as part of the supercontinent Pangaea, with Eurasia to its east.
The Canadian Shield is the largest exposure of this craton.
The focal point of CAFTA is to create a free trade area similar to that of NAFTA.
The most populous country in North America, is the United States with 318.4 million persons.
CARICOM also allowed for the creation of a common passport for associated nations.
Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Central America in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism became the most popular religion in the region until the first half of the 20th century.
Canada, the United States and Mexico host communities of both Jews (6 million or about 1.8%), Buddhists (3.8 million or 1.1%) and Muslims (3.4 million or 1.0%).
Another is that the name is rooted in a Native American language.
Being a newly industrialized country, Mexico maintains both modern and outdated industrial and agricultural facilities and operations.
Spanish North America (New Spain) was often referred to as ''Northern America'', and this was the first official name given to Mexico.
This is in part attributed to the fact that the economy of the United States is the world's largest national economy; the country had a nominal GDP of approximately $14.7&nbsp;trillion in 2010.
The Central American Free Trade Agreement was signed by five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic, and the United States.
As a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many important cultural advances were made there.
Immigration to the United States and Canada remains a significant attribute of many nations close to the southern border of the US.
Danish is prevalent in Greenland alongside Greenlandic, and Dutch is spoken side by side local languages in the Dutch Caribbean.
In addition to the United States, Canada also has relations in Central American trade blocs.
Canada and Mexico are also the home of megaregions.
In the late 18th century and beginning of the 19th, independence movements that sprung up across the continent, led to the creation of the modern countries in the area.
These nations also take part in inter-continental trade blocs.
No definitive length of the Pan-American Highway exists because the US and Canadian governments have never officially defined any specific routes as being part of the Pan-American Highway, and Mexico officially has many branches connecting to the US border.
In 2013, its population was estimated at nearly 565&nbsp;million people in 23 independent states, or about 7.5% of the world's population, if nearby islands (most notably the Caribbean) are included.
These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and two of three in the Americas.
French is the official language of the Province of Quebec, where 95% of the people speak it as either their first or second language, and it is co-official with English in the Province of New Brunswick.
Laurentia is an ancient craton which forms the geologic core of North America; it formed between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago during the Proterozoic eon.
Mexico has a per capita GDP (PPP) of $16,111 and as of 2014 is the 15th largest GDP (nominal) in the world.
The few agreements achieved to date are the origin from Central Asia, with widespread habitation of the Americas during the end of the last glacial period, or more specifically what is known as the late glacial maximum, around 13,000 years before present.
However, Bermuda is often thought of as part of North America, especially given its historical, political and cultural ties to Virginia and other parts of the continent.
Northern Mexico, particularly in the cities of Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and Mexicali, is strongly influenced by the culture and way of life of the United States.
Latin America refers to the other areas of the Americas (generally south of the United States) where the Romance languages, derived from Latin, of Spanish and Portuguese (but French speaking countries are not usually included) predominate: the other republics of Central America (but not always Belize), part of the Caribbean (not the Dutch-, English-, or French-speaking areas), Mexico, and most of South America (except Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana (France), and the Falkland Islands (UK)).
These include cultural, economic, and geographic regions.
Traditionally the largest megaregion has been considered the Boston-Washington, D.C. Corridor, or the Northeast, as the region is one massive contiguous area.
Mexico takes a part in the G3 Free Trade Agreement with Colombia and Venezuela and has a trade agreement with the EU.
In Canadian English, ''North America'' may be used to refer to the United States and Canada together.
The proximity of cities to each other on the Canada–United States border and Mexico–United States border has led to the rise of international metropolitan areas.
The Pan-American Highway route in the Americas is the portion of a network of roads nearly  in length which travels through the mainland nations.
These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 5.5&nbsp;million and include the New York City metropolitan area, Los Angeles metropolitan area, Chicago metropolitan area, and the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex.
The north of the continent maintains recognized regions as well.
Geographically the North American continent has many regions and subregions.
Some genetic research indicated secondary waves of migration occurred after the initial Paleo-Indian colonization, but prior to modern Inuit, Inupiat and Yupik expansions.
In 1507, Waldseemüller produced a world map, in which he placed the word "America" on the continent of South America, in the middle of what is today Brazil.
The continental coastline is long and irregular.
The nearest landmass to it is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina.
Native groups can also be classified by their language family (e.g., Athapascan or Uto-Aztecan).
These urban agglomerations are observed at their largest and most productive in Detroit–Windsor and San Diego–Tijuana and experience large commercial, economic, and cultural activity.
Its main sources of income are oil, industrial exports, manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction, food, banking and financial services.
While Canada and the United States already conducted the largest bilateral trade relationship&nbsp;– and to present day still do&nbsp;– in the world and Canada - United States trade relations already allowed trade without national taxes and tariffs, NAFTA allowed Mexico to experience a similar duty-free trade.
As of 2000, CARICOM trade volume was US$96&nbsp;billion.
The highest peak is Denali in Alaska.
Canada, Mexico and the United States have significant and multifaceted economic systems.
Canada is officially bilingual.
The geographic area that would later become the United States has been the source of more varieties of dinosaurs than any other modern country.
The  United States Geographical Survey (USGS) states that the geographic center of North America is "6&nbsp;miles 10&nbsp;km west of Balta, Pierce County, North Dakota" at about , about  from Rugby, North Dakota.
The second largest country is Mexico with a population of 112,322,757.
North America has been historically referred to by other names.
Several linguistic groups died out, and others changed quite quickly.
North America was reached by its first human populations during the last glacial period, via crossing the Bering land bridge.
Cities near the United States border, particularly in Mexico, are also experiencing large amounts of growth.
Across the Canadian Shield and in the north there are large iron, nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, and uranium reserves.
Its implementation in 1994 was designed for economic homogenization with hopes of eliminating barriers of trade and foreign investment between Canada, the United States and Mexico.
Mexico has the world's second largest number of Catholics, surpassed only by Brazil.
The United States is the largest trade partner of Canada and Mexico; while Canada and Mexico are each other's third largest trade partners.
It can also be considered a northern subcontinent of the Americas.
The vast majority of North America is on the North American Plate.
Although rarely used, the term Middle America—not to be confused with the Midwestern United States—groups the regions of Central America, the Caribbean, and Mexico.
The countries of Central America and the Caribbean are at various levels of economic and human development.
Eight of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the United States.
Spanish-speaking North America shares a common past as former Spanish colonies.
It is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the west and south by the Pacific Ocean, and to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea.
The largest countries of the continent, Canada and the United States, also contain well-defined and recognized regions.
New Spain, a territory that stretched from modern-day southern US to Central America, declared independence in 1810, becoming the First Mexican Empire.
The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is located  from the nearest coastline, between Allen and Kyle, South Dakota at .
Ricardo Palma (1949) proposed a derivation from the "Amerrique" mountains of Central America—Vespucci was the first to discover South America and the ''Amerrique'' mountains of Central America, which connected his discoveries to those of Christopher Columbus.
Later cultures include the Mississippian culture and related Mound building cultures, found in the Mississippi river valley and the Pueblo culture of what is now the Four Corners.
Canada is the third most populous country with 32,623,490.
These causes included warm temperatures, retirement of Baby Boomers, large industry, and the influx of immigrants.
The islands of the West Indies delineate a submerged former land bridge, which had connected North and South America via what are now Florida and Venezuela.
Economically, Canada and the United States are the wealthiest and most developed nations in the continent, followed by Mexico, a newly industrialized country.
Parts of western Mexico, including Baja California, and of California, including the cities of San Diego, Los Angeles, and Santa Cruz, lie on the eastern edge of the Pacific Plate, with the two plates meeting along the San Andreas fault.
Large diamond concentrations have been recently developed in the Arctic, making Canada one of the world's largest producers.
Yet megaregion criterion have allowed the Great Lakes Megalopolis to maintain status as the most populated region, being home to 53,768,125 people in 2000.
Alternatively, some geologists physiographically locate its southern limit at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico, with Central America extending southeastward to South America from this point.
Yet as cities grow in these warmer regions of North America, they are increasingly forced to deal with the major issue of water shortages.
According to the same study religiously unaffiliated (include agnostic and atheist) make up about 17.1% of the population of Canada and the United States.
He used the Latinized version of Vespucci's name (Americus Vespucius), but in its feminine form "America", following the examples of "Europa", "Asia" and "Africa".
In addition to the larger trade blocs there is the Canada-Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement among numerous other free trade relations, often between the larger, more developed countries and Central American and Caribbean countries.
In the past decade the trade bloc focused largely on Free Trade Agreements and under the CARICOM Office of Trade Negotiations (OTN) free trade agreements have been signed into effect.
A shared telephone system known as the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) which is an integrated telephone numbering plan of 24 countries and territories: the United States and its territories, Canada, Bermuda, and 17 Caribbean nations.
Perhaps most importantly they domesticated one of the world's major staples, maize (corn).
Megalopolises have also formed between both nations in the case of the Pacific Northwest and the Great Lakes Megaregion.
Most notable is Tijuana, a city bordering San Diego that receives immigrants from all over Latin America and parts of Europe and Asia.
They lived in several "culture areas", which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones and give a good indication of the main lifeway or occupation of the people who lived there (e.g., the bison hunters of the Great Plains, or the farmers of Mesoamerica).
In the United States exists eleven megaregions that transcend international borders and comprise Canadian and Mexican metropolitan regions.
North America occupies the northern portion of the landmass generally referred to as the New World, the Western Hemisphere, the Americas, or simply America (which, less commonly, is considered by some as a single continent with North America a subcontinent).
While in Mexico there were 3,700 Muslims in the country.
North America's only land connection to South America is at the Isthmus of Panama.
The French language has historically played a significant role in North America and now retains a distinctive presence in some regions.
In a geologic sense, Bermuda is not part of the Americas, but an oceanic island which was formed on the fissure of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge over 100&nbsp;million years ago.
The United States has the largest Christian population in the world, with nearly 247 million Christians (70%), although other countries have higher percentages of Christians among their populations.
Native culture changed drastically and their affiliation with political and cultural groups also changed.
The term Northern America refers to the northern-most countries and territories of North America, Canada, the United States, Greenland, Bermuda, and St. Pierre and Miquelon.
The First Transcontinental Railroad in the United States was built in the 1860s, linking the railroad network of the eastern US with California on the Pacific coast.
These regions also contain many subregions.
Central America has many mountain ranges; the longest are the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, the Cordillera Isabelia, and the Cordillera de Talamanca.
Canada also breaks into the top ten largest metropolitan areas with the Toronto metropolitan area having six million citizens.
The Aztecs were conquered in 1521 by Hernán Cortés.
Also Christianity is the predominant religion in the Caribbean (84.7%).
The countries of NAFTA are also some of each other's largest trade partners.
The United States has proposed and maintained trade agreements under the Transatlantic Free Trade Area between itself and the European Union; the US-Middle East Free Trade Area between numerous Middle Eastern nations and itself; and the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership between Southeast Asian nations, Australia, and New Zealand.
The biggest number of Jewish individuals can be found in the United States (5.4 million), Canada (375,000) and Mexico (67,476).
The 13 British colonies on the North Atlantic coast declared independence in 1776, becoming the United States of America.
During the Age of Discovery, Europeans explored and staked claims to various parts of North America.
Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion.
Peoples with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, nor were they always allies.
No religion make up about 22.8% of the United States population, and 23.9% of Canada total population.
The names and cultures that Europeans recorded were not necessarily the same as the names they had used a few generations before, or the ones in use today.
Before contact with Europeans, the natives of North America were divided into many different polities, from small bands of a few families to large empires.
Some argue that the convention is to use the surname for naming discoveries except in the case of royalty and so a derivation from "Amerigo Vespucci" could be problematic.
Between the mountain ranges lie fertile valleys that are suitable for the people; in fact, most of the population of Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala live in valleys.
Canada's mineral resources are diverse and extensive.
The United States has the largest economy of all three countries and in the world.
The Rockies and other western mountain ranges began forming around this time from a period of mountain building called the Laramide orogeny, between 80 and 55 million years ago.
The earliest verifiable instance of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact by any European culture with the landmasses that geologically constitute the "mainland" of modern North America has been dated to the end of the 10th century CE - this site, situated at the northernmost extent of the island named Newfoundland, is known as L'Anse aux Meadows, where unmistakable evidence of Norse settlement was uncovered in the early 1960s.
Canada's services sector comprises 78% of the country's GDP (estimated in 2010), industry comprises 20% and agriculture comprises 2%.
These include the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor, Golden Horseshoe&nbsp;– both of which are considered part of the Great Lakes Megaregion&nbsp;– and megalopolis of Central Mexico.
In the case of Canada these are the British Columbia Coast, Canadian Prairies, Central Canada, Atlantic Canada, and Northern Canada.
The largest cities in North America, by far, are Mexico City and New York.
There are numerous islands off the continent's coasts; principally, the Arctic Archipelago, the Bahamas, Turks & Caicos, the Greater and Lesser Antilles, the Aleutian Islands (some of which are in the Eastern Hemisphere proper), the Alexander Archipelago, the many thousand islands of the British Columbia Coast, and Newfoundland.
In contrast to the common definition of "North America", that which encompasses the whole continent, the term "North America" is also used to refer to Canada, Mexico, the United States, and Greenland.
Demographically, North America is ethnically diverse.
'''North America''' is a continent entirely within the Northern Hemisphere and almost all within the Western Hemisphere.
Sudbury is an exception to the normal process of forming minerals in the Shield since there is significant evidence that the Sudbury Basin is an ancient meteorite impact crater.
Whilst the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within the United States, Mexico is host to the largest metropolitan area by population in North America: Greater Mexico City.
The UN geoscheme for "North America" separates Mexico from the United States and Canada, placing it instead within its designated "Central America" region, while also treating the islands of the Caribbean separately from the US/Canada definition—the UN's "North America" definition still includes the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and Greenland together with the US/Canada continental definition, with both insular entities being tectonically on the North American plate.
For example, the Maya civilization developed a writing system, built huge pyramids and temples, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero around 400 CE, a few hundred years after the Mesopotamians.
These are the Arizona Sun Corridor, Cascadia, Florida, Front Range, Great Lakes Megaregion, Gulf Coast Megaregion, Northeast, Northern California, Piedmont Atlantic, Southern California, and the Texas Triangle.
The southern North American continent is composed of two regions.
The largest, and best known, is Sudbury, Ontario.
The Classic stage spans roughly the 6th to 13th centuries.
Volcanic eruptions are common in the region.
The formation of the Isthmus of Panama that connected the continent to South America arguably occurred approximately 12 to 15 million years ago, and the Great Lakes (as well as many other northern freshwater lakes and rivers) were carved by receding glaciers about 10,000 years ago.
Other French-speaking locales include the Province of Ontario (the official language is English, but there are an estimated 600,000 Franco-Ontarians), the Province of Manitoba (co-official as ''de jure'' with English), the French West Indies and Saint-Pierre et Miquelon, as well as the US state of Louisiana, where French is also an official language.
While the United States, Canada, and Mexico maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations.
The so-called Paleo-Indian period is taken to have lasted until about 10,000 years ago (the beginning of the Archaic or Meso-Indian period).
Christianity is the largest religion in the United States, Canada and Mexico according to a 2012 Pew Research Center survey, 77.4% of the population considered themselves Christians.
The North American economy is well defined and structured in three main economic areas.
Of these trade blocs, the United States takes part in two.
North America is the third largest continent by area, following Asia and Africa, and the fourth by population after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
The most significant Late Jurassic dinosaur-bearing fossil deposit in North America is the Morrison Formation of the western United States.
Alfred E. Hudd proposed a theory in 1908 that the continents are named after a Welsh merchant named Richard Amerike from Bristol, who is believed to have financed John Cabot's voyage of discovery from England to Newfoundland in 1497.
The Anglophone Caribbean states have witnessed the decline of the British Empire and its influence on the region, and its replacement by the economic influence of Northern America.
The specifics of Paleo-Indian migration to and throughout the Americas, including the exact dates and routes traveled, are subject to ongoing research and discussion.
Although an accomplishment, it achieved the status of first transcontinental railroad by connecting myriad eastern US railroads to the Pacific and was not the largest single railroad system in the world.
Stretching from the borders of the continental humid and subtropical climates, and going west to the Cascades Sierra Nevada, south to the southern tip of durango, north to the border with tundra climate, the steppe/desert climate is the driest climate in the U.S.
Anglo-America includes most of Northern America, Belize, and Caribbean islands with English-speaking populations (though sub-national entities, such as Louisiana and Quebec, are Francophone in composition).
For Waldseemüller, no one should object to the naming of the land after its discoverer.
He explained the rationale for the name in the accompanying book ''Cosmographiae Introductio'':
The United States host the largest Muslim population in North America with 2.7 million or 0.9%, While Canada host about one million Muslim or 3.2% of the population.
There are also large cities in the Caribbean.
Later, other mapmakers extended the name ''America'' to the northern continent, In 1538, Gerard Mercator used ''America'' on his map of the world for all the Western Hemisphere.
The southernmost portion of the continent and much of the West Indies lie on the Caribbean Plate, whereas the Juan de Fuca and Cocos plates border the North American Plate on its western frontier.
In Detroit-Windsor the Border Transportation Partnership study in 2004 concluded US$13&nbsp;billion was dependent on the Detroit–Windsor international border crossing while in San Diego-Tijuana freight at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry was valued at US$20&nbsp;billion.
The predominant religion in Central America is Christianity (95.6%).
In 2014, the US had an estimated per capita gross domestic product (PPP) of $54,980, and is the most technologically developed economy of the three.
The majority of Caribbean island-nations have national populations under a million, though Cuba, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Puerto Rico (a territory of the United States), Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago each have populations higher than a million.
Mexico, with its long plateaus and cordilleras, falls largely in the western region, although the eastern coastal plain does extend south along the Gulf.
Because of the history of colonialism, most North Americans speak English, Spanish or French and societies and states commonly reflect Western traditions.
The term Anglo-America is used to refer to the anglophone countries of the Americas: namely Canada (where English and French are co-official) and the United States, but also sometimes Belize and parts of the tropics, especially the Commonwealth Caribbean.
Britain, Spain, and France took over extensive territories in North America - and fought over them.
The Shield is also covered by vast boreal forests that support an important logging industry.
In 1968 the Arenal Volcano, in Costa Rica, erupted and killed 87 people.
Its three main groups are Caucasians, Mestizos and Blacks.
Recent implementation of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) has left the future of the CACM unclear.
Greenland shares some cultural ties with the indigenous people of Canada but is considered Nordic and has strong Danish ties due to centuries of colonization by Denmark.
Trade volume has steadily increased annually and in 2010, surface trade between the three NAFTA nations reached an all-time historical increase of 24.3% or US$791&nbsp;billion.
&zwnj;†2011 Census figures.
Canada and the United States were both former British colonies.
One of the oldest cultures yet found is the Clovis culture of modern New Mexico.
Canada's per capita GDP (PPP) was estimated at $44,656 and it had the 11th largest GDP (nominal) in 2014.
The traditional theory has been that these early migrants moved into the  Beringia land bridge between eastern Siberia and present-day Alaska around  25,000 to 11,000 years ago.
These areas are the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), and the Central American Common Market (CACM).
The Canadian Grand Trunk Railway (GTR) had, by 1867, already accumulated more than  of track by connecting Ontario with the Canadian Atlantic provinces west as far as Port Huron, Michigan, through Sarnia, Ontario.
Geologically, Canada is one of the oldest regions in the world, with more than half of the region consisting of precambrian rocks that have been above sea level since the beginning of the Palaeozoic era.
Greenland, a self-governing Danish island, and the world's largest, is on the same tectonic plate (the North American Plate) and is part of North America geographically.
Its magnetic anomalies are very similar to the Sudbury Basin, and so it could be a second metal-rich impact crater.
Much of the Mesozoic Era is represented by exposed outcrops in the many arid regions of the continent.
During the thousands of years of native habitation on the continent, cultures changed and shifted.
Next in size are Los Angeles, Toronto, Chicago, Havana, Santo Domingo, and Montreal.
One of the results of the formation of Pangaea was the Appalachian Mountains, which formed some 480&nbsp;million years ago, making it among the oldest mountain ranges in the world.
Additionally, despite Greenland's vast resources in oil and minerals, much of them remain untapped, and the island is economically dependent on fishing, tourism, and subsidies from Denmark.
The Pre-Columbian era ended with the arrival of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the Early Modern period.
The top ten largest North American metropolitan areas by population as of 2013, based on national census numbers from the United States of America, and census estimates from Canada and Mexico.
Anthropologists think that the Inuit people of the high Arctic came to North America much later than other native groups, as evidenced by the disappearance of Dorset culture artifacts from the archaeological record, and their replacement by the Thule people.
The western mountains are split in the middle into the main range of the Rockies and the coast ranges in California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, with the Great Basin—a lower area containing smaller ranges and low-lying deserts—in between.
In Mexico and the Central American countries where civilizations like the Maya developed, indigenous people preserve traditions across modern boundaries.
