Grand Forks and Devils Lake are located in scenic areas of North Dakota.
Several new stations were built in Williston in the early 2010s.
Amtrak's Empire Builder runs through North Dakota, making stops at Fargo (2:13&nbsp;am westbound, 3:35&nbsp;am eastbound), Grand Forks (4:52&nbsp;am westbound, 12:57&nbsp;am eastbound), Minot (around 9&nbsp;am westbound and around 9:30&nbsp;pm eastbound), and four other stations.
A round of federal investment and construction projects began in the 1950s, including the Garrison Dam and the Minot and Grand Forks Air Force bases.
The central region of the state is divided into the Drift Prairie and the Missouri Plateau.
'''North Dakota's Top Agricultural Commodities''' (according to the USDA )
However, lignite coal is the lowest grade coal.
The region is abundant in fossil fuels including natural gas, crude oil and lignite coal.
Of the residents of North Dakota, 69.8% were born in North Dakota, 27.2% were born in a different state, 0.6% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 2.4% were born in another country.
The oil reserves of the Bakken Formation may hold up to  of oil, 25&nbsp;times larger than the reserves in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
North Dakota's economy is aided by nearly $1&nbsp;billion in federal agricultural subsidies annually .
KFGO in Fargo has the largest audience.
That is below the current unemployment rate of the majority of states.
Between 2002 and 2007, total cropland increased by about one million acres (4,000&nbsp;km2), the only state showing an increase.
In 2006, North Dakota was the state with the lowest number of returns filed by taxpayers with an Adjusted Gross Income of over $1M – only&nbsp;333.
Female dancers dance much more subtly than the male dancers.
However, a report issued in April 2008 by the U.S. Geological Survey estimates that the oil recoverable by current technology in the Bakken formation is two orders of magnitude less, in the range of  to , with a mean of .
The Tax Foundation ranks North Dakota as the state with the 20th most "business friendly" tax climate in the nation.
The western terminus of the North Country National Scenic Trail is located on Lake Sakakawea, where it abuts the Lewis and Clark Trail.
North Dakota's court system has four levels.
The south-central part of North Dakota became known as "the German-Russian triangle".
There are intertribal dances throughout the pow wow, where everyone (even spectators) can take part in the dancing.
and was recognized as a Playful City USA by the KaBOOM!
North Dakota has added 56,600 private-sector jobs since 2011, creating an annual growth rate of 7.32 percent.
Bismarck, located in south-central North Dakota along the banks of the Missouri River, has been North Dakota's capital city since 1883, first as capital of the Dakota Territory, and then as state capital since 1889.
North Dakota's major fine art museums and venues include the Chester Fritz Auditorium, Empire Arts Center, the Fargo Theatre, North Dakota Museum of Art, and the Plains Art Museum.
Most of the state is covered in grassland; crops cover most of eastern North Dakota but become increasingly sparse in the center and farther west.
Other weekly and monthly publications (most of which are fully supported by advertising) are also available.
North Dakota is located in the U.S. region known as the Great Plains.
There is concern about too much in monoculture, making the economy liable to risk from insect or crop diseases, in addition to adverse effects on habitat of wildlife and birds, and balance of the ecosystem.
The economy of North Dakota had a gross domestic product of $36.8&nbsp;billion in 2013.
North Dakota is one of the top resettlement locations for refugees.
Christians with unstated or other denominational affiliations, including other Protestants and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), totaled 3%, bringing the total Christian population to 86%.
Kellan Lutz has appeared in movies such as ''Stick It'', ''Accepted'', ''Prom Night'', and ''Twilight''.
North Dakota is also the only state with a state-owned bank, the Bank of North Dakota in Bismarck, and a state-owned flour mill, the North Dakota Mill and Elevator in Grand Forks.
Intercity bus service is provided by Greyhound and Jefferson Lines.
, the state's unemployment rate is the lowest in the nation at 2.6% and it has not touched 5 percent since 1987.
The governor has a cabinet consisting of appointed leaders of various state government agencies, called commissioners.
Ethnic Germans who had settled in Russia for several generations grew dissatisfied in the nineteenth century because of economic problems and because of the revocation of religious freedoms for Mennonites and Hutterites.
In addition to founding the state-owned Bank of North Dakota and North Dakota Mill and Elevator (both still in existence), the NPL established a state-owned railroad line (later sold to the Soo Line Railroad).
The Bismarck-Mandan Symphony Orchestra, Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra, Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra, Minot Symphony Orchestra and Great Plains Harmony Chorus are full-time professional and semi-professional musical ensembles that perform concerts and offer educational programs to the community.
Public access television stations open to community programming are offered on cable systems in Bismarck, Dickinson, Fargo, and Jamestown.
Devils Lake, the largest natural lake in the state, is also found in the east.
The eastern part of the state consists of the flat Red River Valley, the bottom of glacial Lake Agassiz.
The North Dakota Legislative Assembly is a bicameral body consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Soybeans are grown for livestock feed.
According to statistics released on 25 March 2014 by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, North Dakota's personal income grew 7.6 percent in 2013 to $41.3 billion.
North Dakota's principal airports are the Hector International Airport (FAR) in Fargo, Grand Forks International Airport (GFK), Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Minot International Airport (MOT) and Sloulin Field International Airport (ISN) in Williston.
The most prominent of these is the alternative weekly ''High Plains Reader''.
Throughout the latter half of the nineteenth century and into the twentieth century, North Dakota, along with most of the midwest, experienced a mass influx of newcomers both from the eastern United States and new arrivals from Europe.
The state's legal code is named the North Dakota Century Code.
In fiscal year 2014, 582 refugees settled in the state.
Much of the growth has been based on development of the Bakken oil fields in the western part of the state.
Except for Native Americans, the North Dakota population has a lesser percentage of minorities than in the nation as a whole.
It is the descendant of the famous line of the same name run by the Great Northern Railway, which was built by the tycoon James J. Hill and ran from St. Paul to Seattle.
Williston is located near the confluence of the Missouri River and the Yellowstone River near Montana.
They started Lutheran churches and schools, greatly outnumbering other denominations in the area.
Much of this settlement gravitated throughout the western side of the Red River Valley, as was similarly seen in South Dakota and in a parallel manner in Minnesota.
The state is the leading producer of many oilseeds, including 92% of the U.S. canola crop, 94% of flax seed, 53% of sunflower seeds, 18% of safflower seeds, and 62% of mustard seed.
Fort Yates, located along the Missouri River on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation claims to host the final resting place of Hunkpapa Lakota leader Sitting Bull (Mobridge, South Dakota also claims his gravesite).
It is the fastest-growing state in U.S. by GDP.
Throughout Native American history, powwows were held, usually in the spring, to rejoice at the beginning of new life and the end of the winter cold.
North Dakota's personal income growth is tied to various private business sectors such as agriculture, energy development, and construction.
Only Alaska, Wyoming, and Vermont have fewer residents
Growth then slowed, and the population has fluctuated slightly over the past seven decades, hitting a low of 617,761 in the 1970 census, with a total of 642,200 in the 2000 census.
Although less than 10% of the population is employed in the agricultural sector, it remains a major part of the state's economy, ranking 9th in the nation in the value of crops and 18th in total value of agricultural products sold.
Ice fishing, skiing, and snowmobiling are also popular during the winter months.
The reduction in the unemployment rate and growth in per capita income is attributable to the oil boom in the state.
From the 1930s until the end of the 20th century, North Dakota's population experienced a gradual decline, interrupted by a couple of brief increases.
Owners of real property in North Dakota pay property tax to their county, municipality, school district, and special taxing districts.
North Dakota has about 90% of its land area in farms with  of cropland, the third-largest amount in the nation.
Most of the cereal grains are grown for livestock feed.
These events brought Native American tribes together for singing and dancing and allowed them to meet up with old friends and acquaintances, as well as to make new ones.
The state's oldest radio station, WDAY-AM, was launched on May 23, 1922.
The state allows municipalities to institute local sales taxes and special local taxes, such as the 1.75% supplemental sales tax in Grand Forks.
The Missouri River forms Lake Sakakawea, the third largest man-made lake in the United States, behind the Garrison Dam.
The western half of the state consists of the hilly Great Plains, and the northern part of the Badlands to the west of the Missouri River.
North Dakota is considered the least visited state, owing, in part, to its not having a major tourist attraction.
Residents of North Dakota may own or visit a cabin along a lake.
Anti-corporate laws were passed that virtually prohibited a corporation or bank from owning title to land zoned as farmland.
Public broadcasting in North Dakota is provided by Prairie Public, with statewide television and radio networks affiliated with PBS and NPR.
Broadcast television in North Dakota started on April 3, 1953, when KCJB-TV (now KXMC-TV) in Minot started operations.
2011 rank in the U.S
Estimates as to the remaining amount of oil vary, with some estimating over 100 years worth of oil remaining in the area.
They were committed to agriculture.
This makes North Dakota the U.S. state with the largest percentage in population growth since 2011.
The state capital is Bismarck, and the largest city is Fargo.
The major Interstate highways are Interstate 29 and Interstate 94, with I-29 and I-94 meeting at Fargo, with I-29 oriented north to south along the eastern edge of the state, and I-94 bisecting the state from east to west between Minnesota and Montana.
A 2001 survey indicated that 35% of North Dakota's population was Lutheran, and 30% was Catholic.
The park often exceeds 475,000 visitors each year.
In 1953, legislation to make the ground squirrel the state emblem was voted down in the state legislature.
The largest rail systems in the state are operated by BNSF and the Canadian Pacific Railway.
Soybeans are a major crop in the eastern part of the state,  and cultivation is common in the southeast part of the state.
Recoverable oil reserves have jumped dramatically recently.
The three-year median household income from 2002–2004 was $39,594, ranking 37th in the U.S.
Three percent of respondents answered "no religion" on the survey, and 6% declined to answer.
Since that day, it has become common to list the Dakotas alphabetically and thus North Dakota is usually listed as the 39th&nbsp;state.
This area is well known for its fertile lands, and by the outbreak of the First World War was among the richest farming regions in North America.
It is traditional for male dancers to wear regalia decorated with beads, quills and eagle feathers; male grass dancers wear colorful fringe regalia; and male fancy dancers wear brightly colored feathers.
With an area of , North Dakota is the 19th largest state.
North-Western North Dakota is currently in an oil boom: the Williston, Tioga, Stanley and Minot-Burlington communities are experiencing rapid growth.
1.39% (8,593) spoke German, 1.37% (8,432) spoke Spanish, and 0.30% (1,847) spoke Norwegian.
A stave church is a landmark in Minot.
In addition, "it administers federal disaster recovery programs and the Homeland Security Grant Program".
An omnibus bill for statehood for North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Washington, titled the Enabling Act of 1889, was passed on February 22, 1889 during the administration of Grover Cleveland.
The development has driven strong job and population growth, and low unemployment.
The state's high point, White Butte at , and Theodore Roosevelt National Park are located in the Badlands.
Their tribes included the Mandan people, the Dakota people and the Yanktonai: the latter two from the Lakota peoples.
Historically, North Dakota has had a low unemployment rate.
North Dakota has weathered the Great Recession of the early 21st century with a boom in natural resources, particularly a boom in oil extraction from the Bakken formation, which lies beneath the northwestern part of the state.
According to the U.S. Office of Refugee Resettlement, in 2013-2014 "more than 68 refugees" per 100,000 North Dakotans were settled in the state.
Over the same period,  were shifted into soybean and corn production, the largest such shift in the United States.
The Constitution of North Dakota and the North Dakota Century Code form the formal law of the state; the ''North Dakota Administrative Code'' incorporates additional rules and policies of state agencies.
North Dakota is the 19th most extensive but the 4th least populous and the 4th least densely populated of the 50 United States.
Shadoe Stevens hosted ''American Top 40'' from 1988 to 1995.
The state also receives visitors from the neighboring Canadian province of Manitoba, particularly when the exchange rate is favorable.
Canola is suited to the cold winters and it matures fast.
Regular events in the state that attract tourists include ''Norsk Høstfest'' in Minot, billed as North America's largest Scandinavian festival; the Medora Musical; and the North Dakota State Fair.
, the state is the 2nd largest oil producer in the U.S. with an average of 575,490 barrels per day.
Excise taxes are levied on the purchase price or market value of aircraft registered in North Dakota.
North Dakota's three major radio markets center around Fargo, Bismarck, and Grand Forks, though stations broadcast in every region of the state.
Both senators and representatives are elected to four-year terms.
A pow wow is an occasion for parades and Native American dancers in regalia, with many dancing styles presented.
Fargo "Mayor Mahoney said North Dakota accepting the most refugees per capita should be celebrated given the benefits they bring to the state."
Soybeans were not grown in North Dakota in the 1940s, but it has become more common in the last 50 years and especially since 1998.
North Dakota is the second leading producer of sugarbeets, grown in the Red River Valley.
During the first decade of the 21st century, the population increased in large part because of jobs in the oil industry related to development of shale-oil fields.
Other religious groups represented were Methodists&nbsp;(7%), Baptists&nbsp;(6%), the Assemblies of God&nbsp;(3%), Presbyterians (1.27%), and Jehovah's Witnesses&nbsp;(1%).
The share of people in the state employed in agriculture is comparatively high: , only approximately 2–3 percent of the population of the United States is directly employed in agriculture.
The continent's largest Scandinavian event, ''Norsk Høstfest'', is celebrated each September in Minot.
There was a boom in oil exploration in western North Dakota in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as rising petroleum prices made development profitable.
North Dakota has a slightly progressive income tax structure; the five brackets of state income tax rates are 2.1%, 3.92% 4.34%, 5.04%, and 5.54% as of 2004.
The offices of governor and lieutenant governor have four-year terms, which are next up for election in 2016.
In recent years the state has had a strong economy, with unemployment lower than the national average and strong job and population growth.
Areas popular with visitors include Theodore Roosevelt National Park in the western part of the state.
There are 42 district court judges in seven judicial districts.
5.14% (31,684) of North Dakotans spoke a language other than English.
West Fargo, the fifth largest city in North Dakota, is one of the fastest growing cities.
The Icelandic State Park in Pembina County and an annual Icelandic festival reflect immigrants from that country, who are also descended from Scandinavians.
North Dakota is situated near the middle of North America with a stone marker in Rugby, North Dakota marking the "Geographic Center of the North American Continent".
Due to a combination of oil related development and investing in technology & service industries, North Dakota has had a budget surplus every year after the 2008 market crash.
Located a few miles west of Bismarck on the west side of the Missouri River, the city of Mandan was named for the Mandan Indians who inhabited the area at the time of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of North Dakota, which holds court in Bismarck, Fargo, Grand Forks, and Minot.
Unrest among wheat farmers, especially among Norwegian immigrants, led to a radical political movement after World War I centered in the Non Partisan League ("NPL").
Other languages spoken included Serbo-Croatian (0.19%), Chinese and Japanese (both 0.15%), and other Native American languages and French (both 0.13%).
There were an estimated 920&nbsp;Muslims and 730&nbsp;Jews in the state in 2000.
These laws, still in force today, after having been upheld by both state and federal courts, make it almost impossible to foreclose on farmland, as even after foreclosure, the property title cannot be held by a bank or mortgage company.
The state has 10 daily newspapers, the largest being ''The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead''.
Josh Duhamel is an Emmy Award-winning actor known for his roles in ''All My Children'' and ''Las Vegas''.
Harrison directed Secretary of State James G. Blaine to shuffle the papers and obscure from him which he was signing first and the actual order went unrecorded, thus no one knows which of the Dakotas was admitted first.
The state is the largest producer in the U.S. of many cereal grains, including barley (36% of U.S. crop), durum wheat (58%), hard red spring wheat (48%), oats (17%), and combined wheat of all types (15%).
Young adults with university degrees were particularly likely to leave the state.
The other elected constitutional offices are secretary of state, attorney general, state auditor, and state treasurer.
Social gatherings known as "powwows" (or pow-wows) are an important aspect of Native American culture, and occur regularly throughout the State.
"Just over 21% of North Dakota's total 2013 gross domestic product (GDP) of $49.77 billion comes from natural resources and mining."
From fewer than 2,000 people in 1870, North Dakota's population grew to near 680,000 by 1930.
North Dakota was a known popular destination for immigrant farmers and general laborers and their families, mostly from Norway, Sweden, Germany and the United Kingdom.
According to Gallup data, North Dakota led the U.S. in job creation in 2013 and has done so since 2009.
North Dakota has 34 AM and 88 FM radio stations.
Today, powwows are still a part of the Native American culture, and are attended by Native and non-Natives alike.
The rivalry between the two new states presented a dilemma of which was to be admitted first.
His successor, Benjamin Harrison, signed the proclamations formally admitting North Dakota and South Dakota to the Union on November 2, 1889.
The original North Dakota State Capitol in Bismarck burned to the ground on December 28, 1930.
With the advancing process of mechanization of agricultural practices, subsistence farming proved to be too risky for families, and many people moved to urban areas for jobs.
Fargo is home to the second-largest campus of Microsoft with 1,700 employees, and Amazon.com employs several hundred in Grand Forks.
Outdoor activities such as hunting and fishing are hobbies for many North Dakotans.
The state has recorded the highest personal income growth among all states for the sixth time since 2007.
It was replaced by a limestone-faced art deco skyscraper that still stands today.
This group has unique foods such as ''lefse'' and ''lutefisk.''
Transportation in North Dakota is overseen by the North Dakota Department of Transportation.
Ed Schultz is known around the country as the host of progressive talk radio show, ''The Ed Schultz Show'', and ''The Ed Show'' on MSNBC.
Wind energy in North Dakota is also very cost effective because the state has large rural expanses and wind speeds seldom go below 10&nbsp;mph.
A unique feature of the North Dakota Interstate Highway system, is that virtually all of it is paved in concrete, rather than blacktop, because of the extreme weather conditions it must endure.
One of the major causes of migration from North Dakota is the lack of skilled jobs for college graduates.
Tax Freedom Day arrives on April 1, 10&nbsp;days earlier than the national Tax Freedom Day.
Ethnic Norwegians constitute nearly one-third or 32.3% of Minot's total population and 30.8% of North Dakota's total population.
The Great Plains region, which includes the state of North Dakota has been referred to as "the Saudi Arabia of wind energy."
The ground squirrel constantly flicks its tail in a distinctive manner.
Shale gas is also produced.
Municipal courts serve the cities, and most cases start in the district courts, which are courts of general jurisdiction.
Many powwows also held religious significance for some tribes.
The current governor is Jack Dalrymple, a Republican who took office December 7, 2010 after his predecessor, John Hoeven won his race for U.S. Senate, and resigned to prepare for that office.
The age and gender distributions approximate the national average.
The first European to reach the area was the French-Canadian trader Pierre Gaultier, sieur de La Vérendrye, who led an exploration party to Mandan villages in 1738.
Appeals from the trial courts and challenges to certain governmental decisions are heard by the North Dakota Court of Appeals, consisting of three-judge panels.
Its highest unemployment rate was 6.8%, recorded in 1983.
Agriculture is the largest industry in North Dakota, although petroleum, food processing, and technology are also major industries.
North Dakota's earliest industries were fur trading and agriculture.
"The Flickertail State" is one of North Dakota's nicknames and is derived from Richardson's ground squirrel (''Spermophilus richardsonii''), a very common animal in the region.
Icelanders also arrived from Canada.
Corn yields are high in the southeast part of the state and smaller in other parts of the state.
In 2011, the Department selected Geo-Comm, Inc. "for the Statewide Seamless Base Map Project," which will facilitate "identifying locations 9–1–1 callers" and route emergency calls based on locations.
The center of population of North Dakota is located in Wells County, near Sykeston.
They were Lutherans and Roman Catholics who had kept many German customs of the time when their ancestors immigrated to Russia.
In 2015, Lutheran Social Services of North Dakota, the state's only resettlement agency, was "awarded $458,090 in federal funding to improve refugee services."
There are larger and higher grade coal reserves (anthracite, bituminous coal and subbituminous coal) in other U.S. states.
New Salem is the site of the world's largest statue of a holstein cow; the world's largest statue of a bison is in Jamestown.
North Dakota has a great number of Native Americans, and the word "Dakota" is a corruption of a Sioux (Lakota) word meaning "allies" or "friends".
The state has 47&nbsp;districts.
Eastern North Dakota is overall flat; however, there are significant hills and buttes in western North Dakota.
