''The Mercury'' was one of the oldest newspapers still in circulation first published in 1720, founded by William Dicey, an ancestor of the public law commentator, A.V.
Street names in the town give an indication of trades and market centres; Corn Hill, Malt Hill, Mercer Row, Gold Street, Sheep Street and Horse Market.
St James Retail Park is also a large shopping precinct just south of the town centre.
King John regularly stayed at the castle and moved The Treasury there in 1205.
The last Parliament at Northampton was held in 1380.
For the 1918 general election, Northampton's representation was reduced to one MP.
The A14 is close by to the north of Northampton, providing links east and west of the town.
The borough boundaries also changed following a split of the Northampton parliamentary constituency into Northampton North and Northampton South in 1974.
This was eventually repealed and the university's name was revived in 2005 when the unconnected University College Northampton, which was founded in 1924, was upgraded to full university status and renamed the University of Northampton.
According to Centre for Cities data in 2015, Northampton had a population growth of 11.3% between the years 2004 and 2013, one of the ten highest in the UK.
Northampton Museum and Art Gallery on Guildhall Road in the Cultural Quarter has a collection of historical footwear (one of the world's largest at 13,000), Italian art, glass and ceramics, plus visiting exhibitions and local history.
Both these events and the rail link helped Northampton's growth as a commuter town for London.
It was a royal residence, held The Parliament of England many times, and was the site of royal tournaments and feasts.
The town was the location for the BBC sitcom ''Keeping Up Appearances'' from 1990 until 1995.
There are also many equestrian and country activities, and several water sports centres, like the Nene Whitewater Centre, which provides an artificial whitewater course for canoes, kayaks and rafts.
In 1678, the Sessions House and what is now County Hall were amongst the first buildings to be completed.
78 Derngate, the only house in England designed by Charles Rennie Mackintosh, includes a museum celebrating Mackintosh, an art gallery and a restaurant.
The system was extended in stages and taken over by the council in 1897 and named Northampton Corporation Tramways.
It was electrified in 1904, but closed in 1934 mainly as a result of competition from motor buses which were introduced in 1929.
Other notable church buildings include Northampton Cathedral, the mother church of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Northampton and seat of the Bishop of Northampton; St Edmunds, which closed in 1978 and was demolished in 2007 (its bells are now in Saint Paul's Cathedral, Wellington); St Giles Church; St Matthew's in Phippsville, which was built between 1891-4, has a Henry Moore sculpture of the Madonna.
Over 4,000 pairs of leather shoes and 600 pairs of cavalry jack-boots for the Parliamentary armies were manufactured in Northampton during the Civil War, and a further 2,000 for Cromwell's New Model Army in 1648.
Northampton Guildhall, which is Grade II* listed, was constructed mostly in the 1860s in Victorian Gothic architecture designed by Edward William Godwin, and extended in the 1990s.
Very little survived the fire, apart from buildings made of stone, like the Welsh House on Market Square, built in 1595, and Hazelrigg House in Mare Fair, built in 1662.
The town expanded further during the 1920s and saw the erection of Northampton Power Station, which supplied electricity to areas as far away as Wolverton, until its closure in 1975.
The Royal Anglian Regiment serves as the county regiment for Northamptonshire.
However, the population growth slowed down as people moved beyond its boundaries.
Desborough Weather Station also supplies the public with a local weather service.
Each precinct has a range of high street shops, department stores and many smaller individual speciality shops.
The Northampton Development Corporation (NDC) was set up in 1968 to substantially redevelop the town in partnership with the local council, spending £205 million to build new housing and industrial estates, initially in Lumbertubs, Moulton Park and Round Spinney to the east, followed by Briar Hill, Camp Hill and East and West Hunsbury in the south of the town, mainly to accommodate the overflow population of new residents from the London area.
Northampton's royal connection languished in the modern period; the town supported Parliament (the Roundheads) in the English Civil War, which culminated in King Charles II ordering the destruction of the town walls and most of the castle.
The town is also the site of two medieval battles; the Battle of Northampton (1264) and the second in 1460.
In 940, it successfully resisted the invading forces of Danish opposition in Northumbria, but was burnt in 1010 by a Danish army, and again in 1065 by the rebellious northern earls Edwin and Morcar.
"The Saints" had their greatest moment when they won the Heineken Cup in 2000 at Twickenham, beating Munster 9–8.
In 1349, the Black Death pandemic killed more than half the population of Northampton.
This changed on 18 November 1189 when King Richard I granted the town its first charter in exchange for money to fund his crusades.
It was restored by the Jesus Army as part of their Jesus Centre project.
National Express also operates in Northampton, covering routes between major towns and cities in the United Kingdom.
Northampton is the terminus of an arm of the Grand Union Canal.
Following World War I, the shoe industry was increasingly in decline, despite the town's factories supplying over 23 million pairs of boots to the armed forces.
There are also two shopping centres in the town centre: the Grosvenor Centre, which was built in the 1970s, and Market Walk (previously Peacock Place), which was constructed in 1988.
In an act of reconciliation, King Charles II donated timber from the royal forests of Salcey and Whittlebury to help with the rebuild.
Northampton Castle is featured in William Shakespeare's history play ''King John'' and in ''Becket'', a play by Alfred, Lord Tennyson.
An early omnibus service ran to Wellingborough, and since 1919 motor omnibus services ran to villages around the town which brought buyers and sellers to the market.
There are also three non-league clubs in the United Counties Football League: Northampton Spencer; Northampton Sileby Rangers; and Northampton Old Northamptonian Chenecks.
In 1901, the population had expanded to 90,923; in 1931, the population was 92,341.
Other parks include Becket's Park (which is named after Thomas Becket as are nearby Becket's Well and Thomas á Becket pub), Bradlaugh Fields (named after the Northampton MP Charles Bradlaugh), Dallington Park, Delapré Park, Eastfield Park, Hunsbury Hill (which is built around an Iron Age fort), Kingsthorpe Park and Victoria Park.
His son, Simon II de Senlis, built St Peter's Church on a site between a former Anglo-Saxon palace and Northampton Castle.
originally opened in 1838 to serve Northampton St Andrew's became a charity and private healthcare provider when the Berrywood Asylum (later the Northampton County Lunatic Asylum, then St Crispin Hospital in 1948, and since 2010 Berrywood Hospital) opened in 1876.
This was followed by the opening of Castle station in 1859 on the site of part of the historic Northampton Castle, and later St. John's Street station in 1872.
St. John's, a medieval hospital, was situated east of Bridge Street.
These are Billing, Collingtree, Duston, Great Houghton, Hardingstone, Hunsbury Meadow, Upton, West Hunsbury and Wooton & East Hunsbury.
In 1484, the Mayor declared that Northampton was "in great desolation and ruin".
Northampton's nearest towns are Wellingborough, Daventry and Towcester.
A commercial station, Heart Four Counties (formerly Northants 96 and Heart Northampton), broadcasts mostly popular music.
The royal connection to Northampton Castle became less significant, and by the time of the English Civil War, Northampton was decidedly pro-Parliament.
A Georgian town with new houses, shops and workshops eventually grew out of the old medieval town destroyed by the fire.
Regional TV news is broadcast on the BBC East (terrestrial and satellite) with a main programme, BBC Look East, and on ITV's Anglia News.
The castle became an occasional royal residence from the reign of King Henry I in 1130 until that of King Richard II.
Established in 1897, in their centenary season of 1997 they reached Wembley through the play-offs and beat Swansea City 1–0 with an injury time winning free kick from John Frain.
The mayor later ruled with 24 councillors and 48 freemen in a closed body until 1835.
Several popular internet memes have started in Northampton, including "Supergran" Ann Timson, a 71-year-old who foiled a jewel robbery in the town in 2011, and Northampton Clown, an anonymous clown who gained a worldwide online following by standing motionless in Northampton streets in 2013.
It was soon rebuilt and grew rapidly with the industrial development of the 18th century.
The club was promoted from Division 2 of the County Championship in 2013, and play in Group C of the Clydesdale Bank 40 League and the Midlands/Wales/West group of the revamped Friends Provident T20.
The Market Square came to prominence in 1235 when Henry III ordered that the selling of goods in the churchyard of All Saint's should be relocated to the Market Square.
Tram lines were also laid down in the town in 1881 and electrified in 1903.
The town was originally controlled by officials acting for the King who collected taxes and upheld the law.
The eastern part was pedestrianised in 1995 and de-pedestrianised in 2014.
Some of its successful secondary schools include Northampton School for Boys, which became the top performing comprehensive school in the country in 2007, and Northampton School for Girls, the first school in England to gain Specialist Music College status.
In 1215, King John authorised the appointment of William Tilly as the town's first Mayor and ordered that "twelve of the better and more discreet residents of your town" join him as a council to assist him.
The Greyfriars was completely destroyed on 15 March 2015 by way of a controlled explosion.
Northampton is currently represented by three Conservative MPs: David Mackintosh (Northampton South), Michael Ellis (Northampton North) and Andrea Leadsom (South Northamptonshire).
Three radio stations are based in the town, two of which broadcast county-wide.
The film was turned into a musical ''Kinky Boots'', maintaining its Northampton backdrop, which premiered on Broadway in 2013 and won 6 Tony Awards.
It transferred to the West End in London in 2015 and won 3 Olivier Awards.
In addition, BBC Three shows ''Bizarre ER'' and ''Junior Paramedics'' were filmed in Northampton.
The War ended with a Parliamentary victory, resulting in England becoming a Commonwealth, which lasted a decade.
They relocated from the Old Fishmarket which was demolished to make way for the North Gate bus station.
The new council of the town had to pay £200 to have its charter renewed and also required all officials to swear the oath of allegiance and some confirmed by the Crown.
In the 13th century, Northampton had a large Jewish population centred on Gold Street.
In 1277two years after Edward I passed the Statute of the Jewrysome Jewish residents were executed while the remainder were driven out of town.
Other popular entertainment venues include the Legendendary Labour Club, Mollys, O'Malley's, O'Neill's, The Old White Hart, The Penny Whistle and The Wig & Pen.
Principal outlying villages on the canal include Gayton, Blisworth, Braunston and Stoke Bruerne.
Medieval Northampton had many churches, monasteries and the University of Northampton, which were all enclosed by the town walls.
Northampton unsuccessfully applied for unitary status in 1996 and city status in 2000; the town continues to expand with many areas undergoing urban renewal.
Castle station was rebuilt and expanded over the site of Northampton Castle, the remains of which were purchased and demolished in 1880 to make way for the goods shed.
The devastation led to an Act of Parliament for the rebuilding the town.
Nine registered parish councils also lie within the borough of Northampton.
In the town centre, older buildings were demolished and replaced or redeveloped for other buildings, including the former Greyfriars bus station, the Grosvenor Centre, Peacock Place (now Market Walk), shops, flats and hotels.
Charles Bradlaugh, the Picturedrome and the Black Bottom Club, which are all part of the Richardson Group, are also popular.
The Northampton loop of the West Coast Main Line was built in the late 1870s.
In 2006, Northampton became a government expansion zone with new growth promoted by West Northamptonshire Development Corporation (WNDC), an unelected quango, which has provoked a series of regeneration schemes across the town.
Northampton was granted modern borough status in 1974, when it was reconstituted as a non-metropolitan district, a subdivision of its non-metropolitan county (Northamptonshire).
From 1997–2004, Northants TV (NTV) on cable and later terrestrial showed local ads, sport, and limited local activities.
After World War II, Northampton vastly changed.
Radlands Plaza is a new skatepark that opened in 2012.
For international links, the East Midlands Airport and Luton Airport are quickly accessible by the M1; Birmingham Airport is also just north of the town via the M1 and M6 motorways and also by train.
In 1801, the population was 7,020; it more than doubled to 15,351 in 1831, attributed to the fact that there was great demand for footwear caused by the Napoleonic Wars of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
The earliest reference to Northampton in writing occurred in 914 under the name ''Ham tune'', literally meaning "home town".
Rockingham Motor Speedway and Santa Pod Raceway are a few miles north and east of Nortampton respectively, offering a range of drag racing events.
Northampton once had a horse-drawn tramway which opened in 1881.
When the forces of King Henry III overran the supporters of Simon de Montfort, the Second Barons' War broke out.
The Northampton Swimming Club also trained the young Olympic swimmer Caitlin McClatchey.
In the 9th century ''Regenhere of Northampton'' an East Anglian Saint with localised veneration was buried in Northampton.
Other priories in medieval Northampton include St James' Abbey, Graye Friers, Blackfriars and Whitefriars.
The arm connects to the River Nene and from that to the River Great Ouse and the North Sea.
There are 50 primary schools and 8 secondary schools in the town.
It was granted its first town charter by King Richard I in 1189 and its first mayor was appointed by King John in 1215.
During the Middle Ages, the town rose to national significance with the establishment of Northampton Castle, which was an occasional royal residence and regularly hosted the Parliament of England.
In 1959, the M1 motorway was opened to the south-west of the town; in 1968,  Northampton was designated a New Town.
The current All Saints' Church was built on the site of a great Norman church, All Hallows, which was almost completely destroyed by the Great Fire of Northampton in 1675.
Until well into the 19th century, the shoe industry boomed in and around the town with small manufacturing workshops set up in the surrounding areas.
A total of 1,700 men from the town were lost of the 6,000 killed from the Northamptonshire Regiment.
There are other free newspapers circulated within the town.
The prefix "North" was added later to distinguish it from other towns called Hampton, most prominently Southampton.
Since the turn of the Millennium, the town has continued to expand.
There is also a smaller Grade I listed historical museum in the former Abington Park house which mainly has history on domestic life in the town and the Northamptonshire Regiment.
Streets were widened and buildings made of brick and stone and tiled to prevent such devastation again.
According to the website of the Northampton Borough Council, there are a total of 170 parks and open spaces around Northampton, which altogether span around .
It is likely the absolute maximum in the town centre is a degree or so higher owing to the lower elevation, and absolute minimum on the eastern and western edges of the Borough around the Nene valley a couple of degrees colder due to katabatic drainage of cold air allowing a frost hollow effect.
A high of  was recorded on 19 July 2006.
In 1377, the population was 2,200.
It lies on the River Nene, about  north-west of London and  south-east of Birmingham.
Town government alternated between the Liberals and Conservatives, and the town achieved independence from Northamptonshire in 1888 when it became a county borough.
Oliver Cromwell visited in 1645 and General Fairfax marched from the town to Naseby, where Charles I's Royalist army was decisively defeated.
It had 6 electoral wards from 1898, 9 wards from 1900 and 12 wards from 1911.
Spencer Perceval was the elected MP for the constituency in 1796, and became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1809, the only Solicitor General or Attorney General to have been Prime Minister, but also the only Prime Minister to have been assassinated.
Northampton's only further education (FE) college is Northampton College, one of the largest FE colleges in the South Midlands, which has two campuses across the town, offering vocational courses, GCSEs and A Levels.
The Avenue Gallery, is at the Avenue campus of the University of Northampton.
Overstone Park School, Pitsford School and Spratton Hall School are just north of Northampton.
The Royal & Derngate theatre complex, on Guildhall Road in the Cultural Quarter of the town centre, is one of the main venues for arts and entertainment in Northampton.
6.7% failed to report any affiliation.
The Errol Flynn Filmhouse, an independent cinema joined to the side of the Royal & Derngate theatre complex, opened in June 2013.
The Silverstone Circuit, current home of the British Grand Prix, is a few miles south of Northampton.
Until 2004, Northamptonshire operated a three-tier system in education of lower, middle and upper schools.
Though Spencer Compton, Earl of Northampton, was a royalist (Cavalier) and backed King Charles I, the people of Northampton supported Parliament and Oliver Cromwell's republican Roundhead army.
The Nene Navigation Company had previously made the River Nene navigable from King's Lynn as far up as Northampton in 1762, allowing cheap transportation of coal and other goods to the town, but in 1815, the Grand Union Canal reached the town, joining the River Nene, giving the town a direct link to the Midlands coalfields and to Birmingham, Manchester and London.
Both the A45 and A43 link Northampton with the other major towns in Northamptonshire, and can be accessed by a partially completed ring road.
The market square is linked to Abington Street, a major shopping area of Northampton.
It is home to a choral foundation, with choral services sung three times a week by one of its choirs, who also record commercially and tour throughout the world.
A postern, dismantled from its original position and rebuilt into a wall by the station, and a part of the keep mound are all that remains.
Northampton also has many snooker clubs including Rileys Pool, Snooker and Poker Club, as well as ten-pin bowling alleys and late night casinos such as Aspers Casino and Gala Casino as well as a Beacon Bingo.
An estimated 600 buildings were destroyed, amounting to £150,000 lost.
In terms of religion, 56.6% of residents described themselves as Christian, 29.4% reported no religion, 4.2% Muslim, 1.6% Hindu, 0.5% Sikh, 0.5% Other, 0.4% Buddhist and 0.1% Judaism.
The East Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Trust is responsible for the provision of statutory emergency medical services in Northampton.
The ''Domesday Book'' (1086) records the town as ''Northantone'', which evolved into ''Norhamptone'' by the 13th century and later ''Northampton'' by the 17th century.
Two of the original tram shelters are preserved: one at the Racecourse park and another in Kingsthorpe opposite the Cock Hotel.
The first Battle of Northamptona battle in the second civil wartook place in 1264 at the site of Northampton Castle where King Henry III and his son Prince Edward attacked with a large army, pillaged the town and took prisoners.
A permanent military presence was established in the town with the completion of Gibraltar Barracks in 1797.
Cloth and wool were very important but these industries declined.
Popular annual events include Northampton Carnival, the Delapre Beer Festival, the Dragonboat Race, the Umbrella Fair, Diwali celebrations and St Crispins Fair.
The university is currently spread over two campuses across the town, but a new £330 million development will see the university move to one new waterside campus by the River Nene in the town centre by 2018.
The borough failed to become an unitary authority in the 1990s local government reform and again, in 2011, when the motion was voted down by the council.
NHS Northampton guides primary care services (general practitioners, dentists, opticians and pharmacists) in the town, directly provides adult social care and services in the community such as health visiting and physiotherapy and also funds hospital care and other specialist treatments.
The Northampton constituency was established in 1295, which returned two MPs to the House of Commons.
Famously, the poet John Clare liked to sit beneath the portico of the church.
It was the first club to set up a trust for supporters to work with the club as many have done.
Northampton has been used as a location for television, film and theatre.
One of the largest towns in the UK, Northampton had a population of 212,100 in the 2011 census.
Many Parliaments, including the Parliament of England, were held there.
It is open to the public.
Thomas Becket was imprisoned there until he escaped.
Demolition work began in March 2014, following the move of bus services to North Gate bus station.
The town had a long history of religious dissent from the Lollards and Puritanism gained a strong hold on the town.
Local people and businesses helped to raise around £25,000 towards the rebuilding of the town centre based around the Market Square.
Smaller theatres include the Northampton Playhouse and the Cripps Theatre, which is part of Northampton School for Boys.
This university was dissolved by King Henry III in 1265, in revenge of its students siding with the rebellious barons in the Battle of Northampton (1264).
It was originally an earth and timber stockaded construction which was later rebuilt in stone.
Radio Nene Valley operates a free service at Northampton General Hospital - http://www.radionenevalley.co.uk/
Northampton was reconstituted as a non-metropolitan district which also covered areas outside the former borough boundaries but inside the designated New Town.
Simon de Senlis is also thought to have built the medieval town walls, which enclosed about  and had four main gates.
In 1974, Princess Benedikte of Denmark opened Northampton's Carlsberg brewery, the first outside Denmark.
Despite this, the ''Domesday Book'' records ''Northantone'' as possessing 316 houses with a population of 2000 people, ranking between Warwick and Leicester in size.
Northampton General Hospital is an NHS trust hospital which founded in 1744 and moved to its present site in 1793, and has continued to provide healthcare to the local community for more than 200 years.
In 1643, Prince Rupert attacked Northampton with approximately 2,000 men, but was beaten back at the North Gate of the town.
The largest nominal fall in population was in respondents reporting as White, British, there being 8,146 fewer such residents in 2011 than 10 years previous.
Northampton's main private-sector employers are now in distribution and finance rather than manufacturing, and include Avon Products, Barclaycard, Blacks Leisure Group, Nationwide Building Society (Anglia Building Society was formed by amalgamation of Northampton Town and County Building Society with Leicestershire Building Society in 1966 and subsequently merged with the Nationwide in 1987), Panasonic, Travis Perkins, Coca Cola, Schweppes, Simply Business, National Grid, Texas Instruments and Carlsberg.
During an election campaign involving Bradlaugh, a riot broke out in the Market Square that required military to disperse the action.
The former Greyfriars bus station served the town from 1976 until 2014.
After the World Wars, Northampton's growth was limited until it was designated as a New Town in 1968, accelerating development in the town.
The original constituency was abolished for the February 1974 general election and replaced by the new constituencies of Northampton North and Northampton South, which elect one MP each.
In the Roman period, a small rural settlement is thought to have existed in the present-day district of Duston; remains of Roman pottery were found there.
At the 2011 census, there were 91,484 dwellings, 88,731 of which are occupied households.
The dissolution of the monasteries in 1538 led to further destruction of what remained of the medieval town.
The original top of the monument has been knocked off and replaced several times from as early as 1460.
In the 2000s, it was featured on Channel 4's ''Demolition'' programme as the ugliest transport station in the United Kingdom and worthy of demolition.
Virgin Trains also provide two daily services to London.
Northampton continued to grow following the creation of the Grand Union Canal and the arrival of the railways in the 19th century, becoming an industrial centre for footwear and leather manufacture.
Other art galleries include Collective Collaborations, Artist's Sanctuary, Albus3, Gallery 177 and Primose Gallery.
Home tenure was reported as 37.5% of 88,731 households mortgaged, 25.1% owned outright, 16.5% privately rented, 12.8% rented from council, 4.3% social rented, 1.3% private (other) rented, 1.3% shared ownership and 1.2% rent free.
Parts of the 2005 film ''Kinky Boots'' were also made in Northampton and featured shots of the statue outside the Grosvenor Centre in the town centre and inside RE Tricker's shoe factory in St. Michaels Road representing the original factory in Earls Barton.
Northampton applied for city status in 2000 and again in 2002, but failed on both occasions and remains a town.
Northampton is near junctions 15, 15a and 16 of the M1 motorway which connects Northampton with London at its most southern point and Leeds at its most northern.
The university is made of up six schools: Business, Education, Health, Science and Technology, Social Sciences and The Arts.
Between 2001 and 2011, the greatest nominal population increase was in the White, Other group from 3,780 to 13,825 – an increase of 10,045 – likely due to migration from Eastern Europe.
St Andrew's Hospital, its flagship hospital and the United Kingdom's largest psychiatric hospital, is based in Northampton.
There are also many local entertainment venues which provide events.
The corporation of the town, having already refused to provide troops to the King in 1632 or to pay the notorious ship money tax in 1636, petitioned Parliament in 1642 against papists and bishops.
Rainfall, at around  per year is not high, though is often unpredictable, giving rise to flooding events such as 1998, but also short term droughts.
Northamptonshire County Cricket Club, known in limited overs cricket as "The Steelbacks" (a reference to the Northamptonshire Regiment which was formed in 1881), is one of the  18 major county clubs which make up the English and Welsh domestic cricket structure.
The First Barons' War caused significant destruction to Northampton.
