''Juche'' was pronounced in December 1955 in order to emphasize a Korea-centered revolution.
In 2012, Gross national income per capita was $1,523, compared to $28,430 in South Korea.
As they neared the border with China, Chinese forces intervened on behalf of North Korea, shifting the balance of the war again.
North Korea continues to have strong ties with its socialist southeast Asian allies in Vietnam and Laos, as well as with Cambodia.
According to a 2004 South Korean assessment, North Korea possesses a stockpile of chemical weapons estimated to amount to 2,500–5,000 tons, including nerve, blister, blood, and vomiting agents, as well as the ability to cultivate and produce biological weapons including anthrax, smallpox, and cholera.
There was a significant Chinese presence in northern parts of the Korean Peninsula during the next century, and the Lelang Commandery persisted for about 400 years until it was conquered by Goguryeo.
In response, Kim Il-sung began severing ties with China and reemphasizing national and economic self-reliance enshrined in his ''Juche'' Idea, which promoted producing everything within the country.
After the division of the country, the two sides used different terms to refer to Korea: ''Chosun'' or ''Joseon'' (조선) in North Korea, and Hanguk (한국) in South Korea.
Road transport is very limited — only 724 kilometers of the 25,554 kilometer road network are paved, and maintenance on most roads is poor.
The national football team, ''Chollima'', competed in the FIFA World Cup in 2010, when it lost all three matches against Brazil, Portugal and Ivory Coast.
Recovery from the war was quick — by 1957 industrial production reached 1949 levels.
At the same time, North Korea sought to build relations with developed free market countries.
Like Silla, Goryeo was a highly cultural state and created the Jikji in 1377, using the world's oldest movable metal type printing press.
Outside inter-Korean trade, more than 89% of external trade is conducted with China.
North Korea possesses nuclear weapons, but its arsenal remains limited.
Weightlifter Kim Un-guk broke the world record of the Men's 62 kg category at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.
Landlords and Japanese collaborators fled to the South, where there was no land reform and sporadic unrest.
In 1897, the Joseon dynasty changed the official name of the country from ''Joseon'' to ''Daehan Jeguk'' (Korean Empire).
Late marriages after military service, limited housing space and long hours of work or political studies further exhaust the population and reduce growth.
During the 1956 August Faction Incident, Kim Il-sung successfully resisted efforts by the Soviet Union and China to depose him in favor of Soviet Koreans or the pro-Chinese Yan'an faction.
The diplomatic problems culminated in 1976 with the death of Mao Zedong.
In the wider world, because the government controlled the northern part of the Korean Peninsula, it is commonly called North Korea to distinguish it from South Korea, which is officially called the ''Republic of Korea''.
The latter years of the Joseon dynasty were marked by isolation from the outside world.
Computers employ the Red Star OS, an operating system derived from Linux, with a user shell visually similar to that of OS X.
The KPA has 1,106,000 active and 8,389,000 reserve and paramilitary troops, making it the largest military institution in the world.
The first 200 years of the Joseon dynasty were marked by relative peace and saw the creation of Hangul by King Sejong the Great in the 15th century and the rise in influence of Confucianism in the country.
Stories like Kim Jong-un undergoing surgery to look like his grandfather, executing his ex-girlfriend or feeding his uncle to a pack of hungry dogs have been circulated by foreign media as truth despite the lack of a credible source.
Instead, it is closer to worldwide averages, with non-communicable diseases—such as cardiovascular disease and cancers—accounting for two-thirds of the total deaths.
It possesses nuclear weapons.
It is a IAAF Bronze Label Race where amateur runners from around the world can participate.
The famine had a significant impact on the population growth rate, which declined to 0.9% annually in 2002 and 0.53% in 2014.
In the late 1980s and the 1990s its foreign policy was thrown into turmoil with the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
People perceived as hostile to the government, such as Christians or critics of the leadership, are deported to labor camps without trial, often with their whole family and mostly without any chance of being released.
On 7 February 2016, North Korea successfully launched a long-range rocket, supposedly to place a satellite into orbit.
Other prominent ranges are the Hamgyong Range in the extreme northeast and the Rangrim Mountains, which are located in the north-central part of North Korea.
The international environment changed with the election of U.S. president George W. Bush in 2001.
The peninsula was united by King Taejo of Goryeo in 936.
In 1971, secret, high-level contacts began to be conducted culminating in the 1972 July 4th North-South Joint Statement that established principles of working toward peaceful reunification.
A significant contribution to the food supply comes from commercial fishing and aquaculture.
It employs around 1,000 artists in what is likely the biggest art factory in the world where paintings, murals, posters and monuments are designed and produced.
Propaganda efforts began for the "Young General", Kim Jong-un, who succeeded him as paramount leader of North Korea on Kim Jong-il's death in December 2011.
The three major causes of death in DPR Korea are ischaemic heart disease (13%), lower respiratory infections (11%) and cerebrovascular disease (7%).
Its core tenets are economic self-sufficiency, military self-reliance and an independent foreign policy.
The International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea (ICNK) estimates that over 10,000 people die in North Korean prison camps every year.
The MPS, State Security and the police allegedly conduct real-time monitoring of text messages, online data transfer, monitor phone calls and automatically transcribe recorded conversations.
Many of the claims originate from the South Korean right-wing newspaper ''The Chosun Ilbo''.
The study of natural sciences is greatly emphasized while social sciences are neglected.
60% of the population had access to improved sanitation facilities in 2000.
Iron ore and coal production are among the few sectors where North Korea performs significantly better than its southern neighbor&nbsp;– it produces about 10 times larger amounts of each resource.
Pop music appeared in the 1980s with the Pochonbo Electronic Ensemble and Wangjaesan Light Music Band.
North Koreans have been referred to as "some of the world's most brutalized people" by Human Rights Watch, because of the severe restrictions placed on their political and economic freedoms.
The military of North Korea invaded the South on 25 June 1950, and swiftly overran most of the country.
Mount Kumgang in the Taebaek Range, which extends into South Korea, is famous for its scenic beauty.
The Premier represents the government and functions independently.
North Korea experiences a combination of continental climate and an oceanic climate, but most of the country experiences a humid continental climate within the Köppen climate classification scheme.
A 2013 study reported that communicable diseases and malnutrition are responsible for 29% of the total deaths in North Korea.
While some analysts believe private commerce recently changed the Songbun system to some extent, most North Korean refugees say it remains a commanding presence in everyday life.
North Korea has maintained one of the most closed and centralized economies in the world since the 1940s.
In a report to the UN, North Korea dismissed accusations of atrocities as "wild rumors".
The economy is heavily nationalized.
A United Nations force, led by the United States, intervened to defend the South, and rapidly advanced into North Korea.
The main deficiencies of higher education are the heavy presence of ideological subjects, which comprise 50% of courses in social studies and 20% in sciences, and the imbalances in curriculum.
His birthday is one of the most important public holidays in the country.
The longest river is the Amnok (Yalu) River which flows for .
There are no known official statistics of religions in North Korea.
In September 1946, South Korean citizens had risen up against the Allied Military Government.
Kim Jong-il was often the center of attention throughout ordinary life.
The ''Miraewon'' network of electronic libraries was established in 2014 under similar slogans.
North Korean painting combines the influence of Soviet and Japanese visual expression to instill a sentimental loyalty to the system.
It is the country with the highest number of military and paramilitary personnel, with a total of 9,495,000 active, reserve, and paramilitary personnel.
In 1948, North Korea adopted ''Democratic People's Republic of Korea'' (/) as its new legal name.
Government policies towards film are no different than those applied to other arts — motion pictures serve to fulfill the targets of "social education".
Around 200,000 girls and women, many from Korea, were forced to engage in sexual services for the Japanese military, with the euphemism "comfort women".
On October 9, 2006, North Korea announced it had conducted its first nuclear weapons test.
It is one of the most powerful state institutions in North Korea and oversees the national police force, investigates criminal cases and manages non-political correctional facilities.
On 4 October 2007, South Korean president Roh Moo-hyun and Kim Jong-il signed an eight-point peace agreement.
Since the outbreak of the famine, the government has reluctantly tolerated illegal black markets while officially maintaining a state socialist economy.
The Workers' Party of Korea Publishing House is the most authoritative among them and publishes all works of Kim Il-sung, ideological education materials and party policy documents.
Later the Han dynasty defeated the Wiman Joseon and set up Four Commanderies of Han in 108 BC.
Such reports are contested by North Korea researcher B. R. Myers: "Divine powers have never been attributed to either of the two Kims.
The origins of the Korean state began with Korean pottery dating back to 8000 BC, with three kingdoms flourishing in the 1st century BC.
An invasion initiated by North Korea led to the Korean War (1950–53).
Western classical music by Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Stravinsky and other composers is performed both by the State Symphony Orchestra and student orchestras.
In 2014, Russia wrote off 90% of North Korea's debt and the two countries agreed to conduct all transactions in rubles.
North Korea sought to become a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, and emphasized the ideology of ''Juche'' to distinguish it from both the Soviet Union and China.
Occasional deliberate disinformation on the part of North Korean establishments further complicates the issue.
Unified Silla weakened under internal strife, and surrendered to Goryeo in 935.
Some of the most influential films are based on historic events (''An Jung-geun shoots Itō Hirobumi'') or folk tales (''Hong Gildong'').
A statement broadcast on Korean Central Television said that a new Earth observation satellite, Kwangmyongsong-4, had successfully been put into orbit less than 10 minutes after lift-off from the Sohae space centre in North Phyongan province.
Japan tried to suppress Korean traditions and culture and ran the economy primarily for its own benefit.
Command of the Korean People's Army lies in both the Central Military Commission of the Workers' Party of Korea and the independent National Defense Commission.
Major industries include machine building, military equipment, chemicals, mining, metallurgy, textiles, food processing and tourism.
As a result of its isolation, it is sometimes known as the "hermit kingdom", a term that was originally referred to the isolationism in the latter part of the Joseon Dynasty.
North Koreans have an almost obsessive sports mentality and most schools have daily practice in association football, basketball, table tennis, gymnastics, boxing and others.
Rungrado 1st of May Stadium, the largest stadium in the world with its capacity of 150,000, hosts the Festival.
As a result of the North Korean nuclear weapons program, the six-party talks were established to find a peaceful solution to the growing tension between the two Korean governments, Russia, China, Japan, and the United States.
His youngest son Kim Jong-un was announced as his successor.
Inter-Korean relations are at the core of North Korean diplomacy and have seen numerous shifts in the last few decades.
Cardiovascular disease as a single disease group is the largest cause of death in North Korea (2013).
The North Korean government claims all citizens are equal and denies any discrimination on the basis of family background.
According to Kim Il-sung, speaking in 1958, the loyal "core class" constituted 25% of the North Korean population, the "wavering class" 55%, and the "hostile class" 20%.
These efforts are under much international dispute due to their military applications and concerns about safety.
He further explains that the state propaganda painted Kim Jong-il as someone whose expertise lay in military matters and that the famine of the 1990s was partially caused by natural disasters out of Kim Jong-il's control.
Shtykov served as the first Soviet ambassador, while Kim Il-sung became premier.
A second round of reforms in 2002 led to an expansion of market activities, partial monetization, flexible prices and salaries, and the introduction of incentives and accountability techniques.
Instead of depicting his actual residence in a Soviet village during the war with the Japanese, he was claimed to have fought a guerilla war from a secret base.
Songbun allegedly affects access to educational and employment opportunities and particularly whether a person is eligible to join North Korea's ruling party.
Four state-sanctioned churches exist, but freedom of religion advocates claim these are showcases for foreigners.
Defectors have been quoted as saying that North Korean schools deify both father and son.
About 20 percent of men aged 17–54 serve in the regular armed forces, and approximately one in every 25 citizens is an enlisted soldier.
During its height, Balhae controlled most of Manchuria and parts of Russian Far East.
Infectious diseases like tuberculosis, malaria, and hepatitis B are considered to be endemic to the country as a result of the famine.
To its west are the Yellow Sea and Korea Bay, and to its east lies Japan across the Sea of Japan (East Sea of Korea).
Non-communicable diseases risk factors in North Korea include high rates of urbanisation, an aging society, high rates of smoking and alcohol consumption amongst men.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established in the North on 9 September 1948.
Cellular coverage is available with a 3G network operated by Koryolink, a joint venture with Orascom Telecom Holding.
The SPA itself cannot initiate any legislation independently of party or state organs.
They are equipped with 3,700 tanks, 2,100 armoured personnel carriers and infantry fighting vehicles, 17,900 artillery pieces, 11,000 anti-aircraft guns and some 10,000 MANPADS and anti-tank guided missiles.
The government insists the space program is for peaceful purposes, but the United States, Japan, South Korea and other countries maintain that it serves to advance military ballistic missile programs.
Various outlets have called it Stalinist, particularly noting the elaborate cult of personality around Kim Il-sung and his family.
North Korea's energy infrastructure is obsolete and in disrepair.
According to WHO, expenditure on health per capita is one of the lowest in the world.
The DPRK officially describes itself as a self-reliant socialist state and formally holds elections.
Kim Il-sung rejected the notion that he had created a cult around himself, and accused those who suggested this of "factionalism".
Soviet general Terentii Shtykov recommended the establishment of the Soviet Civil Authority in October 1945, and supported Kim Il-sung as chairman of the Provisional People's Committee for North Korea, established in February 1946.
In the early centuries of the Common Era, Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, and the Samhan confederacy occupied the peninsula and southern Manchuria.
During World War II, Koreans at home were forced to support the Japanese war effort.
Russia is the second-largest foreign partner with $100 million worth of imports and exports for the same year.
Over time North Korea has gradually distanced itself from the world communist movement.
North Korea is an atheist state where public religion is discouraged.
Ambassador Shtykov suspected Rhee was planning to invade the North, and was sympathetic to Kim's goal of Korean unification under socialism.
Korea was annexed by the Empire of Japan in 1910 until the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II in 1945, when Korea was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel by the United States and the Soviet Union, with the north occupied by the Soviets and the south by the Americans.
The defense industry is capable of producing a full range of individual and crew-served weapons, artillery, armored vehicles, tanks, missiles, helicopters, surface combatants, submarines, landing and infiltration craft, Yak-18 trainers and possibly co-production of jet aircraft.
Power shortages are chronic and would not be alleviated even by electricity imports because the poorly maintained grid causes significant losses during transmission.
North Korea connects with the Trans-Siberian Railway through Rajin.
Western productions are only available at private showings to high-ranking Party members, although the 1997 ''Titanic'' is frequently shown to university students as an example of Western culture.
Kim Jong-il's personality cult, although significant, was not as extensive as his father's.
Quality of medical care varies significantly by region and is often low, with severe shortages of equipment, drugs and anaesthetics.
Preventive medicine is emphasized through physical exercise and sports, nationwide monthly checkups and routine spraying of public places against disease.
Based on satellite images and defector testimonies, Amnesty International estimates that around 200,000 prisoners are held in six large political prison camps, where they are forced to work in conditions approaching slavery.
While North Korea is classified as a low-income country, the structure of North Korea's causes of death (2013) is unlike that of other low-income countries.
Russian energy company Gazprom has a project for a $2.5 billion gas pipeline to South Korea through Pyongyang, which is expected to generate an annual revenue of $100 million from transit fees.
Between 1592 and 1598, Japan invaded Korea.
Kim Il-sung, who died in 1994, is the country's "Eternal President", while Kim Jong-il was announced "Eternal General Secretary" after his death in 2011.
The shortage of skilled labor, energy, arable land and transportation significantly impeded long-term growth and resulted in consistent failure to meet planning objectives.
Amnesty International reports of severe restrictions on the freedom of association, expression and movement, arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment resulting in death, and executions.
These include ''The Fate of a Self-Defense Corps Man'', ''The Song of Korea'' and ''Immortal History'', a series of historical novels depicting the suffering of Koreans under Japanese occupation.
Instead, North Korea has a walled garden intranet system called Kwangmyong, which is maintained and monitored by the Korea Computer Center.
Written language uses the chosŏn'gul phonetic alphabet, developed under Sejong the Great (1418–1450).
Today, the all-girl Moranbong Band is the most popular group in the country.
Following the death of Kim Il-sung, North Koreans were prostrating and weeping to a bronze statue of him in an organized event; similar scenes were broadcast by state television following the death of Kim Jong-il.
Other dishes served there include gray mullet soup with boiled rice, beef rib soup, green bean pancake, ''sinsollo'' and dishes made from terrapin.
During the 19th century, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the name the "Hermit kingdom".
North Korean institutes are strong in these fields of research, although their engineers require additional training and laboratories need equipment upgrades.
The term ''Koryŏ''  became used to refer to Goguryeo, which renamed itself ''Koryŏ'' in the 5th century.
After the Mongol Empire collapsed, severe political strife followed and the Goryeo dynasty was replaced by the Joseon dynasty in 1392, following a rebellion by General Yi Seong-gye.
North Korea aims to increase the number of foreign visitors from 200,000 to one million by 2016 through projects like the Masikryong Ski Resort.
Studying of Russian and English language was made compulsory in upper middle schools in 1978.
It deployed additional ballistic missiles and placed its military on full combat alert after South Korea, Japan and the United States threatened to intercept a Unha-2 space launch vehicle.
Some of them took part in allied action in China and parts of South East Asia.
The name ''Korea'' derives from Goryeo, itself referring to the ancient kingdom of Goguryeo, the first Korean dynasty visited by Persian merchants who referred to Koryŏ (Goryeo; ) as Korea.
All 12 newspapers and 20 periodicals, including ''Rodong Sinmun'', are published in the capital.
Tourism has been a growing sector for the past decade.
Heuristics is actively applied to develop the independence and creativity of students throughout the system.
It fell to the Khitan in 926.
Flooding in the mid-1990s exacerbated the economic crisis, severely damaging crops and infrastructure and led to widespread famine which the government proved incapable of curtailing.
After Goryeo fell in 1392, ''Joseon'' or ''Chosun'' became the official name for the entire territory, and it was not universally accepted.
North Korea occupies the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula, lying between latitudes 37° and 43°N, and longitudes 124° and 131°E.
The Pyongyang Marathon is another notable sports event.
In the 1960s and 1970s, it pursued an independent foreign policy, established relations with many developing countries, and joined the Non-Aligned Movement.
Relations remained cool well until the early 1990s, with a brief period in the early 1980s when North Korea provided flood relief to its southern neighbor and the two countries organized a reunion of 92 separated families.
Winters bring clear weather interspersed with snow storms as a result of northern and northwestern winds that blow from Siberia.
To compensate for these deficiencies, the KPA has deployed a wide range of asymmetric warfare technologies like anti-personnel blinding lasers, GPS jammers, midget submarines and human torpedoes, stealth paint, electromagnetic pulse bombs, and cyberwarfare units.
Sci-fi works glorify technology and promote the Juche concept of anthropocentric existence through depictions of robotics, space exploration and immortality.
Supporters of the government who deviate from the government line are subject to reeducation in sections of labor camps set aside for that purpose.
It joined the Outer Space Treaty in 2009 and has stated its intentions to undertake manned and Moon missions.
They are given limited funding by the government to promote the religion, because Buddhism played an integral role in traditional Korean culture.
Its 1966 appearance was much more successful, seeing a surprise 1–0 victory over Italy and a quarter final loss to Portugal by 3–5.
The Gija Joseon was founded in 12th century BC.
Usage of communication technology is controlled by the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications.
On September 19, 2016, a TLDR project noticed the North Korean internet DNS data and Top Level Domain was left open which allowed global DNS zone transfers.
Chondoism ("Heavenly Way") is an indigenous syncretic belief combining elements of Korean shamanism, Buddhism, Taoism and Catholicism that is officially represented by the WPK-controlled Chongu Party.
A national team represents the nation in international basketball competitions as well.
His administration rejected South Korea's Sunshine Policy and the Agreed Framework.
People's courts are at the lowest level of the system and operate in cities, counties and urban districts, while different kinds of special courts handle cases related to military, railroad or maritime matters.
The Mongol invasions in the 13th century greatly weakened Goryeo.
North Korea has some 5,200 kilometres of railways mostly in standard gauge which carry 80% of annual passenger traffic and 86% of freight, but electricity shortages undermine their efficiency.
Significant resources have been allocated to the national space program, which is managed by the National Aerospace Development Administration (formerly managed by the Korean Committee of Space Technology until April 2013) Domestically produced launch vehicles and the Kwangmyŏngsŏng satellite class are launched from two spaceports, the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and the Sohae Satellite Launching Station.
North Korea's most famous restaurant, Okryugwan, located in Pyongyang, is known for its ''raengmyeon'' cold noodles.
The culmination of the Sunshine Policy was the 2000 Inter-Korean Summit, when Kim Dae-jung visited Kim Jong-il in Pyongyang.
The major slowdown of the economy contrasted with South Korea, which surpassed the North in terms of absolute Gross Domestic Product and per capita income by the 1980s.
The Ministry of People's Armed Forces is subordinated to the latter.
It came under attack during the Japanese rule from 1910 to 1945, when Japan enforced a cultural assimilation policy.
The name ''Korea'' is derived from the Kingdom of Goguryeo, also spelled as ''Koryŏ'', which was one of East Asia's greatest empires.
Coal accounts for 70% of primary energy production, followed by hydroelectric power with 17%.
The roots of ''Juche'' were made up of a complex mixture of factors, including the cult of personality centered on Kim Il-sung, the conflict with pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese dissenters, and Korea's centuries-long struggle for independence.
Some foreign observers have described North Korea's political system as an absolute monarchy or a "hereditary dictatorship".
The coastal plains are wide in the west and discontinuous in the east.
An additional 300 universities and colleges offer higher education.
The unicameral Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) is the highest organ of state authority and holds the legislative power.
