More than  from the coast, the western, mountainous part of the state has a subtropical highland climate.
In the Battle of Cowan's Ford, Cornwallis met resistance along the banks of the Catawba River at Cowan's Ford on February 1, 1781, in an attempt to engage General Morgan's forces during a tactical withdrawal.
Popular pickle brand Mount Olive Pickle Company was founded in Mount Olive in 1926.
Service industries, including education, health care, private research, and retail trade, are also important.
North Carolina has a variety of shopping choices.
Also, see the North Carolina Music Hall of Fame.
The first Confederate soldier to be killed in the Civil War was Private Henry Wyatt from North Carolina, in the Battle of Big Bethel in June 1861.
There are also a substantial number of Quakers in Guilford County and northeastern North Carolina.
The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) is headquartered in Greensboro, and both the ACC Football Championship Game (Charlotte) and the ACC Men's Basketball Tournament (Greensboro) were most recently held in North Carolina.
In 1710, owing to disputes over governance, the Carolina colony began to split into North Carolina and South Carolina.
In 1584, Elizabeth I granted a charter to Sir Walter Raleigh, for whom the state capital is named, for land in present-day North Carolina (then part of the territory of Virginia).
* Davidson College (Presbyterian)
The eastern half of the state, especially the Tidewater region, developed a slave society based on a plantation system and slave labor.
Despite its name, the hot sauce Texas Pete was created in North Carolina; its headquarters are also in Winston-Salem.
The third was the Roman Catholic Church, with 428,000 members in 190 congregations.
A truck farm is a small farm where fruits and vegetables are grown to be sold at local markets.
Started in 1973, the chain was founded in Fayetteville, with headquarters located in Raleigh.
The state also has several major seminaries, including the Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary in Wake Forest, and the Hood Theological Seminary (AME Zion) in Salisbury.
As in the rest of the former Confederacy, North Carolina had become a one-party state, dominated by the Democratic Party.
The latter became a crown colony in 1729.
North Carolina has rich traditions in art, music, and cuisine.
* Warren Wilson College (Historically Presbyterian)
On October 25, 1836, construction began on the Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad to connect the port city of Wilmington with the state capital of Raleigh.
Eastern North Carolina pork barbecue uses a vinegar-and-red-pepper-based sauce and the "whole hog" is cooked, thus integrating both white and dark meat.
North Carolina is home to three major league sports franchises: the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League and the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association are based in Charlotte, while the Raleigh-based Carolina Hurricanes play in the National Hockey League.
The nonprofit arts and culture industry generates $1.2 billion in direct economic activity in North Carolina, supporting more than 43,600 full-time equivalent jobs and generating $119 million in revenue for local governments and the state of North Carolina.
In the early years the line between indentured servants and African slaves or laborers was fluid.
Additionally, the state has hosted the NCAA Men's Basketball Final Four on two occasions, in Greensboro in 1974 and in Charlotte in 1994.
In the 2014 mid-term elections, Republican David Rouzer won the state's Seventh Congressional District seat, increasing the congressional delegation party split to 10-3 in favor of the GOP.
Southern slave codes criminalized willful killing of a slave in most cases.
Charlotte also hosts the NASCAR Hall of Fame, while Concord is the home of several top-flight racing teams, including Hendrick Motorsports, Roush Fenway Racing, Richard Petty Motorsports, Stewart-Haas Racing, and Chip Ganassi Racing.
After World War II, the state's economy grew rapidly, highlighted by the growth of such cities as Charlotte, Raleigh, and Durham in the Piedmont.
Records of Hernando de Soto attested to his meeting with them in 1540.
In 1567 Captain Juan Pardo led an expedition to claim the area for the Spanish colony and to establish another route to protect silver mines in Mexico.
Except for the Earl Granville holdings, it became a royal colony seventeen years later.
At Appomattox Court House in Virginia in April 1865, the 75th North Carolina Regiment, a cavalry unit, fired the last shots of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia in the Civil War.
Officially established in 1792 as both county seat and state capital, the city was named after Sir Walter Raleigh, sponsor of Roanoke, the "lost colony" on Roanoke Island.
The economy's growth and prosperity was based on slave labor, devoted first to the production of tobacco.
* Queens University of Charlotte (Presbyterian)
One of the more famous arts communities in the state is Seagrove, the handmade-pottery capital of the U.S., where artisans create handcrafted pottery inspired by the same traditions that began in this community more than 200 years ago.
In addition, 30,463 free people of color lived in the state.
* Gardner-Webb University (Cooperative Baptist Fellowship)
In 2012, the state elected a Republican Governor (Pat McCrory) and Lieutenant Governor (Dan Forest) for the first time in more than two decades, while also giving the Republicans veto-proof majorities in both the State House of Representatives and the State Senate.
North Carolina is also home to Charlotte Hounds of the Major League Lacrosse.
North Carolina became one of the English Thirteen Colonies and with the territory of South Carolina was originally known as the Province of Carolina.
In November, after appealing to the governor of North Carolina, who promised safe-haven and a pardon, Blackbeard was killed in an ambush by troops from Virginia.
The '''economy of North Carolina''' covers 15 metropolitan areas.
In the early 2000s, Republican George W. Bush easily won the state by over 12 points, but by 2008, demographic shifts, population growth, and increased liberalization in heavily populated areas such as the Research Triangle, Charlotte, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Fayetteville, and Asheville, propelled Barack Obama to victory in North Carolina, the first Democrat to win the state since 1976.
This was a smaller proportion than in many Southern states.
College sports are also popular in North Carolina, with 18 schools competing at the Division I level.
* Louisburg College (United Methodist Church)
The five basins west of the Blue Ridge Mountains flow to the Gulf of Mexico, while the remainder flow to the Atlantic Ocean.
Asheville boasts the largest breweries per capita of any city in the United States.
* Campbell University (Baptist)
Throughout the Revolutionary War, fierce guerrilla warfare erupted between bands of pro-independence and pro-British colonists.
National Forests include Uwharrie National Forest in central North Carolina, Croatan National Forest in Eastern North Carolina, Pisgah National Forest in the northern mountains, and Nantahala National Forest in the southwestern part of the state.
Both North and South Carolina are hotbeds for traditional rural blues, especially the style known as the Piedmont blues.
North Carolina Schools were segregated until the Brown v. Board of Education trial and the release of the Pearsall Plan.
During the Civil War, the Wilmington-to-Raleigh stretch of the railroad would be vital to the Confederate war effort; supplies shipped into Wilmington would be moved by rail through Raleigh to the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia.
The state has a wide range of elevations, from sea level on the coast to  at Mount Mitchell, the highest point in North America east of the Mississippi River.
The Wells Fargo Championship is a regular stop on the PGA Tour and is held at Quail Hollow Club in Charlotte, while the Wyndham Championship is played annually in Greensboro.
In mid-century, the state's rural and commercial areas were connected by the construction of a 129-mile (208&nbsp;km) wooden plank road, known as a "farmer's railroad", from Fayetteville in the east to Bethania (northwest of Winston-Salem).
Small, isolated, and deeply eroded mountain ranges and peaks are located in the Piedmont, including the Sauratown Mountains, Pilot Mountain, the Uwharrie Mountains, Crowder's Mountain, King's Pinnacle, the Brushy Mountains, and the South Mountains.
As the British Army moved north from victories in Charleston and Camden, South Carolina, the Southern Division of the Continental Army and local militia prepared to meet them.
* Pfeiffer University (Methodist)
Black citizens had no political voice in the state until after the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 were passed to enforce their constitutional rights.
North Carolina has a growing passenger rail system with Amtrak serving most major cities.
The colonists generally supported the American Revolution, as the number of Loyalists was smaller than in some other colonies.
MerleFest in Wilkesboro attracts more than 80,000 people to its four-day music festival; and Wet 'n Wild Emerald Pointe water park in Greensboro is another attraction.
The fourth greatest was the Presbyterian Church (USA), with 186,000 members and 710 congregations; this denomination was brought by Scots-Irish immigrants who settled the backcountry in the colonial era.
The common trend across Western North Carolina is the use of premium grade Boston butt.
A county may have one or more systems within it.
By 1810, nearly 3 percent of the free population consisted of free people of color, who numbered slightly more than 10,000.
North Carolina offers fall colors, freshwater and saltwater fishing, hunting, birdwatching, agritourism, ATV trails, ballooning, rock climbing, biking, hiking, skiing, boating and sailing, camping, canoeing, caving (spelunking), gardens, and arboretums.
In the 500–700 years preceding European contact, the Mississippian culture built large, complex cities and maintained far-flung regional trading networks.
In 1795, North Carolina opened the first public university in the United States—the University of North Carolina (now named the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill).
The regions historic sites are connected by the Historic Albemarle Tour.
During this time, important buildings were constructed as pyramidal, flat-topped buildings.
Some of the yeoman farmers in the state's mountains and western Piedmont region remained neutral during the Civil War, while some covertly supported the Union cause during the conflict.
The state constitution delineates the structure and function of the state government.
The climate of the coastal plains is strongly influenced by the Atlantic Ocean.
Western North Carolina pork barbecue uses a tomato-based sauce, and only the pork shoulder (dark meat) is used.
Tourism has also been a boon for the North Carolina economy as people flock to the Outer Banks coastal area and the Appalachian Mountains anchored by Asheville.
In 2011 the civilian labor force was at around 4.5&nbsp;million with employment near 4.1&nbsp;million.
In the three most recent USDA surveys (2002, 2007, 2012), North Carolina also ranked second in Christmas tree production.
After Nat Turner's slave uprising in 1831, North Carolina and other southern states reduced the rights of free blacks.
In the 1990s, Charlotte became a major regional and national banking center.
The English, Welsh, Scots-Irish, and German settlers of western North Carolina tended to favor American independence from Britain.
EDM producer Porter Robinson hails from Chapel Hill.
In 1840, it completed the state capitol building in Raleigh, still standing today.
Its largest city was Cahokia, located in present-day Illinois near the Mississippi River.
The Hurricanes are the only major professional team from North Carolina to have won a league championship, having captured the Stanley Cup in 2006.
Railroads were built to connect the new industrializing cities.
North Carolina residents, like those of other Southern states, since the colonial era have historically been overwhelmingly Protestant, first Anglican, then Baptist and Methodist.
The title of "last to join the Confederacy" has been disputed; although Tennessee's informal secession on May 7, 1861, preceded North Carolina's official secession on May 20, the Tennessee legislature did not formally vote to secede until June 8, 1861.
North Carolina's port city of Wilmington was the last Confederate port to fall to the Union, in February 1865, after the Union won the nearby Second Battle of Fort Fisher, its major defense downriver.
North Carolina made the smallest per-capita contribution to the war of any state, as only 7,800 men joined the Continental Army under General George Washington; an additional 10,000 served in local militia units under such leaders as General Nathanael Greene.
The American victory at Kings Mountain gave the advantage to colonists who favored American independence, and it prevented the British Army from recruiting new soldiers from the Tories.
Most of North Carolina's slave owners and large plantations were located in the eastern portion of the state.
The United States abolished slavery without compensation to slaveholders or reparations to freedmen.
Many farmers grew some tobacco, and the invention of the cigarette made the product especially popular.
See the following article summary: science, technology, energy and math, or STEM, industries in the area surrounding North Carolina's capital have grown 17.9 percent since 2001, placing Raleigh-Cary at No.
After the Revolution, Quakers and Mennonites worked to persuade slaveholders to free their slaves.
However, Republican Mitt Romney ultimately eked out a 2-point win in North Carolina, the only 2012 swing state that Obama lost, and one of only two states (along with Indiana) to flip from Obama in 2008 to the GOP in 2012.
College basketball in particular is very popular, buoyed by the Tobacco Road rivalries between Duke, North Carolina, North Carolina State, and Wake Forest.
The Piedmont ranges from about  in elevation in the east to about  in the west.
Cook Out, a popular fast-food chain featuring burgers, hot dogs, and milkshakes in a wide variety of flavors, was founded in Greensboro in 1989 and has begun expanding outside of North Carolina.
In 1788 Raleigh was chosen as the site of the new capital, as its central location protected it from coastal attacks.
Also stationed in North Carolina is the Military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point in Southport.
Because the mothers were free, their children were born free.
Towns and cities remained few in the east.
Free African Americans were allowed to vote until 1835, when the state revoked their suffrage in restrictions following the slave rebellion of 1831 led by Nat Turner.
As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in Great Britain, planters imported more slaves, and the state's legal delineations between free and slave status tightened, effectively hardening the latter into a racial caste.
A 16th-century journal by Pardo's scribe Bandera and archaeological findings since 1986 at Joara have confirmed the settlement.
By the 1970s, spurred in part by the increasingly leftward tilt of national Democrats, conservative whites began to vote for Republican national candidates and gradually for more Republicans locally.
Charlotte is also home to North Carolina's only light rail system known as the Lynx.
National Park Service units include the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, the Blue Ridge Parkway, Cape Hatteras National Seashore, Cape Lookout National Seashore, Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site at Flat Rock, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site at Manteo, Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Guilford Courthouse National Military Park in Greensboro, Moores Creek National Battlefield near Currie in Pender County, the Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail, Old Salem National Historic Site in Winston-Salem, the Trail of Tears National Historic Trail, and Wright Brothers National Memorial in Kill Devil Hills.
The working population is employed across the major employment sectors.
In 2016, the US Census Bureau released 2015 population estimate counts for North Carolina's cities with populations above 70,000.
They were also concentrated in the eastern coastal plain, especially at port cities such as Wilmington and New Bern, where a variety of jobs were available.
On April 12, 1776, the colony became the first to instruct its delegates to the Continental Congress to vote for independence from the British Crown, through the Halifax Resolves passed by the North Carolina Provincial Congress.
North Carolina is the home of more ''American Idol'' finalists than any other state: Clay Aiken (season two), Fantasia Barrino (season three), Kellie Pickler (season five), Bucky Covington (season five), Chris Daughtry (season five), Anoop Desai (season eight), Scotty McCreery (season ten), and Caleb Johnson (season thirteen).
During the same period, the English monarch Charles II gave the province to the Lords Proprietors, a group of noblemen who had helped restore Charles to the throne in 1660.
In 1996 Intersal, Inc., a private firm, discovered the remains of a vessel likely to be the ''Queen Anne's Revenge'', which was added to the US National Register of Historic Places.
Nathaniel Batts was documented as one of the first of these Virginian migrants.
In 2010, North Carolina was chosen as the third-best state for business by Forbes Magazine, and the second-best state by Chief Executive Officer Magazine.
Over the last decade, North Carolina has become a cultural epicenter and haven for internationally prize-winning wine (Noni Bacca Winery), internationally prized cheeses (Ashe County), "L'institut International aux Arts Gastronomiques: Conquerront Les Yanks les Truffes, January 15, 2010"  international hub for truffles (Garland Truffles), and beer making, as tobacco land has been converted to grape orchards while state laws regulating alcohol content in beer allowed a jump in ABV from 6% to 15%.
Another , a nuclear attack submarine, was commissioned in Wilmington, NC, on May 3, 2008.
North Carolina has large grazing areas for beef and dairy cattle.
Political tensions ran so high that a small group of white Democrats in 1898 planned to take over the Wilmington government if their candidates were not elected.
Although North Carolina's plantation system was smaller and less cohesive than that of Virginia, Georgia, or South Carolina, significant numbers of planters were concentrated in the counties around the port cities of Wilmington and Edenton, as well as suburban planters around the cities of Raleigh, Charlotte, and Durham in the Piedmont.
By 1914 it was selling 425 million packs of Camels a year.
As early as 1650, settlers from the Virginia colony moved into the area of Albemarle Sound.
A popular North Carolina restaurant chain is Golden Corral.
* Bennett College for Women (United Methodist Church)
The largest school systems in North Carolina are the Wake County Public School System, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, Guilford County Schools, Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools, and Cumberland County Schools.
Generals Greene and Cornwallis finally met at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse in present-day Greensboro on March 15, 1781.
In the mountains, the Brevard Music Center hosts choral, orchestral, and solo performances during its annual summer schedule.
Many universities and colleges in the state have been founded on religious traditions, and some currently maintain that affiliation, including:
Tobacco was one of the first major industries to develop after the Civil War.
The second-largest Protestant denomination in North Carolina after Baptist traditions is Methodism, which is strong in the northern Piedmont, especially in populous Guilford County.
The fort lasted only 18 months; the local inhabitants killed all but one of the 120 men Pardo had stationed at a total of six forts in the area.
This campaign is known as "The Race to the Dan" or "The Race for the River."
Confederate troops from all parts of North Carolina served in virtually all the major battles of the Army of Northern Virginia, the Confederacy's most famous army.
Most of the soldiers fighting for the British side in this battle were Carolinians who had remained loyal to the Crown (they were called "Tories" or Loyalists).
* St. Andrews Presbyterian College (Presbyterian)
The state was the site of the first successful controlled, powered and sustained heavier-than-air flight, by the Wright brothers, near Kitty Hawk on December 17, 1903.
Following this "Pyrrhic victory", Cornwallis chose to move to the Virginia coastline to get reinforcements, and to allow the Royal Navy to protect his battered army.
The internationally acclaimed North Carolina Zoo in Asheboro attracts visitors to its animals, plants, and a 57-piece art collection along five miles of shaded pathways in the world's largest-land-area natural-habitat park.
* Guilford College (Religious Society of Friends Quakers)
They placed their interests above those of the generally non-slave-holding "yeoman" farmers of western North Carolina.
While the Baptists in total (counting both blacks and whites) have maintained the majority in this part of the country (known as the Bible Belt), the population in North Carolina practices a wide variety of faiths, including Judaism, Islam, Baha'i, Buddhism, and Hinduism.
Morgan had moved to the northern part of the state to combine with General Greene's newly recruited forces.
North Carolina is also home to many well-known private colleges and universities, including Duke University, Wake Forest University, Pfeiffer University, Lees-McRae College, Davidson College, Barton College, North Carolina Wesleyan College, Elon University, Guilford College, Livingstone College, Salem College, Shaw University (the first historically black college or university in the South), Laurel University, Meredith College, Methodist University, Belmont Abbey College (the only Catholic college in the Carolinas), Campbell University, University of Mount Olive, Montreat College, High Point University, Lenoir-Rhyne University (the only Lutheran university in North Carolina) and Wingate University.
According to the historian Russell Thornton, "The 1738 epidemic was said to have killed one-half of the Cherokee, with other tribes of the area suffering equally."
After the Spanish in the 16th century, the first permanent European settlers of North Carolina were English colonists who migrated south from Virginia.
* Greensboro College (Methodist)
Located in Goldsboro, Seymour Johnson Air Force Base is home of the 4th Fighter Wing and 916th Air Refueling Wing.
* University of Mount Olive (Baptist)
By the late 19th century, the largest Protestant denomination was the Baptist.
* Wake Forest University (Historically Baptist)
The largest battle fought in North Carolina was at Bentonville, which was a futile attempt by Confederate General Joseph Johnston to slow Union General William Tecumseh Sherman's advance through the Carolinas in the spring of 1865.
In 1835 the legislature withdrew their right to vote.
The Outer Banks and surrounding beaches attract millions of people to the Atlantic beaches every year.
At the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, the 26th North Carolina Regiment participated in Pickett/Pettigrew's Charge and advanced the farthest into the Northern lines of any Confederate regiment.
Located in Jacksonville, Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, combined with nearby bases Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Cherry Point, MCAS New River, Camp Geiger, Camp Johnson, Stone Bay and Courthouse Bay, makes up the largest concentration of Marines and sailors in the world.
While North Carolina has no Major League Baseball team, it does have numerous minor league baseball teams, with the highest level of play coming from the AAA-affiliated Charlotte Knights and Durham Bulls.
Pirates menaced the coastal settlements, but by 1718 the pirates had been captured and killed.
Planters owning large estates wielded significant political and socio-economic power in antebellum North Carolina, which was a slave society.
* Catawba College (United Church of Christ)
Voters of North Carolina's 2nd congressional district elected a total of four African-American congressmen through these years of the late 19th century.
The state also has a special history with the Moravian Church, as settlers of this faith (largely of German origin) found a home in the Winston-Salem area in the 18th and 19th centuries.
North Carolina established the North Carolina Museum of Art as the first major museum collection in the country to be formed by state legislation and funding  and continues to bring millions into the NC economy.
North Carolina has 115 public school systems, each of which is overseen by a local school board.
Raleigh established two colonies on the coast in the late 1580s, but both failed.
The state's shipping, commercial fishing, and lumber industries are important to its economy.
MCAS Cherry Point is home of the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing.
He named it ''Carolina'' in honor of his father Charles I.
Currently, the rapid influx of northerners and immigrants from Latin America is steadily increasing ethnic and religious diversity: the number of Roman Catholics and Jews in the state has increased, as well as general religious diversity.
* William Peace University (Presbyterian)
Construction of Tryon Palace, which served as the residence and offices of the provincial governor William Tryon, began in 1767 and was completed in 1771.
Metal and punk acts such as Corrosion of Conformity, Between the Buried and Me, and Nightmare Sonata are native to North Carolina.
A later expedition by Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe followed in 1584, at the direction of Sir Walter Raleigh.
* High Point University (United Methodist Church)
There was some military action, especially in 1780–81.
In total there are 2,425 public schools in the state, including 99 charter schools.
The latter had grown rapidly and land was less available.
Winston-Salem is the birthplace of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR), founded by R. J. Reynolds in 1874 as one of 16 tobacco companies in the town.
The road to Yorktown and America's independence from Great Britain led through North Carolina.
The Piedmont region of central North Carolina is the state's most populous region, containing the six largest cities in the state by population.
In 2009, the board's chairman also became the "chief executive officer" for the state's school system.
Among the subranges of the Appalachians located in the state are the Great Smoky Mountains, Blue Ridge Mountains, and Black Mountains.
Musicians such as the North Carolina Ramblers helped solidify the sound of country music in the late 1920s, while the influential bluegrass musician Doc Watson also hailed from North Carolina.
The Research Triangle area has long been a well-known center for folk, rock, metal, jazz and punk.
He returned by a different route to Santa Elena on Parris Island, South Carolina, then a center of Spanish Florida.
* Salem College (Historically Moravian Protestant)
A large revolt happened in the state in 1711 known as Cary's Rebellion.
It consists of gently rolling countryside frequently broken by hills or low mountain ridges.
North Carolina has theme parks, aquariums, museums, historic sites, lighthouses, elegant theaters, concert halls, and fine dining.
They installed their own people and elected Alfred M. Waddell as mayor, in the only coup d'état in United States history.
