Protestants have a slight majority in Northern Ireland, according to the latest Northern Ireland Census.
Passenger railways are operated by Northern Ireland Railways.
Sinn Féin MPs, currently five, refuse to take the oath to serve the Queen that is required before MPs are allowed to take their seats.
* The Portadown Line
For example, the websites of the Office of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the UK Statistics Authority describe the United Kingdom as being made up of four countries, one of these being Northern Ireland.
The cycle centres on the reign of Conchobar mac Nessa, who is said to have been king of Ulster around the 1st century.
This constitutes just under 3% of the population of the UK (62 million) and just over 28% of the population of the island of Ireland (6.3 million).
Overall, the Catholic population is somewhat more ethnically diverse than the more homogeneous Protestant population.
The population of Northern Ireland has risen yearly since 1978.
An unconnected section of the M2 also by-passes Ballymena
Of the 108 MLAs, 56 are unionists and 40 are nationalists (the remaining 12 are classified as "other").
A rebellion in 1798 led by the cross-community Belfast-based Society of the United Irishmen and inspired by the French Revolution sought to break the constitutional ties between Ireland and Britain and unite Irish people of all religions.
Disagreement on names, and the reading of political symbolism into the use or non-use of a word, also attaches itself to some urban centres.
8.1% professed to have "some ability" however.
On 28 July 2005, the Provisional IRA declared an end to its campaign and has since decommissioned what is thought to be all of its arsenal.
As a result of the Agreement, the Constitution of the Republic of Ireland was amended.
In 1914, the ''Third Home Rule Bill'' received Royal Assent as the Government of Ireland Act 1914.
During the Home Rule Crisis the possibility was discussed of a "temporary" partition of these six counties from the rest of Ireland.
Northern Ireland competes separately at the Commonwealth Games, and people from Northern Ireland may compete for either Great Britain or Ireland at the Olympic Games.
Foreign flags are also found, such as the Palestinian flags in some nationalist areas and Israeli flags in some unionist areas.
Official voting figures, which reflect views on the "national question" along with issues of candidate, geography, personal loyalty and historic voting patterns, show 54% of Northern Ireland voters vote for unionist parties, 42% vote for nationalist parties and 4% vote "other".
Following this, in an attempt to quell sectarianism and force the removal of discriminatory laws (and to prevent the spread of French-style republicanism to Ireland), the government of the Kingdom of Great Britain pushed for the two kingdoms to be merged.
Although some news bulletins since the 1990s have opted to avoid all contentious terms and use the official name, Northern Ireland, the term "the North" remains commonly used by broadcast media in the Republic.
Established by the Northern Ireland Act 1998 as part of the Good Friday Agreement, the Northern Ireland Assembly holds responsibility for a range of devolved policy matters, while other areas are reserved for the British government.
In Northern Ireland, the victories of the Siege of Derry (1689) and the Battle of the Boyne (1690) in this latter war are still celebrated by some Protestants (both Anglican and Presbyterian).
Northern Ireland law developed from Irish law that existed before the partition of Ireland in 1921.
The first Deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland, Seamus Mallon, was criticised by unionist politicians for calling the region the "North of Ireland" while Sinn Féin has been criticised in a Dublin newspaper for referring to the "Six Counties".
In 2011, its population was 1,810,863, constituting about 30% of the island's total population and about 3% of the UK's population.
As well as broadcasting standard UK-wide programmes, BBC NI produces local content, including a news break-out called BBC Newsline.
The Ulster Cycle is a large body of prose and verse centring on the traditional heroes of the Ulaid in what is now eastern Ulster.
The highest maximum temperature recorded was  at Knockarevan, near Garrison, County Fermanagh on 30 June 1976 and at Belfast on 12 July 1983.
There is often tension when these activities take place near Catholic neighbourhoods, which sometimes leads to violence.
Under the terms of the treaty, Northern Ireland would become part of the Free State unless the government opted out by presenting an address to the king, although in practice partition remained in place.
As early as 1969, armed campaigns of paramilitary groups began, including the Provisional IRA campaign of 1969–1997 which was aimed at the end of British rule in Northern Ireland and the creation of a United Ireland, and the Ulster Volunteer Force, formed in 1966 in response to the perceived erosion of both the British character and unionist domination of Northern Ireland.
The county boundaries still appear on Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland Maps and the Phillips Street Atlases, among others.
Northern Irish murals have become well-known features of Northern Ireland, depicting past and present events and documenting peace and cultural diversity.
Although counties are no longer used for local governmental purposes, they remain a popular means of describing where places are.
While a rail service existed in the early twentieth century, all five counties that now lack a railway are located here, including two in Northern Ireland, Fermanagh and Tyrone.
One of Ireland's regular international venues is Stormont in Belfast.
This final act of decommissioning was performed in accordance with the Belfast Agreement of 1998, and under the watch of the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning and two external church witnesses.
The weather is unpredictable at all times of the year, and although the seasons are distinct, they are considerably less pronounced than in interior Europe or the eastern seaboard of North America.
The biggest parades are held on 12 July (The Twelfth).
The Golfing Union of Ireland, the governing body for men's and boy's amateur golf throughout Ireland and the oldest golfing union in the world, was founded in Belfast in 1891.
In response, opponents to Home Rule, from Conservative and Unionist Party leaders such as Andrew Bonar Law and Dublin-based barrister Sir Edward Carson to militant working class unionists in Ireland, threatened the use of violence.
The erection by some district councils of bilingual street names in both English and Irish, invariably in predominantly nationalist districts, is resisted by unionists who claim that it creates a "chill factor" and thus harms community relationships.
The name of that county then appears in both Irish and English on the passport's information page, as opposed to the town or city of birth on the United Kingdom passport.
The Troubles, which started in the late 1960s, consisted of about thirty years of recurring acts of intense violence during which 3,254 people were killed with over 50,000 casualties.
Main railway lines linking to and from Belfast Great Victoria Street railway station and Belfast Central are:
After declining as a result of the political and social turmoil of the Troubles, its economy has grown significantly since the late 1990s.
The main universities in Northern Ireland are Queen's University Belfast and Ulster University, and the distance learning Open University which has a regional office in Belfast.
Since 1998, Northern Ireland has had devolved government within the United Kingdom.
Key tourism attractions include the historic cities of Derry, Belfast and Armagh and the many castles in Northern Ireland.
Nevertheless, the council has printed two sets of stationery—one for each term—and its policy is to reply to correspondence using whichever term the original sender used.
Following the election held on 7 March 2007, devolved government returned on 8 May 2007 with Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader Ian Paisley and Sinn Féin deputy leader Martin McGuinness taking office as First Minister and deputy First Minister, respectively.
Compared to a similar survey carried out in 1998, this shows a fall in the percentage of Protestants identifying as British and Ulster, and a rise in those identifying as Northern Irish.
Northern Ireland was created in 1921, when Ireland was partitioned between Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland by an act of the British parliament.
Ireland was partitioned between Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland in 1921 under the terms of Lloyd George's Government of Ireland Act 1920 during the Anglo-Irish War between Irish republican and British forces.
The lowest minimum temperature recorded was  at Castlederg, County Tyrone on 23 December 2010.
The Lower and Upper River Bann, River Foyle and River Blackwater form extensive fertile lowlands, with excellent arable land also found in North and East Down, although much of the hill country is marginal and suitable largely for animal husbandry.
The Troubles were brought to an uneasy end by a peace process which included the declaration of ceasefires by most paramilitary organisations and the complete decommissioning of their weapons, the reform of the police, and the corresponding withdrawal of army troops from the streets and from sensitive border areas such as South Armagh and Fermanagh, as agreed by the signatories to the Belfast Agreement (commonly known as the "Good Friday Agreement").
The Gaelic Athletic Association still uses the counties as its primary means of organisation and fields representative teams of each GAA county.
However, its implementation was suspended before it came into effect because of the outbreak of the First World War, and the Amending Bill to partition Ireland was abandoned.
There is no agreement on how to decide on a name.
Northern Ireland has produced two world snooker champions; Alex Higgins, who won the title in 1972 and 1982, and Dennis Taylor, who won in 1985.
The original system of car registration numbers largely based on counties still remains in use.
During the 19th century, legal reforms started in the late 18th century continued to remove statutory discrimination against Catholics, and progressive programmes enabled tenant farmers to buy land from landlords.
0.8% identified with non-Christian religions or philosophies, while 17% identified with no religion or did not state one.
Government and cultural organisations in Northern Ireland often use the word "Ulster" in their title; for example, the University of Ulster, the Ulster Museum, the Ulster Orchestra, and BBC Radio Ulster.
With their decline in official use, there is often confusion surrounding towns and cities which lie near county boundaries, such as Belfast and Lisburn, which are split between counties Down and Antrim (the majorities of both cities, however, are in Antrim).
Northern Ireland has historically been the most industrialised region of Ireland.
This aspect was also central to the Belfast Agreement which was signed in 1998 and ratified by referendums held simultaneously in both Northern Ireland and the Republic.
Since 1972, it has had no official status.
Sports tend to be organised on an all-Ireland basis, with a single team for the whole island.
Following Irish defeat at the Battle of Kinsale, though, the region's Gaelic, Roman Catholic aristocracy fled to continental Europe in 1607 and the region became subject to major programmes of colonialism by Protestant English (mainly Anglican) and Scottish (mainly Presbyterian) settlers.
For Northern Ireland's second largest city, broadcasting outlets which are unaligned to either community and broadcast to both use both names interchangeably, often starting a report with "Londonderry" and then using "Derry" in the rest of the report.
To prevent argument, this report was suppressed and, in exchange for a waiver to the Free State's obligations to the UK's public debt and the dissolution of the Council of Ireland (sought by the Government of Northern Ireland), the initial six-county border was maintained with no changes.
The Irish national anthem is also played at Dublin home matches, being the anthem of the host country.
Although they are transmitted in standard definition, a Freeview HD box or television is required for reception.
However, the number speaking it as their main language in their home is negligible, with only 0.9% of 2011 census respondents claiming to be able to speak, read, write and understand Ulster-Scots.
More recently, the economy has benefited from major investment by many large multi-national corporations into high tech industry.
Black people of various origins made up 0.2% of the 2011 population and people of mixed ethnicity made up 0.2%.
The largest non-white ethnic groups were Chinese (6,300) and Indian (6,200).
Gaelic games include Gaelic football, hurling (and camogie), handball and rounders.
Reserved matters comprise listed policy areas (such as civil aviation, units of measurement, and human genetics) that Parliament may devolve to Northern Ireland Assembly at some time in the future.
The choice of term can be controversial and can reveal the writer's political preferences.
In another survey, from 1999, 1% of respondents said they spoke it as their main language at home.
Belfast's most prominent peak is Cavehill.
Northern Ireland is a common law jurisdiction and its common law is similar to that in England and Wales.
Other pages on the same websites refer to Northern Ireland specifically as a "province" as do publications of the UK Statistics Authority.
The new Articles 2 and 3, added to the Constitution to replace the earlier articles, implicitly acknowledge that the status of Northern Ireland, and its relationships within the rest of the United Kingdom and with the Republic of Ireland, would only be changed with the agreement of a majority of voters in each  jurisdiction.
The war ended on 6 December 1921, with the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, which created the Irish Free State.
These events escalated at the end of the century following an event known as the Battle of the Diamond, which saw the supremacy of the Anglican and Presbyterian Peep o'Day Boys over the Catholic Defenders and leading to the formation of the Anglican Orange Order.
Owing to the outbreak of civil war in the Free State, the work of the commission was delayed until 1925.
It is still used by some British army regiments.
* M5 connecting Belfast to Newtownabbey
In 2000, the telephone numbering system was restructured into an 8 digit scheme with (except for Belfast) the first digit approximately reflecting the county.
Main motorways are:
The Irish language (), or ''Gaelic'', is a native language of Ireland.
NIFL clubs are semi-professional i.e.
The whole of Northern Ireland has a temperate maritime climate, rather wetter in the west than the east, although cloud cover is persistent across the region.
The highest level of competition within Northern Ireland is the NIFL Premiership, with the NIFL Championship below.
The ITV franchise in Northern Ireland is Ulster Television (UTV).
There are supposedly some minute differences in pronunciation between Protestants and Catholics, the best known of which is the name of the letter ''h'', which Protestants tend to pronounce as "aitch", as in British English, and Catholics tend to pronounce as "haitch", as in Hiberno-English.
Efforts by members of the Northern Ireland Assembly to legislate for some official uses of the language have failed to achieve the required cross-community support, and the UK government has declined to legislate.
For the most part, Protestants feel a strong connection with Great Britain and wish for Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom.
Additionally, the Republic's government also has the right to "put forward views and proposals" on non-devolved matters in relation to Northern Ireland.
In many sports, the island of Ireland fields a single team, a notable exception being association football.
However, there are important differences in law and procedure between Northern Ireland and England and Wales.
The Union Jack and the former Northern Ireland flag are flown in many loyalist areas, and the Tricolour, adopted by republicans as the flag of Ireland in 1916, is flown in some republican areas.
In the context of open institutional discrimination, the 18th century saw secret, militant societies develop in communities in the region and act on sectarian tensions in violent attacks.
Major Gaelic Athletic Association matches are opened by the Irish national anthem, "Amhrán na bhFiann (The Soldier's Song)", which is also used by most other all-Ireland sporting organisations.
...it is the birthright of all the people of Northern Ireland to identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or British, or both, as they may so choose, and accordingly the two governments confirm that their right to hold both British and Irish citizenship is accepted by both Governments and would not be affected by any future change in the status of Northern Ireland.
The local economy has seen contraction during the Great Recession.
The foremost hero of the cycle is Conchobar's nephew Cúchulainn.
"Derry" is also used in the names of both the Church of Ireland and Roman Catholic dioceses, and by one of the largest Protestant fraternal societies, the Apprentice Boys of Derry.
In 1973, Northern Ireland held a referendum to determine if it should remain in the United Kingdom, or be part of a united Ireland.
As a consequence of the worsening security situation, autonomous regional government for Northern Ireland was suspended in 1972.
actor Kenneth Branagh).
Discrimination against nationalists under the Stormont government (1921–1972) gave rise to the civil rights movement in the 1960s.
In 2007, 36% of the population defined themselves as unionist, 24% as nationalist and 40% defined themselves as neither.
Some authors have described the meaning of this term as being equivocal: referring to Northern Ireland as being a province both of the United Kingdom and of the traditional country of Ireland.
Players play for local clubs with the best being selected for their county teams.
The highest-ranked Northern Ireland professional on the world circuit presently is Mark Allen from Antrim.
The population in 2011 was 1.8 million, having grown 7.5% over the previous decade from just under 1.7 million in 2001.
Calls from landlines in Northern Ireland to numbers in the Republic of Ireland are charged at the same rate as those to numbers in Great Britain, while landline numbers in Northern Ireland can similarly be called from the Republic of Ireland at domestic rates, using the 048 prefix.
Today, the former generally see themselves as British and the latter generally see themselves as Irish, while a distinct Northern Irish or Ulster identity is claimed both by a large minority of Catholics and Protestants and by many of those who are non-aligned.
Unemployment in Northern Ireland peaked at 17.2% in 1986, dropping to 6.1%  and down by 1.2 percentage points over the year, similar to the UK figure of 6.2%.
This is one of the four major cycles of Irish mythology.
The dialect of English spoken in Northern Ireland shows influence from the lowland Scots language.
The 2008 survey found that 61% of Catholics described themselves as Irish, with 25% identifying as Northern Irish, 8% as British and 1% as Ulster.
The 1998 Good Friday Agreement was a major step in the peace process, including the decommissioning of weapons, although sectarianism and religious segregation still remain major social problems and sporadic violence has continued.
European route E01 runs from Larne through the island of Ireland, Spain and Portugal to Seville.
Elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly are by single transferable vote with six representatives (Member of the Legislative Assembly, MLAs) elected from 18 parliamentary constituencies.
The national football team also uses the Ulster Banner as its flag but uses "God Save The Queen" as its anthem.
These four counties, as well as County Fermanagh and County Tyrone, would later constitute Northern Ireland.
Neither government, however, extends its citizenship to all persons born in Northern Ireland.
These figures were largely unchanged from the 1998 results.
However, because in the past Catholic families tended to send their deaf children to schools in Dublin where Irish Sign Language (ISL) is commonly used.
Alongside the violence, there was a political deadlock between the major political parties in Northern Ireland, including those who condemned violence, over the future status of Northern Ireland and the form of government there should be within Northern Ireland.
When the nationalist-controlled local council voted to rename the city "Derry", unionists objected, stating that as it owed its city status to a Royal Charter, only a charter issued by the Queen could change the name.
The population of Northern Ireland is almost entirely white (98.2%).
NISL takes a large component from the British family of sign language (which also includes Auslan) with many borrowings from ASL.
Meanwhile, 13.7% of Catholics identified as "British" or with a British ethnic group; a further 4.4% identified as "all other", which are largely immigrants, for example from Poland.
Of the four, football is the most popular in Northern Ireland.
The largest island of Northern Ireland is Rathlin, off the north Antrim coast.
Most of the population of Northern Ireland are at least nominally Christian, mostly Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations.
In June 1940, to encourage the neutral Irish state to join with the Allies, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill indicated to the Taoiseach Éamon de Valera that the United Kingdom would push for Irish unity, but believing that Churchill could not deliver, de Valera declined the offer.
Almost 2,000 murals have been documented in Northern Ireland since the 1970s.
Recent successes for Northern Ireland teams include Armagh's 2002 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship win and Tyrone's wins in 2003, 2005 and 2008.
The International Commission later confirmed that the main loyalist paramilitary groups, the UDA, UVF and the Red Hand Commando, had decommissioned what is thought to be all of their arsenals, witnessed by a former Archbishop and a former top civil servant.
Since the end of the Troubles, Northern Ireland has witnessed rising numbers of tourists.
This has caused the two communities to become pillarised.
It can arouse irritation, particularly among nationalists, for whom the title province is properly reserved for the traditional province of Ulster, of which Northern Ireland comprises six out of nine counties.
The Executive wishes to gain taxation powers from London, in order to align Northern Ireland's corporation tax rate with the unusually low rate of the Republic of Ireland.
The Irish Rugby Football Union and the Church of Ireland have used the Saint Patrick's Saltire or "Cross of St&nbsp;Patrick".
Most of the remaining 26 counties which later became the Republic of Ireland were overwhelmingly majority-nationalist.
The largest single denomination is the Roman Catholic Church, to which 41% of the population belonged.
Northern Ireland has also contributed several players to the Great Britain and Ireland Walker Cup team, including Alan Dunbar and Paul Cutler who played on the victorious 2011 team in Scotland.
The conflict was caused by the disputed status of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom and the discrimination against the Irish nationalist minority by the dominant unionist majority.
4.3% were born elsewhere; triple the amount there were in 2001.
The Constitution of Ireland was amended in 1999 to remove a claim of the "Irish nation" to sovereignty over the whole of Ireland (in Article 2), a claim qualified by an acknowledgement that Ireland could only exercise legal control over the territory formerly known as the Irish Free State.
The "Ballast" investigation by the Police Ombudsman has confirmed that British forces, and in particular the RUC, did collude with loyalist paramilitaries, were involved in murder, and did obstruct the course of justice when such claims had been investigated, although the extent to which such collusion occurred is still hotly disputed.
Prominent artists and sports persons from Northern Ireland include Van Morrison, Rory McIlroy, Joey Dunlop, Wayne McCullough and George Best.
The British government's position is that its forces were neutral in the conflict, trying to uphold law and order in Northern Ireland and the right of the people of Northern Ireland to democratic self-determination.
Perhaps Northern Ireland's most notable successes in professional sport have come in golf.
In 1919, David Lloyd George proposed a new bill which would divide Ireland into two Home Rule areas: twenty-six counties being ruled from Dublin and six being ruled from Belfast.
However, within Northern Ireland, print media which are aligned to either ideology (the ''Belfast Telegraph'' and ''News Letter'' are unionist in outlook while the ''Irish News'' is nationalist) generally use their preferred term.
From 1969 to 2003 there were over 36,900 shooting incidents and over 16,200 bombings or attempted bombings associated with The Troubles.
It established a devolved power-sharing government within Northern Ireland, which must consist of both unionist and nationalist parties.
There is a range of local newspapers such as the ''News Letter'' and the ''Irish News''.
ISL is still common among many older deaf people from Catholic families.
They are also, with similar exceptions, entitled to be citizens of Ireland.
Northern Ireland itself forms a single constituency for elections to the European Parliament.
Northern Ireland comprises a patchwork of communities whose national loyalties are represented in some areas by flags flown from flagpoles or lamp posts.
Unionists were in a minority in Ireland as a whole, but in the northern province of Ulster they were a very large majority in County Antrim and County Down, small majorities in County Armagh and County Londonderry and a substantial minority in the rest of the province.
There has recently been an increase in interest in the language among unionists in East Belfast.
Most are from Eastern Europe and Baltic states.
Some words and phrases are shared with Scots Gaelic, and the dialects of east Ulster – those of Rathlin Island and the Glens of Antrim – were very similar to the dialect of Argyll, the part of Scotland nearest to Ireland.
These nine county teams participate in the Ulster Senior Football Championship, Ulster Senior Hurling Championship, All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship.
The division in nomenclature is sometimes seen in the names of organisations associated with either side of the political divide, but there are exceptions.
Northern Ireland co-operates with the Republic of Ireland in some areas, and the Agreement granted the Republic the ability to "put forward views and proposals" with "determined efforts to resolve disagreements between the two governments".
There is also an all-island tournament, the Setanta Sports Cup, which includes six NIFL Premiership teams and six teams from the Republic's League of Ireland Premier Division.
Following the victory of 1691, and contrary to the terms of the Treaty of Limerick, after the Pope who had been allied to William of Orange recognised James II as continuing king of Great Britain and Ireland in place of William, a series of penal laws was passed  by the Anglican ruling class in Ireland.
In the general election of 1918, the pro-independence Sinn Féin won 73 of the 105 parliamentary seats in Ireland and unilaterally established the First Dáil, an extrajudicial parliament in Ireland.
In 2011, 88.8% of the population were born in Northern Ireland, with 4.5% born in Britain, and 2.9% born in the Republic of Ireland.
The most notable exception is association football, which has separate governing bodies for each jurisdiction.
Several studies and surveys carried out between 1971 and 2006 have indicated that, in general, most Protestants in Northern Ireland see themselves primarily as British, whereas a majority of Roman Catholics regard themselves primarily as Irish.
Devolution in Northern Ireland is dependent upon participation by members of the Northern Ireland executive in the North/South Ministerial Council, which co-ordinates areas of co-operation (such as agriculture, education and health) between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
It is described as being related to Irish Sign Language at the syntactic level while much of the lexicon is based on British Sign Language (BSL) and American Sign Language.
The British government in 2001 ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
These institutions were suspended by the British Government in 2002 after Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) allegations of spying by people working for Sinn Féin at the Assembly (Stormontgate).
A rebellion in 1641 by Irish aristocrats against English rule resulted in a massacre of settlers in Ulster in the context of a war breaking out between England, Scotland and Ireland fuelled by religious intolerance in government.
Some writers describe the United Kingdom as being made up of three countries and one province or point out the difficulties with calling Northern Ireland a country.
The Ireland A rugby league team compete annually in the Amateur Four Nations competition (since 2002) and the St Patrick's Day Challenge (since 1995).
Many Catholics however, generally aspire to a United Ireland or are less certain about how to solve the constitutional question.
There is no generally accepted term to describe what Northern Ireland is: province, region, country or something else.
Tourism has been a major growth area since the end of the Troubles.
Ireland are current champions of ICC Intercontinental Cup.
Publications of HM Treasury and the Department of Finance and Personnel of the Northern Ireland Executive, on the other hand, describe Northern Ireland as being a "region of the UK".
This does not however account for the complex identities within Northern Ireland, given that many of the population regard themselves as "Ulster" or "Northern Irish", either as a primary or secondary identity.
