The ship (''Crystal Serenity'', 1000 passengers, 600 crew) left Seward, Alaska, used Amundsen's route and reached New York on September 17.
The approach from the west through Bering Strait is impractical because of the need to sail around ice near Point Barrow.
Roch,'' a Royal Canadian Mounted Police "ice-fortified" schooner, would survive the pressures of the sea ice.
An English expedition was launched in 1576 by Martin Frobisher, who took three trips west to what is now the Canadian Arctic in order to find the passage.
The U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers ''Northwind'' and ''Staten Island'' also sailed in support of the expedition.
In late 2005, it was reported that U.S. nuclear submarines had traveled unannounced through Canadian Arctic waters, sparking outrage in Canada.
Sir Robert McClure was credited with the discovery of the Northwest Passage in 1851 when he looked across McClure Strait from Banks Island and viewed Melville Island.
Later in 1944, Larsen's return trip was far more swift than his first.
In September 2013 the  became the first commercial bulk carrier to transit the Northwest Passage.
Cartographers and seamen tried to demonstrate its reality.
McClure started out from England in December 1849, sailed the Atlantic Ocean south to Cape Horn and entered the Pacific Ocean.
In 1762, the English trading ship ''Octavius'' reportedly hazarded the passage from the west but became trapped in sea ice.
Cartier became persuaded that the St. Lawrence was the Passage; when he found the way blocked by rapids at what is now Montreal, he was so certain that these rapids were all that was keeping him from China (in French, ''la Chine''), that he named the rapids for China.
The Canadian government issued a declaration in 1986 reaffirming Canadian rights to the waters.
The first crossing was made by Amundsen in 1903–1905.
On November 28, 2008, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported that the Canadian Coast Guard confirmed the first commercial ship sailed through the Northwest Passage.
They left Tuktoyaktuk on July 26, 1981, in the  open Boston Whaler and reached Tanquary Fiord on August 31, 1981.
Sir Francis Drake sought the western entrance in 1579.
Before the Little Ice Age, Norwegian Vikings sailed as far north and west as Ellesmere Island, Skraeling Island and Ruin Island for hunting expeditions and trading with the Inuit and people of the Dorset culture who already inhabited the region.
Amundsen intended to hug the shore, live off the limited resources of the land and sea through which he was to travel, and had determined that he needed to have a tiny crew to make this work.
In 1775, the whaler ''Herald'' found the ''Octavius'' adrift near Greenland with the bodies of her crew frozen below decks.
Five years later Bolognini Zaltieri issued a map showing a narrow and crooked Strait of Anian separating Asia from the Americas.
This pair was the first to sail the passage, although they had the benefit of doing so over a couple of summers.
The United States government, when asked by a Canadian reporter, indicated that they did not ask for permission as they were not legally required to.
He sailed the Pacific north and passed through the Bering Strait, turning east at that point and reaching Banks Island.
The Voyage of Rediscovery was completed in five and a half months, with ''Nadon'' reaching Vancouver on December 16, 2000.
McClure's ship was trapped in the ice for three winters near Banks Island, at the western end of Viscount Melville Sound.
He was murdered by his followers in 1687.
Starting on 10 August 2016, the ship sailed from Vancouver to New York City with 1,500 passengers and crew, taking 28 days.
In September 2013 the first large ice strengthened sea freighter, , used the passage.
To fully explore this new inland sea, an expedition under Dionisio Alcalá Galiano was sent in 1792.
The first recorded attempt to discover the Northwest Passage was the east-west voyage of John Cabot in 1497, sent by Henry VII in search of a direct route to the Orient.
He made the trip in 86 days to sail back from Halifax, Nova Scotia to Vancouver, British Columbia.
Although his chosen east–west route, via the Rae Strait, contained young ice and thus was navigable, some of the waterways were extremely shallow ( deep), making the route commercially impractical.
The expeditions by Franklin and McClure were in the tradition of British exploration: well-funded ship expeditions using modern technology, and usually including British Naval personnel.
The ''HMP Okarian'' was eventually flown from Cambridge Bay to Resolute Bay in May 2009, and then driven again on sea-ice by Lee and a team of five from Resolute to the West coast of Devon Island in May 2010.
The harbour, now known as Gjoa Haven, later developed as the only permanent settlement on the island.
Scientists believe that reduced sea ice in the Northwest Passage has permitted some new species to migrate across the Arctic Ocean.
There the expedition remained for nearly two years, with the expedition members learning from the local Inuit people and undertaking measurements to determine the location of the North Magnetic Pole.
Following a journey of more than , Roubinet reached Greenland on September 9, 2007, thereby completing the first Northwest Passage voyage made in one season without engine.
We are going to see this more and more as the years go by."
Most maritime nations, including the United States and those of the European Union, classify these waters as an international strait, where foreign vessels have the right of "transit passage".
After completing the Northwest Passage portion of this trip and having anchored near Herschel Island, Amundsen skied  to the city of Eagle, Alaska.
If the passage’s deep waters become completely ice-free in summer months, they would be particularly enticing for supertankers that are too big to pass through the Panama Canal and must otherwise navigate around the tip of South America.
Under the law of the sea, ships engaged in transit passage are not permitted to engage in research.
The ships captain, Hendrick van der Heul was the quartermaster on William Kidd's expedition to the Indian Ocean in 1696.
In 1969, the  made the passage, accompanied by the Canadian icebreakers CCGS ''John A. Macdonald'' and CCGS ''Louis S. St-Laurent''.
(The veracity of the ''Octavius'' story is questionable.)
In 1741 with Lieutenant Aleksei Chirikov, he explored seeking further lands beyond Siberia.
In such a regime, Canada would have the right to enact fishing and environmental regulation, and fiscal and smuggling laws, as well as laws intended for the safety of shipping, but not the right to close the passage.
The ship, carrying 481 passengers, for 26 days and  at sea, followed in the path of Captain Roald Amundsen.
Each of the men on the trip was awarded a medal by Canada's sovereign, King George VI, in recognition of this notable feat of Arctic navigation.
On August 21, 2007, the Northwest Passage became open to ships without the need of an icebreaker.
They continued to the limits of the Alaskan peninsula and the start of the  chain of Aleutian Islands.
Jacques Cartier's explorations of the Saint Lawrence River were initiated in hope of finding a way through the continent.
On July 1, 1957, the United States Coast Guard Cutter ''Storis'' departed in company with USCGC ''Bramble'' and USCGC ''Spar'' to search for a deep-draft channel through the Arctic Ocean and to collect hydrographic information.
The ''HMP Okarian'' was being ferried from the North American mainland to the Haughton-Mars Project (HMP) Research Station on Devon Island, where it would be used as a simulator of future pressurized rovers for astronauts on the Moon and Mars.
According to Nalan Koc of the Norwegian Polar Institute, this was the first time the Passage has been clear since they began keeping records in 1972.
In the summer of 2000, two Canadian ships took advantage of thinning summer ice cover on the Arctic Ocean to make the crossing.
In 1611, while in James Bay, Hudson's crew mutinied.
Due to Arctic shrinkage, the Beluga group of Bremen, Germany, sent the first Western commercial vessels through the Northern Sea Route (Northeast Passage) in 2009.
They set Hudson and his teenage son John, along with seven sick, infirm, or loyal crewmen, adrift in a small open boat.
Despite reaching 70°N, they encountered nothing but icebergs.
However, Canada's Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced that "ships entering the North-West passage should first report to his government."
It was translated and published in London, stimulating exploration.
The Franklin and McClure expeditions each employed hundreds of personnel and multiple ships.
The Coast Guard vessel was chartered by the Voyage of Rediscovery and crewed by volunteers.
During the passage ''Billy Budd'' – likely a  first for a pleasure vessel - anchored in Winter Harbour in Melville Island, the very same site where almost 200 years ago Sir William Parry was blocked by ice and forced to winter.
From east to west, the direction of most early exploration attempts, expeditions entered the passage from the Atlantic Ocean via the Davis Strait and through Baffin Bay.
On May 9, 1619, under the auspices of King Christian IV of Denmark-Norway, Jens Munk set out with 65 men and the king's two ships, the ''Einhörningen'' (Unicorn), a small frigate, and ''Lamprenen'' (Lamprey), a sloop, which were outfitted under his own supervision.
The only usable route linking the entrances of Lancaster Sound and Dolphin and Union Strait was discovered by John Rae in 1854.
The strait probably took its name from Ania, a Chinese province mentioned in a 1559 edition of Marco Polo's book; it first appears on a map issued by Italian cartographer Giacomo Gastaldi about 1562.
More than once on this trip, he was uncertain whether the ''St.
Shipping from the east was to resume in the fall of 2009.
His mission was to discover the Northwest Passage to the Indies and China.
He set a record for traversing the route in a single season.
By contrast, John Rae was an employee of the Hudson's Bay Company, which operated a far-flung trade network and drove exploration of the Canadian North.
Many attempts were made to find a salt water exit west from Hudson Bay, but the Fury and Hecla Strait in the far north is blocked by ice.
In September 2008, the MV ''Camilla Desgagnés'', owned by Desgagnés Transarctik Inc. and, along with the Arctic Cooperative, is part of Nunavut Sealift and Supply Incorporated (NSSI), transported cargo from Montreal to the hamlets of Cambridge Bay, Kugluktuk, Gjoa Haven, and Taloyoak.
This led to further investigations and the examination of tissue and bone from the frozen bodies of three seamen, John Torrington, William Braine and John Hartnell, exhumed from the permafrost of Beechey Island.
Records showed Franklin died in 1847 and Captain Francis Rawdon Moira Crozier took over command.
In April 2009, planetary scientist Pascal Lee and a team of four on the Northwest Passage Drive Expedition drove the ''HMP Okarian'' Humvee rover a record-setting  on sea-ice from Kugluktuk to Cambridge Bay, Nunavut, the longest distance driven on sea-ice in a road vehicle.
In 1853 explorer John Rae was told by local Inuit about the disastrous fate of Franklin's expedition, but his reports were not welcomed in Britain.
Warning, however, that the NASA satellite images indicated the Arctic may have entered a "death spiral" caused by climate change, Professor Mark Serreze, a sea ice specialist at the U.S. National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) said: "The passages are open.
An ice-bound northern route was discovered in 1850 by the Irish explorer Robert McClure, however it was through a more southerly opening in an area explored by the Scotsman John Rae in 1854 that Norwegian Roald Amundsen made the first complete passage in 1903–1906.
While Franklin and McClure tried to explore the passage by sea, Rae explored by land.
In 1609, Henry Hudson sailed up what is now called the Hudson River in search of the Passage; encouraged by the saltiness of the water in the estuary, he reached present-day Albany, New York, before giving up.
Many artifacts from the expedition were found over the next century and a half, including notes that the ships were ice-locked in 1846 near King William Island, about halfway through the passage, and unable to break free.
::''On the South.''
In 1791 Alessandro Malaspina sailed to Yakutat Bay, Alaska, which was rumoured to be a Passage.
With these men, he sailed for home with the ''Lamprey'' on July 16, 1620, reaching Bergen, Norway, on September 20, 1620.
(Both McClure and his ship were found by a party from HMS ''Resolute'', one of Belcher's ships, so his sledge journey was relatively short.)
Thawing ocean or melting ice simultaneously opened up the Northwest Passage and the Northeast Passage (and within it, the Northern Sea Route), making it possible to sail around the Arctic ice cap.
They adopted a pragmatic approach and tended to be land-based.
Scientists at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union on December 13, 2007, revealed that NASA satellites observing the western Arctic showed a 16% decrease in cloud coverage during the summer of 2007 compared to 2006.
The ship's shallow draft was intended to help her traverse the shoals of the Arctic straits.
During the search for Franklin, Commander Robert McClure and his crew in HMS ''Investigator'' traversed the Northwest Passage from west to east in the years 1850 to 1854, partly by ship and partly by sledge.
The United States built the Alaska Pipeline instead.
The journal of Francisco Antonio Mourelle, who served as Quadra's second in command in 1775, fell into English hands.
In 1845 a lavishly equipped two-ship expedition led by Sir John Franklin sailed to the Canadian Arctic to chart the last unknown swaths of the Northwest Passage.
He returned to Ireland via the Norwegian coast in October 2005.
Because Canada’s Arctic is central to our national identity as a northern nation.
While they were separated, Chirikov discovered several of the Aleutian Islands while Bering charted the Alaskan region.
In 2006 the cruise liner MS ''Bremen'' successfully ran the Northwest Passage, helped by satellite images telling where sea ice was.
Upon her return to Greenland waters, the ''Storis'' became the first U.S.-registered vessel to have circumnavigated North America.
The extreme loss in 2007 rendered the passage "fully navigable".
In 1854, Rae returned to the cities with information from the Inuit about the disastrous fate of the Franklin expedition.
Cold, famine, and scurvy destroyed so many of his men that only he and two other men survived.
This conclusion was supported by the evidence of Alexander MacKenzie, who explored the Arctic and Pacific oceans in 1793.
He reached the Bering Strait in September and after a stopover in Victoria, British Columbia, went on to round Cape Horn and sail back to Belgium, thus being the first sailor to circumnavigate the Americas entirely by ship.
La Salle led an expedition from France in 1684 to establish a French colony on the Gulf of Mexico.
Rae was also the explorer with the best safety record, having lost only one man in years of traversing Arctic lands.
New evidence, confirming reports first made by John Rae in 1854 based on Inuit accounts, has shown that the last of the crew resorted to cannibalism of deceased members in an effort to survive.
On April 9, 2006, Canada's Joint Task Force (North) declared that the Canadian military will no longer refer to the region as the Northwest Passage, but as the Canadian Internal Waters.
In 1728 Vitus Bering, a Danish Navy officer in Russian service, used the strait first discovered by Semyon Dezhnyov in 1648 but later accredited to and named after Bering (the Bering Strait).
Shortly after her return in late 1957, she was reassigned to her new home port of Kodiak, Alaska.
The ESA suggested the passage would be navigable "during reduced ice cover by multi-year ice pack" (namely sea ice surviving one or more summers) where previously any traverse of the route had to be undertaken during favourable seasonable climatic conditions or by specialist vessels or expeditions.
Amundsen set out from Kristiania (Oslo) in June 1903 and was west of the Boothia Peninsula by late September.
The agency's report speculated that the conditions prevalent in 2007 had shown the passage may "open" sooner than expected.
An expedition in May 2008 reported that the passage was not yet continuously navigable even by an icebreaker and not yet ice-free.
In 1848 the expedition abandoned the two ships and its members tried to escape south across the tundra by sledge.
He used dog sleds and techniques of surviving in the environment which he had learned from the native Inuit.
East of Point Barrow the coast is fairly clear in summer.
The Spaniard Bartholomew de Fonte claimed to have sailed from Hudson Bay to the Pacific via the strait in 1640.
The belief that a route lay to the far north persisted for several centuries and led to numerous expeditions into the Arctic.
Since that date, several fortified ships have made the journey.
In September 1619, he found the entrance to Hudson Bay and spent the winter near the mouth of the Churchill River.
The first explorer to conquer the Northwest Passage solely by ship was the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen.
Cree oral legend reports that the survivors lived and traveled with the Cree for more than a year.
In 1985, the U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker ''Polar Sea'' passed through from Greenland to Alaska; the ship submitted to inspection by the Canadian Coast Guard before passing through, but the event infuriated the Canadian public and resulted in a diplomatic incident.
Determining whether a Northwest Passage existed was one of the motives for their efforts.
The first commercial cargo ship to have sailed through the Northwest Passage was the  in August 1969.
Both he and his crew also shared £10,000 awarded them by the British Parliament.
As a result of their westward explorations and their settlement of Greenland, the Vikings sailed as far north and west as Ellesmere Island, Skraeling Island and Ruin Island for hunting expeditions and trading with Inuit groups.
In August and September 2016 a cruise ship was sailed through the northwest passage.
A member of the crew is reported to have claimed that "there was no ice whatsoever".
Although sealift is an annual feature of the Canadian Arctic this is the first time that the western communities have been serviced from the east.
The ''HMP Okarian'' reached the HMP Research Station in July 2011.
Note: A Northwest Passage requires crossing the Arctic Circle twice, once each in the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans.
The  Voyage of Rediscovery was intended to raise awareness concerning ''St.
On August 30, 2012 S/Y ''Billy Budd'', , successfully completed the Northwest Passage in Nome, Alaska, while  sailing  a northern route never  sailed by a sailing pleasure  vessel before.
In 2006 a scheduled cruise liner (the ) successfully ran the Northwest Passage, helped by satellite images telling the location of sea ice.
He confirmed that there was no such passage south of the Bering Strait.
The voyage was organized by the Vancouver Maritime Museum and supported by a variety of corporate sponsors and agencies of the Canadian government.
At 18:45 GMT September 18, 2012, ''Best Explorer'', a steel cutter , skipper Nanni Acquarone, passing between the two Diomedes, was the first Italian sailboat to complete the Northwest Passage along the classical Amundsen route.
After journeying through the Pacific, to make an attempt from the west, Cook began at Nootka Sound in April 1778.
Although some of the crew may have survived into the early 1850s, no evidence has ever been found of any survivors.
After successfully sailing the Passage, the 77-year-old Forsyth completed the circumnavigation of North America, returning to his home port on Long Island, New York.
The allegations arose after the U.S. Navy released photographs of the USS ''Charlotte'' surfaced at the North Pole.
Until 2009, the Arctic pack ice prevented regular marine shipping throughout most of the year.
The largest ship to navigate the Northwest Passage was the cruise liner ''Crystal Serenity'' of gross tonnage 69,000.
To this day, they are known as the Lachine Rapids.
The ship, after extensive upgrades,  followed a more northerly, partially uncharted route.
He was explicitly ordered to explore all channels that might turn out to be a Northwest Passage.
The agreement states that all US Coast Guard vessels are engaged in research, and so would require permission from the Government of Canada to pass through.
Many ended in disaster, including that by Sir John Franklin in 1845.
This was an astonishing feat for that day and age, and McClure was knighted and promoted in rank.
She was carrying a cargo of  of coking coal from Port Metro Vancouver, Canada, to the Finnish Port of Pori, 15,000 more tons than would have been possible via the traditional Panama Canal route.
On July 9, 2007, Prime Minister Harper announced the establishment of a deep-water port in the far North.
In 1539, Hernán Cortés commissioned Francisco de Ulloa to sail along the Baja California Peninsula on the western coast of North America.
At one point, Larsen wondered "if we had come this far only to be crushed like a nut on a shoal and then buried by the ice."
In the spring of 1682, La Salle made his famous voyage down the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico.
The ''Gjøa'' was put into a natural harbour on the south shore of King William Island; by October 3 she was iced in.
However the passage through the Arctic Ocean would require significant investment in escort vessels and staging ports, and it would remain seasonal.
In the government press release the Prime Minister is quoted as saying, “Canada has a choice when it comes to defending our sovereignty over the Arctic.
To make the voyage possible, she was escorted and supported by the Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker ''Simon Fraser''.
The gray whale ''Eschrichtius robustus'' has not been seen in the Atlantic since it was hunted to extinction there in the 18th century, but in May 2010, one such whale turned up in the Mediterranean.
The declaration came after the successful completion of Operation Nunalivut (Inuktitut for "the land is ours"), which was an expedition into the region by five military patrols.
by Andrea Charron, given to the 2004 Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs Institute Symposium.
While searching for him the McClure Arctic Expedition discovered the Northwest Passage in 1850.
He later explored the Arctic and Hudson Bay.
The voyage from the Atlantic to the Pacific was completed in 24 days.
However, this strait was not navigable to ships at that time.
Awaited by shipping companies, this 'historic event' will cut thousands of miles off their routes.
We either use it or lose it.
In 1524, Charles V sent Estêvão Gomes to find a northern Atlantic passage to the Spice Islands.
This leaves the large rectangle north of the coast, south of Parry Channel and east of Baffin Island.
Over the past few years, however, it has become increasingly prevalent there.
Tickets for the 32-day trip started at $22,000 and were quickly sold out.
The eastern entrance and main axis of the northwest passage, the Parry Channel, was found in 1819.
Explorers thought that an open water route close to the North Pole must exist.
According to the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, the latter part of the 20th century and the start of the 21st had seen marked shrinkage of ice cover.
The strait grew in European imagination as an easy sea lane linking Europe with the residence of Khagan (the Great Khan) in Cathay (northern China).
The Greek pilot Juan de Fuca, sailing from Acapulco (in Mexico) under the flag of the Spanish crown, claimed he had sailed the strait from the Pacific to the North Sea and back in 1592.
The eastern portion by NNSI and NTCL from Churchill and Montreal.
Five to seven routes have been taken through the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, via the McClure Strait, Dease Strait, and the Prince of Wales Strait, but not all of them are suitable for larger ships.
In 1772, Samuel Hearne travelled overland northwest from Hudson Bay to the Arctic Ocean, thereby proving that there was no strait connecting Hudson Bay to the Pacific Ocean.
And make no mistake, this Government intends to use it.
On August 28, 2010, Bear Grylls and a team of five were the first rigid inflatable boat (RIB) crew to complete a point-to-point navigation between Pond Inlet on Baffin Island and Tuktoyaktuk in the Northwest Territories.
She also became the only British vessel to complete the Northwest Passage in one season, as well as the only British sailing yacht to return from there to British waters.
If, as has been claimed, parts of the eastern end of the Passage are barely  deep, the route's viability as a Euro-Asian shipping route is reduced.
His was the first vessel to circumnavigate the world via the Northwest Passage.
These trips included one by Eric Forsyth on board the  Westsail sailboat ''Fiona'', a boat he built in the 1980s.
In his first news conference after the 2006 federal election, Prime Minister-designate Stephen Harper contested an earlier statement made by the U.S. ambassador that Arctic waters were international, stating the Canadian government's intention to enforce its sovereignty there.
(As late as the mid-18th century, Captain James Cook had reported that Antarctic icebergs had yielded fresh water, seemingly confirming the hypothesis.)
In 1981 as part of the Transglobe Expedition, Ranulph Fiennes and Charles R. Burton completed the Northwest Passage.
A 1745 act, when extended in 1775, promised a £20,000 prize for whoever discovered the passage.
On July 10, 2007, Rear Admiral Timothy McGee of the United States Navy, and Rear Admiral Brian Salerno of the United States Coast Guard announced that the United States would be increasing its ability to patrol the Arctic.
The major rivers on the east coast were also explored in case they could lead to a transcontinental passage.
The plankton species '' Neodenticula seminae'' had not been seen in the Atlantic for 800,000 years.
