Oslo is the host of many festivals, such as Øyafestivalen and by:Larm.
Among non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest, with 132,135 registered members (2014), and probably fewer than 200,000 in total.
It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the evacuation of Dunkirk to the Normandy landings.
In 2012, an official study showed that 86% of the total population have at least one parent who was born in Norway.
Norway has approximately  of road network, of which  are paved and  are motorway.
Modern interest in the old ways has led to a revival of pagan religious practices in the form of ''Åsatru.''
Yearly immigration has increased since 2005.
The Norwegian government offers language instructional courses for immigrants wishing to obtain Norwegian citizenship.
Norway was awarded first place according to the UN's Human Development Index (HDI) for 2013.
Each December Norway gives a Christmas tree to the United Kingdom as thanks for the British assistance during the Second World War.
Upon the death of Haakon V, King of Norway, in 1319, Magnus Erikson, at just three years old, inherited the throne as King Magnus VII of Norway.
Erna Solberg became Prime Minister in 2013, replacing Jens Stoltenberg.
Within two years 300 societies had been organised all over Norway with a total membership of 20,000 persons.
These were unsuccessful.
Norway is the host of one of the world's biggest extreme sport festivals with music, Ekstremsportveko—a festival held annually in Voss.
As a promoter of human rights, Norway has held the annual Oslo Freedom Forum conference, a gathering described by ''The Economist'' as "on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum."
About 70 Roman bronze cauldrons, often used as burial urns, have been found.
Norway has an extensive coastline, facing the North Atlantic Ocean and the Barents Sea.
The Norwegian Central Bank operates investment offices in London, New York and Shanghai.
Since the late 20th century, Norway has attracted many immigrants from southern and central Europe, the Mideast, Africa and Asia.
After Norway had become Christian, ''Noregr'' and ''Noregi'' had become the most common forms, but during the 15th century the newer forms ''Noreg(h)'' and ''Norg(h)e'', found in medieval Icelandic manuscripts, took over and have survived until modern day.
Norwegians enjoy the second-highest GDP per-capita among European countries (after Luxembourg), and the sixth-highest GDP (PPP) per-capita in the world.
In response to its being overrun by Germany in 1940, the country was one of the founding nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 4 April 1949.
Between 3000 and 2500 BC new settlers (Corded Ware culture) arrived in eastern Norway.
Major works of that period include ''Historia Norwegiæ'', ''Þiðrekssaga'' and ''Konungs skuggsjá''.
The lowlands around Oslo have the warmest and sunniest summers, but also cold weather and snow in wintertime.
Charles John was a complex man whose long reign extended to 1844.
The Monarch officially retains executive power.
In the early Middle Ages, wooden stave churches were constructed throughout Norway.
The government, led by prime minister Einar Gerhardsen, embarked on a programme inspired by Keynesian economics, emphasising state financed industrialisation and co-operation between trade unions and employers' organisations.
The Gulating had its meeting place by Sognefjord and may have been the centre of an aristocratic confederation along the western fjords and islands called the Gulatingslag.
In 2010, 10% of the population was religiously unaffiliated, while another 9%, were members of religious communities outside the Church of Norway.
All of these groups speak many different languages and come from different cultures and religions.
Furthermore, women were then eligible for different occupations, particularly the common school teacher.
Reflecting its monarchical past, Norway was established under the Lutheran Church of Norway, and it continues as the state church.
In 2006, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, almost 4.7 million persons identified as Norwegian Americans, which was larger than the population of ethnic Norwegians in Norway itself.
Norway also lays claim to a section of Antarctica known as Queen Maud Land.
About 6% of the immigrant population come from EU, North America and Australia, and about 8.1% come from Asia, Africa and Latin America.
The film was released in 1975 and is based on characters from Norwegian cartoonist Kjell Aukrust.
Particular successes were ''Kristin Lavransdatter'', based on a novel by a Nobel Prize winner; ''The Telegraphist'' and ''Gurin with the Foxtail''.
The implements vary in shape and mostly are made of different kinds of stone; those of later periods are more skilfully made.
The coastal climate of Norway is exceptionally mild compared with areas on similar latitude elsewhere in the world, with the Gulf Stream passing directly offshore the northern areas of the Atlantic coast.
This is also evident in Norway's low Gini coefficient.
Its debating chamber, in timber, is an abstract version of a ''lavvo,'' the traditional tent used by the nomadic Sami people.
The Sami people have for centuries been the subject of discrimination and abuse by the dominant cultures in Scandinavia and Russia, those countries claiming possession of Sami lands.
In this way, the losses incurred by the market turmoil was recuperated by November 2009.
After the 1994 referendum, Norway maintained its membership in the European Economic Area (EEA), an arrangement granting the country access to the internal market of the Union, on the condition that Norway implements the Union's pieces of legislation which are deemed relevant (of which there were approximately seven thousand by 2010) Successive Norwegian governments have, since 1994, requested participation in parts of the EU's co-operation that go beyond the provisions of the EEA agreement.
Historically, both the Norwegian Labour Party and Conservative Party have played leading political roles.
Since 2000, economic growth has been rapid, pushing unemployment down to levels not seen since the early 1980s (unemployment in 2007: 1.3%).
Of particular note is Edvard Munch, a symbolist/expressionist painter who became world-famous for The Scream which is said to represent the anxiety of modern man.
Norwegian armed forces in the north launched an offensive against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik, until they were forced to surrender on 10 June after losing British support which had been diverted to France during the German invasion of France.
According to a  report by Dagens Næringsliv in June 2016, the country would like to ban all gasoline and diesel powered vehicles as early as 2025.
National and county roads are managed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration.
Norway's population was 5,096,300 people in October 2013.
Olaf's mother and Haakon's widow, Queen Margaret, managed the foreign affairs of Denmark and Norway during the minority of Olaf IV.
However, Norway, together with Iceland and Liechtenstein, participates in the European Union's single market through the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement.
By referendums in 1972 and 1994, Norwegians rejected proposals to join the European Union (EU).
The League had this hold over the royalty because of the loans the Hansa had made to the royalty and the large debt the kings were carrying.
Jan Garbarek, Terje Rypdal, Mari Boine, Arild Andersen, and Bugge Wesseltoft are internationally recognised while Paal Nilssen-Love, Supersilent, Jaga Jazzist and Wibutee are becoming world-class artists of the younger generation.
Net immigration from abroad reached 47,300 (300 higher than in 2011), while immigration accounted for 72% of Norway's population growth.
Knut Erik Jensen was among the more successful new directors, together with Erik Skjoldbjærg, who is remembered for ''Insomnia''.
Norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902.
In the 1st quarter of 2009, the GNP of Norway surpassed Sweden's for the first time in history, although its population is half the size.
Particularly in the 19th century, when economic conditions were difficult in Norway, tens of thousands of people migrated to the United States and Canada, where they could work and buy land in frontier areas.
It can impeach members of the government if their acts are declared unconstitutional.
The Kven minority historically spoke the Uralic Kven language (considered a separate language in Norway, but generally perceived as a Finnish dialect in Finland).
From about 1500 BC bronze was gradually introduced, but the use of stone implements continued; Norway had few riches to barter for bronze goods, and the few finds consist mostly of elaborate weapons and brooches that only chieftains could afford.
As such, he was regarded as a liberal monarch for that age.
Drammen also has a sizeable population of Sikhs; the largest gurdwara in north Europe was built in Lier.
The railways transported 56,827,000 passengers 2,956 million passenger-kilometres and 24,783,000 tonnes of cargo 3,414 million tonne-kilometres.
There are departures to most European countries and some intercontinental destinations.
The Swedish, Finnish and Icelandic Lutheran congregations in Norway have about 27,500 members in total.
According to the terms of the convention, Christian Frederik abdicated the Norwegian throne and authorised the Parliament of Norway to make the necessary constitutional amendments to allow for the personal union that Norway was forced to accept.
Norwegians are an ethnic North Germanic people.
The ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research.
Other Christian denominations total about 4.9% of the population, the largest of which is the Roman Catholic Church, with 83,000 members, according to 2009 government statistics.
The Council reviews and approves all of the Monarch's actions as head of state.
Solberg said her win was "a historic election victory for the right-wing parties".
There was no strong bourgeosie class in Norway to demand a breakdown of this aristocratic control of the economy.
Due to the low population density, narrow shape and long coastlines of Norway, its public transport is less developed than in many European countries, especially outside the major cities.
The destruction of the Western Roman Empire by the Germanic peoples in the 5th century is characterised by rich finds, including tribal chiefs' graves containing magnificent weapons and gold objects.
The Church's incomes and possessions were instead redirected to the court in Copenhagen.
In 2014-15 polling, football ranked far behind biathlon and cross-country skiing in terms of popularity as spectator sports.
Harald V of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg was crowned King of Norway in 1991, the first since the 14th century who has been born in the country.
The constitution still requires that the reigning monarch must be Lutheran and that the country's values are based on its Christian and humanist heritage.
69% of the population aged 15–74 are employed.
These states were based on either clans or tribes (e.g., the Horder of Hordaland in western Norway).
When Ohthere of Hålogaland visited King Alfred the Great in England in the end of the 9th century, the land was called ''Norðwegr'' (lit.
According to tradition, Harald Fairhair unified them into one in 872 after the Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger, thus becoming the first king of a united Norway.
The government controls its petroleum resources through a combination of state ownership in major operators in the oil fields (with approximately 62% ownership in Statoil in 2007) and the fully state-owned Petoro, which has a market value of about twice Statoil, and SDFI.
Upon his release, Marcus Thrane attempted unsuccessfully to revitalize his movement but, after the death of his wife, migrated to the United States.
The Norwegian national football team has participated three times in the FIFA World Cup (1938, 1994, 1998), and once in the European Championship (2000).
By the end of the war, the force had grown to 58 ships and 7,500 men in service in the Royal Norwegian Navy, 5 squadrons of aircraft (including Spitfires, Sunderland flying boats and Mosquitos) in the newly formed Norwegian Air Force, and land forces including the Norwegian Independent Company 1 and 5 Troop as well as No.
The Norwegian farm culture continues to play a role in contemporary Norwegian culture.
Norway is also the world's 2nd-largest exporter of fish (in value, after China).
Inequalities and social differences are still present in public health in Norway today.
The architect Christian H. Grosch designed the earliest parts of the University of Oslo, the Oslo Stock Exchange, and many other buildings and churches constructed in that early national period.
The Sami people have never been a single community in a single region of Lapland.
Norway is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Council of Europe and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Although Norway was unprepared for the German surprise attack (see: Battle of Drøbak Sound, Norwegian Campaign, and Invasion of Norway), military and naval resistance lasted for two months.
While yearly net immigration in 2001–5 was on average 13,613, it increased to 37,541 between 2006 and 2010, and in 2011 net immigration reached 47,032.
This is the famous Syttende Mai (Seventeenth of May) holiday celebrated by Norwegians and Norwegian-Americans alike.
In 1863, the last trace of keeping unmarried women in the status of minors was removed.
''Syttende Mai'' is also called ''Norwegian Constitution Day''.
At the time of the invasion, Norway had the 4th largest merchant marine fleet in the world.
In practice, the Prime Minister exercises the executive powers.
Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway, which in 2011 has slightly more than 5,900 adherents, or 1% of non-Lutheran Norwegians.
As Sweden's military was not strong enough to defeat the Norwegian forces outright and Norway's treasury was not large enough to support a protracted war, and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian coast, the belligerents were forced to negotiate the Convention of Moss.
The attraction and the film ceased their operations on 5 October 2014.
In the 1990s and 2000s the group maintained its popularity domestically, and has remained successful outside Norway, especially in Germany, Switzerland, France and Brazil.
The most valuable minerals are calcium carbonate (limestone), building stone, nepheline syenite, olivine, iron, titanium, and nickel.
In 2012, of the total 660,000 with immigrant background, 407,262 had Norwegian citizenship (62.2%).
King Haakon and the Norwegian government escaped to Rotherhithe in London.
and the Castberg Oil Field (''Castberg-feltet'')—calculated size 540 million barrels of oil, and  (''utvinnbar'') of gas.
Around 1975, both the proportion and absolute number of workers in industry peaked.
Life in Norway (especially economic life) was "dominated by the aristocracy of professional men who filled most of the important posts in the central government."
The two most prominent are the E6 going north-south through the entire country, and the E39, which follows the West Coast.
Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence, this influenced the literature written in the late 12th and early 13th centuries.
Norway first participated at the Olympic Games in 1900, and has sent athletes to compete in every Games since then, except for the sparsely attended 1904 Games and the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when they participated in the American-led boycott.
Harald's realm was mainly a South Norwegian coastal state.
In the 19th century, it inspired a strong romantic nationalistic movement, which is still visible in the Norwegian language and media.
It is now thought that these so-called "Arctic" peoples came from the south and followed the coast northward considerably later.
For an extended period, the Norwegian art scene was dominated by artwork from Germany and Holland as well as by the influence of Copenhagen.
An article in the newspaper ''Aftenposten'' in October 2012 noted there were about 115,234 registered Roman Catholics in Norway; the reporter estimated that the total number of people with a Roman Catholic background may be 170,000–200,000 or higher.
Representations of the Sun, animals, trees, weapons, ships, and people are all strongly stylised.
Under discussion is development of a new high-speed rail system between the nation's largest cities.
Norway has conscription (including 6–12 months of training); in 2013, the country became the first in Europe and NATO to draft women as well as men.
However, there are some isolated cases showing that some municipalities have abused their position in public procurement processes.
Bokmål is the written language used by a large majority of about 80–85%.
The movement covered all branches of culture, including literature (Henrik Wergeland 1808–1845, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson 1832–1910, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen 1812–1845, Jørgen Moe 1813–1882), painting (Hans Gude 1825–1903, Adolph Tidemand 1814–1876), music (Edvard Grieg 1843–1907), and even language policy, where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to today's two official written forms for Norwegian: Bokmål and Nynorsk.
The red list of 2010 encompasses 4,599 species.
About 74.3% of Norwegians were members of the Church of Norway in 2015.
The Iraqi and Somali immigrant populations have increased significantly in recent years.
Norway has the world's largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles per capita, with Oslo recognised as the EV capital of the world.
In 2012, the Norwegian parliament voted to grant the Church of Norway greater autonomy, a decision which was confirmed in a constitutional amendment on 21 May 2012.
Philology professor Magnus Olsen wrote that ''norðrvegr'' refers to the inner-archipelago sailing route of southwestern Norway, the home area of Harald Fairhair, the first king of Norway, and that because of him,  the name was extended to the entire country.
One of the most striking modern buildings in Norway is the Sami Parliament in Kárášjohka, designed by Stein Halvorson and Christian Sundby.
Stunning and dramatic scenery and landscape is found throughout Norway.
It included a number of prominent personalities such as Knut Hamsun.
Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation authority, Reichskommissar Josef Terboven.
Many Norwegians and persons of Norwegian descent joined the Allied forces as well as the Free Norwegian Forces.
The legislature abolished the death penalty for high treason in war and war-crimes in 1979.
A national referendum confirmed the people's preference for a monarchy over a republic.
Still Norway remained a conservative society.
The state also owns significant shares of Norway's largest bank, DnB NOR and the airline SAS.
However, by mid-century, Norway was still far from a "democracy".
The largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale, and the largest fish is the basking shark.
The Hanseatic League forced the royalty to cede to them greater and greater concessions over foreign trade and the economy.
In 1995 the Norwegian government established the sovereign wealth fund ("Government Pension Fund — Global"), which would be funded with oil revenues, including taxes, dividends, sales revenues and licensing fees.
Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to almost 50% of total exports and constitute more than 20% of the GDP.
Frits Thaulow, an impressionist, was influenced by the art scene in Paris as was Christian Krohg, a realist painter, famous for his paintings of prostitutes.
The cities or municipalities with the highest share of immigrants in 2012 were Oslo (32%) and Drammen (27%).
Some supporters have also advocated making Norwegian Sign Language an official language of the country.
If an indicted suspect is impeached, Parliament has the power to remove the person from office.
Quisling, as ''minister president'', later formed a collaborationist government under German control.
They did not exhibit the same permeating Roman influence seen in most other artifacts from the early centuries AD, indicating that parts of northern Europe had not yet come into contact with the Romans at the beginning of the Iron Age.
A short film, ''The Spirit of Norway'' was featured at Maelstrom at Norway Pavilion at Epcot located within Walt Disney World Resort in Florida in the United States.
Norwegian merchant marine ships, often with Norwegian sailors still on board, were then sailing under the British flag and at risk of being sunk by German submarines.
In 1854, women won the right to inherit property in their own right just like men.
Some retained their ancient religion.
(At this time both the kings of Sweden and of Denmark were elected to the throne by their respective nobles.)
Remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway survive today in the form of names, referential names of cities and locations, the days of the week, and other parts of everyday language.
The Old Norse name was borrowed into Old English, as  ''Norðweg,  Norweg'', giving rise to  modern  ''Norway'' by regular development via Middle English ''Norwey, Norwei''.
Two referendums on joining the European Union failed by narrow margins in 1972 and 1994.
Since the 1990s, a divisive question in politics has been how much of the income from petroleum production the government should spend, and how much it should save.
The earliest traces of human occupation in Norway are found along the coast, where the huge ice shelf of the last ice age first melted between 11,000 and 8,000 BC.
The west coast of southern Norway and the coast of northern Norway present some of the most visually impressive coastal sceneries in the world.
Huge burial cairns built close to the sea as far north as Harstad and also inland in the south are characteristic of this period.
Thus at an all-Scandinavian meeting held at Kalmar, Erik of Pomerania was crowned king of all three Scandinavian countries.
Norway uses a civil law system where laws are created and amended in Parliament and the system regulated through the Courts of justice of Norway.
During the national romanticism of the 19th century, this period was by some referred to as the "400-Year Night", since all of the kingdom's royal, intellectual, and administrative power was centred in Copenhagen in Denmark.
Through the Council of State, a privy council presided over by the Monarch, the Prime Minister and the Cabinet meet at the Royal Palace and formally consult the Monarch.
In 1993 Norway became the second country to legalise civil union partnerships for same-sex couples, and on 1 January 2009 Norway became the sixth country to grant full marriage equality to same-sex couples.
150 are elected directly from the 19 constituencies, and an additional 19 seats ("levelling seats") are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote for the political parties.
The issue of separation of church and state in Norway has been increasingly controversial, as many people believe it is time to change this, to reflect the growing diversity in the population.
The modern-day Irish cities of Dublin, Limerick and Waterford were founded by Norwegian settlers.
King Charles III John, who came to the throne of Norway and Sweden in 1818, was the second king following Norway's break from Denmark and the union with Sweden.
Norway shares a  land border with Sweden,  with Finland, and  with Russia to the east.
However, following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the Monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial, such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other ministers in the executive government.
Famous Norwegian winter sport athletes are, for instance, biathlete Ole Einar Bjørndalen and cross country skiers Marit Bjørgen and Bjørn Dæhlie.
The first inhabitants were the Ahrensburg culture (11th to 10th millennia BC), which was a late Upper Paleolithic culture during the Younger Dryas, the last period of cold at the end of the Weichsel glaciation.
Since 2010, Norway has been classified as the world's most democratic country by the Democracy Index.
The Baha'i religion has slightly more than 1,000 adherents.
The old meaning of the word is interpreted as "The narrow way through the strait".
The elk is in Norway known for its size and strength and is often called ''skogens konge'', "king of the forest".
Norway has often been ruled by minority governments.
As Norway has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) the Kven language together with Romani and Scandoromani language has become officially recognised minority languages.
By the late 19th century, in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature, the so-called "Great Four" emerged: Henrik Ibsen, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Alexander Kielland, and Jonas Lie.
It is a Unified National Police Service made up of 27 Police Districts and several specialist agencies, such as Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime, known as ''Økokrim''; and the National Criminal Investigation Service, each headed by a chief of police.
The Norwegian production team Stargate has produced songs for Rihanna, Beyoncé, Shakira, Jennifer Lopez and Lionel Richie, among others.
The Norwegian Armed Forces numbers about 25,000 personnel, including civilian employees.
This led to the development of Nynorsk in the 19th century and to the formation of alternative spelling standards in the 20th century.
It is practised mainly by Somali, Arab, Bosniak, Albanian and Turkish immigrants, as well as Norwegians of Pakistani descent.
The troubles in Punjab after Operation Blue Star and riots committed against Sikhs in India after the assassination of Indira Gandhi led to an increase in Sikh refugees moving to Norway.
The entire network is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration.
Since then labour-intensive industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely been outsourced.
Many went to the Midwest and Pacific Northwest.
In 1349, the Black Death radically altered Norway, killing between 50% and 60% of its population and leaving it in a period of social and economic decline.
Norway has obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population.
The Courts' strict and formal mission is to regulate the Norwegian judicial system, interpret the Constitution, and as such implement the legislation adopted by Parliament.
