Since 2014 the White House annually celebrates Nowruz in attendance of notable Iranian Americans.
Accordingly, the definition of Nowruz given by the Iranian scientist Tusi was the following: "the first day of the official New Year Nowruz was always the day on which the sun entered Aries before noon."
Therefore, half of his face is sometimes painted white in order to prevent the criticisms.
Traditional costume for Nowruz.JPG|Traditional costume for Nowruz in Kazakhstan
The day Prophet Muhammad held Ali on his shoulders to destroy the Quraishie's idols in the house of God, the Kaaba."
In the recent years, limitations on expressions of Kurdish national identity, including the usage of Kurdish in the public sphere, have been considerably relaxed.
The government has stated that the Newroz celebrations will be tolerated as long as they do not become political demonstrations of the treatment of the Kurds.
He is the husband of Nane Sarma, who shares a traditional love story with him in which they can meet each other only once a year.
Live long in praise, be happy and fortunate upon thy golden throne, drink immortality from the ''Cup of Jamshid''; and keep in solemn trust the customs of our ancestors, their noble aspirations, fair gestures and the exercise of justice and righteousness.
Nowruz is the most important holiday in Iran, marking the official New Year of the country.
Among other ideas, Zoroastrianism is the first monotheistic religion that emphasizes broad concepts; such as the corresponding work of good and evil in the world, and the connection of humans to nature.
Nowruz is also a holy day for Sufis, Bektashis, Ismailis, Alawites, Alevis, Babis and adherents of the Bahá'í Faith.
The Parsi New Year is celebrated as ''Jamshed Navroz'' by the entire Parsi community across the world.
Until 2005, the Kurdish population of Turkey could not celebrate their New Year openly.
The first day and the first month were given the attribute of Bahá, an Arabic word meaning splendour or glory, and thus the first day of the year was the day of Bahá in the month of Bahá.
Women wear colored dresses and spangled head scarves and young men wave flags of green, yellow and red, the historic colors of Kurdish people.
In the Shahnameh and Iranian mythology, he is credited with the foundation of Nowruz.
Given their temporal associations, it is possible that the Jews and Iranians of the time may have shared or adopted similar customs for these holidays.
In around the 11th century CE, major reforms of the Iranian calendars took place and whose principal purpose were to fix the beginning of the calendar year, i.e.
It may last weeks, particularly in the states of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan, from where the largest groups of Pakistan's Iranian-speaking people originate from (Pashtuns and Balochis respectively).
Amu Nowruz brings children gifts, much like his Christian counterpart Santa Claus.
The archangel Gabriel appeared to the Prophet, and it is the day that Abraham broke the idols.
267), by a 384–2 vote, "Recognizing the cultural and historical significance of Nowruz, ...
They decorate the doors and windows with garlands of roses and jasmines, and use color powders for creating patterns known as ''rangoli'' on the steps and thresholds.
Persian Bahá'ís still observe many of the Iranian customs associated with Nowruz such as the Haft Sîn, but American Bahá'í communities, for example, may have a potluck dinner, along with prayers and readings from Bahá'í scripture.
Other symbolic items which are usually set along the Haft Seen are candles, a mirror, decorating coins, and decorated eggs (sometimes one for each member of the family).
The day also assumes special significance for Shias as it was on 21 March 656 AD when the first Imam, Ali, assumed the office of Caliphate.
May thy house prosper and thy life be long!"
Many Iranians will throw large Nowruz parties in a central location as a way of dealing with the long distances between groups of friends and family.
According to him, "It is the belief of the Iranians that Nowruz marks the first day when the universe started its motion."
In Zoroastrianism, the seven most important Zoroastrian festivals are the six Gahambar festivals and Nowruz, which occurs at the spring equinox.
This was the first day of Farvardin, which is the first month of the Iranian calendar.
Other celebrations such the Gahambars and Mehrgan were eventually side-lined or were only followed by the Zoroastrians who carried them.
Nowruz is partly rooted in the tradition of Iranian religions, such as Mitraism and Zoroastrianism.
Typically, before the arrival of Nowruz, family members gather around a table, with the ''Haft Seen'' set on it, and await the exact moment of the March equinox to celebrate the New Year.
Thus, Nowruz remained as the main celebration in Iranian lands by both the officials and the people.
It is celebrated in Mazar-i-Sharif during the first 40 days of the year, when the tulip flowers grow in the green plains and over the hills surrounding the city.
This day is the ﬁrst day that the fertile wind blow and the ﬂowers on the earth appeared.
He is an old bearded man wearing colorful clothes with a long hat and rosary who symbolizes beneficence and the power of nature yielding the forces of winter.
As with all Bahá'í holy days, there are few fixed rules for observing Naw-Rúz, and Bahá'ís all over the world celebrate it as a festive day, according to local custom.
It was an important day during the time of the Achaemenids (), where kings from different nations under the Achaemenid Empire used to bring gifts to the King of Kings of Iran.
On the holiday eve, the graves of relatives are visited and tended.
* The dried fruit of the oleaster tree ()
Haft Seen 1393.jpg|Haft Seen table
In the book ''Nowruznama'' ("Book of the New Year", which is attributed to Omar Khayyam, a well known Persian poet and mathematician), a vivid description of the celebration in the courts of the kings of Iran is provided:
He had demons raise him above the earth into the heavens; there he sat on his throne like the sun shining in the sky.
The two holidays are therefore celebrated on different dates but within a few weeks of each other, depending on the year.
Georgian politicians have attended the festivities in the capital over the years, and have congratulated the Nowruz-observing ethnic groups and nationals in Georgia on the day of Nowruz.
In recent years, this activity is being performed only in Kabul and other major cities of Afghanistan, in which the mayor and other high governmental personalities participate for watching and observing.
The king would then summon musicians and singers, and invited his boon companions.
Also known as the ''Farmer's Day'', the observances usually last two weeks, culminating on the first day of the Afghan New Year, on March 21.
According to the Syrian historian Yaqut al-Hamawi, the Iranian Buyid ruler ʿAżod-od-Dawla (r. 949-83) customarily welcomed Nowruz in a majestic hall, wherein servants had placed gold and silver plates and vases full of fruit and colorful flowers.
It has been directly borrowed from the prank-playing April Fools' Day, and has become in vogue in Iran due to its coincidence with the day of the celebration of Sizdah Be-dar.
The initial term ''Haft Chin'' meaning "the seven collected," has been gradually altered to the present-day name of the setting.
Also in London, organizers estimated that 25000 people celebrated Newroz during March 2006.
To welcome, His messengers and obey their rulings.
Nowruz, along with Sadeh (celebrated in mid-winter), survived in society after the Muslim invasion of Iran in 650 CE.
No fires are allowed even on one's own property.
Since the extinction during the 19th century, Nowruz is not celebrated by Armenians and is not a public holiday in Armenia.
People start preparing for Nowruz with a major spring-cleaning of their house and the purchase of new clothes to wear for the New Year, as well the purchase of flowers.
The citizens of Kabul go to Istalif, Charikar or other green places around where the Cercis flowers grow.
The day is also used to symbolize the renewal of time in each religious dispensation.
The festival of ''Dehqān'' (; "Farmer") is celebrated on the first day of the New Year, in which the farmers walk in the cities as a sign of encouragement for the agricultural productions.
The stamp was made public in the presence of the Iranian President during the first International Nowruz Celebrations in Tehran on Saturday, 27 March 2010.
Under the Sassanid emperors, Nowruz was celebrated as the most important day of the year.
Honor the craftsman and the sage in equal degree; disdain the acquisition of wealth.
Go forth from thy rich throne, conquer new lands.
HaftSeen2.JPG|thumb|Haft Seen table in a hotel in Tehran, Iran
During the Taliban rule (1996–2001), Nawruz was banned and considered an "ancient pagan holiday centered on fire worship."
Nowruz at the Palladium Mall, Tehran.jpg|Traditional setting for Nowruz at a mall in Tehran, Iran
It is a secular holiday for most celebrants that is enjoyed by people of several different faiths, but remains a holy day for Zoroastrians.
In Mitraism, festivals had a deep linkage with the sun light.
The day upon which Nowruz falls has been recommended as a day of fasting for Twelver Shia Muslims by Shia scholars, including Abul-Qassim al-Khoei, Imam Khomeini and Ali al-Sistani.
They order and make new attires especially for the festival.
This is also extended to personal attire, and it is customary to buy at least one set of new clothes.
"From the era of Kai Khosrow till the days of Yazdegard, last of the pre-Islamic kings of Iran, the royal custom was thus: on the first day of the New Year, ''Now Ruz'', the king's first visitor was the High Mobad of the Zoroastrians, who brought with him as gifts a golden goblet full of wine, a ring, some gold coins, a fistful of green sprigs of wheat, a sword, and a bow.
The 10th century scholar Biruni, in his work ''Kitab al-Tafhim li Awa'il Sina'at al-Tanjim'', provides a description of the calendar of various nations.
A bowl of water with goldfish, a holy book (e.g.
Newroz (also known as Nevruz) is largely considered as a potent symbol of Kurdish identity in Turkey, even if there are some Turks (including Turkmens) celebrating the festival.
On 15 March 2010, the House of Representatives of the United States passed the ''Nowruz Resolution'' (H.Res.
These latter two variants of the calendar, which are only followed by the Zoroastrians of Pakistan and India, celebrate the spring equinox as ''Jamshed-i Nouroz'', with New Year's Day then being celebrated in July–August as Pateti "(day) of penitence" (from ''patet'' "confession," hence also repentance and penitence).
It is widely celebrated by the country's large Azerbaijani minority (~7% of the total population) as well as by the Iranians living in Georgia.
Nowruz Tehran2013.jpg|Haft Seen in Tupkhane Square of Tehran, 2013
In the folklore of Afghanistan, Kampirak and his retinue pass village by village distributing gathered charities among people.
Among the Yazidis, this festival is celebrated on the first Wednesday of Nisan (April) which marks their New Year's Day.
The ritual of jumping over fire has remained in Armenia in the feast of ''Trndez'', which is a feast of purification in the Armenian Apostolic Church and Armenian Catholic Churches, celebrated forty days after Jesus's birth.
the Avesta or Quran) and/or a poetry book (e.g.
Even the Turkic and Mongol invaders did not attempt to abolish Nowruz in favor of any other celebration.
It is usually celebrated in the evening, and is obtained by people making bonfires and jumping over them, as well as setting off fireworks and sparklers.
He is characterized as an elderly silver-haired man who puts on a felt hat, and has a walking stick, a long cloak of blue canvas, a sash, a pair of thin-soled giveh, and a pair of linen trousers.
The significance of the ceremony in the Achaemenid Empire was such that King Cambyses II's appointment as the king of Babylon was legitimized only after his participation in the referred annual Achaemenid festival.
Nowruz is the day of the vernal equinox, and marks the beginning of spring in the Northern Hemisphere.
Haft Seen 1392.jpg|Haft Seen table
the Divan of Hafez), and Rose water are also included to the setting.
Following the demise of the caliphate and the subsequent re-emergence of Iranian dynasties such as the Samanids and Buyids, Nowruz was elevated to an even more important event.
Every year, large festivities are held notably in the capital Tbilisi.
Charshanbe Suri (; ; ) is a prelude to the New Year.
Most royal traditions of Nowruz, such as royal audiences with the public, cash gifts, and the pardoning of prisoners, were established during the Sassanid era and persisted unchanged until modern times.
The tradition is observed in central provinces, specially Bamyan and Daykundi.
In the traditional songs, he introduces himself as a serf trying to cheer people who he refers to as his lords.
It's a tradition for people to plant trees, dredge irrigation canals, clean houses and prepare scrumptious food for guests during the festival.
They go for picnic with their families during the first two weeks of the New Year.
In the section on the Iran calendar, he mentions Nowruz, Sadeh, Tirgan, Mehrgan, the six Gahambars, Farvardigan, Bahmanja, Esfand Armaz and several other festivals.
Erotic Scene Chehel Soltun Ispahan.JPG|A Safavid painting depecting a Charshanbe Suri celebration
It remains unclear which holiday was established first.
In recent years, the Newroz celebration gathers around 1 million participants in Diyarbakır, the biggest city of the Kurdish dominated Southeastern Turkey.
These items are also known to have astrological correlations to planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Sun and Moon.
Trail mix and berries are also served during the celebration.
This was the address of the High Mobad to the king: "O Majesty, on this feast of the equinox, first day of the first month of the year, seeing that thou hast freely chosen God and the faith of the ancient ones; may Sraosha, the angel-messenger, grant thee wisdom and insight and sagacity in thy affairs.
On the day of Navroz, they dress in their new and best clothes and put on gold and silver kustis and caps.
The Kurds in Finland celebrate the new year as a way of demonstrating their support for the Kurdish cause.
At the time of the equinox, the sun is observed to be directly over the equator, and the north and south poles of the Earth lie along the solar terminator.
Since the communal observations of the ancient Iranians appear in general to have been a seasonal ones, and related to agriculture, "it is probable that they traditionally held festivals in both autumn and spring, to mark the major turning points of the natural year."
* ''Jahenda Bala'' (; "Raising"), which is celebrated on the first day of the New Year, and is attended by high-ranking government officials such as the Vice-President, Ministers, and Provincial Governors – It is a specific religious ceremony performed at the Blue Mosque of Mazar-i-Sharif.
* ''Buzkashi'' tournament, held during the Gul-i-Surkh festival in Mazar-i-Sharif, Kabul and other northern cities of Afghanistan
During the Newroz celebrations in 2008, three Kurds were shot dead by Syrian security forces.
May thy soul flourish; may thy youth be as the new-grown grain; may thy horse be puissant, victorious; thy sword bright and deadly against foes; thy hawk swift against its prey; thy every act straight as the arrow's shaft.
Haft Seen (; "the seven 'S's") is the traditional table setting of Nowruz in Iran.
Nawruz is celebrated widely in Afghanistan.
7SEEN 89.jpg|Haft Seen table
In the language of Iran, he would then glorify God and praise the monarch.
Although there may be no mention of the term ''Nowruz'' in recorded Achaemenid inscriptions, there is a detailed account by Xenophon of a Nowruz celebration taking place in Persepolis and the continuity of this festival in the Achaemenid tradition.
''Banging spoons'' () is an Iranian tradition practiced on the eve of Charshanbe Suri, which is similar to the Halloween custom ''Trick-or-treating''.
On 21 March 2013, PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan called for a ceasefire through a message that was released in Diyarbakır during the Newroz celebrations.
Zoroastrian practices were dominant for much of the history of ancient Iran.
Naw-Rúz is one of nine holy days for adherents of the Bahá'í Faith worldwide.
Boyce and Grenet explain the traditions for seasonal festivals and comment: "It is possible that the splendor of the Babylonian festivities at this season led the Iranians to develop their own spring festival into an established New Year feast, with the name ''Navasarda'' "New Year" (a name which, though first attested through Middle Persian derivatives, is attributed to the Achaemenian period)."
In 539 BC, the Jews came under Iranian rule, thus exposing both groups to each other's customs.
It is also taken place by Iranian communities in several regions in Europe and the Americas, including Los Angeles, Toronto, Cologne and London.
The Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics notes that the Purim holiday is based on a lunar calendar, while Nowruz occurs at the spring equinox (solar calendar).
Kurds gather into fairgrounds mostly outside the cities to welcome spring.
The setting includes seven items starting with the letter ''S'' or ''Seen'' ('''') in Persian alphabet.
There are special ceremonies in the Tekke, led by the clergy, and large meals are served there.
The next international ceremonies to celebrate Nowruz were scheduled to be hosted by Turkmenistan.
The custom and the traditional practice of Haft Seen has been changed over times.
Nowruz 2013 in Tekeli.JPG|Nowruz in Tekeli, 2013
Merriam-Webster (2006) recognizes only the spelling "Nauruz" (and a contestant in the final session of the 2006 Scripps National Spelling Bee in the United States, Allion Salvador, was disqualified on that basis).
* ''Samanu'' () – a sweet pudding made from germinated wheat
Happy Nowruz E27 jeh.jpg|A Nowruz parade held by Iranian Azeris in New York City
Sunlight is evenly divided between the north and south hemispheres.
Usually, Iranians living in Southern California go to the beaches to celebrate the event where it is permissible to build fires.
The first day of the Iranian calendar falls on the March equinox, the first day of spring, around 20 March.
Turkish government renamed the holiday ''Nevroz'' in 1995.
The UN's General Assembly recognized the International Day of Nowruz in 2010, describing it as a spring festival of Iranian origin, which has been celebrated for over 3,000 years.
The Buyids revived the ancient traditions of Sassanian times and restored many smaller celebrations that had been eliminated by the caliphate.
Sabzeh, displayed during Nowruz.jpg|Greenery (''Sabze'') for Haft Seen
In Iran, following the 1979 Revolution, some elements from the government have attempted to suppress Nowruz with very little success.
Most Georgian Azerbaijanis live in Kvemo Kartli, Kakheti, Shida Kartli, and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions.
Thus, the Democratic Society Party was a leading force in the organisation of the 2006 Newroz events throughout Turkey.
In Iran, it is celebrated on the eve of the last Wednesday before Nowruz.
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith, explained that Naw-Rúz was associated with the ''Most Great Name'' of God, and was instituted as a festival for those who observed the Nineteen day fast.
A specific novella is not identified and Encyclopædia Britannica itself notes that "no Jewish texts of this genre from the Persian period are extant, so these new elements can be recognized only inferentially".
Shah Tahmasp I and Humayun.jpg|A 16th century painting of Tahmasp I and Humayun celebrating Nowruz
Fish and floral motifs are a favorite among rangolis and considered highly auspicious.
The influx of tourists from Iran accelerated since around 2010–11.
Novruz003.jpg|Folk dancers in Baku, during the Novruz celebrations
Another custom associated with the day of Sizdah Be-dar is called ''Lie of the Thirteen'', which is the process of lying to someone and making them believe it.
It is practiced by people wearing disguises and going door-to-door to bang spoons against plates or bowls and receive packaged snacks.
Before Sassanids established their power in Western Asia around 300 CE, Parthians celebrated Nowruz in autumn, and the first of Farvardin began at the autumn equinox.
Extensive records on the celebration of Nowruz appear following the accession of Ardashir I, the founder of the Sasanian Empire (224–651 CE).
In Syria, the Kurds dress up in their national dress and celebrate the New Year.
Nowruz celebrations are observed by some of the ethnic groups in Pakistan, such as the Pashtuns and Baloch people.
Haji Firuz, with his face covered in soot, is clad in bright red clothes and a felt hat.
In Azerbaijan, according to old traditions, children slip around to their neighbors' homes and apartments on the last Tuesday prior to Novruz, knock at the doors, and leave their caps or little basket on the thresholds all the while hiding nearby waiting for candies, pastries and nuts.
The ceremony is performed by raising a special banner whose color configuration resembles Derafsh Kaviani.
Each Tuesday, people celebrate the day of one of the four elements&nbsp;– water, fire, earth and wind.
These considered Nowruz a pagan holiday and a distraction from Islamic holidays.
Celebration of Nowruz shared by several countries, Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Pakistan and Turkey..jpg|Traditional dancing during a Nowruz festival in Paris
The Bahá'í calendar is composed of 19 months, each of 19 days,  and each of the months is named after an attribute of God; similarly each of the nineteen days in the month also are named after an attribute of God.
It usually occurs on March 21 or the previous/following day, depending on where it is observed.
As a blackfaced serf, it is a controversial character, reviewed as a racist symbolism.
According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, the story of Purim as told in the Book of Esther is adapted from an Iranian novella about the shrewdness of harem queens, suggesting that Purim may be a transformation of the Iranian New Year.
He dances through the streets while singing and playing a tambourine, and is the companion of Amu Nowruz.
Nowruz is not celebrated by Georgians (excluding those who live in Iran and Azerbaijan), but it has become a public holiday in Georgia since 2010.
In response to the UN recognition, Iran unveiled a postage stamp.
In association with the "rebirth of nature," extensive spring cleaning is a national tradition observed by almost every household in Iran.
Newroz celebrations are usually organised by Kurdish cultural associations and pro-Kurdish political parties.
Although it is not clear whether proto-Indo-Iranians celebrated a feast as the first day of the calendar, there are indications that Iranians may have observed the beginning of both autumn and spring, respectively related to the harvest and the sowing of seeds, for the celebration of the New Year.
In Afghanistan, the festival of Gul-i-Surkh (; "Red Flower," referring to red tulip flowers) is the principal festival for Nawruz.
During the meeting of ''The Inter-governmental Committee for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Heritage'' of the United Nations, held between 28 September&nbsp;– 2 October 2009, Nowruz was officially registered on the UNESCO List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
According to Mary Boyce, "It seems a reasonable surmise that Nowruz, the holiest of them all, with deep doctrinal significance, was founded by Zoroaster himself"; although there is no clear date of origin.
Nowruz, at the vernal equinox.
As the Kurdish Newroz celebrations in Turkey often are theater for political messages, the events are frequently criticized for being political rallies rather than cultural celebrations.
The festival falls on the first day of the first month of the Fasli calendar, followed by the Parsis.
Although having Iranian and religious Zoroastrian origins, Nowruz has been celebrated by people from diverse ethno-linguistic communities for thousands of years.
Because of the house visits, you make sure you have a sufficient supply of pastry, cookies, fresh and dried fruits and mixed nuts on hand, as you typically serve your visitors with these items with tea and other beverages.
However, it is celebrated in Armenia by tens of thousands of Iranian tourists who visit Armenia with relative ease.
It was adopted as the main royal holiday during the Abbasid period.
The second International Nowruz Celebrations were also held in Tehran in 2011.
In Albania, the day of ''Sultan Nevruzit'' is celebrated as a mainly mystical day by the Bektashi sect.
They hold this festival by lighting fire and dancing around it.
This is the biggest recorded Nawroz gathering where up to 200,000 people from all over Afghanistan get together to celebrate the ceremony.
Alongside the religious celebration, all Albanians celebrate a secular version of Nowruz, which is referred to as the ''Spring Day'' ().
During the reign of the Parthian dynasty, the spring festival was Mehrgan, a Zoroastrian and Iranian festival celebrated in honor of Mithra.
Kurds in the diaspora also celebrate the New Year; for example, Kurds in Australia celebrate Newroz, not only as the beginning of the new year, but also as the Kurdish National Day.
The moment the sun crosses the celestial equator and equalizes night and day is calculated exactly every year, and families gather together to observe the rituals.
People from all over the country travel to Mazar-i-Sharif to attend the Nawruz festivals.
Annually, the president furthermore presents his official congratulations to the Iranian-Americans and the Iranian people in Iran and globally as well through a video.
In Iran, families celebrate the New Year since the exact time of the March equinox, which is calculated every year.
The Shahnameh dates Nowruz as far back to the reign of Jamshid, who in Zoroastrian texts saved mankind from a killer winter that was destined to kill every living creature.
