:: This is a reactor design that is cooled by liquid metal, totally unmoderated, and produces more fuel than it consumes.
Originally called "Chicago Pile-4", it was carried out under the direction of Walter Zinn for Argonne National Laboratory.
While not suitable for power production, Farnsworth-Hirsch fusors are used to produce neutron radiation.
These reactors come in two types:
::These dissolve the fuels in fluoride salts, or use fluoride salts for coolant.
Nuclear reactors have been launched into Earth orbit at least 34 times.
:::: Most LMFBRs are of this type.
This is a thermal neutron reactor design, the newest of which are the VVER-1200, Advanced Pressurized Water Reactor and the European Pressurized Reactor.
* Very-high-temperature reactor
Most BWR and PWR commercial reactors use uranium enriched to about 4% U-235, and some commercial reactors with a high neutron economy do not require the fuel to be enriched at all (that is, they can use natural uranium).
Notably, they have no high pressures or flammable components in the core.
Burn up is commonly expressed as megawatt days thermal per metric ton of initial heavy metal.
:: A Soviet design, built to produce plutonium as well as power.
Unlike a PWR, there is no primary and secondary loop.
Inspiration for a new type of reactor using uranium came from the discovery by Lise Meitner, Fritz Strassmann and Otto Hahn in 1938 that bombardment of uranium with neutrons (provided by an alpha-on-beryllium fusion reaction, a "neutron howitzer") produced a barium residue, which they reasoned was created by the fissioning of the uranium nuclei.
This experimental LMFBR operated by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission produced 0.8&nbsp;kW in a test on 20 December 1951 and 100&nbsp;kW (electrical) the following day, having a design output of 200&nbsp;kW (electrical).
"Gen IV" was named in 2000, by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) for developing new plant types.
Maintaining a chain reaction requires the fuel to be more highly enriched in fissile material (about 20% or more) due to the relatively lower probability of fission versus capture by U-238.
By merely placing cheap unenriched uranium into such a core, the non-fissionable U-238 will be turned into Pu-239, "breeding" fuel.
Plutonium is fissionable with both fast and thermal neutrons, which make it ideal for either nuclear reactors or nuclear bombs.
A boiling water reactor is cooled and moderated by water like a PWR, but at a lower pressure, which allows the water to boil inside the pressure vessel producing the steam that runs the turbines.
Shortly after, Hitler's Germany invaded Poland in 1939, starting World War II in Europe.
These reactors can function much like a PWR in terms of efficiency, and do not require much high-pressure containment, as the liquid metal does not need to be kept at high pressure, even at very high temperatures.
Under development in the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), India.
Most reactor systems employ a cooling system that is physically separated from the water that will be boiled to produce pressurized steam for the turbines, like the pressurized water reactor.
Some reactors are used to produce isotopes for medical and industrial use, or for production of weapons-grade plutonium.
Subsequent studies in early 1939 (one of them by Szilárd and Fermi) revealed that several neutrons were also released during the fissioning, making available the opportunity for the nuclear chain reaction that Szilárd had envisioned six years previously.
It is possible to convert Thorium-232 into U-233 in reactors specially designed for the purpose.
According to the International Atomic Energy Agency there are at least 100 research reactors in the world fueled by highly enriched (weapons-grade/90% enrichment uranium).
* Subcritical reactors are designed to be safer and more stable, but pose a number of engineering and economic difficulties.
Their main attraction is their use of light water and un-enriched uranium.
These have many safety features, high efficiency and a high power density suitable for vehicles.
The amount of energy extracted from nuclear fuel is called its burnup, which is expressed in terms of the heat energy produced per initial unit of fuel weight.
* Sodium-cooled fast reactor
All of them use/used liquid sodium.
The memorandum was a product of the MAUD Committee, which was working on the UK atomic bomb project, known as Tube Alloys, later to be subsumed within the Manhattan Project.
First discovered in 1972 by French physicist Francis Perrin, they are collectively known as the Oklo Fossil Reactors.
* The Small, sealed, transportable, autonomous reactor (SSTAR) is being primarily researched and developed in the US, intended as a fast breeder reactor that is passively safe and could be remotely shut down in case the suspicion arises that it is being tampered with.
More than a dozen advanced reactor designs are in various stages of development.
:: A BWR is like a PWR without the steam generator.
:: These are generally graphite moderated and CO2 cooled.
* The pebble-bed reactor, a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGCR), is designed so high temperatures reduce power output by Doppler broadening of the fuel's neutron cross-section.
Self-sustaining nuclear fission reactions took place in these reactors approximately 1.5&nbsp;billion years ago, and ran for a few hundred thousand years, averaging 100&nbsp;kW of power output during that time.
Heat from nuclear fission is passed to a working fluid (water or gas), which runs through steam turbines.
Helium is not subject to steam explosions, resists neutron absorption leading to radioactivity, and does not dissolve contaminants that can become radioactive.
These designs are generally not expected to be available for commercial construction before 2030.
They do not have a neutron moderator, and use less-moderating coolants.
The fission products which produce delayed neutrons have half lives for their decay by neutron emission that range from milliseconds to as long as several minutes, and so considerable time is required to determine exactly when a reactor reaches the critical point.
The thorium-233 beta decays to protactinium-233 and then to uranium-233, which in turn is used as fuel.
But in a fast breeder reactor, some other kind of coolant is used which will not moderate or slow the neutrons down much.
Nuclear reactors are used at nuclear power plants for electricity generation and in propulsion of ships.
Fusion power is an experimental technology, generally with hydrogen as fuel.
U-233 is also believed to have favourable nuclear properties as compared to traditionally used U-235, including better neutron economy and lower production of long lived transuranic waste.
The amount of energy in the reservoir of nuclear fuel is frequently expressed in terms of "full-power days," which is the number of 24-hour periods (days) a reactor is scheduled for operation at full power output for the generation of heat energy.
The prototype was the MSRE, which also used the Thorium fuel cycle.
Theft risk of this fuel (potentially used in the production of a nuclear weapon) has led to campaigns advocating conversion of this type of reactor to low-enrichment uranium (which poses less threat of proliferation).
These contain neutron moderator materials that slow neutrons until their neutron temperature is ''thermalized'', that is, until their kinetic energy approaches the average kinetic energy of the surrounding particles.
It produced around 5&nbsp;MW (electrical).
These systems insert large amounts of poison (often boron in the form of boric acid) into the reactor to shut the fission reaction down if unsafe conditions are detected or anticipated.
Generation IV reactors are a set of theoretical nuclear reactor designs currently being researched.
Controlled nuclear fusion could in principle be used in fusion power plants to produce power without the complexities of handling actinides, but significant scientific and technical obstacles remain.
Commonly-used moderators include regular (light) water (in 74.8% of the world's reactors), solid graphite (20% of reactors) and heavy water (5% of reactors).
They offer a case study of how radioactive isotopes migrate through the Earth's crust.
Its issuance was delayed for 10&nbsp;years because of wartime secrecy.
The heat is carried away from the reactor and is then used to generate steam.
Some are evolutionary from the PWR, BWR and PHWR designs above, some are more radical departures.
CANDU PHWRs have been built in Canada, Argentina, China, India, Pakistan, Romania, and South Korea.
The heavy nucleus splits into two or more lighter nuclei, (the fission products), releasing kinetic energy, gamma radiation, and free neutrons.
The fission reaction was sustained for hundreds of thousands of years.
Enrichment involves increasing the percentage of U-235 and is usually done by means of gaseous diffusion or gas centrifuge.
Several fusion reactors have been built, but only recently reactors have been able to release more energy than the amount of energy used in the process.
The common fission product Xenon-135 produced in the fission process acts as a neutron poison that absorbs neutrons and therefore tends to shut the reactor down.
;; Aqueous Homogeneous Reactor (AHR)
This last stage, where delayed neutrons are no longer required to maintain criticality, is known as the prompt critical point.
slow-moving) neutrons.
He filed a patent for his idea of a simple reactor the following year while working at the Admiralty in London.
There is a scale for describing criticality in numerical form, in which bare criticality is known as ''zero dollars'' and the prompt critical point is ''one dollar'', and other points in the process interpolated in cents.
Nuclear power plant accidents include the SL-1 accident (1961), the Three Mile Island accident (1979), Chernobyl disaster (1986), and the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster (2011).
* The hydrogen-moderated self-regulating nuclear power module (HPM) is a reactor design emanating from the Los Alamos National Laboratory that uses uranium hydride as fuel.
The prototype was the AVR.
:: These use fuel molded into ceramic balls, and then circulate gas through the balls.
One example is the Energy amplifier.
The primary goals being to improve nuclear safety, improve proliferation resistance, minimize waste and natural resource utilization, and to decrease the cost to build and run such plants.
This temporary state is the "iodine pit."
Most types of reactors are sensitive to a process variously known as xenon poisoning, or the iodine pit.
These reactors are fueled with natural uranium and are thermal neutron reactor designs.
** KAMINI — A unique reactor using Uranium-233 isotope for fuel.
Catastrophic scenarios involving terrorist attacks are also conceivable.
Many of these fuel rods are used in each nuclear reactor.
All commercial power reactors are based on nuclear fission.
As a breeder reactor type, it reprocesses the spent fuel, extracting both Uranium and transuranics, leaving only 0.1% of transuranic waste compared to conventional once-through uranium-fueled light water reactors currently in use.
Older designs (i.e.
Also, lead is (mostly) transparent to neutrons, so fewer neutrons are lost in the coolant, and the coolant does not become radioactive.
;; Boiling water reactors (BWR)
Nuclear generated steam in principle can be used for industrial process heat or for district heating.
Unlike sodium, lead is mostly inert, so there is less risk of explosion or accident, but such large quantities of lead may be problematic from toxicology and disposal points of view.
These delayed neutrons account for about 0.65% of the total neutrons produced in fission, with the remainder (termed "prompt neutrons") released immediately upon fission.
The U.S. was not yet officially at war, but in October, when the Einstein-Szilárd letter was delivered to him, Roosevelt commented that the purpose of doing the research was to make sure "the Nazis don't blow us up."
A separate issue are the radioactive fission products, which are not reprocessable and need to be disposed of as with conventional reactors.
Fission also produces iodine-135, which in turn decays (with a half-life of 6.57 hours) to new xenon-135.
The number of full-power days in a reactor's operating cycle (between refueling outage times) is related to the amount of fissile uranium-235 (U-235) contained in the fuel assemblies at the beginning of the cycle.
The thermal efficiency of these reactors can be higher, and they can be simpler, and even potentially more stable and safe.
India also operates a number of PHWRs, often termed 'CANDU-derivatives', built after the Government of Canada halted nuclear dealings with India following the 1974 Smiling Buddha nuclear weapon test.
Current reactors in operation around the world are generally considered second- or third-generation systems, with the first-generation systems having been retired some time ago.
In these reactors power output can be increased by heating the coolant, which makes it a less dense poison.
PHWRs can be refueled while at full power, which makes them very efficient in their use of uranium (it allows for precise flux control in the core).
By this time, the program had been pressured for a year by U.S. entry into the war.
Recycling spent fuel is the core of its design and it therefore produces only a fraction of the waste of current reactors.
Instead of using a single large pressure vessel as in a PWR, the fuel is contained in hundreds of pressure tubes.
The process by which uranium ore is mined, processed, enriched, used, possibly reprocessed and disposed of is known as the nuclear fuel cycle.
The natural nuclear reactors formed when a uranium-rich mineral deposit became inundated with groundwater that acted as a neutron moderator, and a strong chain reaction took place.
At the end of the operating cycle, the fuel in some of the assemblies is "spent" and is discharged and replaced with new (fresh) fuel assemblies, although in practice it is the buildup of reaction poisons in nuclear fuel that determines the lifetime of nuclear fuel in a reactor.
They can have a high thermal efficiency compared with PWRs due to higher operating temperatures.
The first nuclear power plant built for civil purposes was the AM-1 Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant, launched on 27 June 1954 in the Soviet Union.
Nuclear Reactors are classified by several methods; a brief outline of these classification methods is provided.
Under 1% of the uranium found in nature is the easily fissionable U-235 isotope and as a result most reactor designs require enriched fuel.
Fission reactors can be divided roughly into two classes, depending on the energy of the neutrons that sustain the fission chain reaction:
A unique feature that may aid safety is that the fuel-balls actually form the core's mechanism, and are replaced one-by-one as they age.
The first commercial nuclear power station, Calder Hall in Sellafield, England was opened in 1956 with an initial capacity of 50 MW (later 200 MW).
Since all atoms vibrate proportionally to their absolute temperature, a thermal neutron has the best opportunity to fission U-235 when it is moving at this same vibrational speed.
A kilogram of uranium-235 (U-235) converted via nuclear processes releases approximately three million times more energy than a kilogram of coal burned conventionally (7.2&nbsp;×&nbsp;1013 joules per kilogram of uranium-235 versus 2.4&nbsp;×&nbsp;107 joules per kilogram of coal).
Szilárd's ideas for nuclear reactors using neutron-mediated nuclear chain reactions in light elements proved unworkable.
Overall, fast reactors are less common than thermal reactors in most applications.
In this case, the bismuth would present some minor radiation problems, as it is not quite as transparent to neutrons, and can be transmuted to a radioactive isotope more readily than lead.
* Thorium-based reactors.
This is a thermal neutron reactor design.
A thermal neutron is one which is moving about the same speed as the atoms around it.
:: A Canadian design (known as CANDU), these reactors are heavy-water-cooled and -moderated pressurized-water reactors.
However, in some reactors the water for the steam turbines is boiled directly by the reactor core; for example the boiling water reactor.
Thermal neutrons have a far higher cross-section (probability) of fissioning the fissile nuclei uranium-235, plutonium-239, and plutonium-241, and a relatively lower probability of neutron capture by uranium-238 (U-238) compared to the faster neutrons that originally result from fission, allowing use of low-enriched uranium or even natural uranium fuel.
Failure to properly follow such a procedure was a key step in the Chernobyl disaster.
** Advanced heavy-water reactor (AHWR)— A proposed heavy water moderated nuclear power reactor that will be the next generation design of the PHWR type.
;; Pebble-bed reactors (PBR)
This is a thermal neutron reactor design, the newest of which are the Advanced Boiling Water Reactor and the Economic Simplified Boiling Water Reactor.
A higher percentage of U-235 in the core at the beginning of a cycle will permit the reactor to be run for a greater number of full-power days.
This enables fast neutrons to dominate, which can effectively be used to constantly replenish the fuel supply.
Xenon-135 accumulation can be controlled by keeping power levels high enough to destroy it by neutron absorption as fast as it is produced.
This diplomacy led to the dissemination of reactor technology to U.S. institutions and worldwide.
Not all reactors need to be shut down for refueling; for example, pebble bed reactors, RBMK reactors, molten salt reactors, Magnox, AGR and CANDU reactors allow fuel to be shifted through the reactor while it is running.
The moderator is often also the coolant, usually water under high pressure to increase the boiling point.
Such reactors can no longer form on Earth: radioactive decay over this immense time span has reduced the proportion of U-235 in naturally occurring uranium to below the amount required to sustain a chain reaction.
RBMKs are water cooled with a graphite moderator.
The water moderator would boil away as the reaction increased, slowing it back down again and preventing a meltdown.
Plutonium fissions will dominate the U-235 fissions in some reactors, especially after the initial loading of U-235 is spent.
If the coolant is a moderator, then temperature changes can affect the density of the coolant/moderator and therefore change power output.
Hence, like uranium-238, thorium-232 is a fertile material.
A portion of these neutrons may later be absorbed by other fissile atoms and trigger further fission events, which release more neutrons, and so on.
Just as conventional power-stations generate electricity by harnessing the thermal energy released from burning fossil fuels, nuclear reactors convert the energy released by controlled nuclear fission into thermal energy for further conversion to mechanical or electrical forms.
Keeping the reactor in the zone of chain-reactivity where delayed neutrons are ''necessary'' to achieve a critical mass state allows mechanical devices or human operators to control a chain reaction in "real time"; otherwise the time between achievement of criticality and nuclear meltdown as a result of an exponential power surge from the normal nuclear chain reaction, would be too short to allow for intervention.
They are said to "breed" fuel, because they produce fissionable fuel during operation because of neutron capture.
Control rods must be further inserted to replace the neutron absorption of the lost xenon-135.
Fissile U-235 and non-fissile but fissionable and fertile U-238 are both used in the fission process.
As of 2010, 11 remain open, mostly due to safety improvements and help from international safety agencies such as the DOE.
Typical designs have more layers (up to 7) of passive containment than light water reactors (usually&nbsp;3).
The nuclear power industry has improved the safety and performance of reactors, and has proposed new safer (but generally untested) reactor designs but there is no guarantee that the reactors will be designed, built and operated correctly.
The following year the U.S. Government received the Frisch–Peierls memorandum from the UK, which stated that the amount of uranium needed for a chain reaction was far lower than had previously been thought.
In other reactors the coolant acts as a poison by absorbing neutrons in the same way that the control rods do.
:::: Using lead as the liquid metal provides excellent radiation shielding, and allows for operation at very high temperatures.
U-235 is fissionable by thermal (i.e.
It uses ceramic fuels so its safe operating temperatures exceed the power-reduction temperature range.
;; Gas-cooled reactor (GCR) and advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR)
Nuclear reactors generally have automatic and manual systems to scram the reactor in an emergency shut down.
;; Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR)
The primary purpose for the largest reactors (located at the Hanford Site in Washington state), was the mass production of plutonium for nuclear weapons.
The sodium is relatively easy to obtain and work with, and it also manages to actually prevent corrosion on the various reactor parts immersed in it.
Some are run only for research.
The result is an efficient, low-maintenance, very safe reactor with inexpensive, standardized fuel.
The enriched result is then converted into uranium dioxide powder, which is pressed and fired into pellet form.
Thermal reactors generally depend on refined and enriched uranium.
;; Molten salt reactors
United States Naval reactors are of this type.
A moderator increases the power of the reactor by causing the fast neutrons that are released from fission to lose energy and become thermal neutrons.
Almost all current reactors are of this type.
They are the majority of current reactors.
A nuclear reactor coolant — usually water but sometimes a gas or a liquid metal (like liquid sodium) or molten salt — is circulated past the reactor core to absorb the heat that it generates.
Fifteen natural fission reactors have so far been found in three separate ore deposits at the Oklo uranium mine in Gabon, West Africa.
A '''nuclear reactor''', formerly known as an '''atomic pile''', is a device used to initiate and control a sustained nuclear chain reaction.
They generally use uranium and its product plutonium as nuclear fuel, though a thorium fuel cycle is also possible.
Often a reactor of this type would use a lead-bismuth eutectic mixture.
A series of critical safety flaws have also been identified with the RBMK design, though some of these were corrected following the Chernobyl disaster.
An interdisciplinary team from MIT has estimated that given the expected growth of nuclear power from 2005–2055, at least four serious nuclear accidents would be expected in that period.
The design of the fuel makes fuel reprocessing expensive.
Fast reactors have the potential to produce less transuranic waste because all actinides are fissionable with fast neutrons, but they are more difficult to build and more expensive to operate.
These are surrounded by a reactor vessel, instrumentation to monitor and control the reactor, radiation shielding, and a containment building.
This is a significant area of controversy as opponents of geologic waste disposal fear that isotopes from stored waste could end up in water supplies or be carried into the environment.
* The Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor (CAESAR) is a nuclear reactor concept that uses steam as a moderator – this design is still in development.
Fermi and Szilard applied for a patent on reactors on 19 December 1944.
* Fast neutron reactors use fast neutrons to cause fission in their fuel.
A number of incidents connected with the unmanned nuclear-reactor-powered Soviet RORSAT radar satellite program resulted in spent nuclear fuel re-entering the Earth's atmosphere from orbit.
This allows the reactor to be constructed with an excess of fissionable material, which is nevertheless made relatively safe early in the reactor's fuel burn-cycle by the presence of the neutron-absorbing material which is later replaced by normally produced long-lived neutron poisons (far longer-lived than xenon-135) which gradually accumulate over the fuel load's operating life.
U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower made his famous Atoms for Peace speech to the UN General Assembly on 8 December 1953.
Some early power stations were fast reactors, as are some Russian naval propulsion units.
The first portable nuclear reactor "Alco PM-2A" used to generate electrical power (2 MW) for Camp Century from 1960.
* Lead-cooled fast reactor
When a large fissile atomic nucleus such as uranium-235 or plutonium-239 absorbs a neutron, it may undergo nuclear fission.
Some nuclear reactors can operate with a mixture of plutonium and uranium (see MOX).
According to UBS AG, the Fukushima I nuclear accidents have cast doubt on whether even an advanced economy like Japan can master nuclear safety.
Despite these safety improvements, RBMK reactors are still considered one of the most dangerous reactor designs in use.
The disposition and storage of this spent fuel is one of the most challenging aspects of the operation of a commercial nuclear power plant.
Decommissioning costs can be high due to large volume of reactor core.
