Throughout the colonial period and up to the present, the rural population density of Nyasaland has been among the highest in sub-Saharan Africa.
The main port moved downriver from Chiromo to Port Herald in 1908, but by 1912 it was difficult and often impossible to use Port Herald, so a Zambezi port was needed.
Blantyre and East Africa Ltd had once owned 157,000 acres in Blantyre and Zomba districts but sales to small planters reduced this to 91,500 acres by 1925.
Banda and Congress Party leaders started a campaign of direct action against federation, for immediate constitutional change and eventual independence.
On 3 March 1959 Sir Robert Armitage, as governor of Nyasaland, declared a State of Emergency over the whole of the protectorate and, in a police and military undertaking which it called Operation Sunrise arrested Dr. Hastings Banda its president and other members of its executive committee, as well as over a hundred local party officials.
European ownership of large areas of land was one of the main social and political issues for the protectorate.
The 1921 census listed 108,204 “Anguru” (Lomwe speaking immigrants from Mozambique) and it is likely that a large number of those listed under other tribal names had crossed the border from Mozambique as well.
During the 56 years that the protectorate existed, tobacco, tea and cotton were the main export crops, and tea was the only one that remained an estate crop throughout.
However, a 1930 declaration by the British government that white settlers north of the Zambezi could not form minority governments dominating Africans stimulated the political awareness.
Tea was also first planted commercially in 1905 in the Shire Highlands, with significant development of tobacco and tea growing taking place after the opening of the Shire Highlands Railway in 1908.
It soon decided that the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland could not be maintained.
It was not until 1924 that the industry recovered, reaching 2,700 tons in 1932 and a record of 4,000 tons exported in 1935.
Some of these senior officials also sat on the two councils that advised governors.
This varied, but generally entitled a person granted or inheriting the use of land (not its ownership) the exclusive right to farm it for an indefinite period, with the right to pass it to their successors, unless it was forfeited for a crime, neglect or abandonment.
Throughout the period 1907 to 1953, Nyasaland was subject to direct superintendence and control by the Colonial Office and the United Kingdom parliament.
The decline in flue-cured tobacco intensified throughout the 1920s.
Between 1919 and 1935 their numbers fell from 229 to 82.
Both these crops had previously been grown in small quantities, but the decline of coffee prompted planters to turn to tobacco in the Shire Highlands and cotton in the Shire Valley.
However, as early as 1920, while the Land Commission did not consider that the country was inherently overcrowded, it noted that, in congested districts where a large proportion of the working population was employed, particularly on tea estates or near towns, families had only 1 to 2 acres to farm.
Apart from the elderly or widows, all tenants would pay rents in cash by labour or by selling crops to the owner, but rent levels would be regulated.
Their access to land for farming was governed by customary law.
After Port Herald became unsatisfactory, the British South Africa Company built the Central African Railway, mainly in Mozambique, of 61 miles from Port Herald to Chindio on the north bank of the Zambezi in 1914.
The Legislative Council was formed solely of officials in 1907 to advise governors on legislation; from 1909 a minority of nominated “non-official” members was added.
The quality of cotton produced improved from the 1950s with stricter controls on pests and, although 80% of the crop continued to be grown in the lower Shire valley, it also began to be grown in the northern shore of Lake Malawi.
In 1955, the Colonial Office agreed to the suggestion of the governor of Nyasaland that African representation on the Legislative Council should be increased from three to five members, and that the African members should no longer be appointed by the governor, but nominated by Provincial Councils.
On 21 February, European troops of the Rhodesia Regiment were flown into Nyasaland and, in the days immediately following, police or troops opened fire on rioters in several places, leading to four deaths.
The failure of the NAC to prevent this caused its collapse.
Production varied widely, and increasing amounts were used domestically, but at independence cotton was only the fourth most valuable export crop.
The party was also nominated to seven of the 10 Executive Council seats.
The importance of tea increased dramatically after 1934, from only 6% of total exports in 1932 to over 20% in 1935.
The introduction of a market economy eroded several pre-colonial survival strategies such as growing secondary crops in case the main one failed, gathering wild food or seeking support from family or friends and eventually created an underclass of the chronically malnourished poor.
The censuses of 1921, 1926 and 1931 did not make individual counts of the African population, probably under-estimated absentees and under-counted in remote areas.
The Nyasaland government estimated that 58,000 adult males were working outside Nyasaland in 1935, but the Southern Rhodesian census of 1931 alone recorded 54,000 male Nyasaland Africans there, so it was probably an underestimate.
Until the opening of the railway in 1907, passengers and goods were transferred to smaller boats at Chiromo to go a further 50 miles upstream to Chikwawa, where porters carried goods up the escarpment and passengers continued on foot.
Between 1892 and 1894, 3,705,255 acres, almost 1.5 million hectares or 15% of the total land area of the Protectorate, was alienated as European-owned estates through the grant of Certificates of Claim.
Its administration was headed by a Governor, appointed by the British Government and responsible to the Colonial Office.
In 1948, it was estimated that 1.2 million acres (or 487,000 hectares) of freehold estates remained, with an African population of 200,000.
In 1930, its six “non-official” members were no longer nominated by the governor but selected by as association representing white planters and businessmen.
In November and December 1949, the rains stopped several months early, and food shortages rapidly developed in the Shire Highlands.
The British Central Africa Company once owned 350,000 acres, but before 1928 it had sold or leased 50,000 acres.
This success led to a rapid growth in Congress membership in 1956 and 1957.
African-grown cotton was bought by British Central Africa Company and the African Lakes Corporation until 1912 when government cotton markets were established where a fairer price for cotton was given.
Another version of Indirect rule was instituted in 1933, but the chiefs and their councils who became Native Authorities had few real powers and little money to enforce them.
Its promoters had interests in Beira port, and they ignored its high cost and limited benefit to Nyasaland of a shorter alternative route.
The official mortality figure was 100 to 200 deaths, but the true number of may have been higher, and there was severe food shortage and hunger in 1949 and 1950.
In early 1954, Congress abandoned its campaign and lost much of its support.
There was an expectation that community leaders would allocate communal land to the community members, but limit its allocation to outsiders.
Although costly and inefficient, the rail link to Beira remained Nyasaland's main bulk transport link up to and beyond independence.
Only in 1961 was there an election for all Legislative Council seats, and the Malawi Congress Party won 22 out of 28 seats.
The “equivalent” rents in kind required delivering crops worth between 30 and 50 shillings instead of £1 cash, to discourage this option.
However, harbour facilities at several lake ports were inadequate and there were few good roads to most ports: some in the north had no road connection.
The Central African Railway was poorly built, and soon needed extensive repairs.
Halving of the area to 10,000 acres and improving quality made cotton more important, to a peak of 44% of export value in 1917 when the First World War stimulated demand to 1,750 tons.
From 1931 to 1945, natural increase doubled, probably through improved medical services, infant mortality gradually decreased, and although immigration continued throughout the colonial period, it was a less significant factor.
A state of emergency was declared, and military forces were brought in from the Rhodesias and Tanganyika.
The report of the Abrahams Commission divided opinion.
Until 1914, small river steamers carrying 100 tons or less operated between the British concession of Chinde at the mouth of the Zambezi and the Lower Shire, about 180 miles.
The remainder of the 51 officially recorded deaths were in military operations in the Northern Region.
After 1928 maximum cash rents were fixed at £1 for a plot of 8 acres, although some estates charged less.
The first estate crop was coffee, grown commercially in quantity from around 1895, but competition from Brazil which flooded the world markets by 1905 and droughts led to its decline in favour of tobacco and cotton.
In January 1958, Banda presented Congress proposals for constitutional reform to the governor, Sir Robert Armitage.
From 1953 to the end of 1963, Nyasaland was part of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, which was not a fully independent state as it was constitutionally subordinate to the British government.
The main African objections to the Federation were summed up in a joint memorandum prepared by Hastings Banda for Nyasaland and Harry Nkumbula for Northern Rhodesia in 1951.
Land capable of future development as estates was to be protected against unorganised cultivation.
The Zambezi Bridge and northern extension created less traffic than anticipated, and it was only in 1946 that traffic volumes predicted in 1937 were reached.
The best cultivation technique for such soils involves 10 to 15 years of fallow between 2 or 3 years of cultivation, the system of shifting cultivation and fallowing that was common in Nyasaland as long as there was sufficient land to practice it.
By independence, local demand had reduced exports to virtually nil.
Only in 1904 did the Governor receive powers to reserve areas of Crown Land (called Native Trust Land) for the benefit of African communities, and it was not until 1936 that all conversion of Native Trust Land to freehold was prohibited by the 1936 Native Trust Lands Order.
This was mainly African production in the lower Shire valley, as output from European estates became insignificant.
Race depends on the blood in one's veins…”.
The Zambezi crossing ferry using steamers to tow barges had limited capacity and was the weak point in the link to Beira.
Low water levels in Lake Nyasa reduced the Shire River's flow from 1896 to 1934; this and the changing sandbanks made navigation difficult in the dry season.
Until the 1949 famine, maize was not exported but a government scheme then promoted it as a cash crop and 38,500 tons were exported in 1955.
The numbers of District Commissioners and their assistants rose slowly to 51 in 1937 and about 120 in 1961.
In January 1915, the Reverend John Chilembwe staged an attempt at rebellion in protest at discrimination against Africans, which prompted some re-assessment of their policies by colonial authorities.
Before 1920, about 5% of the crop sold was dark-fired tobacco produced by African farmers, and this rose to 14% by 1924.
A local Congress leader encouraged a large crowd to gather, apparently to secure the release of the detainees.
and 20,000 in Zambia.
Its supporters demonstrated against taxes and pass laws.
Two years later the same difficulty arose in the densely populated Cholo District, two-thirds of whose land constituted private estates.
The Union-Castle service was resumed between 1918 and 1922, when the port at Chinde was damaged by a cyclone.
There is no evidence that any formal plan existed, and the Nyasaland government took no immediate action against Banda or other Congress leaders but continued to negotiate with them until late February.
Its negative attitudes towards African agriculture, which it failed to promote, helped to prevent the creation of a properly-functioning peasant economy.
After the Second World War, there was an increase in the expenditure on the police and its expansion into rural areas.
The category of 'native' was large, but there was no general definition of the term.
A Police Training School was opened in 1952, police man-power increased to 750 by 1959 and new units were set up (the Special Branch and the Police Mobile Force for riot control).
After a constitutional conference in London in 1962, Nyasaland achieved internal self-government with Banda as Prime Minister in February 1963.
It never fell below that level, rising to over 40% from 1938 to 1942, and in the three years 1955, 1957 and 1960 the value of tea exports exceeded that of tobacco and until the mid-1960s, Nyasaland had the most extensive area of tea cultivation in Africa.
The number of Africans was estimated (1919) at 561,600 males and 664,400 females, a total of 1,226,000.
In the early years of the protectorate, little of the land on estates was planted.
Road was becoming an alternative to rail, but government regulations designed to promote the use of the railway hindered this.
Around 250,000 acres of former Crown Lands were sold as freehold land or leased, and almost 400,000 acres more originally in Certificates of Claim were sold or leased in holdings whose average size was around 1,000 acres, many representing smaller farms of Europeans coming to Nyasaland after the First World War to grow tobacco.
Order was at first maintained by soldiers of the King's African Rifles, some of whom were seconded to assist the District Commissioners, or by poorly trained police recruited by the District Commissioners.
After this was agreed he returned to Nyasaland in July 1958 and T D T Banda was ousted.
At independence in 1964, only some 422,000 acres (171,000 hectares) of European-owned estates remained, mainly as tea estates or small estates farmed directly by their owners.
The relative importance of cotton exports dropped from 16% of the total in 1922 to 5% in 1932, then rallied to 10% in 1941, falling to 7% in 1951.
However, these purchases were insufficient, and in 1942, hundreds of Africans in the Blantyre District who had been served with notices to quit refused to leave since there was no other land for them.
The great bulk of migrant workers came from the Northern and Central regions: in 1937, out of 91,000 Africans recorded as absent less than 11,000 were from districts in the south.
15,000 were growers in the Southern Province.
These proposals were enacted in 1928, after a 1926 census had shown that over 115,000 Africans (10% of the population) lived on estates.
The danger of Southern Rhodesian rule made African demands for political rights more urgent, and in 1944 various local Voluntary Associations united as the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC).
This occurred in 1956 when Henry Chipembere and Kanyama Chiume, two young radical members of Congress, were nominated together with three moderates, including two Congress supporters.
The main economic centres of the protectorate at Blantyre and in the Shire Highlands were 25 miles from the Shire, and transport of goods from that river was by inefficient and costly head porterage or ox-cart.
This showed that the majority of soils in Malawi were adequate for smallholders to produce maize.
Much of the remaining land, some 867,000 acres, or over 350,000 hectares of estates included a large proportion of the best arable lands in the Shire Highlands, the most densely populated part of the country.
Blantyre (Chileka) was also linked to Beira from 1935.
By 1935, 70% of the national tobacco crop was grown in the Central Province where the Board had around 30,000 registered growers.
Most governors spent the bulk of their career in other territories, but were assisted by heads of departments who spent their working life in Nyasaland.
Of these, 20 were killed at Nkhata Bay where those detained in the Northern Region were being held prior to being transferred south.
Secondly, Africans educated by missions or abroad sought social, economic and political advancement through voluntary "Native Associations".
Three major estate companies retained landholdings in the Shire Highlands.
Before 1928, the prevailing annual rent was 6 shillings (30 pence).
New workers (often the so-called "Anguru" migrants from Mozambique) were encouraged to move onto estates and grow their own crops, but were required to pay rent, usually satisfied by two months’ labour a year in the early years under the system known as thangata, although later, many owners required a longer period.
In these two significant areas, Trust land was rare and consequently overcrowded.
The Shire Highlands Railway opened a line from Blantyre to Chiromo in 1907, and extended it to Port Herald, 113 miles from Blantyre in 1908.
The Colonial Office retained ultimate power over African affairs and the African ownership of land.
The Department of Agriculture's prediction that soil fertility would decline at a rapid rate is contradicted by recent research.
Although Nyasaland has some mineral resources, particularly coal, these were not exploited in colonial times.
The composition of the Legislative Council gradually became more representative.
However, after 1953, world prices declined and production dropped as Tung oil was replaced by cheaper petrochemical substitutes.
Agitation by the government of Southern Rhodesia led to a Royal Commission on future association between Northern and Southern Rhodesia, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, or all three territories.
Native Courts had no jurisdiction over European owned estates; they were subject to the oversight of District Commissioners, and were used to enforce unpopular agricultural rules.
Estate owners and managers were strongly against it, and many European settlers bitterly attacked it.
It was estimated that in 1963 there were 170,000 men absent, 120,000 in Southern Rhodesia, 30,000 in South Africa.
As late as 1920, a Land Commission set up by the Nyasaland authorities proposed further land alienation to promote the development of small to medium size European plantations from the 700,000 acres of Crown Land which it said were available after the present and future needs of the African people were met.
From 1902, English law had been established as the normally-recognised legal code and a High Court was established on the English model, with a Chief Justice and other judges.
In the same year, a northern extension from Blantyre to Lake Nyasa was completed.
As Congress supporters became more violent and Congress leaders made increasingly inflammatory statements, Armitage decided against offering concessions, but prepared for mass arrests.
Dr Banda announced he would only return if given the presidency of Congress.
Beira was congested but significant improvements were being made to it in the 1920s: the route to Quelimane was shorter, but the port was underdeveloped.
A L Bruce Estates Ltd owned 160,000 acres, mostly in the single Magomero estate in Zomba, and Chiradzulu districts.
The stated aim of these measures was to allow the Nyasaland government to restore law and order after the increasing lawlessness following Dr Banda's return.
In deciding to make widespread arrests covering almost the whole Congress organisation, Armitage was influenced by a report received by the police from an informer of a meeting of Congress leaders at which, it was claimed by the Head of Special Branch that the indiscriminate killing of Europeans and Asians, and of those Africans opposed to Congress was planned, the so-called "murder plot".
A person's race or origin does not depend on where he or she is born.
The greater part of the Governors' former powers were transferred to the Federal government.
Maintenance costs were high and freight volumes were low, so transport rates were up to three times Rhodesian and East African levels.
It retained two large blocks of land, each around 100,000 acres, in the Shire Highlands; the rest of its properties were in or near to the Shire valley.
By the 1950s, the term 'native' was regarded as offensive, but it was used in all colonial censuses up to and including 1945.
These crops continued to be staple foods throughout the colonial period, although with less millet and more maize.
They are also widely grown for food.
Exports steadily increased from 375 tons in 1922 to 1,250 tons in 1932, from 12,600 acres planted.
Famines were often associated with warfare, as in a major famine in the south of the country in 1863.
Full independence was achieved on 6 July 1964 with Banda as Prime Minister, and the country became the Republic of Malawi, a republic within the Commonwealth, on 6 July 1966, with Banda as President.
One theory of colonial-era African famines is that colonialism led to poverty by expropriating land for cash crops or forcing farmers to grow them (reducing their ability to produce food), underpaying for their crops, charging rents for expropriated lands and taxing them arbitrarily (reducing their ability to buy food).
The rail link was narrow gauge and single track, with sharp curves and steep gradients, so inadequate for heavy train loads.
Rather than calming the situation immediately, in the emergency that followed fifty-one Africans were killed and many more were wounded.
It was revived not long afterwards by a younger and more militant generation which, ultimately, invited Hastings Banda to return to the country and lead it to independence.
The Commission found that the declaration of a State of Emergency was necessary to restore order and prevent a descent into anarchy, but it criticised instances of the illegal use of force by the police and troops, including burning houses, destroying property and beatings.
There was a marked increase in civil agitation when Nyasaland was forced into a Federation with Southern and Northern Rhodesia in 1953.
This had sole responsibility for external affairs, defence, immigration, higher education, transport, posts and major aspects of economic policy, and the predominant role in health, industrial development and electricity.
These were for an African majority in the Legislative Council and at least parity with non-Africans in the Executive Council.
Much of the best land in the Shire Highlands was alienated to Europeans at the end of the 19th century.
The other 660,000 acres were in areas of more fertile soils, which had a total area of some 1.3 million acres in the Shire Highlands.
The protectorate was divided into districts from 1892, with a Collector of Revenue (later called District Commissioner in charge of each.
'''Nyasaland''', or the '''Nyasaland Protectorate''' ( or ), was a British protectorate located in Africa, which was established in 1907 when the former British Central Africa Protectorate changed its name.
At independence, the annual exports totalled 25,000 tons and groundnuts became Nyasaland’s third most valuable export.
Those less able to cope, such as widows or deserted wives, the old, the very young and those already in poverty suffered most, and families did not help remoter relatives.
Over 2,000 more were imprisoned for offences related to the emergency, including rioting and criminal damage.
Following the Malawi Congress Party's overwhelming victory in August 1961 elections, Banda and four other Malawi Congress Party members or supporters joined the Executive Council as elected ministers alongside five officials.
The number of resident Europeans was always small, only 1,948 in 1945, but their numbers rose to about 9,500 in 1960 and declined thereafter.
Tobacco and a local variety of cotton were grown widely.
In 1935, the ferry was replaced by the construction of the Zambezi Bridge, over two miles long, creating an uninterrupted rail link to the sea.
A second rail link to the Mozambique port of Nacala was first proposed in 1964, and is its principal route for imports and exports today.
For part of the year the river was too shallow, at other times it flooded.
These changes proved insufficient when major disturbances took place 1959.
The Devlin Commission's report is the only example of a British judge examining whether the actions of a colonial administration in suppressing dissent were appropriate.
There were originally around a dozen districts, but the number had increased to some two dozen at independence.
Labour migration continued up to and after independence.
They did however deal with the vast bulk of disputes in the protectorate
In 1949 and 1950, 25,000 tons of food were imported, although initial deliveries were delayed.
Most have sufficient (if barely so) organic material and nutrients, although their low nitrogen and phosphorus favours the use of chemical fertilisers and manure.
In the debate in the House of Commons on 3 March 1959, the day that the State of Emergency was declared, Alan Lennox-Boyd, the Colonial Secretary, stated that it was clear from information received that Congress had planned the widespread murder of Europeans, Asians and moderate Africans, "…in fact, a massacre was being planned".
Census data from colonial censuses and the first census after independence in the table below show a population that increased quite rapidly.
The 12 Collectors and 26 assistants in 1907 were responsible for Hut tax and Customs duties and also had judicial responsibilities as magistrates, although few had any legal training.
Before the 1940s, it had sold little of its land and preferred to farm it directly; by 1948 the estate was largely let to tenants, who produced all its crops.
By 1945 almost 124,000 adult males and almost adult 9,500 females were known to be absent, excluded those not in touch with their families.
Customary law was allowed (but not mandatory) in cases involving Africans, if native law or custom was not repugnant to English legal principles.
Air transport began in a small way in 1934 with a weekly Rhodesian and Nyasaland Airways service from an airstrip at Chileka to Salisbury, increased to twice weekly in 1937.
This plan was rejected by the Colonial Office.
The first protests against colonial rule came from two sources.
In 1953, the NAC opposed federation and demanded independence.
Railways could supplement water transport and, as Nyasaland was nowhere nearer than 200 miles to a suitable Indian Ocean port, a short rail link to river ports that eliminated porterage was initially more practical than a line direct to the coast passing through areas of low population.
In March 1920 Europeans numbered 1,015 and Asians 515.
The colonial censuses were imprecise: those of 1901 and 1911 estimated the African population based on hut tax records and adult male tax defaulters (up to 10% of the total) went unrecorded.
Nyasaland remained a protectorate and its Governors retained responsibilities for local administration, labour and trade unions, African primary and secondary education, African agriculture and forestry, and internal policing.
Roads suitable for motor vehicles were developed in the southern half of the protectorate in the 1920s and replaced head porterage, but there were few all-weather roads in the northern half until quite late in the 1930s, so motor transport was concentrated in the south.
Although these events were on a smaller scale than 1949, the authorities did not react by making adequately preparations to counteract later famines.
Each Collector could determine what powers to delegate to headmen in his district, and some appointed traditional chiefs as Principal headmen with significant authority locally.
Reassurance was needed, because in 1920, when Native Trust Land covered 6.6 million acres, a debate developed about the respective needs of European and African communities for land.
Despite almost unanimous African opposition to amalgamation with Southern Rhodesia, the Bledisloe Commission report of 1939 did not entirely rule-out some form of association in the future, provided Southern Rhodesian forms of racial discrimination were not applied north of the Zambezi.
Several of the younger members of the Nyasaland African Congress had little faith in the ability of its leader, T D T Banda, who they also accused of dishonesty, and wished to replace him with Dr Hastings Banda, then living in the Gold Coast.
Although the population increased quite rapidly, doubling between 1901 and 1931, high infant mortality and tropical diseases restricted the natural increase to no more than 1 to 2 percent a year, and the rest of the increase seems to have resulted from immigration from Mozambique.
Until around 1930, it marketed its tenants' crops, but after this sought cash rents.
At first, the British government tried to calm the situation by nominating additional African members (who were not Malawi Congress Party supporters) to the Legislative Council.
This inward migration of families was balanced by outward labour migration, mainly of men, to Southern Rhodesia and South Africa.
Between 1953 and 1963, Nyasaland was part of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
The aim was to prevent overcrowding, but there was little land available to resettle those expelled and from 1943, evictions were resisted.
In a Nyasaland court case of 1929, the judge opined that, “A native means a native of Africa who is not of European or Asiatic race or origin; all others are non-natives.
These proposals were not implemented in full until 1952.
Chinde was severely damaged by a cyclone in 1922, and was unsuitable for larger ships.
