Zapotec territory extends in and around the Central Valleys region of the state, around the capital city of Oaxaca.
The latter, led by Moctezuma I, finally conquered the Chinantla region during the 15th century.
The Zapotec have an extremely long history in the Central Valleys region and unlike other indigenous groups, do not have a migration story.
This airport has a runway that measures  and a total extension of  with two hangars.
Nobles, who converted to Christianity, were permitted to keep their traditional rights under a 1557 order by Phillip II of Spain.
With development of agricultural practices, with maize as the main crop and settled villages getting established over several centuries, a warrior type of societal culture evolved by 500 BC, with the Zapotec state getting into shape.
Evidence of human habitation dating back to about 11,000 years BC has been found in the Guilá Naquitz cave near the town of Mitla.
Spanish official and merchants would try to take indigenous privileges due to their social status, but this was resisted.
The final distilled product can be served as is or can be flavored (called cremas) with almonds, coffee, cocoa fruits and other flavors.
However, this rebellion was put down by the Spanish, in alliance with about 2,000 Mixtecs and Aztecs.
However; the most important force in the area was the Liberation Army of the South under Emiliano Zapata.
The last is indispensable for the preparation of verde version of mole.
He was followed by Bartolome de Olmade and others who began the superficial conversion of a number of indigenous, including the baptism of Zapotec leader Cosijoeza.
Development of tourism has been strongest in the Central Valleys area surrounding the capital, with secondary developments in Huatulco and other locations along the coast.
This has led to wide scale migration, mostly from the rural areas, to find employment.
Its capital city is Oaxaca de Juárez.
Black beans are preferred.
Founded in 1827 as the Oaxacan Institute for Arts and Sciences, today UABJO offers the widest range of curricula in the state.
There are 1,020 primary care medical facilities and 28 hospitals in the state, 3,240,024 people are registered in one or more government programs and are attended by 3,337 doctors, 5,400 paramedics and 6,887 other health providers.
The site contains a number of notable features including the Danzantes, a set of stone reliefs and the finding of fine quality ceramics.
In 1486 the Aztecs established a fort on the hill of Huaxyácac (now called El Fortín), overlooking the present city of Oaxaca.
In addition, when Zapotec leaders heard about the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, they sent an offer of an alliance.
It was important at that time for its production of salt.
The state of Oaxaca has no official flag, but the state government used a white cloth to shield the center.
The languages of the Zoque and Mixe peoples belong to the Mixe–Zoquean languages.
It is in the valley of the Tehuacán-Cuicatlán-Quiotepec.
Some of the best known dances include Los Diablos, La Tortuga, Las Mascaritas and Los Tejorones.
The municipalities of Santo Domingo Tehuantepec, Juchitán de Zaragoza and Huajuapan de León are known for this work.
Approximately 85% profess the Catholic faith.
About 31% of the population is employed in agriculture, about 50% in commerce and services and 22% in industry.
This poor treatment of indigenous and African populations would continue though the colonial period.
However, no major city state like Monte Albán arose again, with villages and city-states remaining small, between 1,000 and 3,000 people with a palace, temple, market and residences.
The best-known wood craft is the making of "alebrije" figures, which are usually miniature, brightly colored real or imaginary animals.
Minorities include the Chatino (42,477), the Trique (18,292), the Huave people (15,324), the Cuicatecos (12,128), the Zoque, also called the Aiyuuk (roughly 10,000), the Amuzgos (4,819), the Chontales of Oaxaca (4,610), the Tacuates (1,725), the Chocho or Chocholtec (524), the Ixcatecos (207), the Popolocas (61) and a small population of Nahuatl speaking peoples in the border area with Puebla.
New crops such as sugar cane, vanilla and tobacco were introduced.
As of 1997, life expectancy in the state was 71.5 years, 9 years higher than in 1990.
Smaller providers provide service in vans, especially between the city of Oaxaca and the coast.
In 1457, Moctezuma I invaded the Tlaxiaco and Coixtlahuaca areas, gaining control, demanding tribute and establishing military outposts.
Within Oaxaca, many people leave rural villages to work in the city of Oaxaca, the Papaloapan area and the coast.
Other orders followed such as the Jesuits in 1596, the Mercedarians in 1601, and others in the 17th and 18th centuries.
There were two interconnected calendars prevalent at the time- one of 260 days and another of 365 days, which synchronized every 52 years.
The most important annual festival is the Guelaguetza, also called the Fiesta del Lunes del Cerro (Festival of Mondays at the Mountain) which occurs each July.
As of 2000, 1,207,738 hectares are used for the raising of crops, most of which occurs during the annual rainy season, with only 487,963 having crops growing year round.
The inner oval is divided into three parts: the bottom are two white arms breaking chains in the upper left of the place name Huaxyacac comprising: a stylized profile native state of Oaxaca, the flower and fruit in a stylized form huaje tree, at the top right the profile of one of the palaces of the archaeological site of Mitla, and flagging this figure to the right, the Dominican Cross.
The Zapotecs occupied a large region from Central Valleys region to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
Some insect forms such as grasshoppers, larvae and cochineal have economic importance for the state and there are several species of 'giant' stick insects indigenous to the region (such as Bacteria horni which has a body length of up to 22&nbsp;cm).
The economy of Oaxaca is based on agriculture, especially in the interior of the state.
Traditional music and dance has its roots in the indigenous traditions that existed long before the Spanish arrived.
The largest sector of Oaxaca's economy is agriculture, mostly done communally in ejidos or similar arrangements.
As a liberal, he imposed many of the reforms which remain today including those in education and separation of church and state.
Despite the health services that exist, there are serious problems and deficiencies.
Other highways include Federal highway 147 and Federal highway 182.
Juárez died in office.
Conservation efforts in the state are hampered by high marginalization, lack of economic alternatives, agricultural conflicts, change of land use (agricultural activities, fires), over exploitation and pollution of natural water sources, inadequate forest management and illegal tree felling, unsustainable coastal tourist developments, climate change, limited local capacity, and limited local knowledge and valuation of natural resources.
This also has the effect of dividing the state into small secluded communities, which have developed independently over time.
Most of the state's population growth took place between 1980 and 1990.
In subsequent years, as upper strata of society (an "elite class") came into existence, the religious practices and the temple got more formalized with priests controlling the community's religion.
Most of the participating strikers were from the hospital and emergency room sectors, from 15 hospitals and 650 health centers in the state.
One particular health problem the state has is outbreaks of dengue fever during the rainy season, which occurs from June to October.
Mining has traditionally been important to the economy and history.
It is difficult to overstate Juárez's meaning to the state.
It is eaten cold or lightly melted on quesadillas and other dishes.
One native product to reach economic importance during the colonial period was the cochineal insect, used for the making of dyes for textiles.
In 2000, there were 612 hotels with 15,368 rooms.
Other metals, especially iron, are forged into utilitarian and decorative items in places such as Santiago Jamiltepec and Tlacolula de Matamoros.
The Mixe language has seven dialects and this group has the highest rate of monolingualism (36% of speakers in the year 2000) of any Indigenous group in Mexico.
It has a rich biodiversity of flora and fauna.
It is unknown where the Mixe migrated from, with some speculating from as far as Peru, but they arrived in waves from 1300 to 1533.
These two groups were often in conflict throughout the pre-Hispanic period.
This was the major Aztec military base charged with the enforcement of tribute collection and control of trade routes.
Most tourist attractions are located in the city of Oaxaca and the Central Valleys region that surrounds it.
In areas they conquered, they became prolific builders, leaving behind numerous and still unexplored sites.
Some of these cases are hemorrhagic.
Births far outpace deaths.
The six rivers which flow through the reserve are the Tomellín, Chiquito, Las Vueltas, Salado, Zapotitán and Río Grande of the Papaloapan watershed, which finally flow into the Gulf of Mexico.
He and commandant Luis Quintanar persecuted liberals in the state, including Benito Juárez.
Oaxaca is divided into 570 municipalities, about one-quarter of the total of the country.
Intercity bus services is provided by companies such as ADO, Cristòbal Colòn, SUR, Fletes y Pasajes and AU.
This pottery gets its color from the local clay used to make it and its shine from a technique developed by Doña Rosa Nieto in the mid-20th century.
The Sierra Madre de Oaxaca enters the state from the Puebla and Veracruz borders in the Tuxtepec region, running northwest to southeast towards the Central Valleys region, then onto the Tehuantepec area.
The state has not produced as many writers as painters but some important names include Adalberto Carriedo, Jacobo Dalevuelta, Andrés Henestrosa and Natalia Toledo.
La Cañada Region comprises the fourth and fifth districts with a total of 45 municipalities.
Another major craft category is textiles.
The Mixes call themselves Ayuuk, which means The People.
Major woodcarving areas include San MartínTilcajete and Arrazola.
The second largest group are the Mixtecs at just over 240,000 people or 27% of the indigenous population.
The state has traditionally been divided into seven regions, which took into account variables such as ethnic makeup, economics and geography.
The state has the most amphibian species at 133, with one-third of all Mexican species of frogs and salamanders.
Life expectancy is 71.7 for men and 77.4 for women, just under the national average.
Local public transportation is offered various local business using pickup trucks, buses and small cargo trucks.
Historic events in Oaxaca as far back as the 12th century are described in pictographic codices painted by Zapotecs and Mixtecs in the beginning of the colonial period, but outside of the information that can be obtained through their study, little historical information from pre-colonial Oaxaca exist, and our knowledge of this period relies largely on archaeological remains.
Despite conservations efforts starting in the 1970s, the number of nesting sites and nesting turtles has dramatically decreased.
The production of food staples, such as corn and beans, is mostly for internal consumption but this production cannot meet demand.
Most of those leaving Oaxaca and Mexico go to the United States.
Oaxaca has one of the most rugged terrains in Mexico, with mountain ranges that abruptly fall into the sea.
The only valleys of any real size are the Central Valleys between Etla and Miahuatlan, which contains the city of Oaxaca.
Several other languages of the Oto-Manguean languages are spoken in Oaxaca: The Triques, Amuzgos and Cuicatecs are linguistically most closely related to the Mixtecs, The languages of the Chocho, Popoloca and Ixcatec peoples are most closely related to that of the Mazatecs.
Mixtec territory is divided into three sub regions.
Most mines today are located in Etla, Ixtlán, San Pedro Taviche, Pápalo and Salinas Cruz.
One reason for this is the quality and varieties of maguey grown here.
The Zapotecs and Mixtecs both allied themselves and fought among themselves as they tried to maintain their lands and valuable trade routes between the high central plains of Mexico and Central America.
The National Presbyterian Church in Mexico has high percentage of followers in Oaxaca, it is one of its stronghold states.
Violence was reserved for the worst of situations.
The ritual buildings in the valley dated to this period testify this observation.
The oldest known major settlements, such as Yanhuitlán and Laguna Zope are located in this area as well.
There is a railroad line connecting the city of Oaxaca with Mexico City for cargo.
He was born on March 21, 1806 in the village of San Pablo Guelatao and was full blooded Zapotec.
Carver Manuel Jiménez of Arrazola is credited with the creating of the Oaxacan version of this craft.
Music and dance are almost inextricably linked to the state's folkloric heritage.
Zapotecs have always called themselves Be'ena'a, which means The People.
In addition there is the SUNEO university system.
Federal highway 135 leads from Puebla to Oaxaca City then down to Pochutla.
In 1928, a series of earthquakes destroyed many of the buildings in the capital.
Ninety five percent of Oaxaca's population receives health care from one or more government programs.
There is a saying in Oaxaca, "Para todo mal, mezcal, para todo bien, también" (For everything bad, mezcal; for everything good, too.)
The state is a prolific place for reptiles such as turtles, lizards, snakes and crocodiles.
The largest university in the state is the Benito Juárez Autonomous University of Oaxaca (UABJO), located in the capital city of Oaxaca de Juarez.
There is also a system of thirty districts to group municipalities.
This area is the cultural, geographical and political center of the state, filled with pre-Hispanic ruins, Baroque churches and monasteries, indigenous markets and villages devoted to various crafts.
Porfirio Díaz was Juárez's ally through the French Intervention.
This technique is Arab in origin and was introduced by the Spanish.
The palace of the rulers is an enormous monolith with six porticos and several entrances, built in stone and clay and covered with stucco.
Only 81,197 hectares have irrigation.
Alcoholic and non alcoholic drinks (as well as food items) based on the maguey plant have been consumed in many parts of Mexico since early in the pre-Hispanic period.
The valley Zapotecs, the Mixtecs of the Upper Mixteca, the Mazatecas and the Cuicatecas, for the most part, choose not to fight the newcomers, instead negotiating to keep most of the old hierarchy but with ultimate authority to the Spanish.
These same people put pressure on the Zapotec kingdoms until the Spanish conquered both peoples in the 16th century.
Vinicio Castilla is the most notable player hailing from Oaxaca, having played third base in Major League Baseball for the Atlanta Braves, Colorado Rockies, Tampa Bay Devil Rays, Houston Astros and San Diego Padres.
In 1528, the Dominicans settled in the city of Oaxaca, forming the Bishopric of Oaxaca in 1535, and began to spread out from there, eventually reaching Tehuantepec and the coast.
There is about the same ratio of doctors between the two states.
This status continued until the Spanish Conquistadores invaded the valley, which was then a settlement of Zapotecs.
Hierve el Agua is an area with "petrified" waterfalls, where water with extremely high mineral content falls over the side of cliffs, forming stone waterfall-like structures.
Kayaking also takes places along the Copalita River in Huatulco.
It remained a secondary center of power for the Zapotecs until the Mixtecs overran it in 1325.
The most important of these three is Lambityeco, in the middle of the Tlacolula Valley.
Settlers arriving from Spain brought with them domestic animals that had never been seen in Oaxaca: horses, cows, goats, sheep, chickens, mules and oxen.
Today, that percentage has fallen to 20th.
In more tropical areas, crops also include coffee, sesame seed, rice, sugar cane and pineapple.
While much of Mexico's health care system struggles to meet needs, the system in Oaxaca, one of the country's poorest states, has it particularly bad.
The primary highways in the state include Oaxaca (city)-Cuacnopalan toll road and the Pan-American highway, which crosses the state completely from Puebla to Chiapas.
On account of wide variation in topography and annual rainfall, the micro-climatic conditions in the reserve has created a biosphere reserve, which is very rich in flora and fauna.
The most important ocean creatures commercially are shrimp, tuna, bonito, huachinango and mojarra.
Because of its geography and landscape, mountain biking is also common in Oaxaca and is practiced primarily in the Sierra Norte in Ixtlan de Juarez, San Antonio Cuajimoloyas, Santa Catarian Ixtepeji, Benito Juarez Lachatao and San Isidro Llano Grande.
Coastal fishing is also a major source of income and in 2007 the total fishing catch was estimated at 9,300 tons with a value of over 174 million pesos.
the Michigan archaeologists' study delineated the process of religion adapting to different environments as Oaxacan society changed.
The baseball team, Guerreros de Oaxaca, play at the Eduardo Vasconcelos Stadium in Oaxaca de Juarez and play in the Mexican League.
In 2007, there were 122,579 birth and 19,439 deaths.
At its height, Monte Albán was home to some 25,000 people and was the capital city of the Zapotec nation.
The Sierra Atravesada is a prolongation of the Sierra Madre de Chiapas.
After 1812, insurgents began to have some success in the state, especially in the areas around Huajuapan de León, where Valerio Trujano defended the city against royalist forces until José María Morelos y Pavón was able to come in with support to keep the area in rebel hands.
It was designated as a national park under a presidential decree, in 1937.
The Mixe are an isolated group in the northeastern part of the state, close to the border of Veracruz.
Textiles from cotton and other fibers date to early in the pre-Hispanic period on backstrap looms.
The death rate has decreased from 5.79 deaths per thousand to 5.14.
The problem is more severe in the tropical lowlands of the state, near the ocean.
The Sierra Mazteca, Textepec and other areas near the Veracruz border have rains year round.
Other attractions in the area include colonial constructions such as the monasteries in Cuilapan, Tlaxiaco, Coixthlahuaca, Yanhuitlán and Santo Domingo.
Santa María del Tule is home to an enormous Montezuma cypress (Taxodium mucronatum) tree which is over 2,000 years old.
However, even Yagul was abandoned for a brief period, before it became a city-state in Oaxaca.
Most items are produced with cotton or wool fibers, although some maguey fibers can be found and palm fronds are used to produce mats and hats.
There are pine and oak forests in the upper reaches of the mountain, while the lower reaches have scrub oaks, and tropical deciduous forest in the canyons.
There are also 58 species of aquatic plants.
Sport fishing is common in Puerto Escondido and in Huatulco with tournaments held in November and May respectively.
The first is centered in the town of San Bartolo Coyotepec near the capital city.
The mountains are mostly formed by the convergence of the Sierra Madre del Sur, the Sierra Madre de Oaxaca and the Sierra Atravesada into what is called the Oaxaca Complex (Complejo Oaxaqueño).
In 45.5% of Oaxaca's municipalities, the population has declined due to migration.
However, Aztec rule in Oaxaca would last only a little more than thirty years.
The variation of climate allows for a wider range of agricultural crops than would otherwise grow in a geographical region of this size.
They came into conflict with the Mixtecs and Zapotecs, but allied themselves with the Zapotecs against the Aztecs, then resisted the Spanish.
Most of what is known about pre-historic Oaxaca comes from archeological work in the Central Valleys region.
Oaxaca produces seven varieties of mole called manchamanteles, chichilo, Amarillo, rojo, verde, coloradito and negro.
To the south of the Palace of the Six Porticos, there is a narrow street that is paved with stone mosaics extracted from the nearby mountain.
La Sandunga is a song that typifies the musical style of the Tehuantepec region and a musical style called "son bioxho" is an endemic form of the son style played with drums, an empty tortoise shell and a reed flute.
This makes Oaxaca the most ethnically complex of Mexico's 31 states.
The town of Zaachila is known for its archeological site and weekly market.
As of 2005, a total of 1,091,502 people were counted as speaking an indigenous language.
Meat was generally hunted and included tepescuintle, turkey, deer, peccary, armadillo and iguana.
Oaxaca shares many pottery types with other parts of Mexico along with two of its own: barro negro and the green glazed pottery of Atzompa.
In 2007, there were 1,927 small grocery stores, 70 tianguis and 167 municipal markets.
The most populated municipality is the capital, followed by San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec and Juchitán de Zaragoza.
The Mazatecos number at about 165,000 or 15% of Oaxaca's indigenous population.
Two Oaxacans, Benito Juarez and Porfirio Díaz were prominent players in the Reform War.
Both precious and non-precious metals are worked in the state.
Benito Juárez National Park is located  to the north of Oaxaca within the municipal limits of San Felipe del Agua and Donaji, Oaxaca, and San Andres Huayapan of the central district.
The Mixtecan language family, as one of the largest and most diverse families in the Oto-Manguean group, includes three groups of languages: Mixtec, Cuicatec, and Trique.
The coastline along with the regions of Yautepec, Putla, parts of Huahuapan and Silacayoapan are hot and relatively dry.
This development was threatened by the violence associated with the 2006 uprising, which severely curtailed the number of incoming tourists for several years.
To the south, Oaxaca has a significant coastline on the Pacific Ocean.
These included the Izúcar-Tehuantepec section of the Panamerican Highway and the construction of the Miguel Alemán Dam.
The most populous indigenous groups in Oaxaca are the Zapotec or Mixtec.
It is meant to supplement other federal and state services such as IMSS.
Handcrafted items here are noted for their variety and quality.
However, all indigenous were eventually lumped into the category as the Spanish halted warfare among the city-states and creating the official category of "indio" (Indian).
In the bottom of the canvas is the phrase "ESTADO LIBRE Y SOBERANO DE OAXACA".
On the canvas is located Shield of Mexico.
The value of this production was estimated at 2,726.4&nbsp;million pesos with cattle comprising over half of this.
In addition, 90% of all indigenous teachers do not have satisfactory academic backgrounds.
Their region includes 19 municipalities and 108 communities.
This range is not as high as the other two with an average elevation of just over .
There is an oil and natural gas refinery in Salinas Cruz, which provides products to the state and other areas on Mexico's Pacific coast.
Chocolate, which is grown in the state, plays an important part in the making of certain moles, but is best known for its role as a beverage.
