The healthy BMI range varies with the age and sex of the child.
There are a number of theories as to the cause but most believe it is a combination of various factors.
The surgical literature breaks down "class III" obesity into further categories whose exact values are still disputed.
Many organizations have published reports pertaining to obesity.
The risk of overweight and obesity is higher in patients with psychiatric disorders than in persons without psychiatric disorders.
In 1998, the first US Federal guidelines were published, titled "Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report".
Thus a deficiency in leptin signaling, either via leptin deficiency or leptin resistance, leads to overfeeding and may account for some genetic and acquired forms of obesity.
These women, however, still maintained the "hourglass" shape with its relationship to fertility.
The first group coexpresses neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP) and has stimulatory inputs to the LH and inhibitory inputs to the VMH.
An association between viruses and obesity has been found in humans and several different animal species.
Obesity is mostly preventable through a combination of social changes and personal choices.
This apparent alteration of the metabolic potential is believed to confer a greater capacity to harvest energy contributing to obesity.
(The term "non-syndromic obesity" is sometimes used to exclude these conditions.)
''Ēsus'' is the past participle of ''edere'' (to eat), with ''ob'' (over) added to it.
A 2006 review identified ten other possible contributors to the recent increase of obesity: (1) insufficient sleep, (2) endocrine disruptors (environmental pollutants that interfere with lipid metabolism), (3) decreased variability in ambient temperature, (4) decreased rates of smoking, because smoking suppresses appetite, (5) increased use of medications that can cause weight gain (e.g., atypical antipsychotics), (6) proportional increases in ethnic and age groups that tend to be heavier, (7) pregnancy at a later age (which may cause susceptibility to obesity in children), (8) epigenetic risk factors passed on generationally, (9) natural selection for higher BMI, and (10) assortative mating leading to increased concentration of obesity risk factors (this would  increase the number of obese people by increasing population variance in weight).
When compared to their normal weight counterparts, obese workers on average have higher rates of absenteeism from work and take more disability leave, thus increasing costs for employers and decreasing productivity.
The AMA classification is not legally binding, however, so health insurers still have the right to reject coverage for a treatment or procedure.
Comprehensive approaches are being looked at to address the rising rates of obesity.
Decreased intake of sweet drinks is also related to weight-loss.
The only remaining region of the world where obesity is not common is sub-Saharan Africa.
While genetic influences are important to understanding obesity, they cannot explain the current dramatic increase seen within specific countries or globally.
A 2007 report produced by Derek Wanless for the King's Fund warned that unless further action was taken, obesity had the capacity to cripple the National Health Service financially.
But as prosperity increased in the Early Modern period, it affected increasingly larger groups of the population.
Many cultures throughout history have viewed obesity as the result of a character flaw.
The study of the effect of infectious agents on metabolism is still in its early stages.
The adipokines are mediators produced by adipose tissue; their action is thought to modify many obesity-related diseases.
In the developing world, women, men, and children from high social classes had greater rates of obesity.
With the onset of the industrial revolution it was realized that the military and economic might of nations were dependent on both the body size and strength of their soldiers and workers.
Whether these differences are the direct cause or the result of obesity has yet to be determined unequivocally.
Because childhood obesity often persists into adulthood and is associated with numerous chronic illnesses, children who are obese are often tested for hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and fatty liver.
While leptin and ghrelin are produced peripherally, they control appetite through their actions on the central nervous system.
:* A BMI of ≥ 35&nbsp;kg/m2 and experiencing obesity-related health conditions or ≥40–44.9&nbsp;kg/m2 is ''morbid obesity''.
Polymorphisms in various genes controlling appetite and metabolism predispose to obesity when sufficient food energy is present.
The total annual direct cost of overweight and obesity in Australia in 2005 was A$21 billion.
Certain medications may cause weight gain or changes in body composition; these include insulin, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, atypical antipsychotics, antidepressants, steroids, certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin and valproate), pizotifen, and some forms of hormonal contraception.
Dietary energy supply per capita varies markedly between different regions and countries.
The reference data that these percentiles are based on is from 1963 to 1994 and thus has not been affected by the recent increases in rates of obesity.
Obese people consistently under-report their food consumption as compared to people of normal weight.
A similar relationship is seen among US states: more adults, even in higher social classes, are obese in more unequal states.
A 2014 review found that the heart disease and diabetes risks associated with different diets appear to be similar.
The United States had the highest availability with  per person in 1996.
Obesity increases the likelihood of various diseases, particularly heart disease, type 2 diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, certain types of cancer, and osteoarthritis.
to eat more when fat storages are low and less when fat storages are high).
The reference data on which these percentiles were based date from 1963 to 1994, and thus have not been affected by the recent increases in weight.
Some attribute the Venus figurines to the tendency to emphasize fertility while others feel they represent "fatness" in the people of the time.
Surgery for severe obesity is associated with long-term weight loss, improvement in obesity related conditions, and decreased overall mortality.
This field of research had been almost unapproached until the leptin gene was discovered in 1994 by J. M. Friedman's laboratory.
Leptin is produced by adipose tissue to signal fat storage reserves in the body, and mediates long-term appetitive controls (i.e.
During the Renaissance some of the upper class began flaunting their large size, as can be seen in portraits of Henry VIII of England and Alessandro del Borro.
Endocrine changes that occur during periods of malnutrition may promote the storage of fat once more food energy becomes available.
:where ''m'' and ''h'' are the subject's weight and height respectively.
The International Size Acceptance Association (ISAA) is a non-governmental organization (NGO) which was founded in 1997.
Once considered a problem only of high-income countries, obesity rates are rising worldwide and affecting both the developed and developing world.
BMI is usually expressed in kilograms per square metre, resulting when weight is measured in kilograms and height in metres.
Whether obesity causes cognitive deficits, or vice versa is unclear at present.
Its use is associated with high rates of gastrointestinal side effects and concerns have been raised about negative effects on the kidneys.
As of 2008 the WHO estimates that at least 500&nbsp;million adults (greater than 10%) are obese, with higher rates among women than men.
This is a comprehensive evidence-based guideline to address the management and prevention of overweight and obesity in adults and children.
:* Any BMI ≥ 35 or 40&nbsp;kg/m2 is ''severe obesity''.
In Asians the risk of negative health effects begins to increase between 22–25&nbsp;kg/m2.
In the short-term low carbohydrate diets appear better than low fat diets for weight loss.
Certain physical and mental illnesses and the pharmaceutical substances used to treat them can increase risk of obesity.
These investigators postulated that leptin was a satiety factor.
For women, the average increase was  per day ( in 1971 and  in 2004), while for men the average increase was  per day ( in 1971 and  in 2004).
This is illustrated by the fact that the average height of Miss America pageant winners increased by 2% from 1922 to 1999, while their average weight decreased by 12%.
The Obesity Policy Action (OPA) framework divides measure into 'upstream' policies, 'midstream' policies, 'downstream' policies.
A study examining Duke University employees found that people with a BMI over 40&nbsp;kg/m2 filed twice as many workers' compensation claims as those whose BMI was 18.5–24.9&nbsp;kg/m2.
Although administration of leptin may be effective in a small subset of obese individuals who are leptin deficient, most obese individuals are thought to be leptin resistant and have been found to have high levels of leptin.
The decrease in strength of correlation was felt to be due to the effects of globalization.
After centuries of obesity being synonymous with wealth and social status, slimness began to be seen as the desirable standard.
The ''obesus'' or fat character in Greek comedy was a glutton and figure of mockery.
Most of this extra food energy came from an increase in carbohydrate consumption rather than fat consumption.
Another found that if one takes into account chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in those with PAD, the benefit of obesity no longer exists.
One study found that the improved survival could be explained by the more aggressive treatment obese people receive after a cardiac event.
Increasing the average body mass index from what is now considered underweight to what is now the normal range played a significant role in the development of industrialized societies.
In contrast, increasing rates of obesity at a societal level are felt to be due to an easily accessible and palatable diet, increased reliance on cars, and mechanized manufacturing.
Obesity is a public health and policy problem because of its prevalence, costs, and health effects.
In 2006 the Canadian Obesity Network published the "Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on the Management and Prevention of Obesity in Adults and Children".
&nbsp;&nbsp;class III obesity&nbsp;&nbsp;
In the ob/ob mouse, mutations in the leptin gene resulted in the obese phenotype opening the possibility of leptin therapy for human obesity.
In contrast, a 2013 review found that grade 1 obesity (BMI 30-35) was not associated with higher mortality than normal weight, and that overweight (BMI 25-30) was associated with "lower" mortality than was normal weight (BMI 18.5-25).
BMI is closely related to both percentage body fat and total body fat.
These measures started in January 2010 and apply to those state workers whose BMI exceeds 35&nbsp;kg/m2 and who fail to make improvements in their health after one year.
In people with heart failure, those with a BMI between 30.0 and 34.9 had lower mortality than those with a normal weight.
Their ability to take advantage of rare periods of abundance by storing energy as fat would be advantageous during times of varying food availability, and individuals with greater adipose reserves would be more likely to survive famine.
He recommended physical work to help cure it and its side effects.
Diet quality can be improved by reducing the consumption of energy-dense foods, such as those high in fat and sugars, and by increasing the intake of dietary fiber.
Since leptin's discovery, ghrelin, insulin, orexin, PYY 3-36, cholecystokinin, adiponectin, as well as many other mediators have been studied.
The rate of obesity in cats was slightly higher at 6.4%.
The primary sources of these extra carbohydrates are sweetened beverages, which now account for almost 25 percent of daily food energy in young adults in America, and potato chips.
Rubens (1577–1640) regularly depicted full-bodied women in his pictures, from which derives the term Rubenesque.
These increases have been felt most dramatically in urban settings.
Obese people are also paid less than their non-obese counterparts for an equivalent job; obese women on average make 6% less and obese men make 3% less.
It is thought that in developed countries, the wealthy are able to afford more nutritious food, they are under greater social pressure to remain slim, and have more opportunities along with greater expectations for physical fitness.
During the same period, an increase occurred in the average amount of food energy consumed.
Similar findings have been made in other types of heart disease.
Though it is accepted that energy consumption in excess of energy expenditure leads to obesity on an individual basis, the cause of the shifts in these two factors on the societal scale is much debated.
The amount that these associations may have contributed to the rising rate of obesity is yet to be determined.
Different people exposed to the same environment have different risks of obesity due to their underlying genetics.
In children, there appear to be declines in levels of physical activity due to less walking and physical education.
One study found a weight loss of between 14% and 25% (depending on the type of procedure performed) at 10&nbsp;years, and a 29% reduction in all cause mortality when compared to standard weight loss measures.
Hippocrates wrote that "Corpulence is not only a disease itself, but the harbinger of others".
Among developed countries, levels of adult obesity, and percentage of teenage children who are overweight, are correlated with income inequality.
Promotion of the Mediterranean diets among the obese may lower the risk of heart disease.
If diet, exercise, and medication are not effective, a gastric balloon or surgery may be performed to reduce stomach volume or bowel length, leading to feeling full earlier or a reduced ability to absorb nutrients from food.
Excessive body weight is associated with various diseases, particularly cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus type 2, obstructive sleep apnea, certain types of cancer, osteoarthritis and asthma.
There is no information on how these drugs affect longer-term complications of obesity such as cardiovascular disease or death.
Medical illnesses that increase obesity risk include several rare genetic syndromes (listed above) as well as some congenital or acquired conditions: hypothyroidism, Cushing's syndrome, growth hormone deficiency, and the eating disorders: binge eating disorder and night eating syndrome.
In 2000, the extra weight of obese passengers cost airlines US$275&nbsp;million.
In the developing world urbanization is playing a role in increasing rate of obesity.
As with obesity in adults, many factors contribute to the rising rates of childhood obesity.
''Obesity'' is from the Latin ''obesitas'', which means "stout, fat, or plump".
The Alabama State Employees' Insurance Board approved a controversial plan to charge obese workers $25 a month for health insurance that would otherwise be free unless they take steps to lose weight and improve their health.
In the 17th century, English medical author Tobias Venner is credited with being one of the first to refer to the term as a societal disease in a published English language book.
There is an indication that gut flora in obese and lean individuals can affect the metabolic potential.
The circuit begins with an area of the hypothalamus, the arcuate nucleus, that has outputs to the lateral hypothalamus (LH) and ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), the brain's feeding and satiety centers, respectively.
Obesity is a medical condition in which excess body fat has accumulated to the extent that it may have an adverse effect on health.
In the long term; however, all types of low-carbohydrate and low-fat diets appear equally beneficial.
It has more of a global orientation and describes its mission as promoting size acceptance and helping to end weight-based discrimination.
Consistent with cognitive epidemiological data, numerous studies confirm that obesity is  associated with cognitive deficits.
Obesity is more common in women than men.
The most commonly used definitions, established by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1997 and published in 2000, provide the values listed in the table.
In 2014, The European Court of Justice ruled that morbid obesity is a disability.
Public health efforts seek to understand and correct the environmental factors responsible for the increasing prevalence of obesity in the population.
During the late 1990s Europeans had  per person, in the developing areas of Asia there were  per person, and in sub-Saharan Africa people had  per person.
:* A BMI of ≥ 45 or 50&nbsp;kg/m2 is ''super obesity''.
Gut flora has been shown to differ between lean and obese humans.
Worldwide there has been a large shift towards less physically demanding work, and currently at least 30% of the world's population gets insufficient exercise.
People with class I obesity and heart disease do not have greater rates of further heart problems than people of normal weight who also have heart disease.
The first sculptural representations of the human body 20,000–35,000&nbsp;years ago depict obese females.
Obesity is stigmatized in much of the modern world (particularly in the Western world), though it was seen as a symbol of wealth and fertility at other times in history and still is in some parts of the world.
The weight that is viewed as an ideal has become lower since the 1920s.
On the other hand, people's views concerning healthy weight have changed in the opposite direction.
In 2005 the US Congress discussed legislation to prevent civil lawsuits against the food industry in relation to obesity; however, it did not become law.
In 2006, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) issued a guideline on the diagnosis and management of obesity, as well as policy implications for non-healthcare organizations such as local councils.
'''Obesity''' is a medical condition in which excess body fat has accumulated to the extent that it may have a negative effect on health.
While there is substantial evidence supporting the influence of these mechanisms on the increased prevalence of obesity, the evidence is still inconclusive, and the authors state that these are probably less influential than the ones discussed in the previous paragraph.
Changing diet and decreasing physical activity are believed to be the two most important causes for the recent increase in the incidence of child obesity.
In the United States the number of children a person has is related to their risk of obesity.
However, changing rates of smoking have had little effect on the overall rates of obesity.
A woman's risk increases by 7% per child, while a man's risk increases by 4% per child.
This is supported both by tests of people carried out in a calorimeter room and by direct observation.
At an individual level, a combination of excessive food energy intake and a lack of physical activity is thought to explain most cases of obesity.
The American legal system, however, has decided that the potential public health costs exceed the benefits of extending this anti-discrimination law to cover obesity.
In the United States, 23–41% of dogs are overweight, and about 5.1% are obese.
Success rates of long-term weight loss maintenance with lifestyle changes are low, ranging from 2–20%.
The widespread availability of nutritional guidelines has done little to address the problems of overeating and poor dietary choice.
A review in 1989 found that in developed countries women of a high social class were less likely to be obese.
Three medications, orlistat, lorcaserin and a combination of phentermine and topiramate are currently available and have evidence for long term use.
In modern Western culture, excess weight is often regarded as unattractive, and obesity is commonly associated with various negative stereotypes.
This has become particularly common since the HIV epidemic began.
to eat when the stomach is empty and to stop when the stomach is stretched).
To convert from pounds per square inch multiply by .
Due to rising rates of obesity, airlines face higher fuel costs and pressures to increase seating width.
The Court argued that if an employee's obesity prevents him from "full and effective participation of that person in professional life on an equal basis with other workers", then it shall be considered a disability and that firing someone on such grounds is discriminatory.
As of 2006, more than 41 of these sites on the human genome have been linked to the development of obesity when a favorable environment is present.
A review found 63 of 73 studies (86%) showed an increased rate of childhood obesity with increased media exposure, with rates increasing proportionally to time spent watching television.
With the American Medical Association's 2013 classification of obesity as a chronic disease, it is thought that health insurance companies will more likely pay for obesity treatment, counseling and surgery, and the cost of research and development of fat treatment pills or gene therapy treatments should be more affordable if insurers help to subsidize their cost.
In 1997 the WHO formally recognized obesity as a global epidemic.
However, the longer people live, the more medical costs they incur.
On average, obesity reduces life expectancy by six to seven&nbsp;years, a BMI of 30–35&nbsp;kg/m2 reduces life expectancy by two to four&nbsp;years, while severe obesity (BMI&nbsp;>&nbsp;40&nbsp;kg/m2) reduces life expectancy by ten&nbsp;years.
These changes are believed to be due to increasing rates of adiposity leading to increased acceptance of extra body fat as being normal.
The most common injuries in this group were due to falls and lifting, thus affecting the lower extremities, wrists or hands, and backs.
In children, a healthy weight varies with age and sex.
Height and weight thus both increased through the 19th&nbsp;century in the developed world.
A number of reviews have found that mortality risk is lowest at a BMI of 20–25&nbsp;kg/m2 in non-smokers and at 24–27&nbsp;kg/m2 in current smokers, with risk increasing along with changes in either direction.
In the 1950s increasing wealth in the developed world decreased child mortality, but as body weight increased heart and kidney disease became more common.
This continued through much of Christian European history, with only those of low socioeconomic status being depicted as obese.
In the United States consumption of fast-food meals tripled and food energy intake from these meals quadrupled between 1977 and 1995.
However, soon thereafter J. F. Caro's laboratory could not detect any mutations in the leptin gene in humans with obesity.
It is defined by body mass index (BMI) and further evaluated in terms of fat distribution via the waist–hip ratio and total cardiovascular risk factors.
People of all ages can face social stigmatization, and may be targeted by bullies or shunned by their peers.
The rate of obesity also increases with age at least up to 50 or 60&nbsp;years old and severe obesity in the United States, Australia, and Canada is increasing faster than the overall rate of obesity.
The risk of obesity in dogs is related to whether or not their owners are obese; however, there is no similar correlation between cats and their owners.
During this time period insurance companies realized the connection between weight and life expectancy and increased premiums for the obese.
Agricultural policy and techniques in the United States and Europe have led to lower food prices.
In both children and adults, there is an association between television viewing time and the risk of obesity.
They also had more than 12&nbsp;times as many lost work days.
Both groups of arcuate nucleus neurons are regulated in part by leptin.
In 2005, the medical costs attributable to obesity in the US were an estimated $190.2&nbsp;billion or 20.6% of all medical expenditures, while the cost of obesity in Canada was estimated at CA$2 billion in 1997 (2.4% of total health costs).
The most effective treatment for obesity is bariatric surgery.
Those who quit smoking gain an average of 4.4&nbsp;kilograms (9.7&nbsp;lb) for men and 5.0&nbsp;kilograms (11.0&nbsp;lb) for women over ten years.
An update of this review carried out in 2007 found the same relationships, but they were weaker.
Medications may be taken, along with a suitable diet, to reduce appetite or decrease fat absorption.
Even after cardiac bypass surgery, no increase in mortality is seen in the overweight and obese.
The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for all adults followed by behavioral interventions in those who are obese.
In 2014, 600 million adults (13%) and 42 million children under the age of five were obese.
There are many possible pathophysiological mechanisms involved in the development and maintenance of obesity.
Obesity prevention programs have been found to reduce the cost of treating obesity-related disease.
During the 20th century, as populations reached their genetic potential for height, weight began increasing much more than height, resulting in obesity.
Ancient Greek medicine recognizes obesity as a medical disorder, and records that the Ancient Egyptians saw it in the same way.
''The Oxford English Dictionary'' documents its first usage in 1611 by Randle Cotgrave.
As a result, obesity has been found to reduce life expectancy.
Other evidence suggests that the association of BMI and waist circumference with mortality is U- or J-shaped, while the association between waist-to-hip ratio and waist-to-height ratio with mortality is more positive.
Leptin and ghrelin are considered to be complementary in their influence on appetite, with ghrelin produced by the stomach modulating short-term appetitive control (i.e.
A BMI above 32&nbsp;kg/m2 has been associated with a doubled mortality rate among women over a 16-year period.
When constructing urban environments, efforts have been made to increase access to parks and to develop pedestrian routes.
The correlation between social class and BMI varies globally.
In the United States, subsidization of corn, soy, wheat, and rice through the U.S. farm bill has made the main sources of processed food cheap compared to fruits and vegetables.
From 1971 to 2000, obesity rates in the United States increased from 14.5% to 30.9%.
