Some of the Odessans had a more favourable view of the Romanian occupation, in contrast with the Soviet official view that the period was exclusively a time of hardship, deprivation, oppression and suffering – claims embodied in public monuments and disseminated through the media to this day.
Hennadiy Avdyeyenko won a 1988 Olympic gold medal in thehigh jump, setting an Olympic record at .
The market has roughly 6,000 traders and an estimated 150,000 customers per day.
Few months later the city was occupied by the French Army and Greek legions that supported the Russian White Army in struggle with Bolsheviks.
Hocabey was a sanjak centre of Silistre Province.
The city has produced many writers, including Isaac Babel, whose series of short stories, Odessa Tales, are set in the city.
Some expressed doubts about this claim, while others noted the reputation of Gribovsky as an honest and modest man.
It was named after the ancient Greek city of Odessos, which was mistakenly believed to have been located here.
This resulted in the development of a spa culture and the establishment of a number of high-end hotels in the city.
Since the 1970s, the majority of the remaining Jewish population emigrated to Israel and other countries, shrinking the Jewish community.
Passenger ships and ferries connect Odessa with Istanbul, Haifa and Varna, whilst river cruises can occasionally be booked for travel up the Dnieper River to cities such as Kherson, Dnipropetrovsk and Kiev.
Agriculture is a relatively important sector in the territories surrounding the city.
The city was land mined in the same way as Kiev.
Up until the early 1940s the city also had a large Jewish population.
Trams were imported from Germany.
File:Defence of Odessa REVERSE.jpg|Reverse of the Soviet campaign medal “For the Defence of Odessa”
Numerous sculptures can also be found within the grounds as well as a musical fountain, the waters of which are computer controlled to coordinate with the musical melody being played.
Kataev became a benefactor for these young authors, who would become some of the most talented and popular Russian writers of this period.
Tavria-V is the biggest private company and the biggest tax payer.
Figure skaters Oksana Grishuk and Evgeny Platov won the 1994 and 1998 Olympic gold medals as well as the 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997 World Championships in ice dance.
The 2 May 2014 Odessa clashes between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian protestors killed 42 people.
It became home to an extremely diverse population of Albanians, Armenians, Azeris, Bulgarians, Crimean Tatars, Frenchmen, Germans (including Mennonites), Greeks, Italians, Jews, Poles, Romanians, Russians, Turks, Ukrainians, and traders representing many other nationalities (hence numerous "ethnic" names on the city's map, for example ''Frantsuzky'' (French) and ''Italiansky'' (Italian) Boulevards, ''Grecheskaya'' (Greek), ''Yevreyskaya'' (Jewish), ''Arnautskaya'' (Albanian) Streets).
The actual massacre took place in streets nearby, not on the steps themselves, but the film caused many to visit Odessa to see the site of the "slaughter".
File:Pavlichenko LM.jpg|Sniper Lyudmila Pavlichenko
In 1866, the city was linked by rail with Kiev and Kharkiv as well as with Iaşi in Romania.
Some local historians consider that the settlement predates Odessa by about thirty years and assert that the locality was founded by Moldavians who came to build the fortress of Yeni Dunia for the Ottomans and eventually settled in the area in the late 1760s, right next to the settlement of Khadjibey (since 1795 Odessa proper), on what later became the Primorsky Boulevard.
Before being occupied by Romanian troops in 1941, a part of the city's population, industry, infrastructure and all cultural valuables possible were evacuated to inner regions of the USSR and the retreating Red Army units destroyed as much as they could of Odessa harbour facilities left behind.
This created a gigantic complicated labyrinth of underground tunnels beneath Odessa, known as "Odessa Catacombs".
Odessa also has a cable car and recreational ferry service.
Being located in the south of Ukraine, the topography of the area surrounding the city is typically flat and there are no large mountains or hills for many kilometres around.
The city suffered severe damage and sustained many casualties over the course of the war.
Chess player Efim Geller was born in the city.
* Leonid Buryak, football coach and former Olympic bronze-medal-winning player
The second football team in Odessa is FC Odessa.
'''Other notable athletes:'''
Odessa was attacked by Romanian and German troops in August 1941.
Odessa produced one of the founders of the Soviet violin school, Pyotr Stolyarsky.
The city of Odessa, founded by order of Catherine the Great, Russian Empress, centers on the site of the Turkish fortress Khadzhibei, which was occupied by Russian Army in 1789.
Its cosmopolitan nature was documented by the great Russian poet Alexander Pushkin, who lived in internal exile in Odessa between 1823 and 1824.
The South Ukrainian National Pedagogical University is also based in the city, this is one of the largest institutions for the preparation of educational specialists in Ukraine and is recognised as one of the country's finest of such universities.
The defense was organized on three lines with emplacements consisting of trenches, AT ditches and pillboxes.The first line was 80&nbsp;km long and situated some 25–30&nbsp;km from the city.
During the Soviet period (until 1991) the city functioned as the USSR's largest trading port; it continues in a similar role as independent Ukraine's busiest international port.
Poet Anna Akhmatova was born in Bolshoy Fontan near Odessa.
Partisan fighting continued, however, in the city's catacombs.
In the period from 1795 to 1814 the population of Odessa increased 15 times over and reached almost 20 thousand people.
The city's industries include shipbuilding, oil refining, chemicals, metalworking and food processing.
After the Nazi forces began to lose ground on the Eastern Front, the Romanian administration changed its policy, refusing to deport the remaining Jewish population to extermination camps in German occupied Poland, and allowing Jews to work as hired labourers.
Vera Inber, a poet and writer, as well as the famous poet and journalist, Margarita Aliger were both born in Odessa.
The park covers an area of around  and is located near the centre of the city, on the side closest to the sea.
In 1819, the city became a free port, a status it retained until 1859.
His contributions to the city are mentioned by Mark Twain in his travelogue ''Innocents Abroad'': "I mention this statue and this stairway because they have their story.
As a result, despite the tragic events of 1941, the survival of the Jewish population in this area was higher than in other areas of occupied eastern Europe.
Odessa is served by a number of railway stations and halts, the largest of which is Odesa Holovna (Main Station), from where passenger train services connect Odessa with Warsaw, Prague, Bratislava, Vienna, Berlin, Moscow, St. Petersburg, the cities of Ukraine and many other cities of the former USSR.
In 1794, the city of Odessa was founded by a decree of the Empress Catherine the Great.
Beside transportation Port of Odessa became a provisional headquarters of the Ukrainian Navy, due the Russian occupation of Crimea in 2014.
Other museums in the city include the Odessa Archeological Museum, which is housed in a beautiful neoclassical building, the renowned Odessa Numismatics Museum, the Odessa Art Museum, the Odessa Museum of the Regional History, Museum of Heroic Defense of Odessa (411th Battery).
2015 Mayoral election of Odessa Gennadiy Trukhanov was reelected in the first round of the election with 52,9% of the vote.
The territory of Odessa is divided into four administrative raions (districts):
* Viktor Petrenko, Olympic champion in figure skating
Both were born and raised in the city, though they skated at first for the Soviet Union, in the Unified Team, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and then Russia.
It was one of the first four Soviet cities to be awarded the title of "Hero City" in 1945 ( Leningrad, Stalingrad, Sevastopol, and Odessa).
Despite this, the city grew rapidly by filling the void of those left with new migrants from rural Ukraine and industrial professionals invited from all over the Soviet Union.
There are a number of monuments and memorials in the park, one of which is dedicated to the park's namesake, the Ukrainian national poet Taras Shevchenko.
Mechnikov' National University.
Igor Glazer Production Manager Baruch Agadati (1895–1976), the Israeli classical ballet dancer, choreographer, painter, and film producer and director grew up in Odessa, as did Israeli artist and author Nachum Gutman (1898–1980).
Odessa is a warm-water port.
Flora is of the deciduous variety and Odessa is famous for its beautiful tree-lined avenues which, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, made the city a favourite year-round retreat for the Russian aristocracy.
The average elevation at which the city is located is around , whilst the maximum is  and minimum (on the coast) amounts to  above sea level.
Her first 2 kills were made near Belyayevka using a Mosin-Nagant bolt-action rifle with a P.E.
The city's Filatov Institute of Eye Diseases & Tissue Therapy is one of the world's leading ophthalmology clinics.
The city became the home of a large Jewish community during the 19th century, and by 1897 Jews were estimated to comprise some 37% of the population.
However, the city is still lacking an extra-urban bypass for transit traffic which does not wish to proceed through the city centre.
The city currently covers a territory of , the population density for which is around 6,139 persons/km².
Four were killed during the protests, and at least 32 pro-Russian protesters were killed after a trade union building was set on fire.
The municipal council is made up of 120 elected members, who are each elected to represent a certain district of the city for a four-year term.
The port is able to handle up to 14 million tons of cargo and about 24&nbsp;million tons of oil products annually, whilst its passenger terminals can cater for around 4&nbsp;million passengers a year at full capacity.
Within the park there is a wide variety of cultural and entertainment facilities, wide pedestrian avenues and natural beauty.
File:Defence_of_Odessa_OBVERSE.jpg|Obverse of the Soviet campaign medal “For Defence of Odessa”
Odessa is situated () on terraced hills overlooking a small harbor on the Black Sea in the Gulf of Odessa, approximately  north of the estuary of the Dniester river and some  south of the Ukrainian capital Kiev.
With regard to primary and secondary education, Odessa has a large number of schools catering for all ages from kindergarten through to lyceum (final secondary school level) age.
They include: Illya Mechnikov (Nobel Prize in Medicine 1908), Igor Tamm (Nobel Prize in Physics 1958), Selman Waksman (Nobel Prize in Medicine 1952), Dmitri Mendeleev, Nikolay Pirogov, Ivan Sechenov, Vladimir Filatov, Nikolay Umov, Leonid Mandelstam, Aleksandr Lyapunov, Mark Krein, Alexander Smakula, Waldemar Haffkine, Valentin Glushko, and George Gamow.
The Seventh-Kilometer Market is a major commercial complex on the outskirts of the city where private traders now operate one of the largest market complexes in Eastern Europe.
The original 200 steps (now reduced to 192) were designed by Italian architect Francesco Boffo and built between 1837 and 1841.
In 1887 one of the city's most well known architectural monuments was completed – the theatre, which still hosts a range of performances to this day; it is widely regarded as one of the world's finest opera houses.
It has also produced many musicians, including the violinists Nathan Milstein, David Oistrakh and Igor Oistrakh, Boris Goldstein, Zakhar Bron and pianists Sviatoslav Richter, Benno Moiseiwitsch, Vladimir de Pachmann, Shura Cherkassky, Emil Gilels, Maria Grinberg, Simon Barere, Leo Podolsky and Yakov Zak.
Odessa is also a Ukrainian naval base and home to a fishing fleet.
Before moving to Moscow in 1922, he made quite a few acquaintances here, including Yury Olesha and Ilya Ilf (Ilf's co-author Petrov was in fact Kataev's brother, Petrov being his pen-name).
It is known for its large outdoor market – the Seventh-Kilometer Market, the largest of its kind in Europe.
* Lenny Krayzelburg, Olympic champion swimmer
Another version posits that the settlement appeared after Odessa itself was founded, as a settlement of Moldavians, Greeks and Albanians fleeing the Ottoman yoke.
The people of Odessa badly suffered from a famine that occurred as a result of the Russian Civil War in 1921–1922 due to the Soviet policies of prodrazverstka.
Key areas of business include: retail, wholesale, catering, production, construction and development, private label.
* Maksim Chmerkovskiy, professional ballroom & Latin dancer on American Dancing With the Stars
* Ihor Belanov, European Footballer of the Year in 1986
The site of present-day Odessa was then a fortress known as Khadjibey (named for Hacı I Giray, and also spelled Kocibey in English, Hacıbey or Hocabey in Turkish, and Hacıbey in Crimean Tatar).
During World War II, from 1941–1944, Odessa was subject to Romanian administration, as the city had been made part of Transnistria.
Sergei Eisenstein's famous motion picture ''The Battleship Potemkin'' commemorated the uprising and included a scene where hundreds of Odessan citizens were murdered on the great stone staircase (now popularly known as the "Potemkin Steps"), in one of the most famous scenes in motion picture history.
In 1905, Odessa was the site of a workers' uprising supported by the crew of the Russian battleship Potemkin and Lenin's Iskra.
Since then the university has developed to become one of modern Ukraine's leading research and teaching universities, with staff of around 1,800 and total of thirteen academic faculties.
* Malynovsky Raion (Russian: Малиновский район, )
The theatre was projected along the lines of Dresden's famous Semperoper built in 1878, with its nontraditional foyer following the curvatures of the auditorium; the building's most recent renovation was completed in 2007.
Abandoned mines were later used and broadened by local smugglers.
In 2003 this sector recorded a total revenue of 189,2 mln UAH.
* Charles Goldenberg, NFL football player
Electric tramway started to operate on 22 August 1907.
At the top of the steps, which lead down to the port, stands a statue of the Duc de Richelieu.
The funicular has now become as much a part of historic Odessa as the staircase to which it runs parallel.
In addition to all the state-run universities mentioned above, Odessa is also home to a large number of private educational institutes and academies which offer highly specified courses in a range of different subjects.
There are five deputy mayors, each of which is responsible for a certain particular part of the city's public policy.
The last of these institutions is a highly specialised and prestigious establishment for the preparation and training of merchant mariners which sees around 1,000 newly qualified officer cadets graduate each year and take up employment in the merchant marines of numerous countries around the world.
The council has seventeen standing commissions which play an important role in controlling the finances and trading practices of the city and its merchants.
Intercity bus services are available from Odessa to many cities in Russia (Moscow, Rostov-on-Don, Krasnodar, Pyatigorsk), Germany (Berlin, Hamburg and Munich), Greece (Thessaloniki and Athens), Bulgaria (Varna and Sofia) and several cities of Ukraine and Europe.
Odessites were and are viewed in the ethnic stereotype as sharp-witted, street-wise and eternally optimistic.
Pogroms were carried out in 1821, 1859, 1871, 1881 and 1905.
Typically, for a total of 4 months – from June to September – the average sea temperature in the Gulf of Odessa and city's bay area exceeds .
Tavria-V is the most popular retail chain in Odessa.
However, adjacent to the new official locality, a Moldavian colony already existed, which by the end of the 18th century was an independent settlement known under the name of Moldavanka.
It soon recovered and the growth in trade made Odessa Russia's largest grain-exporting port.
Richelieu founded Odessa – watched over it with paternal care – labored with a fertile brain and a wise understanding for its best interests – spent his fortune freely to the same end – endowed it with a sound prosperity, and one which will yet make it one of the great cities of the Old World".
The city's best-known and most prestigious university is the Odessa 'I.I.
In 2007 the Port of Odessa handled 31,368,000 tonnes of cargo.
* Ekaterina Rubleva, Russian ice dancing champion
A number of world-famous scientists have lived and worked in Odessa.
In his letters he wrote that Odessa was a city where "the air is filled with all Europe, French is spoken and there are European papers and magazines to read".
This is largely because the higher winter temperatures and coastal location of Odessa prevent significant snowfall.
Zhvanetsky's and Kartsev's success in the 1970s, along with Odessa's KVN team, contributed to Odessa's established status as "capital of Soviet humor", culminating in the annual Humoryna festival, carried out on and around the April Fools' Day.
The Italian writer, slavist and anti-fascist dissident Leone Ginzburg was born in Odessa into a Jewish family, and then went to Italy where he grew up and lived.
The first city plan was designed by the engineer F. Devollan in the late 18th century.
The current council is the fifth in the city's modern history, and was elected in January 2011.
Odessa is a city of more than 1 million people.
During the Russian-Turkish War of 1787–1792, on 25 September 1789, a detachment of Russian forces under Ivan Gudovich took Khadjibey and Yeni Dünya for the Russian Empire.
Odessa is linked to the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, by the M05 Highway, a high quality multi-lane road which is set to be re-designated, after further reconstructive works, as an 'Avtomagistral' (motorway) in the near future.
Odessa was the site of a large Greek settlement, called Odyssos, not later than the middle of the 6th century BC (a necropolis from the 5th–3rd centuries BC has long been known in this area).
Among the city's public sculptures, two sets of ''Medici lions'' can be noted, at the Vorontsov Palace as well as the Starosinnyi Garden.
After planning by the official architects who designed buildings in Odessa's central district, such as the Italians Francesco Carlo Boffo and Giovanni Torricelli, Moldovanka was included in the general city plan, though the original grid-like plan of Moldovankan streets, lanes and squares remained unchanged.
Nowadays the garden is home to a bandstand and is the traditional location for outdoor theatre in the summertime.
Odessa also has a well-developed system of inter-urban municipal roads and minor beltways.
Polls conducted from September to December 2014 found little support for joining Russia
The current station, which is characterised by its many socialist-realist architectural details and grand scale, was renovated by the state railway operator Ukrainian Railways in 2006.
Yedisan Crimean Tatars traded there in the 14th century.
This is a large sandy beach which is located to the south of the city centre.
Additionally Turkish Airlines wide network and daily flights offers more than 246 destinations all over the world.
Odessa is a major maritime transportation hub that includes several ports including Port of Odessa, Port of Chornomorsk (ferry, freight), Yuzhne (freight only).
Archaeological artifacts confirm extensive links between the Odessa area and the eastern Mediterranean.
Foreign business ventures have thrived in the area, as since 1 January 2000, much of the city and its surrounding area has been declared a free economic zone – this has aided the foundation of foreign companies' and corporations' Ukrainian divisions and allowed them to more easily invest in the Ukrainian manufacturing and service sectors.
From 1819 to 1858, Odessa was a free port.
The city's unique identity has been formed largely thanks of its varied demography; all the city's communities have influenced aspects of Odessan life in some way or form.
Having fled the French Revolution, he had served in Catherine's army against the Turks.
Sources of running water in the city include the Dniester River, from which water is taken and then purified at a processing plant just outside the city.
* Suvorovsky Raion (Russian, Суворовский Район, )
Approximately 38,000 people have been awarded (servicemen of the Soviet Army, Navy, Ministry of Internal Affairs, and civil citizens who took part in the defense of Odessa).
Daily sales, according to the Ukrainian periodical ''Zerkalo Nedeli'', were believed to be as high as USD 20 million in 2004.
Finally by 1920 the Soviet Red Army managed to overpower both Ukrainian and Russian White Army and secure the city.
Other than the National University, the city is also home to the 1921-inaugurated Odessa National Economic University, the Odessa National Medical University (founded 1900), the 1918-founded Odessa National Polytechnic University and the Odessa National Maritime University (established 1930).
The Odessa Sea Port is located on an artificial stretch of Black Sea coast, along the north-western part of the Gulf of Odessa.
The "Odessite speech" became a staple of the "Soviet Jew" depicted in a multitude of jokes and comedy acts, in which a Jewish adherent served as a wise and subtle dissenter and opportunist, always pursuing his own well-being, but unwittingly pointing out the flaws and absurdities of the Soviet regime.
It was part of the Dykra region.
Other Odessites are the duo Ilf and Petrov, and Yuri Olesha.
These authors and comedians played a great role in establishing the "Odessa myth" in the Soviet Union.
In addition, every raion has its own administration, subordinate to the Odessa City council, and with limited responsibilities.
One additional mode of transport in Odessa is quite unique; the Potemkin Stairs funicular railway, which runs between the city's Primorsky Bulvar and the sea terminal, has been in service since 1902.
Many ended up in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Brighton Beach, sometimes known as "Little Odessa".
6 in 2012 International Rally Challenge Production cup standings
He was the unofficial publisher of the Anglo-Jewish community, and retained the Vallentine Mitchell Publisher even after the sale of Frank Cass & Co.
When Felix decided that he was no longer able to provide enough money for the garden's upkeep, he decided to present it to the people of Odessa.
In addition to this there are a number of large commercial shopping centres in the city.
With a staff of 1,200 (mostly guards and janitors), the market is also the region's largest employer.
The defense of Odessa lasted 73 days from 5 August to 16 October 1941.
The second and main line of defense was situated 6–8&nbsp;km from the city and was about 30&nbsp;km long.
Russia formally gained possession of the area as a result of the Treaty of Jassy (Iaşi) in 1792 and it became a part of Novorossiya ("New Russia").
* Viacheslav Kravtsov, NBA basketball player
The city has seen violence in the 2014 pro-Russian conflict in Ukraine during 2014 Odessa clashes.
To date a number of Japanese and Chinese companies, as well as a host of European enterprises, have invested in the development of the free economic zone, to this end private investors in the city have invested a great deal of money into the provision of quality office real estate and modern manufacturing facilities such as warehouses and plant complexes.
During the 19th century, it was the fourth largest city of Imperial Russia, after Moscow, Saint Petersburg and Warsaw.
Odessa was struck by three bomb blasts in December 2014, one of which killed one person (the injuries sustained by the victim indicated that he had dealt with explosives).
Following the Siege of Odessa, and the Axis occupation, approximately 25,000 Odessans were murdered in the outskirts of the city and over 35,000 deported; this came to be known as the Odessa massacre.
De Ribas and Franz de Volan recommended the area of Khadzhibei fortress as the site for the region's basic port: it had an ice-free harbor, breakwaters could be cheaply constructed and would render the harbor safe and it would have the capacity to accommodate large fleets.
'''Odessa''' or '''Odesa''' (, ; ) is the third most populous city of Ukraine and a major seaport and transportation hub located on the northwestern shore of the Black Sea.
During the 1960s and 1970s, the city grew.
The Odessa International Film Festival is also held in this city annually since 2010.
Consumer recognition is mainly attributed to the high level of service and the quality of services.
These establishments, however, typically charge much higher fees than government-owned establishments and may not have hold the same level of official accreditation as their state-run peers.
During the tsarist era, Odessa's climate was considered to be beneficial for the body, and thus many wealthy but sickly persons were sent to the city in order to relax and recuperate.
* Vladimir Portnoi, Olympic silver and bronze medalist in gymnastics
The transfer of ownership took place on 10 November 1806.
The city was named in compliance with the Greek Plan of Catherine the Great.
During the Soviet period it was the most important port of trade in the Soviet Union and a Soviet naval base.
The average annual temperature of sea is , whilst seasonal temperatures range from an average of  in the period from January to March, to  in August.
(Note: Richter studied in Odessa but wasn't born there.)
The port complex contains an oil and gas transfer and storage facility, a cargo-handling area and a large passenger port.
Odessa was also the home of the late Armenian painter Sarkis Ordyan (1918–2003), the Ukrainian painter Mickola Vorokhta and the Greek philologist, author and promoter of Demotic Greek Ioannis Psycharis (1854–1929).
Deribasivska Street, an attractive pedestrian avenue named after José de Ribas, the Spanish-born founder of Odessa and decorated Russian Navy Admiral from the Russo-Turkish War, is famous by its unique character and magnificent architecture.
The first opera house was opened in 1810 and destroyed by fire in 1873.
The main professional football club in the city is FC Chornomorets Odesa, who play in the Ukrainian Premier League.
Yuri Siritsov, bass player of the Israeli Metal band PallaneX is originally from Odessa.
Odessa is also an administrative center of the Odessa Oblast and a multiethnic cultural center.
Above all comes the mayor, who is elected, by the city's electorate, for five years in a direct election.
Through most of the 19th century and until the mid 20th century the largest ethnic group in Odessa was Russians, with the second largest ethnic group being the Jews.
As the result of mass deportation to extermination camps during the Second World War, the city's Jewish population declined considerably.
Industrial enterprises located in and around the city include those dedicated to fuel refinement, machine building, metallurgy, and other types of light industry such as food preparation, timber plants and chemical industry.
