The word shares its etymology with several Germanic words: Frisian ''ôffal'', German ''Abfall'' (''Offall'' in some Western German dialects and in Luxem-bourgish), ''afval'' in Dutch and Afrikaans, ''avfall'' in Norwegian and Swedish, and ''affald'' in Danish.
Pork, beef or veal kidneys, known in Polish as ''cynadry'', are typically braised and eaten as a main dish.
It is not prepared in any particular way, but rather ground up and generally disguised within the food.
The tongue is usually boiled, sliced and marinated with a mixture of oil, vinegar, salt, chopped peppers and garlic.
There are numerous recipes to cook the above-mentioned items available on many South African websites.
Medicinal usages are also similar to mainland China and less common with offal uses.
File:Aep ong-o.jpg|''Aep ong-o'' is a Northern Thai dish of chopped pig's brain mixed with egg and a Thai curry paste.
This includes Scottish haggis, Jewish chopped liver, U.S. chitterlings, Mexican menudo as well as many other dishes.
Sheep skull and tongue, alongside knee joints, as a formal breakfast dish called ''kale pache'' (lit.
''Buchada'', a popular dish from the northeast of the country, consists of the diced organs of a goat, which are seasoned and then sewn inside the goat's stomach and boiled.
The idea of essences and energy, heat and cold, are key.
It is a sort of ragout containing veal lungs and heart.
Within Indonesian cuisine traditions, the Minangkabau cuisine (popularly known as "Padang food") are known for their fondness of offals, mostly are made into ''gulai'' (a type of curry) such as ''gulai otak'' (brain), ''gulai babat'' (tripes), ''gulai usus'' (intestine), ''gulai sumsum'' (bone marrow), also fried ''hati'' (liver) and ''limpa'' (spleen).
Only two offal based dishes are still routinely served nationwide at home and in restaurants and are available as pre-cooked package meals in supermarket chains: Steak and kidney pie (typically featuring veal or beef kidneys) is still widely known and enjoyed in Britain and Ireland as is liver (of lamb, calf, pig or cow) and onions served in a rich sauce (gravy).
Dry deer antlers are still a common medicine, thought to provide "yang energy" to complement the male sex and the tail, "yin energy" for the female sex.
Sausage is made from the small intestine of a goat, cow or sheep, stuffed with chilli and small chunks of meat, fatty meat, and blood (although some people prefer the bloodless kind).
The derisive term "mystery meat" is often used to describe offal which have been ground or otherwise heavily processed in order to obscure its origin.
Finally, there are many dishes in Romania that are based on whole offal, such as: grilled pig and cow kidney (served with boiled or steam cooked vegetables—usually peas and carrot slices); butcher's brain called ''creier pane'' (usually lamb's brains, rolled in batter and deep-fried); tongue and olives stew (mostly done with cow tongue) and many others.
*''tacos de sesos'': beef brain
In Korea, offal usage is very similar to mainland China but less frequent.
*''tacos de lengua'': boiled beef tongue
A variation of that is found in other Arab countries such as in Egypt and is known as ''Kawari''' () and in Israel it is still eaten by Iraqi Jews
"Luncheon tongue" refers to reformed pork tongue pieces.
Pepper Pot soup (frequently served in Philadelphia) is made from beef tripe.
Beef stomach and intestines are still quite popular for cooking.
''Dinuguan'' is a particular type of blood-stew (depending on region) made using pig intestines, pork meat and sometimes ears and cheeks usually with a vinegar base, and green chili peppers.
Gizzard stews, fried beef liver and beef stomach stews used to be more popular dishes in the past, but are nonetheless still consumed.
"head and leg"), are boiled in water with beans and eaten with traditional bread.
It is a large head cheese that is made with pig's blood, suet, bread crumbs and oatmeal with chunks of pickled beef tongue added.
In Malaysia, cow or goat lung, called ''paru'', coated in turmeric and fried is often served as a side dish to rice, especially in the ever popular nasi lemak.
Pajata and tomatoes are often used to prepare a sauce for rigatoni.
In the United States, the giblets of chickens, turkeys and ducks are much more commonly consumed than the mammal offal.
For example, Cantonese "燒味—''Siu mei''", (Barbecue Delicacies) shops, have achieved their foundation of influence here.
Some of the strongest are as hard in texture as chorizo or salami, while others are soft, and some types incorporate rice, giving the stuffing a haggis-like appearance.
Buffalo leaf tripe stuffed with bone marrow (''sapu mhichā''), stuffed goat lung (''swan pukā'') and fried variety meats (''pukālā'') are delicacies in the Kathmandu Valley.
Cow or goat tongue is sliced and fried, sometimes in a spicy sauce, or more often beef tongue are cooked as semur stew.
Beef and pork liver are regularly eaten pan-fried with onion or breaded and deep-fried.
''Markklößchen'' are small dumplings made with bone marrow; they are served as part of ''Hochzeitssuppe'' (wedding soup), a soup served at marriages in some German regions.
Formerly a nutritious winter food for the poor, it is now considered a delicacy, and is enjoyed as a festive winter meal.
''Cỗ lòng'', a suite of boiled internal of pigs is a delicacy.
A popular spicy stew, considered a national dish, is made from beef tripe.
Beef tripe is used to cook a soup simply called ''flaki'' (pl.
Also in Bulgaria, Republic of Macedonia and Turkey, ''shkembe chorba'' is a widespread soup variety.
Beef tendon and beef tripe is used in southern Vietnamese versions of ''Pho''.
Other offal, such as  blood, pancreas, spleen and thymus must be declared by name.
Some traditional dishes are ''callos'' (cow tripe, very traditional in Madrid and Asturias), liver (often prepared with onion or with garlic and parsley, and also as breaded steaks), kidneys (often prepared with sherry or grilled), sheep's brains, ''criadillas'' (bull testicles), braised cow's tongue, pig's head and feet (in Catalonia; pig's feet are also traditionally eaten with snails), pork brains (part of the traditional 'tortilla sacromonte' in Granada), and pig's ears (mostly in Galicia).
It is not difficult to find grilled chicken hearts, gizzards, and feet in traditional street bars.
Desiccated liver is sold in caplets to be consumed purely for the nutritive benefits.
Soon after nursing, the calf is slaughtered, and its intestines are cleaned, but the milk is left inside.
Beef or goat blood, sometimes mixed with other offal pieces, is often cooked to make a dish known in Shona as 'musiya'.
Bleached tripe was a popular dish in Northern England (especially in South Lancashire) with many specialist tripe shops in industrial areas.
Sheep's head has gained many nicknames over the years such as 'skopo' (township colloquial term meaning head) and 'smiley' (referring to the expression of the head when cooked).
Deep fried fish skin is a popular side dish at fish ball noodle shops.
For example, liver and onions is a traditional, "classic" menu item in diners throughout the country, often as a "blue plate special".
Although the term ''offal'' is used in the United Kingdom and Canada, in the United States the terms ''variety meats'' or ''organ meats'' are used instead.
The use of fish offal in Cantonese cuisine is not limited to the maw.
The heart is often eaten on its own or used as an additive to the ground meat, as do lungs which give a lighter, airier texture to it.
Liver is also eaten in various other forms including fried slices and minced liver patties.
Offal originating from cattle is also an ingredient in certain dishes (see ''yakiniku'').
Liver casserole, traditionally made with minced liver, rice, butter, onions, egg, syrup and usually raisins, used to be mainly a Christmas dish, but is now available and eaten all year round.
In Bavaria, lung stew is served with Knödel, dumplings.
Giblets, liver and intestines of chicken, duck and ''burung ayam-ayaman'' (watercock) are consumed as delicacies, commonly skewered as satay and being deep fried.
Fish intestines are also central to several Norwegian dishes, such as mølje.
Scrapple, sometimes made from pork offal, is somewhat common in the Mid-Atlantic US, particularly in Philadelphia and areas with Amish communities.
"Ox tongue" made from pressed complete tongue, is more expensive.
Tripe is also consumed as satay.
Sweden has a version of the British black pudding called "''blodpudding''" (blood pudding) and the Dutch also have their version of black pudding, called "''bloedworst''" (bloodsausage).
As an English mass noun, the term "offal" has no plural form.
Home pressing and cooking of tongue has become less common over the last fifty years.
File:Soto Kaki Mencos Betawi.JPG|Betawi style tendon soto from Jakarta, Indonesia
Paça soup is made from lamb or sheep feet, except in summer.
However, there are other strange offal usages in folk practice.
It is commonly sliced and browned in butter or bacon fat prior to consumption.
Intestines are traditionally used as casing for sausages.
The intestines are steamed with egg and other ingredients in Hakka cuisine.
In Denmark a version of liver pâté, known as "''leverpostej''" in Danish, used as a spread (often in an open sandwich on rye bread) is considered a popular dish.
Offal dishes are particularly popular in the southern region of Guangdong and its culinary capital of Hong Kong.
As well as pork, the offal of other animals is used in traditional Chinese cooking, most commonly cattle, duck, and chicken.
Another British and Irish food is black pudding, consisting of congealed pig's blood with oatmeal made into sausage-like links with pig intestine as a casing, then boiled and is usually fried on preparation.
In Zimbabwe, as in most of sub-Saharan Africa, little of a slaughtered animal goes to waste.
Stews and puddings made with blood (poultry, pork or beef) are also quite common.
Tripe is also used to make ''pancita'' and ''menudo''.
''Isaw'' is a street food popular in the Philippines made with pig and chicken intestine pieces which are skewered, barbecued, and dipped in vinegar before eating.
The broth is flavored with the animal's bile and the fruit of the Averrhoa bilimbi.
During the Sino-Japanese War, Japanese troops took pigs from Chinese farmers and slaughtered the animals only for the major muscles (no head, feet and fully disemboweled).
In the more pragmatic folksy eateries, however, maximum utilization of the food resource is the traditional wisdom.
A festive variety is ''kokoretsi'' (from Turkish ''kokoreç'', Macedonian ''kukurek''), traditional for Easter; pieces of lamb offal (liver, heart, lungs, spleen, kidney and fat) are pierced on a spit and covered by washed small intestine wound around in a tube-like fashion, then roasted over a coal fire.
A popular cheap dish containing all this and more is called sopa de menudencias.
Another traditional Easter food is ''magiritsa'', a soup made with lamb offal and lettuce in a white sauce, eaten at midnight on Easter Sunday as an end to the lenten fast.
They are sometimes grilled but rarely fried.
Syltelabb is usually sold cooked and salted.
However, these words are not often used to refer to food with the exception of Afrikaans in the agglutination ''afvalvleis'' (lit.
In India and Pakistan, the goat's brain (''maghaz''), feet (''paey''), head (''siri''), stomach (''ojhari'' or ''but''), tongue (''zabaan''), liver (''kalayji''), kidney (''gurda''), udder (''kheeri'') and testicles (''kapooray'') as well as chickens' heart and liver are enjoyed.
The skin and fleece of the head is torched, the brain removed, and the head is salted, sometimes smoked, and dried.
Italy's Florentine cuisine includes cow brain.
Ground or chopped pork offal is usually made into a hearty sausage known as "''disznósajt''" (lit.
In Portugal traditionally, viscera and other animal parts are used in many dishes.
Dobradinha is a dish made with tripe, a variation of the northern Portuguese dish.
Variations can also be found in Nicaragua, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Honduras, El Salvador, Panama, Puerto Rico, Venezuela.
However, these are being marginalized as synthetic hormones get more popular and affordable.
In the province of Cagayan, a version of the dish without the bile is called ''menudencia''.
Morcilla (blood sausage), Chicharrón (fried pork rinds), and other pork offal are commonly served in a Puerto Rican Cuchifrito.
Iceland has its own version of both haggis and brawn.
Avian offals are commonly consumed too.
In Norcia and other parts of Umbria, pig's bowels are also cured with herbs, chili peppers, and spices, then dried and smoked to make a tough, spicy sausage in which the bowel, instead of serving only as the usual casing, is the main ingredient.
The head is often eaten from the front to the back, working around the bones of the skull.
Other Norwegian specialities include ''smalaføtter'', which is a traditional dish similar to ''smalahove'', but instead of a sheep's head it is made of lamb's feet.
It can also be consumed as salad.
In the Kikuyu traditions, grilled goat/sheep kidneys are a delicacy usually reserved for young ladies, although today, anybody can consume it.
It is grilled while wrapped inside banana leaves.
One popular dish, ''Kata-Kat'', is a combination of spices, brains, liver, kidneys and other organs.
In Nepal, a goat's brain (''gidi''), feet (''khutta''), head (''tauko''), bone marrow (''masi''), stomach skin (''bhudi''), tongue (''jibro''), liver (''kalejo''), kidney, lungs (''fokso''), fried intestines (''aandra,vuton(means Fried.Vuton is Fried stomach and intestine of animal)''), fried solidified blood (''rakti''), ear and tail (charcoal-cooked), and, to a lesser extent, testicles are considered delicacies and are in very high demand in Dashain when families congregate and enjoy them with whiskey and beer.
"鴨腳紮—Ap Kerk Jat" is a piece each of ham, shiitake mushroom and deep fried fish maw wrapped with duck feet in a dried bean curd sheet in and steamed.
Besides the popular ''cha siu'' barbecued pork, "siu yuk" crispy skin pork, along with assorted types of poultry, there are also the roasted chicken liver with honey, and the very traditional, and very expensive now, "金錢雞—Gum Chin Gai", another honey roasted dimsum that is a sandwich of a piece each of pork fat, pork/chicken liver, ginger and cha siu.
In Indonesia cow and goat internal organs are popular delicacies, it can be fried, made into soto soups or grilled as satay and almost all of the parts of the animal are eaten.
Chickens' heart, gizzard (''gi-la'') and liver are also enjoyed.
The use of the pancreas, liver, kidney, gall bladder, lung and even bronchus of various farm animals together with herbs in Chinese medicine have strong empirical theories and studies are being conducted to try to understand their nature in modern scientific terms.
In Lebanon, lamb brain is used in ''nikhaat'' dishes and sometimes as a sandwich filling.
In Bangladesh, a bull's or goat's brain (''mogoj''), feet (''paya''), head (''matha''), stomach skin (''bhuri''), tongue (''jib-ba''), liver (''kolija''), lungs (''fepsha''), kidney and heart (''gurda'') are delicacies.
This particular version also contains ''nam phia'', which are the contents of the first stomach of a cow.
Due to its rarity the testicles are among the most expensive offals in Indonesia.
The types of pork offals being offered as ''sekba'' are pig's ears, tongue, intestines and lungs.
Also coagulated, boiled blood is a typical dish in Valencia (cut into cubes and often prepared with onion and/or tomato sauce).
Beef or veal tongue in tomato-Madeira sauce with mushrooms and kidneys in mustard cream sauce are probably the most famous ones.
In the southern Indian city of Mangalore, a spicy dish called ''rakti'', made of heavily spiced porcine offal and cartilaginous tissue, is considered a homely indulgence by the local Christian community.
''Criadillas'' or ''huevos de toro'' ("bull's eggs", testicles) are eaten mostly in cattle-raising regions, while cow udder ("ubres") is served fried or boiled.
Chickens' heart and liver are also enjoyed but it is chickens' gizzards that are truly prized.
Sheep's or goat's head are eaten as part of the barbacoa, a dish originating with the Taino people.
Swabia is famous for ''Saure Kutteln''—sour tripes, served steaming hot with fried potatoes.
In medieval times, "humble pie" (originally, "Umble pie") made from animal innards (especially deer) was a peasant food and is the source of the commonly used idiom "eating humble pie", although it has lost its original meaning as meat pies made from offal are no longer referred to by this name.
In Sicily, many enjoy a sandwich called "pani ca meusa", bread with spleen and caciocavallo cheese.
Since pork is the most consumed meat in China, popular pork offal dishes include stir-fried pork kidneys with oyster sauce, ginger and scallions, "五更肠旺—Wu Geng Chang Wang" a spicy stew with preserved mustard, tofu, pork intestine slices and congealed pork blood cubes.
Ironically, given its provenance and history, offal has started to be reintroduced as an item of haute cuisine, with stylish restaurants offering roasted bone marrow, fried pork rind, tongue or heart as part of their menus.
''Gandinga'' is a hearty stew, well known in Cuba and Puerto Rico, prepared from the heart, liver, kidneys, and esophageal tissue of either pork (''gandinga de cerdo'') or beef (''gandinga de res'').
'''Offal''' , also called '''variety meats''', '''pluck''' or '''organ meats,''' refers to the internal organs and entrails of a butchered animal.
''Sesos'' (brains) are used to make ravioli stuffing.
Chicken gizzards can be a base for various soups, such as ''krupnik'', a pearl barley soup (not to be confused with a vodka of the same name).
In Peru and Bolivia, beef heart is used for ''anticuchos''—a sort of ''brochette''.
''Tzigerosarmas'' (from Turkish ''ciğer sarması'', meaning "liver wrap") and ''gardoumba'' are two varieties of ''splinantero'' and ''kokoretsi'' made in different sizes and with extra spices.
Versions of brawn (often served on rye bread as an open sandwich with garnish of cucumber slices or dijon mustard and pickled beetroot) and blood sausage (served pan-fried with muscovado) are eaten mainly during wintertime, e.g.
There is also a blood drink called "Ñachi", made from spiced, fresh blood from a recently slaughtered animal.
Kidneys and brains are sometimes used in cooking.
The dish is known in Kuwait, Bahrain and other Persian Gulf countries as ''Pacha'' (پاچة) too.
Pig's ears are usually diced into squares of cartilage and fat and pickled, after which they are eaten as an appetizer or a snack.
Pajata, a traditional dish from Rome, refers to the intestines of an unweaned calf, i.e., fed only on its mother's milk.
Stir-fried pork kidneys and/or liver slices with oyster sauce, ginger and scallions or in soups is a regular dish in southern provinces.
For instance, the German word for offal is ''Innereien'' meaning innards and the Swedish word is "innanmat" literally meaning "inside-food".
The heads, lungs and hooves of animals are boiled to make soup and sometimes mixed with herbs for medicinal purposes.
While decreasing in popularity, stews made from poultry testicles are still considered a delicacy and a dish of high prestige in the countryside.
''Morcillas'' are added to soups or boiled on their own, in which case the cooking liquid is discarded.
Snake wine with a live snake gallbladder is thought to promote stamina due to the "essences of energy and heat", which is derived from a snake's attributes, such as aggressive behavior (fiery) and venom (energy).
Chicken dishes include feet, liver, intestines and gizzards.
The testicles were for the young men.
Pork tongues are also eaten cold with bread and a vinaigrette with raw onions or some mustard.
This is known as ''menudo de birria'' in the Pacific states and is made with goat parts instead of sheep.
The fish is used in its entirety and nothing is wasted.
Smalahove is considered by some to be unappealing or even repulsive.
Each respectable operation has its own recipe for preparing the stews of brisket, intestine, lung, and varieties of tripe.
In Singapore, pig's organ soup is a common feature of hawker centres.
Liver is part of various recipes, such as some sorts of Knödel and Spätzle, and in Liverwurst.
Offal not used directly for human or animal food is often processed in a rendering plant, producing material that is used for fertilizer or fuel; or in some cases, it may be added to commercially produced pet food.
The main ingredient in khash is pig's or cow's feet, although other animal parts, such as the ears and tripe, may also be used.
When cooked, the combination of heat and the enzyme rennet in the intestines coagulates the milk to create a thick, creamy, cheese-like sauce.
In Romania, there is a dish similar to haggis called ''drob'', which is served at Easter.
The famous "stoofvlees" or carbonade flamande, a beef stew with onions and brown beer, used to contain pieces of liver or kidney, to reduce the costs.
''Kaszanka'', a traditional sausage similar to black pudding, is made with a mixture of pig's blood, pig offal and buckwheat or barley usually served fried with onions or grilled.
The pork intestines' tough inner skin (which is exposed to bolus and pre-fecal materials) is completely removed.
In Norway the ''smalahove'' is a traditional dish, usually eaten around and before Christmas time, made from a sheep's head.
The pork ears, feet and snout are pickled and eaten in tostadas.
In the English Midlands and South Wales, faggots are made from ground or minced pig offal (mainly liver and cheek), bread, herbs and onion wrapped in pig's caul fat.
The Icelandic brawn "''Svið''" is made from singed sheep heads, and it is eaten either hot or cold off the bone or set in gelatin.
The nephrons of pork kidneys are skilfully excised, and the kidneys are soaked for several hours and cleaned.
In Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, the traditional ''asado'' is often made along with several offal types (called "''achuras''"), like ''chinchules", "chinchulines'' and ''tripa gorda'' (chitterlings), ''mollejas'' (sweetbreads) and ''riñón'' (cow's kidney).
Some cultures shy away from offal as food, while others use it as everyday food, or in delicacies.
Liver pâté (leverpostei) and patéd lung (lungemos) are common dishes, as are head cheese (sylte) and blood pudding (blodklubb).
In Hungary, a variety of traditional dishes are based on offal.
Brawn is a British English term for 'head cheese', or the collection of meat and tissue found on an animal's skull (typically a pig) that is cooked, chilled and set in gelatin.
"炸肥肠—Zha Fei Chang," deep fried pork intestine slices and dipped in a sweet bean sauce is commonly offered by street hawkers.
Use of organs of mammals is not common, except for the liver, which is common to a certain degree.
Liver is fried, grilled, skewed and additive of pilaf.
''Papaitan'' is a soup made from cow, carabao or goat tripe and innards.
Cow's stomach (''babat'') and intestine (''iso'') are popular, fried or in soup, in Javanese cuisine.
The dish contains all sorts of organ meat, and is often accompanied by Vietnamese bánh mì (baguette) and sweet-and-sour dipping sauce.
Both kinds of tongue are found in tinned form and in slices in supermarkets and local butchers.
In the Philippines, people eat practically every part of the pig, including snout, intestines, ears, and innards.
Offal dishes from many other cultures exist but the appeal is usually limited to the immigrant communities that introduced the dish.
In dim sum restaurants, the feet of chicken, ducks and pork are offered in various cooking styles.
There is also a twofold variation on the concept of head cheese: ''piftie'' which does contain gelatin, is served cold and is usually only made from pork or beef (traditionally only pork), but does not contain as much head material (usually only the lower legs and ears are used since they contain large amounts of gelatin) and ''pacele'' which is exclusively made of meat and tissue found on the head (save for the eyes and usually only made from lamb; addition of brain and tongue varies by local habit).
Liver is also sometimes made into a spicy dish called rendang.
In the Italian neighborhoods of Brooklyn, New York, where it is also commonly eaten, it goes by the name 'vastedda', which in Sicilian refers to the bread only.
The blood of the pig is used to produce a form of black pudding known as ''farinhato'', which includes flour and seasonings.
The ''montalayo'' is a dish made of chopped organs, spiced with ''adobo'', and cooked inside of the sheep stomach.
The main difference being that ''drob'' is enclosed in abdominal membranes (''prapore'') of the animal, while chitterlings is used for ''caltaboş''.
File:Paru goreng masakan Padang.JPG|Padang style fried cow lung from West Sumatra, Indonesia
In Spain, the visceral organs are used in many traditional dishes, but the use of some of them is falling out of favor with the younger generations.
In earlier times, mobs sometimes threw offal and other rubbish at condemned criminals as a show of public disapproval:
Pork brains are considered a delicacy and are eaten in the deep fried ''quesadilla de sesos''.
The head is boiled for about 3 hours and served with mashed ''rutabaga''/swede and potatoes.
Cow cod soup is a traditional Jamaican dish made with bull penis.
"Elder" is the name given to cooked cow's udder - another Lancashire offal dish rarely seen today.
