The traditional school songs from "Carmen Ohio" to "Hang on Sloopy" to "Fight the Team Across the Field", are arranged to fit this instrumentation.
The Ohio State Women's Glee Club was established in 1903.
Four years later, the members of the group then became one of the four founding chapters of Mortar Board National College Senior Honor Society, which now has charters at 231 campuses in the U.S. For more than 100 years at Ohio State, members of Mortar Board have been selected for their significant contributions in scholarship, leadership and service.
The first Ohio Union, located on the south edge of the South Oval, was constructed in 1909 and was later renamed Enarson Hall.
The second Ohio Union was completed in 1950 and was located prominently along High Street, southeast of the Oval.
The most notable of these is the Center for Slavic and East European Studies founded in 1965 by Professor Leon Twarog.
It was a center of student life at Ohio State University for more than 50 years, providing facilities for student activities, organizations and events, and serving as an important meeting place for campus and community interaction.
A unique aspect to Ohio State's multibillion-dollar endowment is the Student Investment Management Program.
The OSU Wind Symphony has recently released its newest album, "Southern Harmony," the Naxos Label in 2009.
In 2003, the television station began broadcasting in high definition.
Ohio State also administers two large-scale scholarship programs to ensure access to the university to high-ability students from low-income or traditionally underrepresented groups.
During this time, student activities had been relocated to Ohio Stadium and other academic buildings.
Of their nine ranking criteria, Ohio State ranked in the top-25 in four categories and between 26–50 in an additional four categories.
An annual operational fund relies on University grants, outside sponsors, and event registration fees.
''The Lantern'' is the school's daily newspaper and has operated as a laboratory newspaper in the School of Communication (formerly the School of Journalism) since 1881.
News & World Report'' ranked the graduate art program 18th, with the ceramics program at 4th.
All of these programs have the ultimate goal of making students better leaders, people, and citizens of Ohio.
The organization receives support, advising, and specialized leadership training from the University.
Ohio State football players have combined for seven Heisman Awards including the only two-time winner Archie Griffin in 1974 and 1975, Eddie George in 1995, and most recently Troy Smith in 2006.
The initial idea of a manufacturing and agriculture university in central Ohio had been hindered in the 1870s by hostility from the state's agricultural interests and competition for resources from Ohio University, which was chartered by the Northwest Ordinance, and Miami University; although, these issues were dismissed by Republican stalwart Governor Rutherford B. Hayes.
Brutus Buckeye is the mascot.
The RPAC features two on-campus dining locations, a 50-meter competitive pool, 12 wood courts, 10 racquetball courts, 4 squash courts, a four-lane jogging/walking track, five multipurpose rooms, and approximately 27,500 square feet of fitness space with state-of-the-art equipment.
The Glee Club is under the direction of Dr. Robert J.
The Union's vision is to prepare students to be responsible, engaged leaders committed to community participation for social action and change.
Ohio State operates 38 on-campus residence halls divided into three geographic clusters: South Campus (site of the university's original dormitories) (currently include joint dorms known as Smith-Steeb and Park-Stradley), North Campus (largely constructed during the post-war enrollment boom) and West Campus or "The Towers."
The Ohio State law school is ranked by ''U.S.
This unique wall cladding was requested by Austin E. Knowlton, the namesake of and main patron to the creation of Knowlton Hall.
Ohio State's main campus has been lauded in recent years for the racial diversity of its student body.
OHIO.FM is the music station and Scarlet and Gray Sports Radio broadcasts eleven different Ohio State sports.
The ''Washington Monthly'' college rankings, which seek to evaluate colleges' contributions to American society based on factors of social mobility, research, and service to the country by their graduates, in 2016 placed Ohio State 69th in the nation.
In 1878, the first class of six men graduated.
In the last quarter century, 32 Ohio State faculty members have been awarded the prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship, which is more than all other public and private Ohio universities combined.
Fisher's Executive MBA program was ranked 3rd nationally for return on investment by The Wall Street Journal in 2008 citing a 170 percent return on an average of $66,900 invested in tuition and expenses during the 18-month program.
At the end of the performance, the "i" in "Ohio" is "dotted" by a high-stepping senior sousaphone player.
In 2007, Sports Illustrated nicknamed Ohio State's athletic program as being "The Program" due to the unsurpassed facilities, unparalleled amount of men's and women's sport teams, their success, and the financial support of an impressive fan base.
The program offers a series of academic camps each summer and counseling throughout the students' high school careers.
Within the residence hall system are 40 smaller living and learning environments defined by social or academic considerations.
The DFC conducted their research by polling 270 corporations regarding how design schools were preparing their students for the future of professional practice in design.
The Ohio State equestrian team has won eight Intercollegiate Horse Show Association national championships.
It would later acquire colleges of medicine, dentistry, optometry, veterinary medicine, commerce, and journalism in subsequent years.
Ohio State also announced in 2006, that it would be designating at least $110 million of its research efforts to what it termed "fundamental concerns" such as research towards a cure for cancer, renewable energy sources and sustainable drinking water supplies.
News & World Report'' for 2016, with the international politics section 8th, American politics 10th, and political methodology 10th.
The book was revived from 1985 to 1994 and has since been revived again in 2000 thanks to several student organizations.
It is home to the James Cancer Hospital, a cancer research institute and one of the National Cancer Institute's forty-one comprehensive cancer centers, along with the Richard M. Ross Heart Hospital, a research institute for cardiovascular disease.
'''The Ohio State University''', commonly referred to as '''Ohio State''' or '''OSU''', is a public research university in Columbus, Ohio.
It has more than 30 departments.
Each year, students may sign-up to participate in  BuckeyeThon, Ohio State's student-led philanthropy.
Additionally, the libraries receive approximately 35,000 serial titles on a regular basis.
The 2007 freshman class contained 22.7% of first generation college students, which far exceeded the national norm on American campuses of 15.9%.
Subsequently, Ohio State's Middle Eastern Studies Center and East Asian Studies Center also achieved Comprehensive National Resource Center status.
With an initial goal of raising $850 million, the campaign's final tally was $1.23 billion, placing Ohio State among the small group of public universities to have successfully conducted a $1 billion campaign.
Tuition and fees for full-time, Ohio residents enrolled at the Columbus campus for the 2014-2015 academic year are $10,037.
News & World Report'' ranked the graduate program in interior design 2nd in the nation for 2016.
The tradition of high quality bands is not limited to the football field.
Founded in 1911 it is one of the oldest humor magazines in the country.
Ohio State is also one of only two universities to appear in the national championship games in both football and men's basketball in the same calendar year (the other university is the University of Florida.)
Outstanding sports figures that were student athletes at Ohio State include 1936 Olympics gold medalist Jesse Owens "the Buckeye Bullet" (track and field), John Havlicek, Jerry Lucas, Bobby Knight, and Larry Siegfried (basketball), 2010 Olympics silver medalist Ryan Kesler (ice hockey), Katie Smith and the first 3-time player of the year in Big Ten Basketball history Jessica Davenport (women's basketball), Frank Howard (basketball and baseball), Jack Nicklaus (golf); and Chic Harley (three-time All-American football running back).
The Office of Student Life also oversees the operation of.
Research expenditures at Ohio State were $720 million in 2007.
The William Oxley Thompson Memorial Library, anchoring the Oval's western end, is Ohio State library's main branch and single largest repository.
In 2009, 17 Ohio State faculty were elected as AAAS Fellows.
The Ohio State men's ice hockey program competes in the Big Ten Conference, while its women's hockey program competes in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association.
At his welcoming ceremony, returning President E. Gordon Gee announced that, in the Fall of 2007, Ohio State would be launching a $2.5 billion fund-raising campaign.
Roboticist James S. Albus was named a "Hero of US Manufacturing" by ''Fortune Magazine'' in 1997.
Undergraduate admissions to Ohio State are classified as "more selective" by ''US News & World Report'' and ''The Princeton Review'' and according to the data are the most selective for any public university in Ohio.
Numerous graduates have gone on to become governors, Senators and members of Congress.
For the 2006–2007 academic year, tuition at Ohio State for Ohio residents placed it as the fifth most expensive public university and slightly beneath the weighted average tuition of $8,553 among Ohio's thirteen public four-year universities.
That claim is often disputed by Men's Glee Club, but after consultation with Ohio Union Staff, Agricultural Education Society was named as the university's oldest organization.
During the 2005–2006 school year Ohio State became the first Big Ten team to win conference championships in Football, Men's Basketball, and Women's Basketball.
is also located inside of the RPAC.
The band is famous for "Script Ohio", during which the band marches single-file through the curves of the word "Ohio", much like a pen writes the word, all the while playing the French march "Le Regiment de Sambre et Meuse."
Ohio State has several student managed publications and media outlets.
Ohio State offers two distinct honors programs for high ability undergraduates: Honors and Scholars.
In its 2015-16 rankings, ''Times Higher Education World University Rankings'' ranked it tied for 90th in the world.
The OAC also has an outdoor equipment rental office and a trip-planning resource center.
Each year since 2002, Ohio State has either led or been second among all American universities in the number of their faculty elected as fellows to the AAAS.
''The Makio'' is the official yearbook.
To the west are Hale Hall, the Kuhn Honors House, Browning Amphitheatre (a traditional stone Greek theatre) and Mirror Lake.
Also in 1878, in light of its expanded focus, the college permanently changed its name to the now-familiar "The Ohio State University", with "The" as part of its official name.
Additionally, Ohio State offers the Honors Collegium with membership extended to ten incoming freshmen and following the Spring of a student's first or second year to the university's top undergraduates.
The middle 50% range of ACT scores is 27-31, while the middle 50% SAT scores (Critical Reading and Math only) is 1210–1360.
The Big Ten Academic Alliance (BTAA) is the academic consortium of the universities in the Big Ten Conference.
The Outdoor Adventure Center (OAC) is another recreational facility on campus.
Ohio State's library system encompasses twenty-one libraries located on its Columbus campus.
The Ohio State Jazz Ensemble performed at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 1975, 1978, 1986, 1996, and 2001.
The RPAC is the main recreational facility on campus, and offers over half a million square feet of recreation, aquatic, fitness, and meeting space.
The college began with a focus on training students in various agricultural and mechanical disciplines but was developed into a comprehensive university under the direction of Governor Rutherford B. Hayes, and in 1878 the Ohio General Assembly passed a law changing the name to "The Ohio State University".
In a 2007 report released by the National Science Foundation, Ohio State's research expenditures for 2006 were $652 million, placing it 7th among public universities and 11th overall, also ranking 3rd among all American universities for private industry sponsored research.
News & World Report'' tied for 34th overall in America for 2016, with the nursing school tied for 22nd, public affairs tied for 25th, and the medical school ranked tied for 31st for research and tied for 40th for primary care;  the graduate engineering program was ranked 32nd best and the College of Education ranked 15th in America.
In 2006, the Thompson Library began a $100 million renovation with the stated aims of becoming a "global benchmark twenty-first century" library while maintaining the building's classical Italian Renaissance architecture.
An additional eight branches are located at off-campus research facilities, regional campuses, and a book storage depository near campus.
(The women's hockey program competes in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association).
The university is home to an extensive student life program, with over 1,000 student organizations; intercollegiate, club and recreational sports programs; student media organizations and publications, fraternities and sororities; and three active student governments.
''Bloomberg Businessweek'' ranked the undergraduate business program at Ohio State's Fisher College of Business as the 14th best in the nation in its 2016 rankings.
The Ohio State University Men's Glee Club was formed in 1875.
In the study, 31 universities and 11 liberal arts colleges were evaluated on tenure clarity and fairness, nature of work including workloads, quality of students, and teaching environment, compensation, work and family balance, collegiality and overall satisfaction.
120 promising minority students from Ohio's nine largest urban public school districts are selected prior to entering high school.
''The Advocate College Guide for LGBT Students'' lists Ohio State as one of the 20 best campuses in America for LGBT students.
OSU's School of Music contains several high quality concert bands consisting of graduate and undergraduate music majors and non-music majors.
Programs with which students can get involved include are the Leadership Collaborative, Leadership Ohio State, Residence Halls Advisory Council, LeaderShape, Buckeye Service Council, Community Commitment Day, SERV team, Service Squad, ImpactOSU, and BUCK I SERV alternative break trips.
Some of the more significant collections include The Byrd Polar Research Center Archival Program, which contains the archives of Admiral Richard E. Byrd as well as a significant collection of polar research materials; The Hilandar Research Library, which contains the world's largest collection of medieval Slavic manuscripts on microform; the Ohio State Cartoon Library & Museum, the world's largest repository of original cartoons; The Lawrence and Lee Theatre Research Institute; and the archives of Senator John Glenn.
Ohio State began accepting graduate students in the 1880s, and in 1891, the school saw the founding of its law school, Moritz College of Law.
The Land Grant Scholarship was initiated in 2005.
The Ohio State College of Medicine is on the southern edge of the central campus.
In 1916, Ohio State was elected into membership in the Association of American Universities.
According to the Student Organization Office in the Ohio Union, Agricultural Education Society is the oldest student organization on campus.
Additionally, the Service-Learning Institute offers courses that educate students while also helping the greater community.
In June 2006, the endowment passed the $2 billion mark.
Ohio State, despite selective admissions, has also maintained a high amount of socio-economic diversity among its students.
The OAC features the Tom W. Davis Climbing Center with a 4,000-square-foot, 35-foot tall climbing structure and bouldering cave.
In 2008, three Ohio State faculty were awarded Guggenheim Fellowships, placing Ohio State among the top 15 universities in the nation.
The ''Academic Ranking of World Universities'' placed Ohio State 42nd nationally and 79th globally for 2016.
Engaging in $10 billion in research in 2014-2015, BTAA universities provide powerful insight into important issues in medicine, technology, agriculture, and communities.
The first woman graduated the following year.
Founded in 1870 as a land-grant university and ninth university in Ohio with the Morrill Act of 1862, the university was originally known as the '''Ohio Agricultural and Mechanical College''' ('''Mech''').
Professor Alexander Wendt was ranked the most influential scholar of international relations in the world in a 2011 survey of American professors of international relations.
The first concluded in 1987 and raised $460 million—a record at the time for a public university.
The school colors are scarlet and gray.
In a recent study by Harvard University's Graduate School of Education, Ohio State was one of five universities rated as "exemplary" workplaces for junior faculty.
Along with its main campus in Columbus, Ohio State also operates a regional campus system with regional campuses in Lima, Mansfield, Marion, Newark, and Wooster.
It has since grown into the third largest university campus in the United States.
The Office of Student Life has partnership affiliations with the Schottenstein Center, the Blackwell Inn, and the Drake Events Center.
Both stations broadcast on an Internet audio stream (no broadcast signals are available in Columbus).
In recent decades, and in response to continually shrinking state funding, Ohio State has conducted two significant multi-year fundraising campaigns.
George Steinbrenner, former owner of the New York Yankees who won seven World Series with the team, earned his master's degree from Ohio State.
In 2003, it was decided by the United States Department of Homeland Security to base the National Academic Consortium for Homeland Security at The Mershon Center.
News & World Report'' ranks the MBA program tied for 30th in America.
At year's end 2005, Ohio State's endowment stood at $1.73 billion, ranking it seventh among public universities and 27th among all American universities.
Twice, Ohio State alumni have graced the cover of ''Sports Illustrated'' as its Sportsman of the Year.
Beginning its season under the direction of Dr. Richard Schnipke, the OSU Women's Glee Club was honored to have the opportunity to sing for the Ohio Choral Directors Association annual conference in June 2010.
Knowlton Hall along with the Fisher College of Business and Hitchcock Hall form an academic nucleus in the Northwestern corner of North campus.
The graduate program placed at #3 in the south and #2 in the east, resulting in 10th overall in the nation.
Michael V. Drake, former chancellor of the University of California, Irvine, assumed the role of university president on June 30, 2014.
The school was originally situated within a farming community located on the northern edge of Columbus.
The second Ohio Union was demolished in February 2007 to make way for the new Ohio Union, which was finished in 2010.
Block "O" is currently the largest student-run organization on the campus of Ohio State.
At its eastern end, it is anchored by the Ohio Union.
''The Makio's'' sales plummeted by 60% during the early 1970s; the organization went bankrupt and stopped publication during the late 1970s.
Ohio State's faculty currently includes a Nobel Prize-winning physicist, 21 members of the National Academy of Sciences or National Academy of Engineering, four members of the Institute of Medicine, and 177 elected fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Unique to BuckeyeThon is the use of an operational fund separate from the main philanthropic cancer fund.
Upon completion of the program, which also mandates a college preparatory curriculum and minimum grade point average, the students are guaranteed admission to Ohio State as well as any need-based financial aid necessary.
In the group's recent past, under the leadership of Dr. Hilary Apfelstadt, the Glee Club has been selected to sing for state and regional conferences of the Ohio Music Education Association and the American Choral Directors Association.
Ohio State has also won national championships in wrestling, men's volleyball, men's swimming & diving, men's outdoor track & field, men's golf, men's gymnastics, men's fencing, women's rowing, co-ed fencing, and multiple synchronized swimming championships.
Ohio State is a participant in the Big Ten Academic Alliance.
Collegium students try to compete for internships, graduate schools and nationally competitive awards, such as the Marshall, Rhodes, or Truman Scholarships.
The first of these, The Young Scholars Program, was initiated in 1988.
In 1990, led by Professor James Gallagher, the Men's Glee Club participated in the International Musical Eisteddfod in Llangolen, Wales and won the male chorus competition by an unprecedented 20 points before, in a unanimous decision of the judges, being named "Choir of the World"—the first American choir to win such an honor.
Athletes from Ohio State have won 100 Olympic medals (44 gold, 35 silver, and 21 bronze).
Ohio State athletic teams compete in Division I (Football Bowl Subdivision for football) of the NCAA and are known as the Ohio State Buckeyes.
Ohio State also offers three honors residence halls: Bradley Hall, Lincoln Tower, and Taylor Tower.
Ohio State has committed to offering a full-ride scholarship each academic year to at least one student from each of Ohio's 88 counties.
One of the founders of Wikipedia, Larry Sanger, and Steve May, Chief Technology Officer at Pixar, both graduated from Ohio State.
It is the largest all-brass and percussion band in the world.
The Residence Hall Advisory Council (RHAC), which is a representative body of all students living in the University's residence halls, helps evaluate and improve the living conditions of the residence halls.
Students at participating schools are also allowed "in-house" borrowing privileges at other schools' libraries.
In 2016, ''QS World University Rankings'' ranked the university 88th in the world.
After a 17-year hiatus in which no magazine was published it has recently been revived, first in print form, and now in an online humor blog, as well as multiple social media outlets.
The "Affirm Thy Friendship Campaign" took place between 1995 and 2000.
Ohio State currently has over 475,000 living alumni located around the world.
Students also operate a local cable TV channel known as Buckeye TV, which airs primarily on the campus closed cable system operated by the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO).
Ohio State is also the only public university in Ohio to which the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching has given both its highest overall classification of ''Doctoral/Very High Research Activity'' and highest undergraduate admissions classification of ''more selective''.
The Wellness Center within the  (RPAC) offers services such as nutrition counseling, financial coaching, HIV and STI testing, sexual assault services, and alcohol and other drug education.
Student Life University Housing also administers student residential housing on the OSU Newark, OSU Mansfield and OSU Agricultural Technical Institute (ATI) campuses.
In addition to being named a ''Best in the Midwest'' selection by ''The Princeton Review'', Ohio State was also the only public university in Ohio to make their list of ''America's 150 Best Value Colleges''.
This program seeks to ensure access to Ohio State to high-ability students from low-income backgrounds.
It has also appeared at the Mexico City International Jazz Festival in 1990 and the North Sea Jazz Festival in 1986, 1996, and 2001.
In all, the Ohio State library system encompasses fifty-five branches and specialty collections.
Additionally, Ohio State ranked 10th in the nation in 2006 for the numbers of African American doctors graduated.
Ohio State is one of a select few top American universities to offer multiple area studies programs under "Comprehensive National Resource Center" (often called "Title VI") funding from the U.S. Department of Education.
Each February, thousands of students and community members attend BuckeyeThon's signature event, a Dance Marathon consisting of two separate 12-hour shifts.
The Office of Student Life is responsible for many of the outside-the-classroom aspects of student life at Ohio State.
With over 2,400 annual members, Block "O" serves as the official student cheering section at athletic events for the University.
Knowlton Hall, dedicated in October 2004, is at the corner of West Woodruff Avenue and Tuttle Park Place, next to Ohio Stadium.
62% of incoming freshmen in autumn 2014 were ranked in the top 10% of their high school class.
The Honors program is open to students in all majors.
The organization hosts events throughout the year to support the hematology/oncology/bone marrow transplant unit at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio.
Three residence are designated all or in part as honors residences: Taylor Tower, Bradley Hall, and Lincoln House.
Ohio State's "Buckeye Bullet" electric car broke the world record for the fastest speed by an electric vehicle on October 3, 2004 with a speed of 271.737&nbsp;mph (437.3&nbsp;km/h) at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah.
Ohio State has two improvisational comedy groups, ''The 8th Floor Improv'' and ''Fishbowl Improv'', who regularly perform long and short-form improv around campus and across the U.S.
Knowlton Hall is home to the KSA Café, the disciplines of Architecture, Landscape Architecture, City and Regional Planning, and about 550 undergraduate and graduate students.
In various surveys and rankings it has been included among the best campuses in the nation for African Americans.
This allows the entirety of donations made to the cancer fund to solely support patients without hindrance from outside costs.
Ohio State currently has 36 varsity teams.
Ohio State was among the first group of four public universities to raise a $1 billion endowment when it passed the $1 billion mark in 1999.
Alumni and former students have gone on to prominent careers in government, business, science, medicine, education, sports, and entertainment.
Its athletes have won a combined eighty-three Olympic medals and three times received the Sullivan Award as the nation's top amateur athlete.
Upperclass finance students taking Business Finance 724 are given the opportunity to manage a twenty million dollar investment fund.
Although BuckeyeThon is operated entirely by student volunteers, it is embedded within Student Life and the Ohio State University Foundation.
In 1914, with the approval of President William Oxley Thompson and under the watchful eye of Dean Caroline Breyfogle, Ph.D., Mortar Board Senior Honor Society was established by seven senior women.
The history department was recently ranked 18th in the nation (6th among public universities) by the National Research Council.
In addition, the OSU men's volleyball team is a member of the Midwestern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association (MIVA).
OSU was in the top ten rankings of the corporate leaders' assessments in all regions (#4 in the south, #2 in the midwest, #7 in the east, and #4 in the west).
Knowlton also requested that 5 white marble columns be erected on the site, each column representing one of the classical orders of Architecture.
The Scholars program is centered on thirteen specific programs such as "Architecture Scholars", "Media, Marketing, and Communications Scholars", "Biological Sciences Scholars", "International Affairs Scholars", "Business Scholars" and "Politics, Society and Law Scholars."
Students in the Scholars program are expected to live and take select classes with other members of the program.
The Ohio State University was founded in 1870 as a land-grant university in with the Morrill Act of 1862 under the name of the Ohio Agricultural and Mechanical College.
In addition to strong bands, the university is also recognized for outstanding choral performance.
In 2007, Buckeye Bullet 2 was launched.
The Ohio Union is dedicated to the enrichment of the student experience, on and off the university campus.
Jon Stewart hosted ''The Daily Show's'' "Battlefield Ohio: ''The Daily Show'''s Midwest Midterm Midtacular" from Ohio State's Roy Bowen Theatre during the week of October 30 to November 2, 2006.
