The Ohio Board of Regents coordinates and assists with Ohio's institutions of higher education which have recently been reorganized into the University System of Ohio under Governor Strickland.
Much of Ohio features glaciated plains, with an exceptionally flat area in the northwest being known as the Great Black Swamp.
The Adena were able to establish "semi-permanent" villages because they domesticated plants, which included squash, sunflowers, and perhaps corn.
Ohio also is home to  of the Historic National Road, now U.S. Route 40.
Some scholars believe that the Fort Ancient people "were ancestors of the historic Shawnee people, or that, at the very least, the historic Shawnees absorbed remnants of these older peoples."
Slavery was not permitted in the new territory.
The Ohio River was a vital artery for troop and supply movements, as were Ohio's railroads.
Ohio's neighbors are Pennsylvania to the east, Michigan to the northwest, Ontario Canada, to the north, Indiana to the west, Kentucky on the south, and West Virginia on the southeast.
The result reflected the concerns of the Progressive Era.
American Indians in the Ohio Valley were greatly affected by the aggressive tactics of the Iroquois Confederation, based in central and western New York.
In 2010, there were 469,700 foreign-born residents in Ohio, corresponding to 4.1% of the total population.
Major east-west through routes include the Ohio Turnpike (I-80/I-90) in the north, I-76 through Akron to Pennsylvania, I-70 through Columbus and Dayton, and the Appalachian Highway (State Route 32) running from West Virginia to Cincinnati.
The state government of Ohio consists of the executive, judicial, and legislative branches.
While 1/3 of Ohio's land mass is part of the federally defined Appalachian region, only 12.8% of Ohioans live there (1.476 million people.)
Little is known about the people who replaced them.
36% of Ohioans indicate that they attend religious services at least once weekly, 35% attend occasionally, and 27% seldom or never participate in religious services.
Virginia-born William Henry Harrison lived most of his life in Ohio and is also buried there.
Ohio's manufacturing sector is the third-largest of all fifty United States states in terms of gross domestic product.
In 1912 a Constitutional Convention was held with Charles B. Galbreath as secretary.
The state takes its name from the Ohio River.
The other military airfield is Wright Patterson Air Force Base which is one of the largest Air Force bases in the United States.
In the Treaty of Paris in 1783, Britain ceded all claims to Ohio country to the United States.
Specifically, 26% of Ohio's population identified as Evangelical Protestant, 22% as Mainline Protestant, and 21% as Roman Catholic.
The system averages an annual enrollment of over 400,000 students, making it one of the five largest state university systems in the U.S.
The other elected constitutional offices in the executive branch are the secretary of state (Jon A. Husted), auditor (Dave Yost), treasurer (Josh Mandel), and attorney general (Mike DeWine).
Ohio, nicknamed the "Mother of Presidents," has sent seven of its native sons (Ulysses S. Grant, Rutherford B. Hayes, James A. Garfield, Benjamin Harrison, William McKinley, William Howard Taft, and Warren G. Harding) to the White House.
Ohio's southern border is defined by the Ohio River (with the border being at the 1792 low-water mark on the north side of the river), and much of the northern border is defined by Lake Erie.
During the 18th century, the French set up a system of trading posts to control the fur trade in the region.
Ohio's borders were defined by metes and bounds in the Enabling Act of 1802 as follows:
Almost 35,000 Ohioans died in the conflict, and thirty thousand were physically wounded.
The Ohio General Assembly is a bicameral legislature consisting of the Senate and House of Representatives.
supplemented by seasonal hunts.
Many of them follow rail trails, with conversion ongoing.
A lieutenant governor succeeds the governor in the event of any removal from office, and performs any duties assigned by the governor.
:*Zanesville (home of Zane State College).
The United States created the Northwest Territory under the Northwest Ordinance of 1787.
Beginning in 1754, France and Great Britain fought a war that was known in North America as the French and Indian War and in Europe as the Seven Years' War.
Partitioned from the Northwest Territory, the state was admitted to the Union as the 17th state (and the first under the Northwest Ordinance) on March 1, 1803.
The lowest level is the court of common pleas: each county maintains its own constitutionally mandated court of common pleas, which maintain jurisdiction over "all justiciable matters."
Ohio contributed more soldiers per-capita than any other state in the Union.
2 in the country for best business climate by Site Selection magazine, based on a business-activity database.
Ohio is historically known as the "Buckeye State" after its Ohio buckeye trees, and Ohioans are also known as "Buckeyes".
'''Ohio'''  is an Eastern state in the Great  Lakes region of the United States.
, Ohio's median household income is $46,645, and 13.1% of the population is below the poverty line, slightly above the national rate of 13%.
Ohio has the nation's 10th largest highway network, and is within a one-day drive of 50% of North America's population and 70% of North America's manufacturing capacity.
All seven were Republicans.
By the end of the Civil War, the Union's top three generals–Ulysses S. Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, and Philip Sheridan–were all from Ohio.
Geologically similar to parts of West Virginia and southwestern Pennsylvania, this area's coal mining legacy, dependence on small pockets of old manufacturing establishments, and distinctive regional dialect set this section off from the rest of the state.
Unaffiliated voters have an attrition of 15% since 2004, losing an estimated 718,000 of their kind.
Researchers have identified two additional, distinct prehistoric cultures: the Fort Ancient people and the Whittlesey Focus people.
The executive branch is headed by the Governor of Ohio.
The total now rests at 4,057,518 Ohioans.
Ohio is home to some of the nation's highest-ranked public libraries.
The state has also won three consecutive Governor's Cup awards from the magazine, based on business growth and developments.
Six Presidents of the United States have been elected who had Ohio as their home state.
Between 1,000 and 800&nbsp;BC, the sedentary Adena culture emerged.
One of those pioneer routes, known in the early 20th century as "Main Market Route 3", was chosen in 1913 to become part of the historic Lincoln Highway which was the first road across America, connecting New York City to San Francisco.
The capital was then moved to Zanesville for two years, as part of a state legislative compromise, in order to get a bill passed.
Twelve courts of appeals exist, each retaining jurisdiction over appeals from common pleas, municipal, and county courts in a set geographical area.
Instead constitutional amendments have been proposed by petition to the legislature hundreds of times and adopted in a majority of cases.
The highest-ranking court, the Ohio Supreme Court, is Ohio's "court of last resort."
According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), in 2010 the largest denominations by adherents were the Roman Catholic Church with 1,992,567; the United Methodist Church with 496,232; the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 223,253, the Southern Baptist Convention with 171,000, the Christian Churches and Churches of Christ with 141,311, the United Church of Christ with 118,000, and the Presbyterian Church (USA) with 110,000.
Ohio also had the nation's largest population of Slovene speakers, second largest of Slovak speakers, second largest of Pennsylvania Dutch (German) speakers, and the third largest of Serbian speakers.
Though, predominantly white, Ohio has large black populations in all major metropolitan areas throughout the state, Ohio has a significant Hispanic population made up of Mexicans in Toledo and Columbus, and Puerto Ricans in Cleveland and Columbus, and also has a significant and diverse Asian population in Columbus.
At the municipal level, there are approximately 700 school districts statewide.
The assumption was that it would exceed 60,000 residents by the time it was admitted as a state.
The most spectacular remnant of the Adena culture is the Great Serpent Mound, located in Adams County, Ohio.
13 overall for best business climate, including No.
Around 100&nbsp;BC, the Adena were joined in Ohio Country by the Hopewell people, who were named for the farm owned by Captain M. C. Hopewell, where evidence of their unique culture was discovered.
A seven-justice panel composes the court, which, by its own discretion, hears appeals from the courts of appeals, and retains original jurisdiction over limited matters.
Harrison conducted his political career while living on the family compound, founded by his father-in-law, John Cleves Symmes, in North Bend, Ohio.
7 for best litigation climate.
Severe weather is not uncommon in the state, although there are typically fewer tornado reports in Ohio than in states located in what is known as the Tornado Alley.
The state still lacks 45,000 jobs compared to the prerecession numbers of 2007.
An estimated 2,408,178 Ohioans are registered to vote as Democrats, while 1,471,465 Ohioans are registered to vote as Republicans.
Ohio's per capita income stands at $34,874.
Following the Ohio Company, the Miami Company (also referred to as the "Symmes Purchase") claimed the southwestern section, and the Connecticut Land Company surveyed and settled the Connecticut Western Reserve in present-day Northeast Ohio.
By the 18th century, they were part of a larger global economy brought about by European entry into the fur trade.
No Republican has ever won the presidency without winning Ohio.
Settlement began with the founding of Marietta by the Ohio Company of Associates, which had been formed by a group of American Revolutionary War veterans.
For many years this body of water, over , was the largest artificial lake in the world.
The House of Representatives is composed of 99 members.
10 for best business-friendly tax systems in their Business Tax Index 2009, including a top corporate tax and capital gains rate that were both ranked No.
The Hopewell, however, disappeared from the Ohio Valley in about 600&nbsp;AD.
The labor force participation as of April 2015 is 63%, slightly above the national average.
This glaciated region in the northwest and central state is bordered to the east and southeast first by a belt known as the glaciated Allegheny Plateau, and then by another belt known as the unglaciated Allegheny Plateau.
Finally, the capital was moved to Columbus, in order to have it near the geographic center of the state, where it would be more accessible to most citizens.
The program is largely successful in allowing researchers for access to books and other media that might not be otherwise available.
Because Ohio links the Northeast to the Midwest, much cargo and business traffic passes through its borders along its well-developed highways.
Their complex, large and technologically sophisticated earthworks can be found in modern-day Marietta, Newark, and Circleville.
The climate of Ohio is a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification ''Dfa'') throughout most of the state except in the extreme southern counties of Ohio's Bluegrass region section which are located on the northern periphery of the humid subtropical climate and Upland South region of the United States.
The rugged southeastern quadrant of Ohio, stretching in an outward bow-like arc along the Ohio River from the West Virginia Panhandle to the outskirts of Cincinnati, forms a distinct socio-economic unit.
There are also small minorities of Jehovah's Witnesses (1%), Muslims (1%), Hindus (<0.5%), Buddhists (<0.5%), Mormons (<0.5%), and other faiths (1-1.5%).
Significant rivers within the state include the Cuyahoga River, Great Miami River, Maumee River, Muskingum River, and Scioto River.
Ancestries claimed by less than 1% of the population include Sub-Saharan African, Puerto Rican, Swiss, Swedish, Arab, Greek, Norwegian, Romanian, Austrian, Lithuanian, Finnish, West Indian, Portuguese and Slovene.
Numerically: 10,100,586 spoke English, 239,229 Spanish, 55,970 German, 38,990 Chinese, 33,125 Arabic, and 32,019 French.
The question asks whether a new convention is required.
Ohio has only that portion of the river between the river's 1792 low-water mark and the present high-water mark.
Senators in the 112th Congress are Republican Rob Portman and Democrat Sherrod Brown.
The indigenous nations to inhabit Ohio in the historical period included the Miamis (a large confederation); Wyandots (made up of refugees, especially from the fractured Huron confederacy); Delawares (pushed west from their historic homeland in New Jersey); Shawnees (also pushed west, although they may have been descended from the Fort Ancient people of Ohio); Ottawas (more commonly associated with the upper Great Lakes region); Mingos (like the Wyandot, a group recently formed of refugees from Iroquois); Eries (gradually absorbed into the new, multi-ethnic "republics," namely the Wyandot); and eastern Siouan nations such as the Tutelo, Saponi, and the Catawba (territory expanded from the Carolina's, into Virginia, and the Ohio valley).
The Ohio to Erie Trail (route 1) connects Cincinnati, Columbus, and Cleveland.
Many of these Ohio-country nations were multi-ethnic (sometimes multi-linguistic) societies born out of the earlier devastation brought about by disease, war, and subsequent social instability.
OPLIN also provides Ohioans with free home access to high-quality, subscription research databases.
Precipitation in Ohio is moderate year-round.
Archeological evidence suggests that the Ohio Valley was inhabited by nomadic people as early as 13,000&nbsp;BC.
Eight US Presidents hailed from Ohio at the time of their elections, giving rise to its nickname "Mother of Presidents", a sobriquet it shares with Virginia.
The 5 international includes Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Port Columbus International Airport, and Dayton International Airport, Ohio's third largest airport.
This is approximately  south and west of Ohio's population center in 1990.
The Ohio Lottery has contributed over $15.5 billion to public education in its 34-year history.
Severe lake effect snowstorms are also not uncommon on the southeast shore of Lake Erie, which is located in an area designated as the Snowbelt.
Forbes ranked the state No.
5,212,000 Ohioans are currently employed by wage or salary.
Ohio country was also the site of Indian massacres, such as the Yellow Creek Massacre, Gnadenhutten and Pontiac's Rebellion school massacre.
The largest groups were: Mexico (54,166), India (50,256), China (34,901), Germany (19,219), Philippines (16,410), United Kingdom (15,917), Canada (14,223), Russia (11,763), South Korea (11,307), and Ukraine (10,681).
Growth then slowed for the next four decades.
In addition 59,881 spoke a Slavic language and 42,673 spoke another West Germanic language according to the 2010 Census.
After the Beaver Wars in the mid-17th century, the Iroquois claimed much of the Ohio country as hunting and, more importantly, beaver-trapping ground.
Most of Ohio is of low relief, but the unglaciated Allegheny Plateau features rugged hills and forests.
Ohio has the largest bioscience sector in the Midwest, and is a national leader in the "green" economy.
Substantively, Ohio's system is similar to those found in other states.
Rickenbacker International Airport is one of two military airfields which is also home to the 7th largest FedEx building in America.
These are changes from 2004 of 72% and 32%, respectively, and Democrats have registered over 1,000,000 new Ohioans since 2004.
Other major airports are located in Toledo and Akron.
As of 2011, 27.6% of Ohio's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups.
** Columbus Metropolitan Library (First)
, Ohio's gross domestic product (GDP) was $478 billion.
The Cincinnati Masters is an ATP World Tour Masters 1000 and WTA Premier 5 tennis tournament.
Cultivation of these in addition to hunting and gathering supported more settled, complex villages.
In 1965 the United States Congress passed the Appalachian Regional Development Act, at attempt to "address the persistent poverty and growing economic despair of the Appalachian Region."
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Ohio was 11,613,423 on July 1, 2015, a 0.67% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
Ohio's unemployment rate stands at 5.2% as of April 2015, down from 10.7% in May 2010.
As Ohio prepared for statehood, the Indiana Territory was created, reducing the Northwest Territory to approximately the size of present-day Ohio plus the eastern half of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan and the eastern tip of the Upper Peninsula.
This came to an end with the colonists' victory in the American Revolution.
The University of Cincinnati Bearcats represent Ohio in the American Athletic Conference.
There are three levels of the Ohio state judiciary.
They subsisted on agriculture (corn, sunflowers, beans, etc.)
Baseball's first fully professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings of 1869, were organized in Ohio.
Historian R. Douglas Hurt asserts that not since Virginia 'had a state made such a mark on national political affairs.'
Following the 2000 census, Ohio lost one congressional district in the United States House of Representatives, which leaves Ohio with 18 districts, and consequently, 18 representatives.
After the devastation of epidemics and war in the mid-17th century, which largely emptied the Ohio country of indigenous people by the mid-to-late 17th century, the land gradually became repopulated by the mostly Algonquian-speaking descendants of its ancient inhabitants, that is, descendants of the Adena, Hopewell, and Mississippian cultures.
Virginia native William Henry Harrison, a Whig, resided in Ohio.
Ohio occupies 16 seats in the United States House of Representatives.
With about 70,000 people in 2015 Ohio had the largest Amish population of all states of the US.
In 1980, the U.S. Supreme Court held that, based on the wording of the cessation of territory by Virginia (which at that time included what is now Kentucky and West Virginia), the boundary between Ohio and Kentucky (and, by implication, West Virginia) is the northern low-water mark of the river as it existed in 1792.
Congress intervened, making Michigan's admittance as a state conditional on ending the conflict.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for selected cities in Ohio
** Cuyahoga County Public Library (Second)
In exchange for giving up its claim to the Toledo Strip, Michigan was given the western two-thirds of the Upper Peninsula, in addition to the eastern third that was already considered part of the state.
Since 2010, the Republicans have largely controlled Ohio state politics, including a super-majority in the state's House, a majority in the state Senate, the Governorship, etc.
The rivers in the northern part of the state drain into the northern Atlantic Ocean via Lake Erie and the St. Lawrence River, and the rivers in the southern part of the state drain into the Gulf of Mexico via the Ohio River and then the Mississippi.
Ohio also has a highly developed network of signed state bicycle routes.
As a result of the Treaty of Paris, the French ceded control of Ohio and the remainder of the Old Northwest to Great Britain.
Ohio is also one of 41 states with its own lottery, the Ohio Lottery.
An informal early 20th century American football association, the Ohio League, was the direct predecessor of the NFL, although neither of Ohio's modern NFL franchises trace their roots to an Ohio League club.
In 1835, Ohio fought with Michigan in the Toledo War, a mostly bloodless boundary war over the Toledo Strip.
The Native Americans had no immunity to common European diseases.
* 500,000 books or more
A case heard in this system is decided by a three-judge panel, and each judge is elected.
Ohio has had three capital cities: Chillicothe, Zanesville, and Columbus.
In total, there are 7,937,161 Ohioans registered to vote.
The Senate is composed of 33 districts, each of which is represented by one senator.
To the north, Lake Erie gives Ohio  of coastline, which allows for numerous cargo ports.
The Directorship's Boardroom Guide ranked the state No.
On August 7, 1953 (the year of Ohio's 150th anniversary), President Eisenhower signed a congressional joint resolution that officially declared March 1, 1803 the date of Ohio's admittance into the Union.
Ohio's central position and its population gave it an important place during the Civil War.
For 2008, 31 of Ohio's library systems were all ranked in the top ten for American cities of their population category.
However, Obama won only 22 of Ohio's 88 counties.
The capital was then moved back to Chillicothe, which was the capital from 1812 to 1816.
From just over 45,000 residents in 1800, Ohio's population grew at rates of over 10% per decade (except for the 1940 census) until the 1970 census, which recorded just over 10.65 million Ohioans.
The Ohio Seismic Network (OhioSeis), a group of seismograph stations at several colleges, universities, and other institutions, and coordinated by the Division of Geological Survey of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, maintains an extensive catalog of Ohio earthquakes from 1776 to the present day, as well as earthquakes located in other states whose effects were felt in Ohio.
As of 2014, the state Senate is 1 Republican away from a super-majority.
Pontiac's Rebellion in the 1760s, however, posed a challenge to British military control.
The arrival of the Lincoln Highway to Ohio was a major influence on the development of the state.
Government employs 787,000 Ohioans (15.1%), manufacturing employs 669,000 Ohioans (12.9%), and professional and technical services employs 638,000 Ohioans (12.2%).
** Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County (Tenth)
Seven Presidents were born in Ohio, making it second to Virginia's eight.
Bicycle Route 50 traverses Ohio from Steubenville to the Indiana state line outside Richmond.
Ohio played a central role in the development of both Major League Baseball and the National Football League.
As a result, the Miami Conservancy District was created as the first major flood plain engineering project in Ohio and the United States.
Akron Fulton International Airport handles cargo and for private use.
Of these, 229,049 (2.0%) were naturalized US citizens and 240,699 (2.1%) were not.
Ohio's population growth lags that of the entire United States, and Caucasians are found in a greater density than the United States average.
The worst weather disaster in Ohio history occurred along the Great Miami River in 1913.
In the United States presidential election of 2008, then-Senator Barack Obama of Illinois won 51.50% of Ohio's popular vote, 4.59 percentage points more than his nearest rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona (with 46.91% of the popular vote).
As Ohio historian George W. Knepper notes, this sophisticated culture was "so named because evidences of their culture were excavated in 1902 on the grounds of Adena, Thomas Worthington's estate located near Chillicothe".
Ohio was ranked No.
Ohio is the 34th largest by area, the 7th most populous, and the 10th most densely populated of the 50 United States.
According to the same data, a majority of Ohioans, 55%, feel that religion is "very important," 30% say that it is "somewhat important," and 15% responded that religion is "not too important/not important at all."
The 2008 study by Thomas J. Hennen Jr. ranked Ohio as number one in a state-by-state comparison.
17% of the population is unaffiliated with any religious body.
By employment, Ohio's largest sector is trade/transportation/utilities, which employs 1,010,000 Ohioans, or 19.4% of Ohio's workforce, while the health care and education sector employs 825,000 Ohioans (15.8%).
Under the Jeffersonian principle that laws should be reviewed once a generation, the constitution provided for a recurring question to appear on Ohio's general election ballots every 20 years.
At a special session at the old state capital in Chillicothe, the Ohio state legislature approved a new petition for statehood that was delivered to Washington, D.C. on horseback.
Marcy Kaptur (D-9) is the dean, or most senior member, of the Ohio delegation to the United States House of Representatives.
The 2008 elections, Democrats gained three seats in Ohio's delegation to the House of Representatives.
In Ohio, the Lincoln Highway linked many towns and cities together, including Canton, Mansfield, Wooster, Lima, and Van Wert.
6.2% of Ohio's population is under 5 years of age, 23.7 percent under 18 years of age, and 14.1 percent were 65 or older.
Like the Adena, the Hopewell people participated in a mound-building culture.
There is also fairly good evidence that eastern Siouan nations such as the Tutelo and Saponi descend from Indian Knoll, Adena, and Hopewell peoples.
Interstate 75 between Cincinnati and Dayton is one of the heaviest traveled sections of interstate in Ohio.
