In the United States, the checklist is called a Declaration of Inspection or DOI.
All single-hulled tankers around the world will be phased out by 2026, in accordance with the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 (MARPOL).
With facilities prepared in Jakarta, Singapore, Bangkok, Saigon, Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Kobe, the fledgling Shell company was ready to become Standard Oil's first challenger in the Asian market.
As the tanker becomes full, crew members open and close valves to direct the flow of product and maintain close communication with the pumping facility to decrease and finally stop the flow of liquid.
''Seawise Giant'' was renamed ''Happy Giant'' in 1989, ''Jahre Viking'' in 1991, and ''Knock Nevis'' in 2004 (when she was converted into a permanently moored storage tanker).
This resulted in a glut of ships when demand dropped due to a weakened global economy and dramatically reduced demand in the United States.
Despite efforts of scientists, managers, and volunteers over 400,000 seabirds, about 1,000 sea otters, and immense numbers of fish were killed.
The inert gas buffer between fuel and oxygen atmospheres ensures they are never capable of ignition.
On August 24, 1892, the ''Murex'' became the first tanker to pass through the Suez Canal.
In all, double-hull tankers are said to be safer than a single-hull in a grounding incident, especially when the shore is not very rocky.
Following the ''Exxon Valdez'' spill, the United States passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA-90), which excluded single-hull tank vessels of 5,000 gross tons or more from US waters from 2010 onward, apart from those with a double bottom or double sides, which may be permitted to trade to the United States through 2015, depending on their age.
Rate per ton arrangements are used mostly in chemical tanker chartering, and differ from lump sum rates in that port costs and voyage expenses are generally paid by the charterer.
The 1880s also saw the beginnings of the Asian oil trade.
An oil tanker's inert gas system is one of the most important parts of its design.
The vessel's use was curtailed by U.S. and Belgian authorities citing safety concerns.
The baseline rate is expressed as WS 100.
Firstly, an OBO would be able to switch between the dry and wet bulk trades based on market conditions.
Lightering is sometimes used where a loaded tanker is too large to enter a specific port.
Because of their great size, supertankers often cannot enter port fully loaded.
After a tank is cleaned, provided that it is going to be prepared for entry, it will be ''purged''.
In this spill, the ship ran aground and dumped  of oil into the ocean in March 1989.
Amidst high oil prices, geopolitical tension, and fears of disruptions to the oil supply, growing demand was the main driving force in the tanker shipping market for the year.
Some systems use rotating high-pressure water jets to spray hot water on all the internal surfaces of the tank.
A completed chartering contract is known as a charter party.
Other problems with barrels were their expense, their tendency to leak, and the fact that they were generally used only once.
In 1876, Ludvig and Robert Nobel, brothers of Alfred Nobel, founded Branobel (short for Brothers Nobel) in Baku, Azerbaijan.
From 2003, the demand for new ships started to grow, resulting in 2007 in a record breaking order backlog for shipyards, exceeding their capacity with rising newbuilding prices as a result.
These units are usually moored to the seabed through a spread mooring system.
In 2005, 475 new oil tankers were built, accounting for .
To differentiate them from smaller ULCCs, these ships are sometimes given the ''V-Plus'' size designation.
In 1998, the Marine Racecar Board of the National Academy of Science conducted a survey of industry experts regarding the pros and cons of double-hull design.
In addition to fuel, replenishment ships may also deliver water, ammunition, rations, stores and personnel.
However, the system is still used today.
This amounted to 34.1% of all seaborne trade for the year.
In 1863, two sail-driven tankers were built on England's River Tyne.
She had 46 tanks,  of deck, and at her full load draft, could not navigate the English Channel.
As of 2007, the United States Central Intelligence Agency statistics count 4,295&nbsp;oil tankers of  or greater worldwide.
Despite these strengths, each of the five tanker freight indices dropped during 2006.
Tanks must be cleaned from time to time for various reasons.
The purpose of the system is to create an atmosphere inside tanks in which the hydrocarbon oil vapors cannot burn.
Combination ore-bulk-oil carriers and permanently moored floating storage units are two other variations on the standard oil tanker design.
A tanker with a single outer shell between the product and the ocean is said to be "single-hulled".
One method is for the ship to moor alongside a pier, connect with cargo hoses or marine loading arms.
A third method is by ship-to-ship transfer, also known as lightering.
By comparison, the United States and the United Kingdom only had 59 and 27 registered oil tankers, respectively.
By comparison, , , and  worth of oil tanker capacity was built in 1980, 1990, and 2000 respectively.
One of the more famous OBOs was the MV ''Derbyshire'' of  which in September 1980 became the largest British ship ever lost at sea.
As a result, several tanker operators laid up their ships.
Oil spills have devastating effects on the environment.
In 1955 the world's largest supertanker was  and : the  launched that year by Vickers Armstrongs Shipbuilders Ltd in England for Stavros Niarchos.
On the other hand, components of the liquid cargo system, from pumps to valves to piping, tend to develop problems when subjected to periods of disuse.
A turret-style mooring system can be used in areas prone to severe weather.
A sudden rise in oil production, longer transport routes, and slow steaming because of high bunker prices led to a shortage in tonnage towards the end of the year.
A supertanker's routes are generally long, requiring it to stay at sea for extended periods, up to and beyond seventy days at a time.
Until 1956, tankers were designed to be able to navigate the Suez Canal.
It adopted the best practices from previous oil tanker designs to create the prototype for all subsequent vessels of the type.
The act of hiring a ship to carry cargo is called chartering.
In 2006, time-charters tended towards long term.
This amounted to 34.1% of all seaborne trade for that year.
It sank in a Pacific typhoon while carrying a cargo of iron ore from Canada to Japan.
In this period the average age of scrapped oil tankers has ranged from 26.9 to 31.5 years.
Thus, as air replaces the inert gas, the concentration cannot rise to the lower flammable limit and is safe.
In a time charter the vessel is hired for a set period of time, to perform voyages as the charterer directs.
The COW system circulates part of the cargo through the fixed tank-cleaning system to remove wax and asphaltic deposits.
Before the New York Mercantile Exchange started trading crude oil futures in 1983, it was difficult to determine the exact price of oil, which could change with every contract.
When the total concentration of oxygen in the tank reaches about 11%, the upper and lower flammable limits converge and the flammable range disappears.
These holds were further subdivided into port and starboard sections by a longitudinal bulkhead.
The market is affected by a wide variety of variables such as the supply and demand of oil as well as the supply and demand of oil tankers.
It is also common for the ship to move water ballast during the loading of cargo to maintain proper trim.
Combining the amount carried with the distance it was carried, oil tankers moved 11,705 billion metric-ton-miles of oil in 2005.
These factors have contributed to a steady reduction in the number of OBO ships worldwide since the 1970s.
One of the key aspects of any charter party is the freight rate, or the price specified for carriage of cargo.
A major component of tanker architecture is the design of the hull or outer structure.
In 2005,  worth of oil tankers were sold used.
As oil enters the tank, the vapors inside the tank must be somehow expelled.
Nineteen of these were VLCC size, 19 were suezmax, 51 were aframax, and the rest were smaller designs.
When the transfer begins, it is the ship's cargo pumps that are used to move the product ashore.
As discussed above, a VLCC tanker can carry  of crude oil.
In 2004 and 2005,  and  respectively of oil tankers were scrapped.
Although they were in the past, ships of the smaller Aframax and Suezmax classes are no longer regarded as supertankers.
Mucking requires protocols for entry into confined spaces, protective clothing, designated safety observers, and possibly the use of airline respirators.
Each of the sister ships has a capacity of over , a length overall of  and a cargo capacity of .
These ships can transport  of oil/318,000 metric tons.
Tank-gauging equipment is used to tell the person in charge how much space is left in the tank, and all tankers have at least two independent methods for tank-gauging.
It was a good year across all segments of the tanker market segments, but not as good as 2004 and 2005.
In practice, the flexibility which the OBO design allows has gone largely unused, as these ships tend to specialize in either the liquid or dry bulk trade.
FPSO and FSOs are often created out of old, stripped-down oil tankers, but can be made from new-built hulls Shell España first used a tanker as an FPSO in August 1977.
A pumproom generally spans the total breadth of the ship.
But this approach of dividing the ship's storage space into smaller tanks virtually eliminated free-surface problems.
Hellespont sold these ships to Overseas Shipholding Group and Euronav in 2004.
In the 1860s, Pennsylvania oil fields became a major supplier of oil, and a center of innovation after Edwin Drake had struck oil near Titusville, Pennsylvania.
As of 2011, the world's two largest working supertankers are the TI class supertankers ''TI Europe'' and ''TI Oceania''.
Their size is measured in deadweight metric tons (DWT).
Although anthropogenic use of oil reaches to prehistory, the first modern commercial exploitation dates back to James Young's manufacture of paraffin in 1850.
This design was intended to provide flexibility in two ways.
Depending on local regulations, the vapors can be expelled into the atmosphere or discharged back to the pumping station by way of a vapor recovery line.
Second only to pipelines in terms of efficiency, the average cost of oil transport by tanker amounts to only two or three United States cents per .
At first, they divided the groups as ''General Purpose'' for tankers under ; ''Medium Range'' for ships between 25,000 and  and ''Large Range'' for the then-enormous ships that were larger than .
By comparison, in 1970 1.44 billion metric tons of oil were shipped by tanker.
Merchant oil tankers carry a wide range of hydrocarbon liquids ranging from crude oil to refined petroleum products.
Purging is accomplished by pumping inert gas into the tank until hydrocarbons have been sufficiently expelled.
The combined deadweight tonnage of oil tankers and bulk carriers, represents 72.9% of the world's fleet.
Although double-hull design is superior in low energy casualties and prevents spillage in small casualties, in high energy casualties where both hulls are breached, oil can spill through the double-hull and into the sea and spills from a double-hull tanker can be significantly higher than designs like the mid-deck tanker, the Coulombi egg tanker and even a pre-MARPOL tanker, as the last one has a lower oil column and reaches hydrostatic balance sooner.
In 2006, the sustained rise in oil prices had only a limited impact on demand.
In 1954 Shell Oil developed the average freight rate assessment (AFRA) system which classifies tankers of different sizes.
The world's largest supertanker was built in 1979 at the Oppama shipyard by Sumitomo Heavy Industries, Ltd. as the ''Seawise Giant''.
Considering the volume of oil carried by sea, however, tanker owners' organisations often argue that the industry's safety record is excellent, with only a tiny fraction of a percentage of oil cargoes carried ever being spilled.
Oil tankers are only one source of oil spills.
The system was developed for tax reasons as the tax authorities wanted evidence that the internal billing records were correct.
Earlier designs suffered from stability problems caused by the free surface effect, where oil sloshing from side to side could cause a ship to capsize.
Some of the advantages of the double-hull design that were mentioned include ease of ballasting in emergency situations, reduced practice of saltwater ballasting in cargo tanks decreases corrosion, increased environmental protection, cargo discharge is quicker, more complete and easier, tank washing is more efficient, and better protection in low-impact collisions and grounding.
The idea that led to moving Russian oil to the Far East via the Suez Canal was the brainchild of two men: importer Marcus Samuel and shipowner/broker Fred Lane.
Of these, 31.6% were under 4 years old and 14.3% were over 20 years old.
Fuel oil itself is very difficult to ignite, but its hydrocarbon vapors are explosive when mixed with air in certain concentrations.
The first half of 2007 was relatively strong, but in the second half rates dropped significantly.
The United Nations has decided to phase out single hull oil tankers by 2010.
An example of a FSO that used to be an oil tanker is the ''Knock Nevis''.
The detailed statistics for 2004 shown in the table below show tank vessels responsible for somewhat less than 5% of the number of total spills but more than 60% of the volume.
The average one-year time charter rate for a 5-year-old tanker of 280,000 metric tons of deadweight varied from $56,500 per day in December 2005 to $53,000 per day in September 2007 with a high of $64,500 per day in September 2006.
This turret system lets the unit rotate to minimize the effects of sea-swell and wind.
This is about eight times the amount spilled in the widely known ''Exxon Valdez'' incident.
By way of comparison, the United Kingdom consumed about  of oil per day in 2009.
Tankers are hired by four types of charter agreements: the voyage charter, the time charter, the bareboat charter, and contract of affreightment.
Items on the checklist include proper signals and signs are displayed, secure mooring of the vessel, choice of language for communication, securing of all connections, that emergency equipment is in place, and that no repair work is taking place.
In 1958 United States shipping magnate Daniel K. Ludwig broke the record of 100,000 long tons of heavy displacement.
The safety benefits are less clear on larger vessels and in cases of high speed impact.
This size restriction became much less of a priority after the closing of the canal during the Suez Crisis of 1956.
The ship also featured a set of 21 vertical watertight compartments for extra buoyancy.
Six other flag states had more than 200 registered oil tankers: Liberia (464), Singapore (355), China (252), Russia (250), the Marshall Islands (234) and the Bahamas (209).
Finally, in a contract of affreightment or COA, the charterer specifies a total volume of cargo to be carried in a specific time period and in specific sizes, for example a COA could be specified as  of JP-5 in a year's time in  shipments.
, the chartering market is persistently volatile across all tanker sectors.
The first problem was weight: the standard empty barrel weighed , representing 20% of the total weight of a full barrel.
By the sheer amount of oil carried, modern oil tankers must be considered a threat to the environment.
As inert gas is introduced into a mixture of hydrocarbon vapors and air, it increases the lower flammable limit or lowest concentration at which the vapors can be ignited.
To make it an independent instrument, Shell consulted the ''London Tanker Brokers’ Panel (LTBP)''.
The first successful oil tanker was the ''Zoroaster'', which carried its 242 long tons of kerosene cargo in two iron tanks joined by pipes.
An ore-bulk-oil carrier, also known as combination carrier or OBO, is a ship designed to be capable of carrying wet or dry bulk cargoes.
Some representative prices for that year include $42.5M for a  tanker, $60.7 million for a , $73 million for a , and $116 million for  tanker.
A pumpable room houses all the pumps connected to a tanker's cargo lines.
"Supertankers" are the largest tankers, including very large crude carriers (VLCC) and ULCCs with capacities over .
Specially trained personnel monitor the tank's atmosphere, often using hand-held gas indicators which measure the percentage of hydrocarbons present.
Marine species constantly exposed to PAHs can exhibit developmental problems, susceptibility to disease, and abnormal reproductive cycles.
In this method, two ships come alongside in open sea and oil is transferred manifold to manifold via flexible hoses.
These floating units reduce oil production costs and offer mobility, large storage capacity, and production versatility.
Worldwide, tankers carry some  annually, and the cost of transportation by tanker amounts to only US$0.02 per gallon at the pump.
A similar system, the floating production storage and offloading unit (FPSO), has the ability to process the product while it is on board.
Crude oil contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) which are very difficult to clean up, and last for years in the sediment and marine environment.
Hybrid designs such as "double-bottom" and "double-sided" combine aspects of single and double-hull designs.
The ship had a length overall of , a beam of , and a draft of .
This approach, almost universal today, was first used by Swan in the Nobel tankers ''Blesk'', ''Lumen'', and ''Lux''.
The exception is in cases when the tank must be entered.
In the early 1850s, oil began to be exported from Upper Burma, then a British colony.
An '''oil tanker''', also known as a '''petroleum tanker''', is a merchant ship designed for the bulk transport of oil.
In a voyage charter the charterer rents the vessel from the loading port to the discharge port.
The Panamanian, Liberian, Marshallese and Bahamian flags are open registries and considered by the International Transport Workers' Federation to be flags of convenience.
and was purchased by Wilhelm Anton Riedemann, an agent for the Standard Oil Company along with several of her sister ships.
It was, during the late 19th century, one of the largest oil companies in the world.
International law requires that every merchant ship be registered in a country, called its flag state.
After the conference is complete, the person in charge on the ship and the person in charge of the shore installation go over a final inspection checklist.
They were the first ULCCs to be double-hulled.
The average size for these new tankers was .
Break-bulk boats and barges were originally used to transport Pennsylvania oil in  wooden barrels.
Instead of one or two large holds, Swan's design used several holds which spanned the width, or beam, of the ship.
Turning his attention to self-propelled tankships, he faced a number of challenges.
Oil tankers have been involved in a number of damaging and high-profile oil spills.
Topping off is a very dangerous time in handling oil, and the procedure is handled particularly carefully.
In a bareboat charter the charterer acts as the ship's operator and manager, taking on responsibilities such as providing the crew and maintaining the vessel.
Shell and BP, the first companies to use the system, abandoned the AFRA system in 1983, later followed by the US oil companies.
He first experimented with carrying oil in bulk on single-hulled barges.
Prior bids to move oil through the canal had been rejected by the Suez Canal Company as being too risky.
The world's total oil tankers deadweight tonnage has increased from  in 1970 to  in 2005.
Crude carriers are among the largest, ranging from  Panamax-sized vessels to ultra-large crude carriers (ULCCs) of over .
Hostilities in the Middle East which interrupted traffic through the Suez Canal contributed, as did nationalization of Middle East oil refineries.
The size classes range from inland or coastal tankers of a few thousand metric tons of deadweight (DWT) to the mammoth '''ultra large crude carriers''' ('''ULCCs''') of .
By 2013 only a few ULCCs remain in service, none of which are more than 400 meters long.
The main discharge ports were located in North America, Europe, and Japan with 537.7, 438.4, and 215.0 million metric tons of cargo discharged in these regions.
Prior to any transfer of cargo, the chief officer must develop a transfer plan detailing specifics of the operation such as how much cargo will be moved, which tanks will be cleaned, and how the ship's ballasting will change.
Safely gas-freeing a tank is accomplished by purging hydrocarbon vapors with inert gas until the hydrocarbon concentration inside the tank is under about 1%.
Then a steady pressure is achieved and held during the operation.
Tanks that carry less viscous cargoes are washed with water.
For a concrete example, in 2006, Bonheur subsidiary First Olsen paid US$76.5 million for ''Knock Sheen'', a 159,899 DWT tanker.
Overnight, VLCC rates climbed from $20,000 per day to $200–$300,000 per day, and even higher numbers were recorded.
Named the ''Murex'', the ''Conch'' and the ''Clam'', each had a capacity of 5,010&nbsp;long tons of deadweight.
Ship-owners and buyers negotiate scrap prices based on factors such as the ship's empty weight (called light ton displacement or LDT) and prices in the scrap metal market.
These were followed in 1873 by the first oil-tank steamer, the ''Vaderland'', which was built by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company for Belgian owners.
One tank was forward of the midships engine room and the other was aft.
Some particular variables include winter temperatures, excess tanker tonnage, supply fluctuations in the Persian Gulf, and interruptions in refinery services.
In this same timeframe, tankers have accounted for between 56.5% and 90.5% of the world's total scrapped ship tonnage.
One reason is to change the type of product carried inside a tank.
In summary, spills are much more rare but much more serious on tank vessels than on non-tank vessels.
Another method involves mooring to offshore buoys, such as a single point mooring, and making a cargo connection via underwater cargo hoses.
The tanks are numbered with tank one being the forwardmost.
Similarly, each  of oil tankers was responsible for 32,400 metric-ton miles of carriage.
Air pollution from normal tanker engines operation and from cargo fires is another serious concern.
Some specialized types of oil tankers have evolved.
A ship's flag state exercises regulatory control over the vessel and is required to inspect it regularly, certify the ship's equipment and crew, and issue safety and pollution prevention documents.
The same report lists the following as some drawbacks to the double-hull design, including higher build costs, greater operating expenses (e.g.
ULCCs, commissioned in the 1970s, were the largest vessels ever built, but the longest ones have already been scrapped.
But apart from these considerations is a simple economic advantage: the larger an oil tanker is, the more cheaply it can move crude oil, and the better it can help meet growing demands for oil.
On the other hand, spills resulting from accidents like collisions, groundings, hull failures, and explosions are much larger, with 84% of these involving losses of over 700 metric tons.
