Oklahoma City and Tulsa serve as Oklahoma's primary economic anchors, with nearly two-thirds of Oklahomans living within their metropolitan statistical areas.
In the 2007–2008 school year, there were 181,973 undergraduate students, 20,014 graduate students, and 4,395 first-professional degree students enrolled in Oklahoma colleges.
* State mammal: American bison
Stillwater is known as the epicenter of Red Dirt music, the best-known proponent of which is the late Bob Childers.
In 2000, there were about 5,000 Jews and 6,000 Muslims, with 10 congregations to each group.
Spanning the southern and eastern parts of the United States, the area is known for politically and socially conservative views, even though Oklahoma has more voters registered with the Democratic Party than with any other party.
The Cherokee Preservation Foundation has invested $3 million into opening schools, training teachers, and developing curricula for language education, as well as initiating community gatherings where the language can be actively used.
* State beverage: Milk
Democrats are strongest in the eastern part of the state and Little Dixie, as well as the most heavily African American parts of Oklahoma City and Tulsa.
The state has a rich history in ballet with five Native American ballerinas attaining worldwide fame.
By the late 1920s, the Ku Klux Klan had declined to negligible influence within the state.
More than  of roads make up the state's major highway skeleton, including state-operated highways, ten turnpikes or major toll roads, and the longest drivable stretch of Route 66 in the nation.
The state has four schools that compete at the highest level of college sports, NCAA Division I.
The state has two primary newspapers.
The executive branch consists of the Governor, their staff, and other elected officials.
* State language: English; Cherokee and other Native American languages
In 1927, Oklahoman businessman Cyrus Avery, known as the "Father of Route 66", began the campaign to create U.S. Route 66.
Oklahoma's first newspaper was established in 1844, called the ''Cherokee Advocate'', and was written in both Cherokee and English.
Oklahoma's largest commercial airport is Will Rogers World Airport in Oklahoma City, averaging a yearly passenger count of more than 3.5 million (1.7 million boardings) in 2010.
Al Gore in 2000, though, was the last Democrat to even win any counties in the state.
Over a twenty-year period ending in 1950, the state saw its only historical decline in population, dropping 6.9 percent as impoverished families migrated out of the state after the Dust Bowl.
Other companies in Tulsa include Heller Theatre and Tulsa Spotlight Theater.
He discussed with President Theodore Roosevelt the possibility of making Oklahoma a majority-black state.
* State folk dance: Square dance
In Tulsa, Oklahoma's oldest resident professional company is American Theatre Company, and Theatre Tulsa is the oldest community theatre company west of the Mississippi.
Because of its position in the center of the United States, Oklahoma is also among the top states for logistic centers, and a major contributor to weather-related research.
Over almost all of Oklahoma, winter is the driest season.
This district, which covers most of Little Dixie, is the Democrats' best region of the state, and has been represented by a Democrat for a dozen years.
The building, known as the "Carnegie Hall of Western Swing", served as the performance headquarters of Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys during the 1930s.
The state had the second-highest number of Native Americans in 2002, estimated at 395,219, as well as the second highest percentage among all states.
The Oklahoma City Museum of Art contains the most comprehensive collection of glass sculptures by artist Dale Chihuly in the world, and Oklahoma City's National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum documents the heritage of the American Western frontier.
In 2004, the state ranked 36th in the nation for the relative number of adults with high school diplomas, though at 85.2 percent, it had the highest rate among southern states.
Of Oklahoma's federally protected park or recreational sites; the Chickasaw National Recreation Area is the largest, with 9,898.63 acres (18&nbsp;km2).
As an example, on November 11, 1911, the temperature at Oklahoma City reached  in the afternoon (the record high for that date), then an Arctic cold front of unprecedented intensity slammed across the state, causing the temperature to crash 66 degrees, down to  at midnight (the record low for that date); thus, both the record high and record low for November 11 were set on the same date.
Two of the fifty-largest cities in the United States are located in Oklahoma, Oklahoma City and Tulsa, and 65 percent of Oklahomans live within their metropolitan areas, or spheres of economic and social influence defined by the United States Census Bureau as a metropolitan statistical area.
Early June can still be wet, but most years see a marked decrease in rainfall during June and early July.
* State vegetable: Watermelon
'''Oklahoma'''  (Cherokee: ''Asgaya gigageyi'' / ᎠᏍᎦᏯ ᎩᎦᎨᏱ; or transliterated from English as ᎣᎦᎳᎰᎹ (''òɡàlàhoma''), Pawnee: ''Uukuhuúwa'', Cayuga: ''Gahnawiyoˀgeh'') is a state located in the South Central United States.
Other religions represented in the state include Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.
* State wildflower: Indian blanket (''Gaillardia pulchella'')
Choctaw Chief Allen Wright suggested the name in 1866 during treaty negotiations with the federal government regarding the use of Indian Territory, in which he envisioned an all-Indian state controlled by the United States Superintendent of Indian Affairs.
The territory now known as Oklahoma was first a part of the Arkansas Territory from 1819 until 1828.
In total, Oklahoma has over 150 public-use airports.
For his crime, McVeigh was executed by the federal government on June 11, 2001.
Norman is also host to the Medieval Fair of Norman, which has been held annually since 1976 and was Oklahoma's first medieval fair.
The University program was founded in 1962 and was the first fully accredited program of its kind in the United States.
Tribal governments are recognized by the United States as quasi-sovereign entities with executive, judicial, and legislative powers over tribal members and functions, but are subject to the authority of the United States Congress to revoke or withhold certain powers.
The Oklahoma judiciary also contains two independent courts: a Court of Impeachment and the Oklahoma Court on the Judiciary.
Following the 2000 census, the Oklahoma delegation to the U.S. House of Representatives was reduced from six to five representatives, each serving one congressional district.
Two of them are coal-fired power plants: one in Muskogee, and the other in Redrock.
In 2007, it had one of the fastest-growing economies in the United States, ranking among the top states in per capita income growth and gross domestic product growth.
For a complete list visit the  Oklahoma Association of Regional Councils.
Interior Highlands—a region especially prone to severe weather.
The state's 2006 per capita personal income ranked 37th at $32,210, though it has the third fastest-growing per capita income in the nation and ranks consistently among the lowest states in cost of living index.
Oklahoma City, the state's capital and largest city, had the largest metropolitan area in the state in 2010, with 1,252,987 people, and the metropolitan area of Tulsa had 937,478 residents.
* State gospel song: "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot"
His accomplice, Terry Nichols, is serving life in prison without parole for helping plan the attack and prepare the explosive.
These were Yvonne Chouteau, sisters Marjorie and Maria Tallchief, Rosella Hightower and Moscelyne Larkin, known collectively as the Five Moons.
Percentage of population()
More than 500 named creeks and rivers make up Oklahoma's waterways, and with 200 lakes created by dams, it holds the highest number of artificial reservoirs in the nation.
Traveling westward, the climate transitions progressively toward a semi-arid zone (Koppen ''BSk'') in the high plains of the Panhandle and other western areas from about Lawton westward, less frequently touched by southern moisture.
Norman plays host to the Norman Music Festival, a festival that highlights native Oklahoma bands and musicians.
As a whole, the oil energy industry contributes $35 billion to Oklahoma's gross domestic product, and employees of Oklahoma oil-related companies earn an average of twice the state's typical yearly income.
Snowfall ranges from an average of less than  in the south to just over  on the border of Colorado in the panhandle.
Eight and a half percent of the nation's natural gas supply is held in Oklahoma, with  being produced in 2009.
As the lawmaking branch of the state government, it is responsible for raising and distributing the money necessary to run the government.
Oklahoma holds eleven public regional universities, including Northeastern State University, the second-oldest institution of higher education west of the Mississippi River, also containing the only College of Optometry in Oklahoma and the largest enrollment of Native American students in the nation by percentage and amount.
''Average high/low temperatures in ''°F''''
The Oklahoma City bombing of April 19, 1995, in which Timothy McVeigh detonated a large, crude explosive device outside the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, killed 168 people, including 19 children.
Its residents are known as ''Oklahomans'', or informally "Okies", and its capital and largest city is Oklahoma City.
Collegiate athletics are a popular draw in the state.
During the 19th century, thousands of Native Americans were expelled from their ancestral homelands from across North America and transported to the area including and surrounding present-day Oklahoma.
* State meal: Fried okra, squash, cornbread, barbecue pork, biscuits, sausage and gravy, grits, corn, strawberries, chicken fried steak, pecan pie, and black-eyed peas.
In Oklahoma City, Interstate 35 intersects with Interstate 44 and Interstate 40, forming one of the most important intersections along the United States highway system.
+ '''Top 10 Non-English Languages Spoken in Oklahoma'''
* State reptile: Collared lizard
* State insect: Honeybee
For the 112th Congress (2011–2013), there were no changes in party strength, and the delegation included four Republicans and one Democrat.
Both county and municipal governments collect taxes, employ a separate police force, hold elections, and operate emergency response services within their jurisdiction.
It was much easier to leave the mistake as it was than for Texas to cede land to New Mexico to correct the original surveying error.
Among the state's largest industries, the aerospace sector generates $11 billion annually.
The magazine also placed Devon Energy as the second-largest company in the mining and crude oil-producing industry in the nation, while Chesapeake Energy ranks seventh respectively in that sector and Oklahoma Gas & Electric ranks as the 25th-largest gas and electric utility company.
The humid subtropical climate (Koppen ''Cfa'') of central, southern and eastern Oklahoma is influenced heavily by southerly winds bringing moisture from the Gulf of Mexico.
Oklahoma is located on a confluence of three major American cultural regions and historically served as a route for cattle drives, a destination for southern settlers, and a government-sanctioned territory for Native Americans.
The largest osteopathic teaching facility in the nation, Oklahoma State University Medical Center at Tulsa, also rates as one of the largest facilities in the field of neuroscience.
Korean, Arabic, Tagalog, Japanese (tied)
The ''New York Times'' rates the Tulsa Ballet as one of the top ballet companies in the United States.
The responsibilities of the Executive branch include submitting the budget, ensuring that state laws are enforced, and ensuring peace within the state is preserved.
Oklahoma is located in a humid subtropical region.
The Ozark and Ouachita Mountains rise from west to east over the state's eastern third, gradually increasing in elevation in an eastward direction.
Its western and eastern halves, however, are marked by extreme differences in geographical diversity: Eastern Oklahoma touches eight ecological regions and its western half contains three.
In total, aerospace accounts for more than 10 percent of Oklahoma's industrial output, and it is one of the top 10 states in aerospace engine manufacturing.
With small mountain ranges, prairie, mesas, and eastern forests, most of Oklahoma lies in the Great Plains, Cross Timbers and the U.S.
The tribal governments are required to submit a constitution and any subsequent amendments to the United States Congress for approval.
* Roman Catholic – 13%
Marshlands, sabal minor, cypress forests and mixtures of shortleaf pine, loblolly pine and deciduous forests dominate the state's southeastern quarter, while mixtures of largely post oak, elm, red cedar (''Juniperus virginiana'') and pine forests cover northeastern Oklahoma.
OG&E was the first electric company in Oklahoma to generate electricity from wind farms in 2003.
Usually land was open to settlers on a first come first served basis.
Interior Highlands region, the Ozark and Ouachita Mountains mark the only major mountainous region between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachians.
However, Oklahoma Democrats were generally considered to be more conservative than Democrats in other states.
Cherokee is an official language in the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area and in the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians.
The Cherokee Nation instigated a 10-year language preservation plan that involved growing new fluent speakers of the Cherokee language from childhood on up through school immersion programs as well as a collaborative community effort to continue to use the language at home.
Also, in southeastern Oklahoma lives the American alligator.
Two private institutions in Tulsa, the University of Tulsa and Oral Roberts University; are also Division I members.
Thirty-nine Native American tribal governments are based in Oklahoma, each holding limited powers within designated areas.
The Fair was held first on the south oval of the University of Oklahoma campus and in the third year moved to the Duck Pond in Norman until the Fair became too big and moved to Reaves Park in 2003.
According to the Pew Research Center, the majority of Oklahoma's religious adherents are Christian, accounting for about 80 percent of the population.
TBN, a Christian religious television network has a studio in Tulsa, and built their first entirely TBN-owned affiliate in Oklahoma City in 1980.
Oklahoma had 598 incorporated places in 2010, including four cities over 100,000 in population and 43 over 10,000.
Where rainfall is sparse in the western regions of the state, shortgrass prairie and shrublands are the most prominent ecosystems, though pinyon pines, red cedar (junipers), and ponderosa pines grow near rivers and creek beds in the far western reaches of the panhandle.
Other sites include the Santa Fe and Trail of Tears national historic trails, the Fort Smith and Washita Battlefield national historic sites, and the Oklahoma City National Memorial.
The state has a term limit for its legislature that restricts any one person to a total of twelve cumulative years service between both legislative branches.
The westernmost center of the Mississippian culture was Spiro Mounds, in what is now Spiro, Oklahoma, which flourished between AD 850 and 1450.
By 1890, more than 30 Native American nations and tribes had been concentrated on land within Indian Territory or "Indian Country".
Partial plains interrupted by small, sky island mountain ranges like the Antelope Hills and the Wichita Mountains dot southwestern Oklahoma; transitional prairie and oak savannahs cover the central portion of the state.
The Cancer Treatment Centers of America at Southwestern Regional Medical Center in Tulsa is one of four such regional facilities nationwide, offering cancer treatment to the entire southwestern United States, and is one of the largest cancer treatment hospitals in the country.
CityRep is a professional company affording equity points to those performers and technical theatre professionals.
* State rock: Rose rock
Oklahoma has four primary mountain ranges: the Ouachita Mountains, the Arbuckle Mountains, the Wichita Mountains, and the Ozark Mountains.
Oklahoma is between the Great Plains and the Ozark Plateau in the Gulf of Mexico watershed, generally sloping from the high plains of its western boundary to the low wetlands of its southeastern boundary.
The ''Tulsa World'', the second-most widely circulated newspaper in Oklahoma and 79th in the nation, holds a Sunday circulation of 132,969 and a weekday readership of 93,558.
238,732 Oklahoma residents reported speaking a language other than English in the 2,000 census, about 7.4% of the total population of the state.
With 39,000 acres (158&nbsp;km2), the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve in north-central Oklahoma is the largest protected area of tallgrass prairie in the world and is part of an ecosystem that encompasses only 10 percent of its former land area, once covering 14 states.
Both ports are located on the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System, which connects barge traffic from Tulsa and Muskogee to the Mississippi River via the Verdigris and Arkansas rivers, contributing to one of the busiest waterways in the world.
Contained within the U.S.
Although having fewer ecological regions Western Oklahoma contains many rare, relic species.
During the 1930s, parts of the state began suffering the consequences of poor farming practices, extended drought and high winds.
Enid and Lawton host professional basketball teams in the USBL and the CBA.
This plan was part of an ambitious goal that in 50 years, 80% or more of the Cherokee people will be fluent in the language.
Other local government units include school districts, technology center districts, community college districts, rural fire departments, rural water districts, and other special use districts.
While each municipality operates as a separate and independent local government with executive, legislative and judicial power, county governments maintain jurisdiction over both incorporated cities and non-incorporated areas within their boundaries, but have executive power but no legislative or judicial power.
The Cross Timbers, a region transitioning from prairie to woodlands in Central Oklahoma, harbors 351 vertebrate species.
Oklahoma supports teams in several minor leagues, including Minor League Baseball at the AAA and AA levels (Oklahoma City Dodgers and Tulsa Drillers, respectively), hockey's ECHL with the Tulsa Oilers, and a number of indoor football leagues.
A portion of the Flint Hills stretches into north-central Oklahoma, and near the state's eastern border, Cavanal Hill is regarded by the Oklahoma Tourism & Recreation Department as the world's tallest hill; at 1,999&nbsp;feet (609&nbsp;m), it fails their definition of a mountain by one foot.
With a population of 8.6% Native American in the state, it is also worth noting that most Native American precincts vote Democratic in margins exceeded only by African Americans.
Republican Markwayne Mullin won the election, making the state's congressional delegation entirely Republican.
In 1881, four of five major cattle trails on the western frontier traveled through Indian Territory.
German has 13,444 speakers representing about 0.4% of the total state population, and Vietnamese is spoken by 11,330 people, or about 0.4% of the population, many of whom live in the Asia District of Oklahoma City.
Oklahoma's gross domestic product per capita was $35,480 in 2010, which was ranked 40th among the states.
The name ''Oklahoma'' comes from the Choctaw phrase ''okla'' ''humma'', literally meaning ''red people''.
In addition to having a prevalence of English, German, Scottish, Scotch-Irish, and Native American ancestry, more than 25 Native American languages are spoken in Oklahoma, second only to California.
The Tulsa Race Riot broke out in 1921, with whites attacking blacks.
Oklahoma is host to a diverse range of sectors including aviation, energy, transportation equipment, food processing, electronics, and telecommunications.
Tulsa competes in FBS football and other sports in the American Athletic Conference, while Oral Roberts, which does not sponsor football, is a member of The Summit League.
Native North American languages
* State tree: Eastern redbud
By the 1960s, Oklahoma had created more than 200 lakes, the most in the nation.
The phrase "Trail of Tears" originated from a description of the removal of the Choctaw Nation in 1831, although the term is usually used for the Cherokee removal.
The interactions between these three contrasting air currents produces severe weather (severe thunderstorms, damaging thunderstorm winds, large hail and tornadoes) with a frequency virtually unseen anywhere else on planet Earth.
Of the state's ten largest cities, three are outside the metropolitan areas of Oklahoma City and Tulsa, and only Lawton has a metropolitan statistical area of its own as designated by the United States Census Bureau, though the metropolitan statistical area of Fort Smith, Arkansas extends into the state.
Known as the Dust Bowl, areas of Kansas, Texas, New Mexico and northwestern Oklahoma were hampered by long periods of little rainfall and abnormally high temperatures, sending thousands of farmers into poverty and forcing them to relocate to more fertile areas of the western United States.
In one of the costliest episodes of racial violence in American history, sixteen hours of rioting resulted in 35 city blocks destroyed, $1.8 million in property damage, and a death toll estimated to be as high as 300 people.
Social tensions were exacerbated by the revival of the Ku Klux Klan after 1915.
Most of the state lies in an area known as Tornado Alley characterized by frequent interaction between cold, dry air from Canada, warm to hot, dry air from Mexico and the Southwestern U.S., and warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico.
The percentage of Oklahomans affiliated with Catholicism is half of the national average, while the percentage affiliated with Evangelical Protestantism is more than twice the national average – tied with Arkansas for the largest percentage of any state.
Tulsa is the base for the Tulsa Revolution, which plays in the American Indoor Soccer League.
The Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge is the oldest and largest of nine national wildlife refuges in the state and was founded in 1901, encompassing 59,020 acres (238.8&nbsp;km2).
* State rock song: "Do You Realize??"
Cimarron County in Oklahoma's panhandle is the only county in the United States that touches four other states: New Mexico, Texas, Colorado and Kansas.
Spanish is the second-most commonly spoken language in the state, with 141,060 speakers counted in 2000.
It was then set along the 103rd Meridian.
The Oklahoma/New Mexico border is actually 2.1 to 2.2 miles east of the Texas line.
Oklahoma also has a rich African American history.
In 2006, there were more than 220 newspapers located in the state, including 177 with weekly publications and 48 with daily publications.
During this time, it was also carried by every winning Democratic candidate up to Harry Truman.
Its highest and lowest points follow this trend, with its highest peak, Black Mesa, at 4,973 feet (1,516&nbsp;m) above sea level, situated near its far northwest corner in the Oklahoma Panhandle.
Regular LPGA tournaments are held at Cedar Ridge Country Club in Tulsa, and major championships for the PGA or LPGA have been played at Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa, Oak Tree Country Club in Oklahoma City, and Cedar Ridge Country Club in Tulsa.
In 2006, there were more than 500 radio stations in Oklahoma broadcasting with various local or nationally owned networks.
forests; the region has a rolling to flat landscape with intermittent canyons and mesa ranges like the Glass Mountains.
Oklahoma City University School of Law, University of Oklahoma College of Law, and University of Tulsa College of Law are the state's only ABA accredited institutions.
In the process, railroad companies took nearly half of Indian-held land within the territory for outside settlers and for purchase.
'''Monthly temperatures for Oklahoma's largest cities'''
There were many black towns that thrived in the early 20th century because of black settlers moving from neighboring states, especially Kansas.
The cities of Norman, Lawton, and Stillwater, among others, also host well-reviewed community theatre companies.
''Oklahoma'' later became the de facto name for Oklahoma Territory, and it was officially approved in 1890, two years after the area was opened to white settlers.
In 2010, Oklahoma City-based Love's Travel Stops & Country Stores ranked 18th on the Forbes list of largest private companies, Tulsa-based QuikTrip ranked 37th, and Oklahoma City-based Hobby Lobby ranked 198th in 2010 report.
Tulsa International Airport, the state's second-largest commercial airport, served more than 1.3 million boardings in 2010.
Rated one of the top golf courses in the nation, Southern Hills has hosted four PGA Championships, including one in 2007, and three U.S.
Both University of Oklahoma and University of Tulsa are Tier 1 institutions, with the University of Oklahoma ranked 68th and the University of Tulsa ranked 86th in the nation.
On November 16, 1907, Oklahoma became the 46th state to enter the union.
The Oklahoma City Thunder of the National Basketball Association (NBA) is the state's only major league sports franchise.
It is one of six states on the Frontier Strip and lies partly in the Great Plains near the geographical center of the 48 contiguous states.
In 2008, Interstate 44 in Oklahoma City was Oklahoma's busiest highway, with a daily traffic volume of 123,300 cars.
With an educational system made up of public school districts and independent private institutions, Oklahoma had 638,817 students enrolled in 1,845 public primary, secondary, and vocational schools in 533 school districts .
In 2010, the state had the nation's third highest number of bridges classified as structurally deficient, with nearly 5,212 bridges in disrepair, including 235 National Highway System Bridges.
The House passed HCR 1024, which will change the state motto from "Labor Omnia Vincit" to "Oklahoma-In God We Trust!"
Between 2000 and 2010, the cities that led the state in population growth were Blanchard (172.4%), Elgin (78.2%), Jenks (77.0%), Piedmont (56.7%), Bixby (56.6%), and Owasso (56.3%).
* State soil: Port Silt Loam
Oklahoma is the 20th-most extensive and the 28th-most populous of the 50 United States.
Most of the state lies in two primary drainage basins belonging to the Red and Arkansas rivers, though the Lee and Little rivers also contain significant drainage basins.
Oklahoma State University, the University of Oklahoma, the University of Central Oklahoma, and Northeastern State University are the largest public institutions of higher education in Oklahoma, operating through one primary campus and satellite campuses throughout the state.
Of these students, 18,892 received a bachelor's degree, 5,386 received a master's degree, and 462 received a first professional degree.
This type of phenomenon is also responsible for many of the tornadoes in the area, such as the 1912 Oklahoma tornado outbreak, when a warm front traveled along a stalled cold front, resulting in an average of about one tornado per hour over the course of a day.
The state is home to the Storm Prediction Center, the National Severe Storms Laboratory, and the Warning Decision Training Branch, all part of the National Weather Service and located in Norman.
Surveying techniques were not as accurate in 1819, and the actual 103rd Meridian was approximately 2.2 miles to the east.
Oklahoma is connected to the nation's rail network via Amtrak's ''Heartland Flyer'', its only regional passenger rail line.
Oklahoma is in the nation's middle percentile in per capita spending on the arts, ranking 17th, and contains more than 300 museums.
The Egyptian art collection at the Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art in Shawnee is considered to be the finest Egyptian collection between Chicago and Los Angeles.
In 2006, Tulsa's Oktoberfest was named one of the top 10 in the world by ''USA Today'' and one of the top German food festivals in the nation by ''Bon Appetit'' magazine.
Oklahoma is the 20th-largest state in the United States, covering an area of 69,898 square miles (181,035&nbsp;km2), with 68,667 square miles (177847&nbsp;km2) of land and 1,281 square miles (3,188&nbsp;km2) of water.
