The site has been commemorated as the Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum.
Oklahoma City also has several major national and state highways within its city limits.
Oklahoma City has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: Cfa), with frequent variations in weather daily and seasonally, except during the consistently hot and humid summer months.
Lake Hefner Parkway runs through northwest Oklahoma City, while Airport Road runs through southwest Oklahoma City and leads to Will Rogers World Airport.
In 2014, ''Forbes'' ranked Oklahoma City No.
Its Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) has a medical education division responsible for aeromedical education in general as well as the education of aviation medical examiners in the U.S. and 93 other countries.
The blast and catastrophic collapse killed 168 people and injured over 680.
This also allows the central portion of the city to expand south and connect with the shore of the Oklahoma River.
The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.11.
Focusing on the form and function of the skeletal system, this  museum displays hundreds of skulls and skeletons from all corners of the world.
The median income for a household in the city was $48,557 and the median income for a family was $62,527.
Prolonged and severe droughts (sometimes leading to wildfires in the vicinity) as well as very heavy rainfall leading to flash flooding and flooding occur with some regularity.
Minimum staffing per shift is 213 personnel.
In 2013, ''Forbes'' ranked Oklahoma City No.
Casady School and Heritage Hall School are both examples of a private college preparatory school with vigorous academics that range among the top in Oklahoma.
After an arrival to Oklahoma City for the 2008–09 season, the Oklahoma City Thunder secured a berth (8th) in the 2010 NBA Playoffs the next year after boasting its first 50-win season, winning two games in the first round against the Los Angeles Lakers.
On April 19, 1995, the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building was destroyed by a fertilizer bomb manufactured and detonated by Timothy McVeigh.
In 1928, WKY was purchased by E.K.
Lake Stanley Draper is the city's largest and most remote lake.
The city is bisected geographically and culturally by the North Canadian River, which basically divides North Oklahoma City and South Oklahoma City.
Oklahoma City is protected by the Oklahoma City Fire Department (OKCFD), which employs 1015 paid, professional firefighters.
Located in the Frontier Country region of the state, the city's northeast section lies in an ecological region known as the Cross Timbers.
Every year on April 19, survivors, families and friends return to the memorial to read the names of each person lost.
Oklahoma City was home to several pioneers in radio and television broadcasting.
The Oklahoma City metropolitan area is one of the most tornado-prone major cities in the world, with about 150 tornadoes striking within the city limits since 1890.
17.1% of the population and 12.4% of families were below the poverty line.
INTEGRIS Health owns several hospitals, including INTEGRIS Baptist Medical Center, the INTEGRIS Cancer Institute of Oklahoma, and the INTEGRIS Southwest Medical Center.
The per capita income for the city was $26,208.
The team ultimately returned to New Orleans full-time for the 2007–08 season.
On May 20, 2013, far southwest Oklahoma City, along with Newcastle and Moore, was hit again by a EF5 tornado; it was  wide and killed 23 people.
The state of Oklahoma hosts a highly competitive high school football culture, with many teams in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area.
The Oklahoma History Center is the history museum of the state of Oklahoma.
Oklahoma City is home to the American Banjo Museum, which houses a large collection of highly decorated banjos from the early 20th century and exhibits on the history of the banjo and its place in American history.
Some 10,000 homesteaders settled the area that would become the capital of Oklahoma.
The city added a new baseball park; central library; renovations to the civic center, convention center and fairgrounds; and a water canal in the Bricktown entertainment district.
The Oklahoma City Police Department, has a uniformed force of 1,169 officers and 300+ civilian employees.
Being in the center of what is colloquially referred to as Tornado Alley, it is prone to especially frequent and severe tornadoes, as well as very severe hailstorms and occasional derechoes.
In addition, there is a magazine published by ''Back40 Design Group'' called ''The Edmond Outlook''.
The outdoor Symbolic Memorial can be visited 24 hours a day for free, and the adjacent Memorial Museum, located in the former ''Journal Record'' building damaged by the bombing, can be entered for a small fee.
Southern Nazarene University, which was founded by the Church of the Nazarene, is a university located in suburban Bethany, which is surrounded by the Oklahoma City city limits.
Oklahoma City area schools in this division include: Edmond North, Mustang, Moore, Yukon, Edmond Memorial, Edmond Santa Fe, Norman North, Westmoore, Southmoore, Putnam City North, Norman, Putnam City, Putnam City West, U.S. Grant, Midwest City.
The district's Classen School of Advanced Studies and Harding Charter Preparatory High School rank high among public schools nationally according to a formula that looks at the number of Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate and/or Cambridge tests taken by the school's students divided by the number of graduating seniors.
The town grew quickly; the population doubled between 1890 and 1900.
"The Brick", as it is locally known, is considered one of the finest minor league parks in the nation.
In the American College of Sports Medicine's annual ranking of the United States' 50 most populous metropolitan areas on the basis of community health, Oklahoma City took last place in 2010, falling five places from its 2009 rank of 45.
Since the time weather records have been kept, Oklahoma City has been struck by thirteen violent tornadoes, eleven F/EF4s and two F/EF5.
Eight councilpersons represent each of the eight wards of Oklahoma City.
Oklahoma City is the annual host of the Big 12 Baseball Tournament, the World Cup of Softball, and the annual NCAA Women's College World Series.
The city boasts a number of private and parochial schools.
In 2008, ''Forbes'' magazine named Oklahoma City the most "recession proof city in America".
Oklahoma City has a major park in each quadrant of the city, going back to the first parks masterplan.
The majority of the east shore area is taken up by parks and trails, including a new leashless dog park and the postwar-era Stars and Stripes Park.
Oklahoma City also has a combination racetrack and casino open year-round, Remington Park, which hosts both Quarter horse (March – June) and Thoroughbred (August – December) seasons.
In March 2009, the Mat Hoffman Action Sports Park was named by the National Geographic Society Travel Guide as one of the "Ten Best."
Consistent northerly winds during the winter can intensify cold periods.
There are numerous community and international newspapers locally that cater to the city's ethnic mosaic; such as ''The Black Chronicle'', headquartered in the Eastside, the OK VIETIMES and ''Oklahoma Chinese Times'', located in Asia District, and various Hispanic community publications.
The magazine reported that the city had falling unemployment, one of the strongest housing markets in the country and solid growth in energy, agriculture and manufacturing.
Beginning with the largest, the classes are: 6A, 5A, 4A, 3A, 2A, A, B, and C. Class 6A is broken into two divisions.
It was the deadliest terror attack in the history of the United States until the attacks of September 11, 2001, and remains the deadliest act of domestic terrorism in U.S. history.
The American Banjo Museum located in the Bricktown Entertainment district is dedicated to preserving and promoting the music and heritage of the banjo.
News & World Report''s 2012 list of Best Hospitals.
In 1950, the Census Bureau reported city's population as 8.6% black and 90.7% white.
Several elements of "Core to Shore" were included in the MAPS 3 proposal approved by voters in late 2009.
There are 347 physicians for every 100,000 people in the city.
The Dale Rogers Training Center in Oklahoma City is a nonprofit vocational training center for individuals with disabilities.
Private career and technology education schools in Oklahoma City include Oklahoma Technology Institute, Platt College, Vatterott College, and Heritage College.
The major U.S. broadcast television networks have affiliates in the Oklahoma City market (ranked 41st for television by Nielsen and 48th for radio by Arbitron, covering a 34-county area serving the central, northern-central and west-central sections Oklahoma); including NBC affiliate KFOR-TV (channel 4), ABC affiliate KOCO-TV (channel 5), CBS affiliate KWTV-DT (channel 9, the flagship of locally based Griffin Communications), PBS station KETA-TV (channel 13, the flagship of the state-run OETA member network), Fox affiliate KOKH-TV (channel 25), CW affiliate KOCB (channel 34), independent station KAUT-TV (channel 43), MyNetworkTV affiliate KSBI-TV (channel 52), and Ion Television owned-and-operated station KOPX-TV (channel 62).
In the 1990s, as part of the citywide revitalization project known as MAPS, the city built a series of low-water dams, returning water to the portion of the river flowing near downtown.
Frontier City also hosts a national concert circuit at its amphitheater during the summer.
Less than two weeks later, on May 31, another outbreak affected the Oklahoma City area, including an EF1 and an EF0 within the city and an EF3 tornado several miles west of the city that was  in width, the widest tornado ever recorded.
Langston also has an urban campus in the eastside section of the city.
The current Chief of Department is G. Keith Bryant, the department is also commanded by three Deputy Chiefs, who – along with the department chief – oversee the Operational Services, Prevention Services, and Support Services bureaus.
OCU Law is located in the Midtown district near downtown, in the old Central High School building.
In April 2005, the Oklahoma City Skate Park at Wiley Post Park was renamed the Mat Hoffman Action Sports Park to recognize Mat Hoffman, an Oklahoma City area resident and businessman that was instrumental in the design of the skate park and is a 10-time BMX World Vert champion.
Oklahoma City Community College in south Oklahoma City is the second-largest community college in the state.
In mid-2002, WKY radio was purchased outright by Citadel Broadcasting, who was bought out by Cumulus Broadcasting in 2011.
The Oklahoma School of Science and Mathematics, a school for some of the state's most gifted math and science pupils, is also located in Oklahoma City.
Northwest Expressway (Oklahoma State Highway 3) runs from North Classen Boulevard in north-central Oklahoma City to the northwestern suburbs.
INTEGRIS Health operates hospitals, rehabilitation centers, physician clinics, mental health facilities, independent living centers and home health agencies located throughout much of Oklahoma.
By the time Oklahoma was admitted to the Union in 1907, Oklahoma City had surpassed Guthrie, the territorial capital, as the population center and commercial hub of the new state.
METRO Transit maintains limited coverage of the city's main street grid using a hub-and-spoke system from the main terminal, making many journeys impractical due to the rather small number of bus routes offered and that most trips require a transfer downtown.
The main transfer terminal is located downtown at NW 5th Street and Hudson Avenue.
It was also aided by federal development of Tinker Air Force Base.
For every 100 females there were 95.6 males.
One of the more prominent landmarks downtown is the Crystal Bridge at the Myriad Botanical Gardens, a large downtown urban park.
The main suspect, Timothy McVeigh, was executed by lethal injection on June 11, 2001.
Northeast of the city is Langston University, the state's historically black college (HBCU).
In September 2013, Oklahoma City area attorney David Slane announced that he would pursue legal action regarding MAPS3, on claims that the multiple projects that made up the plan violate a state constitutional law limiting voter ballot issues to a single subject.
In 2007, following a renovation of the stage, Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park relocated to the Myriad Gardens.
Exhibits include adaptation, locomotion, classification and diversity of the vertebrate kingdom.
Downtown Oklahoma City, which has 7,600 residents, is currently seeing an influx of new private investment and large scale public works projects, which have helped to resuscitate a central business district left almost deserted by the Oil Bust of the early 1980s.
The city was the scene of the April 19, 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, in which 168 people died.
In addition, The National Academy of Science offers Research Associateship Programs for fellowship and other grants for CAMI research.
Although technically not a university, the FAA's Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center has many aspects of an institution of higher learning.
It contains local commentary and human interest pieces direct-mailed to over 50,000 Edmond residents.
In addition to commuter rail, a short heritage rail line that would run from Bricktown just a few blocks away from the Amtrak station to the Adventure District in northeast Oklahoma City is currently under reconstruction.
Oklahoma City once was the crossroads of several interstate passenger railroads, but service at that level has long since been discontinued.
Through zoning regulations, historic districts, and other special zoning districts, including overlay districts, are established.
Oklahoma City also has two amusement parks, Frontier City theme park and White Water Bay water park.
Oklahoma City's WKY Radio was the first radio station transmitting west of the Mississippi River and the third radio station in the United States.
The Oklahoma City National Memorial in the northern part of Oklahoma City's downtown was created as the inscription on its eastern gate of the Memorial reads, "to honor the victims, survivors, rescuers, and all who were changed forever on April 19, 1995"; the memorial was built on the land formerly occupied by the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building complex prior to its 1995 bombing.
On May 3, 1999 parts of southern Oklahoma City and nearby suburban communities suffered from one of the most powerful tornadoes on record, an F5 on the Fujita scale, with wind speeds estimated by radar at .
Oklahoma City is the principal city of the eight-county Oklahoma City Metropolitan Statistical Area in Central Oklahoma and is the state's largest urbanized area.
The Bricktown district is the best example of such an initiative.
IPHF honors those who have made significant contributions to the art and/or science of photography and relocated to St. Louis, Missouri in 2013.
In the 2000 Census, Oklahoma City's age composition was 25.5% under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 30.8% from 25 to 44, 21.5% from 45 to 64, and 11.5% who were 65 years of age or older.
Soon after, the capital was moved from Guthrie to Oklahoma City.
Providence Hall is a Protestant school.
The city has called on residents to vote for sales tax-based projects to revitalize parts of the city.
Across Oklahoma and Texas generally, there was record flooding in the latter part of the month
Walking trails line Lake Hefner and Lake Overholser in the northwest part of the city and downtown at the canal and the Oklahoma River.
Tornadoes have occurred in every month of the year and a secondary smaller peak also occurs during autumn, especially October.
The Myriad Gardens will undergo a massive renovation in conjunction with the recently built Devon Tower directly north of it.
There were 256,930 housing units at an average density of 375.9 per square mile (145.1/km²).
Oklahoma City is one of the largest cities in the nation in compliance with the Clean Air Act.
Business districts, and to a lesser extent, neighborhoods tend to maintain their boundaries and character through the application of zoning regulations and business improvement districts (districts where property owners agree to a property tax surcharge to support additional services for the community).
The Thunder is led by second year head coach Billy Donovan and is anchored by All-Star point guard Russell Westbrook.
The city has held the 2005 NCAA Men's Basketball First and Second round and hosted the Big 12 Men's and Women's Basketball Tournaments in 2007 and 2009.
The OU Medicine hosting the state's only Level-One trauma center.
The centerpiece of downtown is the newly renovated Crystal Bridge and Myriad Botanical Gardens, one of the few elements of the Pei Plan to be completed.
Severe ice storms and snowstorms happen sporadically during the winter.
OU Medicine, an academic medical institution located on the campus of The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, is home to OU Medical Center.
As a result of MAPS, the population living in downtown housing has exponentially increased, together with demand for additional residential and retail amenities, such as grocery, services, and shops.
''The Oklahoman'' is Oklahoma City's major daily newspaper and is the most widely circulated in the state.
Consistent winds, usually from the south or south-southeast during the summer, help temper the hotter weather.
8 on its list of the Best Places for Business and Careers.
Post-war growth accompanied the construction of the Interstate Highway System, which made Oklahoma City a major interchange as the convergence of I-35, I-40 and I-44.
The park has an amphitheater, known as the Water Stage.
NewsOK.com is the Oklahoman's online presence.
South Oklahoma City is generally more blue collar working class and significantly more industrial, having grown up around the Stockyards and meat packing plants at the turn of the century, and is currently the center of the city's rapidly growing Latino community.
Due to Oklahoma City's explosive growth, parts of several suburban districts spill into the city, including Putnam City School District in the northwest, Moore Public Schools in the south, and Mid-Del School District in the southeast.
The Hornets played their final home game in Oklahoma City during the exhibition season on October 9, 2007 against the Houston Rockets.
''The Campus'' is the student newspaper at Oklahoma City University.
The greater Oklahoma City metropolitan transit plan identified from the Fixed Guideway Study includes streetcar in the downtown section that would be fed by enhanced city bus service and commuter rail from the suburbs including Edmond, Norman, and Midwest City.
The park also features a recreation of a western gunfight at the 'OK Corral' and many shops that line the "Western" town's main street.
Oklahoma City is home to the state's largest school district, Oklahoma City Public Schools.
Mick Cornett serves as Mayor, having first been elected in 2004, and re-elected in 2006, 2010, and 2014.
The team became the first NBA franchise to play regular-season games in the state of Oklahoma.
INTEGRIS Baptist Medical Center was named in ''U.S.
A notable exception was the city's construction of the Myriad Gardens and Crystal Bridge, a botanical garden and modernistic conservatory in the heart of downtown.
There were 230,233 households, 29.4% of which had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.4% were married couples living together, 13.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.4% were non-families.
One, Harold Stafford, died in a motorcycle accident in Tulsa not long after the restaurant murders.
With 19.48 inches of rainfall, May 2015 was by far Oklahoma City's record-wettest month since record keeping began in 1890.
''Oklahoma Gazette'' is Oklahoma City's independent newsweekly, featuring such staples as local commentary, feature stories, restaurant reviews and movie listings and music and entertainment.
Early leaders of the development of the city included Anton Classen, John Shartel, Henry Overholser and James W. Maney.
Other theaters include Lyric Theatre, Jewel Box Theatre, Kirkpatrick Auditorium, the Poteet Theatre, the Oklahoma City Community College Bruce Owen Theater and the 488-seat Petree Recital Hall, at the Oklahoma City University campus.
Before World War II, Oklahoma City developed major stockyards, attracting jobs and revenue formerly in Chicago and Omaha, Nebraska.
Each engine is staffed with a driver, an officer, and one to two firefighters, while each ladder company is staffed with a driver, an officer, and one firefighter.
City Manager Jim Couch was appointed in late 2000.
Other private schools include Crossings Christian School.
In 2014 Oklahoma City again reached the NBA's Western Conference Finals but eventually lost to the San Antonio Spurs in six games.
Oklahoma City currently has three business improvement districts, including one encompassing the central business district.
Oklahoma City, lying in the Great Plains region, features one of the largest livestock markets in the world.
The city ranks as the eighth-largest city in the United States by land area (including consolidated city-counties; it is the largest city in the United States by land area whose government is not consolidated with that of a county or borough).
The site is also home to the National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism, a non-partisan, nonprofit think tank devoted to the prevention of terrorism.
The population grew following the 2010 Census, with the population estimated to have increased to 631,346 as of July 2015.
Latting was also the first woman to serve as mayor of a U.S. city with over 350,000 residents.
Oklahoma City has experienced significant population increases since the late 1990s.
KIPP Reach College Preparatory School in Oklahoma City received the 2012 National Blue Ribbon along with its school leader, Tracy McDaniel Sr., being awarded the Terrel H. Bell Award for Outstanding Leadership.
Another, Verna Stafford, was sentenced to life without parole after being granted a new trial after she had previously been sentenced to death.
The Oklahoma City Zoo and Botanical Garden is home to numerous natural habitats, WPA era architecture and landscaping, and hosts major touring concerts during the summer at its amphitheater.
In the recent MAPS 3 vote, the city's fraternal order of police criticized the project proposals for not doing enough to expand the police presence to keep up with the growing residential population and increased commercial activity.
Other major sporting events include Thoroughbred and Quarter horse racing circuits at Remington Park and numerous horse shows and equine events that take place at the state fairgrounds each year.
In 1993, the city passed a massive redevelopment package known as the Metropolitan Area Projects (MAPS), intended to rebuild the city's core with civic projects to establish more activities and life to downtown.
An upscale lifestyle publication called ''Slice Magazine'' is circulated throughout the metropolitan area.
The population density was 956.4 inhabitants per square mile (321.9/km²).
The median age was 34 years.
The blast shockwave destroyed or damaged 324 buildings within a 340-meter radius, destroyed or burned 86 cars, and shattered glass in 258 nearby buildings, causing at least an estimated $652&nbsp;million worth of damage.
The Department has a central police station and five substations covering 2,500 police reporting districts that average 1/4 square mile in size.
The worst of which occurred in 1978, when six employees of a Sirloin Stockade restaurant on the city's south side were murdered execution-style in the restaurant's freezer.
Several downtown buildings are undergoing renovation/restoration.
In the next few years a massive new central park will link the gardens near the CBD and the new convention center to be built just south of it to the North Canadian River, as part of a massive works project known as ''Core to Shore''; the new park is part of MAPS3, a collection of civic projects funded by a 1-cent temporary (seven-year) sales tax increase.
Gaylord Boulevard in downtown Oklahoma City and runs south eventually connecting to I-35 near the suburb of Moore.
The art deco Civic Center Music Hall, which was totally renovated in 2001, has performances from the Oklahoma City Ballet, the Oklahoma City Opera, the Oklahoma City Philharmonic and also various concerts and traveling Broadway shows.
The University of Oklahoma has several institutions of higher learning in the city and metropolitan area, with OU Medicine and the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center campuses located east of downtown in the Oklahoma Health Center district, and the main campus located to the south in the suburb of Norman.
Located nearby in Bricktown, the Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark is the home to the city's baseball team, the Dodgers.
Martin Park Nature Center is a natural habitat in far northwest Oklahoma City.
Water taxis transport passengers within the district, adding color and activity along the canal.
Since the MAPS projects' completion, the downtown area has seen continued development.
The north side is characterized by very diverse and fashionable urban neighborhoods near the city center and sprawling suburbs further north.
This is the first ever grant for Oklahoma City for rail-based initiative and is thought to be somewhat of a turning point by city leaders who have previously applied for grants only to continuously be denied.
The average temperature is , with the monthly daily average ranging from  in January to  in July.
The Oklahoma City Thunder of the National Basketball Association (NBA) has called Oklahoma City home since the 2008–09 season, when owner Clay Bennett relocated the franchise from Seattle, Washington.
Greyhound and several other intercity bus companies serve Oklahoma City at the Union Bus Station in downtown.
The Museum of Osteology houses more than 300 real animal skeletons.
The county seat of Oklahoma County, the city ranks 27th among United States cities in population.
Black or African American
The market is also home to several religious stations including TBN owned-and-operated station KTBO-TV (channel 14) and Norman-based Daystar owned-and-operated station KOCM (channel 46).
Hispanic or Latino (of any race)
It is believed the streetcar would begin construction in 2014 and be in operation around 2017.
Oklahoma City's city-limits extend into Canadian, Cleveland, and Pottawatomie counties, though much of those areas outside of the core Oklahoma County area are suburban or rural (watershed).
The OKCFD currently operates out of 37 fire stations, located throughout the city in six battalions.
With the 1928 discovery of oil within the city limits (including under the State Capitol), Oklahoma City became a major center of oil production.
The city receives about  of precipitation annually, of which  is snow.
Urban renewal projects in the 1970s, including the Pei Plan, removed many older historic structures but failed to spark much new development, leaving the city dotted with vacant lots used for parking.
7 on its list of Best Places for Business.
The Science Museum Oklahoma (formerly Kirkpatrick Science and Air Space Museum at Omniplex) houses exhibits on science, aviation, and an IMAX theater.
MAPS has become one of the most successful public-private partnerships undertaken in the U.S., exceeding $3&nbsp;billion in private investment as of 2010.
Gaylord's Oklahoma Publishing Company and affiliated with the NBC Red Network; in 1949, WKY-TV (channel 4) went on the air and later became the first independently owned television station in the U.S. to broadcast in color.
The third-largest university in the state, the University of Central Oklahoma, is located just north of the city in the suburb of Edmond.
