in the Austro-Bavarian dialect).
* '''''Bodo's Cafezelt''''' – Don’t come to Bodo’s looking for beer.
The City of Munich supported the showman foundation with a contribution of €200,000, so it could run a museum tent, a velodrome, as well as a children's program.
Beginning in 1950, the festival has always been opened with the same traditional procedure: A twelve-gun salute and the tapping of the first keg of Oktoberfest beer at 12:00&nbsp;p.m. by the incumbent Mayor of Munich with the proclamation "''O'zapft is!''"
In 1813, the festival was canceled due to the involvement of Bavaria in the Napoleonic Wars, after which the Oktoberfest grew from year to year.
After the Oktoberfest the next largest public fairs in Germany are the ''Cannstatter Volksfest'' in Stuttgart with about 4.5&nbsp;million visitors each year, the ''Cranger Kirmes'' in Herne (Wanne-Eickel) (the largest fair in Northrhine-Westphalia) with 4.4&nbsp;million visitors, the Rheinkirmes in Düsseldorf (called largest fair on the Rhine) and the ''Freimarkt'' in Bremen (the biggest fair in northern Germany) with over 4&nbsp;million visitors per year each.
As such, if the first Sunday in October falls on the 1st or the 2nd, then the festival would run until October 3 (German Unity Day).
A so-called ''historische Wiesn'' (historical Oktoberfest) took place, starting one day earlier than usual on the southern part of the festival grounds.
Traditionally, the Bavarian Minister-President is served the first liter of beer.
After the bombing in 1980, the main entrance of the Oktoberfest was redesigned in 1981.
''Kronprinz'' Ludwig (1786-1868), later King Ludwig I (reign: 1825-1848), married Princess Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen on October 12, 1810.
For the anniversary, a horse race in historical costumes was held on opening day.
* '''''Wirtshaus im Schichtl''''' – The mayor Christian Ude once wrote: "An Oktoberfest without Schichtl is inconceivable.
The fairground, once outside the city, was chosen due to its natural suitability.
This amounts to about 13% of the daily electrical needs of the City of Munich.
* '''''Café Mohrenkopf''''' – Since 1950 Café Mohrenkopf has been baking cakes and pies fresh daily in the Oktoberfest tent.
Starting in 2008, a new Bavarian law was passed to ban smoking in all enclosed spaces open to the public.
The animal tent included, among other things, a petting zoo, and was managed by the Hellabrunn Zoo and the Bavarian Farmers Association.
* '''''Wildstuben''''' – The newest tent at Oktoberfest, you’ll appreciate the intricate details of the woodwork and the homey hunting-lodge ambiance.
Since 1950, this parade is organized annually and has become one of the highlights of the Oktoberfest and one of the worlds largest parades of its kind.
Since 1850, the parade has become an annual event and an important component of the Oktoberfest.
Every year, visitors eagerly await to see how many strokes the mayor needs to use before the first beer flows.
Before the race started, a performance was held in homage of the bridegroom and of the royal family in the form of a train of 16 pairs of children dressed in ''Wittelsbach'' costumes, and costumes from the then nine Bavarian townships and other regions.
To honour the marriage of Prince Ludwig and Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen, a parade took place for the first time in 1810.
In 1994, this longstanding schedule was modified in response to German reunification.
The Munich prosecutor tried to accuse the engineer, from TÜV Munich, of negligent injury, but the proceedings did not come to a conclusion.
Heinz Wurst- Und Hühnerbraterei
Horse races, in the tradition of the 15th-century ''Scharlachrennen'' (Scarlet Race at Karlstor), were held on October 17 to honor the newlyweds.
Consequently, the number of toilets was increased by 20% in 2005.
In 2010, the festival lasted until the first Monday in October (October 4), to mark the event's bicentennial.
This tent is noted for its huge tower, with a ''Maß'' of Paulaner beer sitting atop it.
The Sendlinger Hill (today ''Theresienhohe'') was used as a grandstand for 40,000 race spectators.
This is overshadowed by yet another tower where an even larger drinking lion sits.
Nevertheless, the parking situation around the festival grounds is critical.
In 1818, carnival booths appeared; the main prizes awarded were of silver, porcelain, and jewelry.
Only then can the other tents begin to serve beer.
The change in regulations was aimed in particular to benefit the large tents of the Oktoberfest: So, smoking in the tents is still legal, but the tents usually have non-smoking areas.
Poschners Hühner- Und Entenbraterei
Unlike the usual Oktoberfest, the Historic Wiesn closed at 8pm.
Held annually in Munich, Bavaria, Germany, it is a 16- to 18-day folk festival running from mid or late September to the first weekend in October, with more than 6 million people from around the world attending the event every year.
Bets are even made.
After heavy losses in the 2008 local elections, with the smoking ban being a big issue in political debates, the state's ruling party implemented general exemptions to beer tents and small pubs.
* '''''Zum Stiftl''''' – Zum Stiftl is famous for its traditional duck and roasted chicken dishes, cozy atmosphere, and daily entertainment.
* '''''Schiebl's Kaffeehaferl''''' – With seating for about 100, Schiebl’s comfy coffeehouse tent is a friendly meeting place for the whole family.
In 1881, booths selling ''bratwurst'' opened and the first beer was served in glass mugs in 1892.
Schiebl's Kaffeehaferl
The Oktoberfest anniversary was accompanied by an artistic and cultural program, in which for example the ''Biermösl Blosn'' (local entertainers) performed.
2010 brought the implementation of advances to the security plan, including three lockdown rings around the ''Theresienwiese'' as well as access control and flight bans over the festival grounds.
Also, backpacks and bags with a volume of more than 3 liters are no longer allowed on the festival grounds.
This tent is also known as ''Himmel der Bayern'' (Heaven of the Bavarians).
The station occasionally needs to be closed due to overcrowding after the closure of the beer tents.
There is also a wide variety of traditional foods including ''Hendl'' (roast chicken), ''Schweinebraten'' (roast pork), ''Schweinshaxe'' (grilled ham hock), ''Steckerlfisch'' (grilled fish on a stick), ''Würstl'' (sausages) along with ''Brezen'' (pretzels), ''Knödel'' (potato or bread dumplings), ''Käsespätzle'' (cheese noodles), ''Reiberdatschi'' (potato pancakes), ''Sauerkraut'' or ''Rotkohl/Blaukraut'' (red cabbage) along with such Bavarian delicacies as ''Obatzda'' (a spicy cheese-butter spread) and ''Weißwurst'' (a white sausage).
The festival grounds remained undeveloped except for the king’s tent.
After the parade of the restaurateurs on carriages from downtown to the festival grounds, at exactly 12:00 clock the lord mayor opens the first beer barrel in the Schottenhammel tent.
According to a City Council decision there will be an ''Oide Wiesn'' in 2015 before the Central Agricultural Exhibition claims the locations again on the Theresienwiese in 2016.
In 1938, after Hitler had annexed Austria and won the Sudetenland via the Munich Agreement, Oktoberfest was renamed to "''Großdeutsches Volksfest''" (German Empire folk festival), and as a showing of strength, the NS-regime transported people from Sudetenland to the ''Wiesn'' by the score.
The story of the entry of the Oktoberfest restaurateurs and breweries for the opening of the Oktoberfest began in 1887, when the then manager, Hans Steyrer, first marched from his meadow to the Tegernseer Landstrasse with his staff, a brass band and a load of beer to the Theresienwiese.
The sale of tobacco in the tents is now legal, but is widely boycotted by mutual agreement.
The beer (or wine) served in each is in the accompanying table.
In contrast to the other tents (which must close by 11&nbsp;pm), it is open until 12:30&nbsp;am, and it can be very difficult to gain admittance.
The mountains of rubbish are hauled away and the ways cleanly washed down each morning.
There is also a station for lost & found children, a lost property office, a security point for women and other public services.
The city fathers assumed responsibility for festival management in 1819, and it was decided that Oktoberfest be made an annual event.
The festival site had to be temporarily closed several times due to overcrowding.
Outside, it increased seats from 800 to 1,000.
In 1887, the parade of the Oktoberfest staff and breweries took place for the first time.
At the same time special parking outside the city is established, which can be reached by public transportation.
* '''''Fischer-Vroni''''' – Translates as "Fishers Veronika".
''Fisch'' is the German word for fish and this tent carries a huge selection on its menu.
On the first festival Sunday, 8000 participants march in the parade in their historic festival costumes from the Maximilianeum on a seven kilometer stretch to the festival grounds
In 1999 there were six and a half million visitors to the 42 hectare Theresienwiese.
* '''''Poschners Hühner- Und Entenbraterei''''' – Poschner’s famous roasted chicken and duck have been a tradition on the ''Wiesn'' for four generations.
The Mayor then gives the first litre of beer to the Minister-President of the State of Bavaria.
The beer mugs in the beer tents did not have the company logo of the breweries, but rather the inscription "Munich beer".
Two years later, Oktoberfest's 125th anniversary was celebrated with all the frills.
The Oktoberfest is an important part of Bavarian culture, having been held since 1810.
In 1870, the Franco-Prussian War again forced the cancellation of the festival.
Governmental authorities initiated numerous official inquires, purporting that a right-wing extremist, Gundolf Köhler, from Donaueschingen, a social outcast who was killed in the explosion, was the perpetrator.
Eight thousand people—mostly from Bavaria—and dressed in traditional costumes walk from Maximilian Street through the centre of Munich to the Oktoberfest grounds.
In 2004, a new service center was placed in the authorities court, in which the police, the Munich fire department, medical services, and a department of district administration is located.
The clubs and groups come mostly out of Bavaria, but also from other German states, Austria, Switzerland, Northern Italy and other European countries.
Jamming devices are, however, illegal in Germany, and Faraday cages made of copper would have been too expensive, so these ambitious plans were dropped, and signs were placed instead, warning toilet users not to use cellular phones in the stalls.
The citizens of Munich were invited to attend the festivities held on the fields in front of the city gates to celebrate the royal event.
In 2004 the queues outside the toilets became so long that the police had to regulate access.
Especially at night, the U- and S-Bahn trains are full.
Due to the numerous Italian visitors to the Oktoberfest, since 2005 officers from Bolzano, Italy are also present.
In addition, the front exit of the subway station Theresienwiese has been closed off.
The ''Münchner Verkehrsgesellschaft'' reports transporting almost four million visitors, to and from, the festival grounds each Oktoberfest.
In 1895, the Bavarian novelist Maximilian Schmidt organized another parade with 1,400 participants in 150 traditional costume groups.
For medical treatment of visitors, the Bavarian branch of the German Red Cross operates an aid facility and provides emergency medical care on the festival grounds, staffed with around 100 volunteer medics and doctors per day.
Käfer Wiesn-Schänke
The police can quickly divert the crowds, if needed, through radio communication, as well as close down train stations.
The more tufts of chamois hair on one's hat, the wealthier one was considered to be.
Heimer Hendl- und Entenbratere
The historic rides in 2013 required a 1 Euro fee.
Many Oktoberfest guests visit the quiet stalls in order to use their mobile phones.
Feisingers Ka's und Weinstubn
Café Kaiserschmarrn
Armbrustschützenzelt
Wirtshaus im Schichtl
Which is then followed by the decorated horse carriages and floats of the breweries and the carriages of the other restaurateurs and showmen.
* '''''Feisingers Ka's und Weinstubn''''' – Cheese and everything that complements it is the specialty of the house in this unique tent.
A substantial part of the tent is guaranteed to traditional ''Studentenverbindungen'' (a particular form of student fraternities) and outfitted with their distinctive colors and coats of arms.
In April/May it's the Munich ''Frühlingsfest'' (Spring Festival) and Tollwood Festival in December with 650,000 visitors.
During National Socialism, Oktoberfest was used as part of Nazi propaganda.
In 1933, Jews were forbidden to work on the ''Wiesn''.
Visitors also enjoy numerous attractions, such as amusement rides, sidestalls and games.
The city ring roads and highways around Munich are periodically blocked to allow only one lane of through traffic, which leads to massive traffic congestion.
Since its foundation, Oktoberfest has not been celebrated 24 times.
Another of the smaller tents.
With these rules, the organisers of the Oktoberfest were able to curb the tumultuous party mentality and preserve the traditional beer-tent atmosphere.
A specially brewed beer (solely available at the tents of the historical Oktoberfest), horse races, and a museum tent gave visitors an impression of how the event felt a century ago.
Before the festival officially starts, parades are held with the traditional marksmen's clubs, beer-tent waitresses, and landlords participating.
Actually there are two different parades which both end at the ''Theresienwiese''.
* '''''Heinz Wurst- Und Hühnerbraterei''''' – Since 1906, the Heinz Sausage and Chicken Grill has been a fixture on the ''Wiesn'', specializing in authentic Oktoberfest tradition.
Included in the price of admission, an animal tent and the racecourse could be visited next to the museum.
However, this account is strongly disputed by various groups.
For example, in 2003 the action, ''Sichere Wiesn für Mädchen und Frauen'' (Safe Oktoberfest for Girls and Women), was launched.
On the first Sunday of the festival, this tent hosts the hugely popular gay & lesbian party, Rosa Wiesn.
Instead you’ll find, exotic cocktails, Prosecco, champagne, coffee, donuts, ice cream, pastry, and strudel variations of all kinds.
Other cities across the world also hold Oktoberfest celebrations that are modelled after the original Munich event.
This worldly Bavarian patron was first sketched by Leo von Klenze in a classic style and Ludwig Michael Schwanthaler romanticised and "Germanised" the draft.
In 1811, a show was added to promote Bavarian agriculture.
The music bands from the beer tents accompany the parade.
* '''''Bräurosl''''' (Hacker-Pschorr) – Translates as "brewers Rosemary".
They start around 9.45 a.m. to 10.50 a.m.
2012 brought the banning of glass bottles after the increase in the number of injuries and cuts.
The musicians' tent increased the number of indoor seats from 1000 to 1,500.
* '''''Hofbräu-Festzelt''''' – The counterpart to the famous Hofbräuhaus, this tent is especially popular with Americans, Australians and New Zealanders.
The Bavariaring is closed off, to allow security forces adequate space to react.
Since 1850, the statue of Bavaria has watched over the Oktoberfest.
Most festival tents and rides use green electricity from ''Stadtwerke München'' in order to reduce pollution.
* '''''Ammer Hühner & Entenbraterei''''' – In 1885, poultry dealer Joseph Ammer was allowed to construct his small booth at the Oktoberfest, creating the world’s first chicken roastery.
The best performance is still two strokes (Christian Ude, 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013; Dieter Reiter, 2015, 2016), and there was also 19 strokes required (Thomas Wimmer, 1950).
Approximately 1,800 toilets and urinals are available today.
They serve together with special detachments of Munich police, the fire department and other municipal authorities in the service centre at the ''Behördenhof'' (authorities' court), a large building specially built for the Oktoberfest at the east side of the ''Theresienwiese'', just behind the tents.
The march is led by the ''Münchner Kindl''.
For decades now, the Bavarian Red Cross has been responsible for the medical service at the Oktoberfest.
A large marquee requires an average of 400 kilowatts, and 300 kilowatts is required for bigger rides.
Because of problems enforcing the anti-smoking law in the big tents, an exception was granted to the Oktoberfest in 2008, although the sale of tobacco was not allowed.
The blanket smoking ban did not take effect until 2011, but all tents instituted the smoking ban in 2010 in order to do a "dry run" in order to identify any unforeseeable issues.
The slogan "proud city – cheerful country" was meant to show the alleged overcoming of differences between social classes, and can be seen as an example of the regime's consolidation of power.
Besides the Oktoberfest, there are other public festivals that take place at the same location.
* '''''Heimer Hendl- und Entenbraterei''''' – Very popular among the locals, Heimer’s is a family-friendly tent where authentic Oktoberfest tradition is timeless.
In 1880, electric light illuminated more than 400 booths and tents.
* '''''Wiesn Guglhupf Café-Dreh-Bar''''' – A ''Guglhupf'' is a German cake, like an English bundt cake, and this slowly moving carousel bar is easy to spot because it’s shaped like one.
Historically, in Bavaria chamois hair was highly valued and prized.
Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu
Previously, 350 meters of the Oktoberfest were still unfenced.
Twelve gunshots are then fired on the stairway of Ruhmeshalle.
To keep traffic moving through the toilets, men headed for the toilets were directed first to the urinals (giant enclosed grates) if they only needed to urinate.
To keep the Oktoberfest, and especially the beer tents, amicable for the elderly and families, the concept of the "quiet Oktoberfest" was developed in 2005.
The underground station, ''Theresienwiese'', has trains arriving at rush hour in three-minute intervals.
In order to ensure sufficient capacity of cellular networks, each year several mobile masts are set up in the lawn areas surrounding the festival.
* '''''Wildmoser Hühnerbraterei''''' – Owned by the family Wildmoser since 1981, this small tent has been adopted and popularized by the Munich locals.
Additional medical services are located in the ''Fischer Vroni'' tent (Aicher Ambulance), and the Munich U-Bahn has commissioned additional backups in the rapid transit station ''Theresienwiese'' provided by the Johanniter-Unfall-Hilfe.
However, the origins of the horse races, and Oktoberfest itself, may have stemmed from proposals offered by Franz Baumgartner, a coachman and Sergeant in the National Guard.
They are now found outside of the security ring further away from the fairground.
Hochreiters Haxnbraterei
There was no Oktoberfest in 1866 because Bavaria was involved in the Austro-Prussian War.
As a consequence, the effort for controls and towing services is substantial.
Nearly 1,000&nbsp;tons of rubbish result annually from the Oktoberfest.
The precise origins of the festival and horse races remain a matter of controversy, however, the decision to repeat the horse races, spectacle, and celebrations in 1811 launched what is now the annual Oktoberfest tradition.
The six Munich breweries Augustiner, Hacker-Pschorr, Hofbräu, Löwenbräu, Paulaner and Spaten presented a special exclusively brewed dark beer, which was made after a historic recipe from the early 19th century.
* '''''Winzerer Fähndl''''' – Translates as "Winzerers (bavarian for Winebrewers (In German Winzer)) flag".
For the first time a re-entry was possible with the tickets.
The safety concepts of the event have been modified and adapted continuously over the past decades.
Until then, there were games of skittles, large dance floors, and trees for climbing in the beer booths.
In 1873, the festival was cancelled due to yet another cholera epidemic.
There are significant negative effects pertaining to traffic.
On the occasion of the 200th anniversary in 2010 a so-called ''Historisches Oktoberfest'' (Historical Oktoberfest) was designed on the site of the Central Agricultural Festival at the south end of the ''Theresienwiese''.
The Oktoberfest is powered via 43 kilometers of cable and 18 partially underground transformer stations.
The horse races were accompanied by tree climbing, bowling alleys, and swings and other attractions.
In 2009, road blocks were raised, and access controls during the festival, due to the perceived threat of attacks by Islamists, were increased.
During World War II, from 1939 to 1945, no Oktoberfest was celebrated.
Since the power outage occurred in the morning, there were service shortages in the catering areas, but no panic resulted.
Organizers wanted more room for guests and musicians which resulted in the booths becoming beer halls which are still used today.
There are currently fourteen large tents and twenty small tents at the Oktoberfest.
The main dish is ''Steckerlfisch'', which is grilled outside of the tent.
This parade is also led by the Münchner Kindl; followed by notables of the city council and the city administration and the state of Bavaria, usually the minister-president and his wife, traditional costume and rifle clubs, musical bands, marching bands, flag-wavers and about 40 carriages with decorated horses and carts.
According to the Munich City Council Decision on October 16, 2012, the entry fee for the Historical Oktoberfest, now called ''Oide Wiesn'' (bavarian for ''old fairground''), in 2013 was to be three euros again.
Since the 1970s, local German gay organizations have organized "Gay Days" at Oktoberfest, which since the 21st century always begin in the ''Bräurosl'' tent on the first Sunday.
However, in early 2010, a referendum held in Bavaria as a result of a popular initiative re-instituted the original, strict, smoking ban of 2008; thus, no beer will be sold to people caught smoking in the tents.
To supply the tents with natural gas, a four kilometer long network of gas lines was built.
* '''''Glöckle Wirt''''' – A visual treat, decorated with oil paintings, antique instruments and cooking utensils, the Glöckle Wirt offers its visitors an authentic Oktoberfest experience in a warm, welcoming atmosphere.
Then in the other tents, the first barrels are tapped and beer is served to the visitors.
The fest-tent name derives from a famous stage character of the actor Jörg Hube, who died in 2009.
Following the war, from 1946 to 1948, Munich celebrated only the "Autumn Fest".
This was the second deadliest terrorist attack in the history of Germany after the Munich Massacre.
Especially during the middle weekend of the festival, many Italians arrive with caravans (this weekend is therefore referred to by the residents of Munich as "Italian weekend").
15% of visitors come from foreign countries like the surrounding EU countries and other non-European countries including the United States, Canada, Australia and East Asia.
More recently, amplifying live music in the toilets has led to them no longer representing a quiet retreat for telephoning.
* '''''Café Kaiserschmarrn''''' – Beautifully created by Rischart, the Café holds a daily commemoration of the occasion of the first Oktoberfest – the wedding of Ludwig I and Therese of Saxony.
This event always takes place on the first Saturday of the Oktoberfest and serves as the official prelude to the Oktoberfest celebration.
In 2013, the terrain was enlarged and attractive entrances were added.
Thus, the festival now runs for 17 days when the first Sunday is October 2 and 18 days when it is October 1.
The Schichtl is as essential as beer, radish and chicken."
Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu
* '''''Able's Kalbs-Kuchl''''' – Resembling a large Bavarian hut, the “calf kitchen” is traditional and inviting yet still has a lively party atmosphere which Oktoberfest fans crave.
The rides are extensively tested in advance, and the examination is performed by the cableways and temporary structures department of today's ''TÜV SÜD''.
