''land'' "land"  jɔ
Old East Norse, between 800 and 1100, is in Sweden called ''Runic Swedish'' and in Denmark ''Runic Danish''.
All the while, the changes resulting in breaking (for example ''hiarta'' from *''hertō'') were more influential in the East probably once again due to generalizations within the inflectional system.
The Dalecarlian dialects developed as Old Swedish dialects and as such can be considered separate languages from Swedish.
Some  or  and  or  result from breaking of  and  respectively.
In Iceland, initial  before  was lost.
Contemporary Icelandic-speakers can read Old Norse, which varies slightly in spelling as well as semantics and word order.
Here is a comparison between the two dialects as well as Old Gutnish.
Note: The low/low-mid vowels may be indicated differently:
+ History of Old Norse and Old Icelandic vowels
In addition, numerous common, everyday Old Norse words were adopted into the Old English language during the Viking age.
In Icelandic, all Ǫ merged with Ø.
The ''jj'' and ''ww'' of Proto-Germanic became ''ggj'' and ''ggv'' respectively in Old Norse, a change known as Holtzmann's law.
All phonemes have, more or less, the expected phonetic realization.
This caused  to become an independent phoneme from , and the written distinction of  for  from medial and final  to become merely etymological.
Dræpær maþar svænskan man eller smalenskæn, innan konongsrikis man, eigh væstgøskan, bøte firi atta ørtogher ok þrettan markær ok ænga ætar bot.
The gender of some words' plurals does not agree with that of their singulars, such as ''lim'' and ''mund''.
Faroese retains many similarities but is influenced by Danish, Norwegian, and Gaelic (Scottish and/or Irish).
Þessi sveinn Alexander var í skóla settur, sem siðvenja er til ríkra manna utanlands að láta gera við börn sín.
cognate "æg" which became Middle English "eye"/"eai"), ''fellow'' (félagi), ''gap'' (gap), ''husband'' (húsbóndi), ''cake'' (kaka), ''keel'' (kiǫlʀ, stem also kial-, kil-), ''kid'' (kið), ''knife'' (knífʀ), ''law'' (lǫg, stem lag-), ''leg'' (læggʀ), ''link'' (hlænkʀ), ''loan'' (lán, related to OE.
Others were formed via ʀ-umlaut from , , , , and .
Uncials not encoded separately in Unicode as of this section's writing.
The effect of the dropping usually results in the lack of distinction between some forms of the noun.
This vowel came to be epenthetic, particularly before ''-ʀ'' endings.
In the case of '''i-umlaut''' and '''ʀ-umlaut''', this entails a fronting of back vowels, with retention of lip rounding.
Not all cognates occur in the same register classes in all three languages, partly due to language-specific restrictions on the contexts in which the two classes can occur.
In the 11th century, Old Norse was the most widely spoken European language, ranging from Vinland in the West to the Volga in the East.
In the case of '''u-umlaut''', this entails labialization of unrounded vowels.
In a simple sentence like "They are both weak" the extent of the Old Norse loanwords becomes quite clear (Old East Norse with archaic pronunciation: "Þæiʀ eʀu báðiʀ wæikiʀ" while Old English "híe syndon bégen (þá) wáce").
Strong verbs ablaut the lemma's nucleus to derive the past forms of the verb.
This can be determined by their distinction within the 12th-century First Grammatical Treatise but not within the early 13th-century Prose Edda.
One generally sees adjectives in their neuter form when used pronominally for this reason.
While typically "Eastern" in structure, many later post-runic changes and trademarks of EON had yet to happen.
*'''Conjunction''' – though/tho (þó)
In some instances the term ''Old Norse'' refers specifically to Old West Norse.
cognate "sweostor"), ''skill'' (skial/skil), ''skin'' (skinn), ''skirt'' (skyrta vs. the native English ''shirt'' of the same root), ''sky'' (ský), ''slaughter'' (slátr), ''snare'' (snara), ''steak'' (stæik), ''thrift'' (þrift), ''tidings'' (tíðindi), ''trust'' (traust), ''window'' (vindauga), ''wing'' (væ(i)ngʀ)
This change is shared with Old Gutnish.
The Old Gutnish dialect was spoken in Gotland and in various settlements in the East.
cognate "giefan"), ''glitter'' (glitra), ''hit'' (hitta), ''lift'' (lyfta), ''raise'' (ræisa), ''ransack'' (rannsaka), ''rid'' (ryðia), ''run'' (rinna, stem rinn-/rann-/runn-, related to OE.
:3 However, the distinction still holds in Dalecarlian dialects.
Some , , , , and all ,  were obtained by u-umlaut from , , , , and ,  respectively.
Old Norwegian exhibited all three: /u/ was used in West Norwegian south of Bergen, as in ''aftur'', ''aftor'' (older aptr); North of Bergen, /i/ appeared in ''aftir'', ''after''; and East Norwegian used /a/, ''after'', ''aftær''.
Dræpær maþær vtlænskæn prest, bøte sva mykit firi sum hærlænskan man.
Long vowels were sometimes marked with acutes, but also sometimes left unmarked or geminated.
Some , , , , , , , and  were obtained by i-umlaut from , , , , , , , and  respectively.
If a Southerner is slain or an Englishman, he shall pay four marks to the plaintiff and two marks to the king.
þessi sveinn Alexander var í skóla settr, sem siðvenja er til ríkra manna útanlands at láta gera við bǫrn sín.
This is because the 3rd strong masculine declension, to which it belongs, marks the nominative singular and nominative and accusative plural, but not the accusative singular, with inflectional ʀs.
The words "they" and "weak" are both borrowed from Old Norse, and the word "both" might also be a borrowing, though this is disputed.
Towards the end of the 13th century, Ę () merged to E ().
... Dræpar maþær danskan man allæ noræn man, bøte niv markum.
So aigu oc suiar sykia gutland firir vtan cornband ellar annur forbuþ.
This notation did not catch on, and would soon be obsolete.
Thus, pre-13th-century ''grœnn'' ‘green’ became modern Icelandic ''grænn''.
Meistari var honum fenginn sá, er Aristóteles hét.
As Proto-Norse evolved into Old Norse, in the 8th century, the effects of the umlauts seem to have been very much the same over the whole Old Norse area.
The earliest body of text appears in runic inscriptions and in poems composed c. 900 by Þjóðólfr of Hvinir (although the poems are not preserved in contemporary sources, but only in much later manuscripts).
Umlaut is phonemic and in many situations grammatically significant as a side effect of losing the Proto-Germanic morphological suffixes whose vowels created the umlaut allophones.
For example, the diphthong ''ai'' in ''aigu'', ''þair'' and ''waita'' was not retroactively umlauted to ''ei'' as in e.g.
Of the modern languages, Icelandic is the closest to Old Norse.
Around the 13th century, Œ/Ǿ () merged to Æ ().
Some words, such as ''hungr'', have multiple genders, evidenced by their determiners being declined in different genders within a given sentence.
If someone slays a Dane or a Norwegian, he will pay nine marks.
Later Old Icelandic
Hence Old Norse ''bœndr'' "farmers" > Norwegian class 1 ''bønder'', but ''baunir'' "beans" and ''bœnir'' "prayers" both > Norwegian class 2 ''bønner'' (homophonous with ''bønder'' except for the pitch difference).
Old West Norse underwent a lengthening of initial vowels at some point, especially in Norwegian, so that OWN ''eta'' became ''éta,'' ONW ''akr'' > ''ákr'', OIC ''ek'' > ''ék''.
hann var harðla góðr klerkr ok inn mesti spekingr at viti.
Exceptions, including minimal pairs, have arisen for various reasons:
With the conversion to Christianity in the 11th century came the Latin alphabet.
No sign of any tonal system is found in Icelandic or Faroese.
Today Old Norse has developed into the modern North Germanic languages Icelandic, Faroese, Norwegian, Danish and Swedish, of which Norwegian, Danish and Swedish retain considerable mutual intelligibility.
Many of these were borrowed from Latin.
Old Norse had three grammatical genders – masculine, feminine and neuter.
In essence it matches or surpasses the archaicness of post-runic Old West Norse which in its turn is generally more archaic than post-runic Old East Norse.
This is an extract from ''Västgötalagen'', the Westrogothic law.
It appears in words like gøra (gjǫra, geyra), from Proto-Germanic *garwijaną, and commonly in verbs with a velar consonant before the suffix like søkkva :1
''skjǫldr'' "shield"  v between vowels).
* '''Verbs''' – ''are'' (er, displacing OE "sind") ''blend'' (blanda), ''call'' (kalla), ''cast'' (kasta), ''clip'' (klippa), ''crawl'' (krafla), ''cut'' (possibly from ON kuta), ''die'' (døyia), ''gasp'' (gæispa), ''get'' (geta), ''give'' (gifa/gefa, related to OE.
Runes continued to be commonly used until the 15th century and have been recorded to be in use in some form as late as the 19th century in some parts of Sweden.
cognate "wyrt", cf.
*'''Interjection''' – ''hail'' (hæill), ''wassail'' (ves hæill)
Dropping of /w/ in initial /wɾ/ is shared only with Old Icelandic.
Compare ON ''orð, úlfr, ár'' with English ''word, wolf, year''.
The standardized orthography marks the long vowels with an acute accent.
"Bull" may be from either Old English "bula" or Old Norse "buli", while "Thursday" may be a borrowing, or it could simply be from the Old English "Þunresdæg", which could have been influenced by the Old Norse cognate.
Præstær skal i bondalaghum væræ.
Unlike Proto-Norse, which was written with the Elder Futhark, runic Old Norse was originally written with the Younger Futhark, which only had 16 letters.
At the beginning of words, this manifested as a dropping of the initial ''j'' or ''v''.
In compound words, secondary stress falls on the second stem (e.g.
Words like "bull" and "Thursday" are more difficult when it comes to their origins.
But in later dialects of the language a split occurred mainly between west and east as the use of umlauts began to vary.
Monophthongization of ''æi > ē'' and ''øy, au > ø̄'' started in mid-10th-century Denmark.
The typical umlauts (for example ''fylla'' from *''fullijan'') were better preserved in the West due to later generalizations in the east where many instances of umlaut were removed (many archaic Eastern texts as well as eastern runic inscriptions however portray the same extent of umlauts as in later Western Old Norse).
Likewise, the Swedes had the right to go to Gotland without corn restrictions or other prohibitions.
The earliest inscriptions in Old Norse are runic, from the 8th century.
The nasal vowels, also noted in the First Grammatical Treatise, are assumed to have been lost by this time.
In general, however, class 1 words are those that are monosyllabic in Old Norse, while class 2 words are those that are polysyllabic.
*'''Prepositions''' – ''till'' (til), ''fro'' (frá)
Various other languages, which are not closely related, have been heavily influenced by Norse, particularly the Norman dialects, Scottish Gaelic and Irish.
The Old East Norse dialect was spoken in Denmark, Sweden, settlements in Kievan Rus', eastern England, and Danish settlements in Normandy.
Lateral approximant
From the 11th to 14th centuries, the unstressed vowels -''a'', -''o'' and -''e'' (standard normalization -''a'', -''u'' and -''i'') started to merge into -''ə'', represented with the letter ''e''.
The Gutasaga is the longest text surviving from Old Gutnish.
These nasalizations also occurred in the other Germanic languages, but were not retained long.
Old English and Old Norse were related languages.
The use of ''Swedish'' and ''Danish'' is not for linguistic reasons as the differences between them are minute at best during the more ancient stages of this dialect group.
sendimen al oc kunungr oc ierl samulaiþ a gutnal þing senda.
Old Norwegian differentiated early from Old Icelandic by the loss of the consonant ''h'' in initial position before ''l'', ''n'' and ''r'', thus whereas Old Icelandic manuscripts might use the form ''hnefi'' "fist", Old Norwegian manuscripts might use ''nefi''.
After c. 1350, the Black Death and following social upheavals seem to have accelerated language changes in Norway.
The phoneme , and some  merged to , so that Old Icelandic '''Þórðr''' becomes '''Tortr'''.
This means that when the gender of a noun is unknown, adjectives and pronouns referencing it use the neuter gender forms, rather than the masculine or feminine.
Dræpær maþær vtlænskan man, eigh ma frid flyia or landi sinu oc j æth hans.
If someone slays a foreign priest, he will pay as much as for a fellow countryman.
Vice versa, masculine i-stems with the root ending in either ''g'' or ''k'' tended to shift the plural ending to that of the ja-stems while OEN kept the original: ''drængiaʀ'', ''*ælgiaʀ'' and ''*bænkiaʀ'' while OWN ''drengir'', ''elgir'' (elks) and ''bekkir'' (modern Danish "drenge", "elge", "bænke", modern Swedish ''drängar'', ''älgar'', ''bänkar'').
It is therefore not surprising that many words in Old Norse look familiar to English speakers (e.g., ''armr'' (arm), ''fótr'' (foot), ''land'' (land), ''fullr'' (full), ''hanga'' (to hang), ''standa'' (to stand)).
An epenthetic vowel became popular by 1200 in Old Danish, 1250 in Old Swedish and Norwegian, and 1300 in Old Icelandic.
These occurred as allophones of the vowels before nasal consonants and in places where a nasal had followed it in an older form of the word, before it was absorbed into a neighboring sound.
The abbreviations are expanded in a version with normalized spelling like the standard normalization system's.
vtan tull oc allar utgiftir.
Subsequently, Old Norse became the vehicle of a large and varied body of vernacular literature, unique in medieval Europe.
So, by their own will, the Gotlanders became the subjects of the Swedish king, so that they could travel freely and without risk to any location in the Swedish kingdom without toll and other fees.
In addition, reading the manuscript itself requires familiarity with the letterforms of the native script.
From the late 14th century, the language used in Norway is generally referred to as Middle Norwegian.
Old Norse also had an influence on English dialects and Lowland Scots, which contain many Old Norse loanwords.
Orthographic evidence suggests that, in a confined dialect of Old Norwegian, /ɔ/ may have been unrounded before /u/, so that u-umlaut was reversed where the ''u'' had not been eliminated.
through tonal word accent), while in Danish the difference is the presence or absence of ''stød'', a glottal gesture considered a kind of creaky voice that seems to have been documented by Swedish sources as early as the 16th century.
An unstressed vowel was used which varied by dialect.
The facsimile demonstrates the sigla used by scribes to write Old Norse.
The following text is from ''Alexanders saga'', an Alexander romance.
# The Old Norse non-syllabic morpheme ''-r'' after a consonant later became syllabic through the epenthesis of a vowel, without changing the class.
Old Icelandic(1st Grammarian)
Modern Swedish, Danish, and Norwegian have two registers reflected in differing pronunciation of the stressed syllable of words.
Russian, Belarusian, Lithuanian, Finnish, Latvian and Estonian also have a number of Norse loanwords; the words ''Rus'' and ''Russia'', according to one theory, may be named after the Rus' people, a Norse tribe; ''see Rus (name)'', probably from present-day east-central Sweden.
Runic Old East Norse is characteristically archaic in form, especially Swedish (which is still true for modern Swedish compared to Danish).
Sometime around the 13th century, Ǫ () merged with Ø or O in all dialects except Old Danish.
In Old Norwegian, Old Danish and later Old Swedish the groups ''hl'', ''hr'', ''hn'' were reduced to plain ''l'', ''r'', ''n'', suggesting that they were most likely realised as voiceless sonorants by Old Norse times.
*'''Adverbs''' – ''thwart/athwart'' (þvert)
A few examples of Old Norse loanwords in modern English are (English/Viking age Old East Norse):
God help his spirit'':
Most other letters are written with the same glyph as the IPA phoneme, except as shown in the table below.
... ſem oꝩın͛ h̅ſ brıgzloðo h̅o̅ epꞇ͛ þͥ ſe̅ ſıðaʀ mon ſagꞇ verða.
Hence Old Norse ''and-inn'' "the duck" > Swedish class 1 ''anden'', but ''andi-nn'' "the spirit" > class 2 ''anden''.
þair sendibuþar aighu friþ lysa gutum alla steþi til sykia yfir haf sum upsala kunungi til hoyrir.
A modified version of the letter wynn called vend was used briefly for the sounds , , and .
It was written in the 13th century and dealt with the early history of the Gotlanders.
veꞇᷓ gamall aꞇ allꝺrı nalıga alroſcın̅ aꞇ ꝩıꞇı.
They were noted in the First Grammatical Treatise, and otherwise might have remained unknown.
However, the 13th-century Codex Regius copy of the Poetic Edda probably relied on newer and/or poorer quality sources — demonstrating either difficulty with or total lack of natural distinction, the manuscripts show separation of the two phonemes in some places, but frequently mix up the letters chosen to distinguish them in others.
This can also be seen in the Icelandic and Norwegian words sterkur and sterk ("strong"), which in Swedish is stark as in Old Swedish.
At the end of the 10th and early 11th century initial ''h-'' before ''l'', ''n'' and ''r'' was still preserved in the middle and northern parts of Sweden, and is sporadically still preserved in some northern dialects as ''g-'', e.g.
Although Swedish, Danish and the Norwegian languages have diverged the most, they still retain asymmetric mutual intelligibility.
... sem óvinir hans brigzluðu honum eftir því, sem síðarr man sagt verða.
The consonant digraphs ''hl'', ''hr'', ''hn'' occurred word-initially.
was obtained through a simultaneous u- and i-umlaut of .
The king was to provide protection and help, when they needed it and asked for it.
Example (Old Norse)
Compare Icelandic ''rangur'' with Norwegian ''vrangr'', OEN ''vrangʀ''.
This dialect of Old West Norse was spoken by Icelandic colonies in Greenland.
For example, Old East Norse traits were found in eastern Norway, although Old Norwegian is classified as Old West Norse, and Old West Norse traits were found in western Sweden.
The 12th-century Icelandic ''Gray Goose Laws'' state that Swedes, Norwegians, Icelanders and Danes spoke the same language, ''dǫnsk tunga'' ("Danish tongue"; speakers of Old East Norse would have said ''dansk tunga'').
Hann var harðla góður klerkur og hinn mesti spekingur að viti og er hann var 12 vetra gamall að aldri, nálega alroskinn að viti en stórhugaður umfram alla sína jafnaldra ...
Nasal and oral vowels probably merged around the 11th century in most of Old East Norse.
Old Norse was divided into three dialects: Old West Norse, Old East Norse and Old Gutnish.
Like in other languages, the grammatical gender of an impersonal noun is generally unrelated to an expected natural gender of that noun.
Unlike the other three groups above, it was retained much longer in all dialects, and never developed into a voiceless sonorant in Icelandic, but instead "hardened" to a plosive .
The languages are also sufficiently similar in writing that they can mostly be understood across borders.
If someone slays a Swede or a Smålander, a man from the kingdom, but not a West Geat, he will pay eight örtugar (20-pence coins) and thirteen marks, but no weregild.
An alternative and probably more accurate transliteration would therefore render the text in OEN as such:
Oc latta þar taka scatt sinn.
In medieval manuscripts, it is often unmarked but sometimes marked with an accent or through gemination.
It is contemporaneous with most of the Icelandic literature.
From the late 13th century, Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian started to diverge more.
It is the oldest text written as a manuscript found in Sweden and from the 13th century.
Another difference was that Old West Norse lost certain combinations of consonants.
The oldest preserved texts in Old Norse in the Latin alphabet date from the middle of the 12th century.
Changes had a tendency to occur earlier in the Danish region and until this day many Old Danish changes have still not taken place in modern Swedish rendering Swedish as the more archaic out of the two concerning both the ancient and the modern languages, sometimes by a profound margin but in all differences are still minute.
Most speakers spoke Old East Norse in what is present day Denmark and Sweden.
* ꝩar ıſcola ſeꞇꞇr ſem ſıðꝩenıa e͛ ꞇıl rıkra man̅a vꞇan-lanꝺz aꞇ laꞇa g͛a vıð boꝛn̅ ſíıƞ́ Meıſꞇarı ꝩar h̅o̅ ꝼengın̅ ſa e͛ arıſꞇoꞇıleſ heꞇ.
Breaking was especially active in Old Gutnish, leading to forms such as ''bjera'' and ''bjauþa'', mainland ''bera'' and ''bjúþa''.
The combinations -''mp''-, -''nt''-, and -''nk''- were assimilated into -''pp''-, -''tt''- and -''kk''- in Old West Norse, but this phenomenon was limited in Old East Norse.
It is a transcription from one of the Funbo Runestones (U 990) meaning : ''Veðr and Thane and Gunnar raised this stone after Haursi, their father.
When the colonies died out around the 15th century, the dialect went with it.
merged with  during the 12th century.
The same text in Modern Icelandic
The 12th-century Grágás manuscripts distinguish the vowels, and so the Codex Regius copy does as well.
Oc so þair sum þan wegin aigu hinget sykia.
A specifically Icelandic sound, the long, u-umlauted A, spelled Ǫ́ and pronounced , developed circa the early 11th century.
Primitive Old West Norse
* '''Adjectives''' – ''flat'' (flatr), ''happy'' (happ), ''ill'' (illr), ''likely'' (líklígʀ), ''loose'' (lauss), ''low'' (lágʀ), ''meek'' (miúkʀ), ''odd'' (odda), ''rotten'' (rotinn/rutinn), ''scant'' (skamt), ''sly'' (sløgʀ), ''weak'' (væikʀ), ''wrong'' (vrangʀ)
The text marks the beginning of Old Swedish as a distinct dialect.
Old Icelandic ''eigu'', ''þeir'' and ''veita''.
The First Grammarian marked these with a dot above the letter.
The OEN original text above is transliterated according to traditional scholarly methods, wherein u-umlaut is not regarded in runic Old East Norse.
It was short-lived, being marked in the Grammatical Treatises and remaining until the end of the 12th century.
Digital facsimile of the manuscript text
+ Generic vowel system c. 13th–14th centuries
If someone slays a foreigner, he shall not be banished and have to flee to his clan.
Because of the limited number of runes, the rune for the vowel ''u'' was also used for the vowels ''o'', ''ø'' and ''y'', and the rune for ''i'' was used for ''e''.
h̅ ꝩar harðla goðꝛ clercr ⁊ en̅ meſꞇı ſpekıngr aꞇ ꝩıꞇı.
'''Umlaut''' or '''mutation''' is an assimilatory process acting on vowels preceding a vowel or semivowel of a different vowel backness.
