Second, that contrary to popular notions, the interviews revealed that the reduced activity and socializing of the over 85s does not harm their well-being; they “welcome increased detachment.” Third, rather than a continuity of self-concept, as the interviewees faced new situations they
It implies that the person being referred to is retired.
argues that appropriate medical treatment for the frail is not the same as for the robust.
Synonyms include '''old age pensioner''' or '''pensioner''' in British English, and '''retiree''' and '''senior''' in American English.
About the same number said that, given a terminal illness, they would choose assisted suicide.
There is currently no United Nations human rights convention that specifically protects older persons; however one has been proposed and is under discussion.
Minois comments that the scribe’s “cry shows that nothing has changed in the drama of decrepitude between the age of the Pharaoh and the atomic age” and “expresses all the anguish of old people in the past and the present.”
Wattis and Curran add a fifth dimension: developmental.
'''Classical period'''
There are two different types of people described in this stage of life.
been with us since the stage of primitive society; it was both the source of wisdom and of infirmity, experience and decrepitude, of prestige and suffering.”
Immortality is the belief that your life will go on past death, some examples are an afterlife or living on through one's family.
In the United Kingdom, the state pension age for men and women will rise to 66 in 2020 with further increases scheduled after that.”
Historical periods reveal a mixed picture of the “position and status” of old people, but there has never been a “golden age of aging.” Studies have disproved the popular belief that in the past old people were venerated by society and cared for by their families.
The chronological age denoted as "old age" varies culturally and historically.
Those who see them as symbols of disability reject them.
their 80s) were rare enough to be a novelty and were revered as wise sages.
The United Nations has agreed that 60+ years may be usually denoted as old age and this is the first attempt at an international definition of old age.
Morrison concludes, “old age is not for the fainthearted.” In the book ''Life Beyond 85 Years'', the 150 interviewees had to cope with physical and mental debilitation and with losses of loved ones.
The distinguishing marks of old age normally occur in all five senses at different times and different rates for different persons.
At the same time, the WHO recognized that the developing world often defines old age, not by years, but by new roles, loss of previous roles, or inability to make active contributions to society.
in attempts to postpone death.
A third sub-grouping is “young old” (65-74), “old” (74-84), and "old-old" (85+).
One study placed the incidence of frailty for ages 65+ at 10.7%.
Coping is a very important skill needed in the aging process to move forward with life and not be 'stuck' in the past.
It has also been found that happiness in old age is not proportional to activity.
In the industrialized countries, life expectancy and, thus, the old age population have increased consistently over the last decades.
Old people often have limited regenerative abilities and are more susceptible to disease, syndromes, and sickness than younger adults.
Definitions of old age include official definitions, sub-group definitions, and four dimensions as follows.
''Key Concepts in Social Gerontology'' lists four dimensions: chronological, biological, psychological, and social.
For people in their 80s and 90s, Joan Erikson added a ninth stage in ''The Life Cycle Completed: Extended Version''.
When they reached age 86, 69% used them.
(Frailty and decrepitude are synonyms.)
In her ''The Denial of Aging'', Dr. Muriel R. Gillick, a baby boomer, accuses her contemporaries of believing that by proper exercise and diet they can avoid the scourges of old age and proceed from middle age to death.
The general understanding is that those who lived into their 40's were treated with respect and awe.
Despair", during which a person focuses on reflecting back on his life.
By the 90-100 year range, 60% would be considered frail because of very poor functionality and only 5% still possessed good functionality.
Paul Harpur, ‘ Old Age is Not Just Impairment: The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Need for a Convention on Older Persons’ (2016) 37 ''University of Pennsylvania  Journal of International Law'' 3, 1027-1057
In 2014, a documentary film called ''The Age of Love'' used humor and poignant adventures of 30 seniors who attend a speed dating event for 70- to 90-year-olds, and discovered how the search for romance changes; or does not change; from a childhood sweetheart to older age.
God is become evil.
Two British scholars, Paul Higgs and Chris Gilleard, have added a “fourth age” sub-group.
In opposition to the Disengagement Theory the Activity Theory of old age argues that disengagement in old age occurs not by desire, but by the barriers to social engagement imposed by society.
Oldness has come; old age has descended.
The subjects were ambivalent regarding the use of the assistive devices: as “enablers” or as “disablers.” People who view assistive devices as enabling greater independence accept and use them.
The circumstances are loss of relationships by death and distance.
“Old people were respected or despised, honoured or put to death according to circumstance.”
The study calls these years the “fourth age” or “old age in the real meaning of the term.” Similarly, the “Berlin Aging Study” rated over-all functionality on four levels: good, medium, poor, and very poor.
In the United States the proportion of people aged 65 or older increased from 4% in 1900 to about 12% in 2000.
NBC’s Today Show and is available online.
The number of old people is growing around the world chiefly because of the post–World War II baby boom and increases in the provision and standards of health care.
Writing at the age of 87, Mary C. Morrison delineates the heroism required by old age: to live through the disintegration of one’s own body or that of someone you love.
About half of older adults suffer multimorbidity, that is, they have three or more chronic conditions.
These marks do not occur at the same chronological age for everyone.
warns against the tendency to medicalize and overtreat the frail.
However, nearly everyone feared a long process of dying.
The elderly also face other social issues around retirement, loneliness, and ageism.
In the United States, the 85+ age group is the fastest growing, a group that is almost sure to face the “inevitable decrepitude” of survivors.
In his ''Ethics'', he wrote that “old people are miserly; they do not acknowledge disinterested friendship; only seeking for what can satisfy their selfish needs.”
Their fear about the process of dying was that it would prolong their distress.
A worldwide study of “patterns of frailty” based on data from 20 nations found (a) a consistent correlation between frailty and age, (b) a higher frequency among women, and (c) more frailty in wealthier nations where greater support and medical care increases longevity.
In addition to chronological age, people can be considered old because of the other dimensions of old age.
By 2013, the over 65 population had grown to equal the under 5 population.
Additionally, patients aged 65+ had the highest percentage of hospital stays for adults with multiple chronic conditions but the second highest percentage of hospital costs in 2003-2014.
''Ageism'' documents that Americans generally have “little tolerance for older persons and very few reservations about harboring negative attitudes” about them.
A group of geriatricians proposed a general definition of frailty as “a physical state of increased vulnerability to stressors that results from decreased reserves and disregulation in multiple physiological systems.”
Medical treatments in the final days are not only economically costly, they are often unnecessary, even harmful.
These problems coupled with increased dependency in the basic activities of daily living (ADLs) required for personal care add emotional problems: depression and anxiety.
Joan Erikson observed that “aged individuals are often ostracized, neglected, and overlooked; elders are seen no longer as bearers of wisdom but as embodiments of shame.”
Projections place this number at 21 million by 2030 when 40% of Americans over 70 will need assistance.
“Decrepitude, which shrivels heroes, seemed worse than death.”
In the Classical period of Greek and Roman cultures, old age was denigrated as a time of “decline and decrepitude.” “Beauty and strength” were esteemed and old age was viewed as defiling and ugly.
It is used in general usage instead of traditional terms such as ''old person'', ''old-age pensioner'', or ''elderly'' as a courtesy and to signify continuing relevance of and respect for this population group as "citizens" of society, of ''senior'' rank.
Antonio de Guevara’s utopian nation “had a custom, not to live longer than sixty five years.” At that age, they practiced self-immolation.
Up to that time (and still true in underdeveloped countries), five or less percent of the population was over 65.
By 2050, 33% of the developed world’s population and almost 20% of the less developed world’s population will be over 60 years old.
:File:Study for a Self Portrait -Triptych, 1985-86.jpg|Francis Bacon (artist), ''Study for a Self-Portrait—Triptych, 1985–86''
Feebleness has arrived; dotage is here anew.
This theory proposes that in old age a mutual disengagement between people and their society occurs in anticipation of death.
People were defined as “old” because of their inability to perform useful tasks rather than their years.
It has come into widespread use in recent decades in legislation, commerce, and common speech.
The worldwide over 65 population in 1960 was one-third of the under 5 population.
However, in 2011, using a Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM), the old age American poverty rate was measured as 15.9%.
Old age was reckoned as one of the unanswerable “great mysteries” along with evil, pain, and suffering.
What old age does to men is evil in every respect.
Frailty is marked by an array of chronic physical and mental problems which means that frailty is not treatable as a specific disease.
In governmental contexts it is usually associated with an age at which pensions or medical benefits for the elderly become available.
The heart is forgetful and cannot recall yesterday.
The eyes are weak, the ears are deaf, the strength is disappearing because of weariness of the heart and the mouth is silent and cannot speak.
Besides being a release from misery, some saw death as a way to reunion with departed loved ones.
For Thomas More, on the island of Utopia, when people are so old as to have “out-lived themselves” and are terminally ill, in pain, and a burden to everyone, the priests exhort them about choosing to die.
The growing number of people living to their 80s and 90s in the developed world has strained public welfare systems and has also resulted in increased incidence of diseases like cancer and dementia that were rarely seen in premodern times.
Full retirement age for Social Security benefits for people retiring in 2012 is age 66.
Therefore, rather than lumping together all people who have been defined as old, some gerontologists have recognized the diversity of old age by defining sub-groups.
“The Olympians did not like old people.” Their youth rebelled against the old, driving them off or killing them.
Marks of old age can easily vary between people of the same chronological age.
As she wrote, she added the ninth stage because the Integrity of the eighth stage imposes “a serious demand on the senses of elders” and the Wisdom of the eighth stage requires capacities that ninth stage elders “do not usually have.”
In his study ''Aging and Old Age'', Posner discovers “resentment and disdain of older people” in American society.
According to Erik Erikson’s "Stages of Psychosocial Development”, the human personality is developed in a series of eight stages that take place from the time of birth and continue on throughout an individual’s complete life.
By 2000, the number of senior citizens had increased to about 35 million (of 280 million US citizens).
By 1990, the United States was spending 30 per cent of its budget on the elderly, compared with 2 per cent on education.
One of the theories is the Disengagement Theory proposed in 1961.
'''Ancient times'''
For all 65+ people, more women (76%) than men (53%) and more blacks (87%) than whites (63%) consider religion “very important” to them.
Other writers treat the perceptions of middle-age people regarding their own old age.
A basic mark of old age that affects both body and mind is “slowness of behavior.” This “slowing down principle” finds a correlation between advancing age and slowness of reaction and physical and mental task performance.
These individuals will attain wisdom, even when confronting death.
'''Modern period'''
This deterioration is gradual for some and precipitous for others.
Furthermore, disengaging from social ties in old age is not across the board: unsatisfactory ties are dropped and satisfying ones kept.
Chronological age may differ considerably from a person’s functional age.
Gerontologists have recognized the very different conditions that people experience as they grow older within the years defined as old age.
In spite of its prevalence, ageism is seldom the subject of public discourse.
Even with healthy life styles, most 85+ people will undergo extended “frailty and disability.”
The focus of this theory is continuity sustained by social networks, albeit networks narrowed by choice and by circumstances.
Successfully completing this phase means looking back with few regrets and a general feeling of satisfaction.
In the practice of religion, a study of 60+ people found that 25% read the Bible every day and over 40% look at religious TV.
Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds—100,000 per day—die of age-related causes.
Able Data lists 40,000 assistive technology products in 20 categories.
Many studies of old age overlook the 85+ survivors so their conclusions do not apply.
Famed caricaturist Al Hirschfeld claimed on several occasion that his father Isaac Hirschfeld invented the term 'senior citizen'.
The Medieval and Renaissance periods depicted old age as “cruel or weak.”
The young are “consistent in their negative attitude” toward the old.
By 2050, it is projected that at least 400,000 Americans will be 100 or older.
One interviewee described living in old age as “pure hell.”
The study of  ''Older Adults' Views on Death'' found that the more frail people were, the more “pain, suffering, and struggles” they were enduring, the more likely they were to “accept and welcome” death as a release from their misery.
Then “lose” them one by one, trying to feel each loss, until you have lost them all as happens in old age.
In contrast, perceptions of old age by writers 80+ years old (“old age in the real meaning of the term) tend to be negative.
This theory has been subjected to the criticism that old age disengagement is neither natural, inevitable, nor beneficial.
Medical advances have made it possible to “postpone death” for years.
It always has, it always will.” Dr. Rubin contrasts the “real old age” with the “rosy pictures” painted by middle-age writers.
However, studies from Buffalo University and Northwestern University have shown that the elderly are a happier age group than their younger counterparts.
Early old age is a pleasant time: children are grown, retirement from work, time to pursue interests.
Many people are also willing to get involved in community and activist organizations to promote their well-being.
The longitudinal interviews of 150 age 85+ people summarized in ''Life Beyond 85 Years'' found “progressive terminal decline” in the year prior to death: constant fatigue, much sleep, detachment from people, things, and activities, simplified lives.
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory also depicts how people maintain continuity in old age.
Extinction refers to feeling as if life has no purpose.
The 16th century utopians, Thomas More and Antonio de Guevara allowed no decrepit old people in their fictional lands.
A third option is assisted living where 24-hour round-the-clock supervision is given with aid in eating, bathing, dressing, etc.
In a British 20-year longitudinal study, less than half of the old people surveyed said that religion was “very important” to them and a quarter said they had become less religious in old age.
Medical advances have made it possible to “postpone death,” but in many cases this postponement adds “prolonged sickness, dependence, pain, and suffering,” a time that is costly in social, psychological, economic terms.
The choice is for more harmonious relationships.
According to a study by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), the rate of ED visits was consistently highest among patients ages 85 years and older in 2006-2011 in the United States.
'''Medieval and Renaissance periods'''
If a person lived to an advanced age, it was due to genetic factors and/or a relatively easy lifestyle, since diseases of old age could not be treated before the 20th century.
In talking with 85+ year olds, they found some popular conceptions about old age to be erroneous.
, usually with reference to deterioration".
Being 60–65 years old is usually a requirement for becoming eligible for senior social programs.
The Pew Research Center’s study of black and white old people found that 62% of those in ages 65–74 and 70% in ages 75+ asserted that religion was “very important” to them.
In commercial contexts, where it may serve as a marketing device to attract customers, the age is often significantly lower.
Many new assistive devices made especially for the home have enabled more old people to care for themselves activities of daily living (ADL).
Veneration for and antagonism toward the aged have coexisted in complex relationships throughout history.
In their interviews, Johnson and Barer found that 24% of the 85+ had no face-to-face family relationships; many have outlived their families.
Also, they occur at different rates and order for different people.
Thus, old age is a "social construct" rather than a definite "biological stage".
Research on age-related attitudes consistently finds that negative attitudes exceed positive attitudes toward old people because of their looks and behavior.
Although he was skeptical of the gods, Aristotle concurred in the dislike of old people.
Most of the interviewees did not fear death; some would welcome it.
He characterises old age as a period of "Integrity vs.
Many books by middle-age writers depict their perceptions of old people.
The definitions of old age continue to change especially as life expectancy in developed countries has risen to beyond 80 years old.
When defined in an official context, ''senior citizen'' is often used for legal or policy-related reasons in determining who is eligible for certain benefits available to the age group.
In ancient times, although some strong and healthy people lived until they were over 70 most died before they were 50.
The over 65 population is projected to double the under five by 2050.
However, after 75, they will become increasingly frail, a condition marked by serious mental and physical debilitation.
Senior citizen is a common euphemism for an old person used in American English, and sometimes in British English.
However, for its study of old age in Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) set 50 as the beginning of old age.
These final years are also costly in economic terms.
changed their “cognitive and emotional processes” and reconstituted their “self–representation.”
In Canada, the OASP (Old Age Security Pension) is available at 65 (gradually increasing to 67, starting in the years 2023-2029), and the CPP (Canada Pension Plan) as early as age 60.
Frailty is a common condition in later old age, but different definitions of frailty produce diverse assessments of prevalence.
Elderhood refers to those individuals who live past the life expectancy of their birth cohorts.
In sum, frailty has been depicted as a group of “complex issues,” distinct but “causally interconnected,” that often include “comorbid diseases,”, progressive weakness, stress, exhaustion, and depression.
The way a person adapts and copes, reflects his aging process on a psycho-social level.
In the 80-90 year range, the four levels of functionality were divided equally.
Roughly half chose doing nothing except live day by day until death comes naturally without medical or other intervention designed to prolong life.
''Blind Spot: Hidden Biases of Good People'', a book about the test, reports that 80% of Americans have an “automatic preference for the young over old” and that attitude is true worldwide.
This added time costs many frail people “prolonged sickness, dependence, pain, and suffering.”
Newman & Newman also proposed a ninth stage of life, Elderhood.
In her ''Choosing Medical Care in Old Age'', Muriel R. Gillick M.D.
One person said, “Living this long is pure hell.”
In the United States, 90% of old age Hispanics view themselves as very, quite, or somewhat religious.
Rather than condemn the practice, Bishop Guevara called it a “golden world” in which people “have overcome the natural appetite to desire to live.”
Pew Research found that in the age 65+ range, 75% of whites and 87% of blacks pray daily.
On set #1, write your 5 most enjoyed activities; on set #2, write your 5 most valued possessions; on set #3, write your 5 most loved people.
This choice was coupled with a desire to receive palliative care if needed.
Frail people require a high level of care.
The dominant perception of the American old age population changed from “needy” and “worthy” to “powerful” and “greedy,” old people getting more than their share of the nation's resources.
Another study’s sub-grouping is young-old (65 to 74), middle-old (75–84), and oldest-old (85+).
Another option is community services which can provide the person with transportation, meal plans, or activities in senior centers.
One exercise was to lay out 3 sets of 5 slips of paper.
According to the Continuity Theory, in spite of the inevitable differences imposed by their old age, most people try to maintain continuity in personhood, activities, and relationships with their younger days.
However, various countries and societies consider the onset of old age as anywhere from the mid-40s to the 70s.
Old age comprises "the later part of life; the period of life after youth and middle age .
In the United States, the standard retirement age is currently 66 (gradually increasing to 67).
The AARP allows couples in which one spouse has reached the age of 50 to join, regardless of the age of the other spouse.
“The problem of the ambiguity of old age has .
People in their 70s were mostly rated good.
Old age survivors on-average deteriorate from agility in their 65-80s to a period of frailty preceding death.
A final option is a nursing home which provides professional nursing care.
A Canadian study illustrated how frailty increases with age and calculated the prevalence for 65+ as 22.4% and for 85+ as 43.7%.
