Pronoun usage could reflect either natural or grammatical gender, when those conflicted (as in the case of , a neuter noun referring to a female person).
( according to some authors).
¶ Cnut, king, greets his archbishops and his lede''''(people's)''''-bishops and Thorkell, earl, and all his earls and all his '''''people'''''ship, '''''greater''''' '''(having a 1200 shilling weregild)''' and '''''lesser''''' '''(200 shilling weregild)''', hooded'''(ordained to priesthood)''' and lewd'''(lay)''', in England friendly.
Used in modern editions, to distinguish from short .
, including its allophone  (before /k/, /g/).
(In some older editions an acute accent mark was used for consistency with Old Norse conventions.)
A rare spelling of , which was usually written as  ( in modern editions).
For example, the word "sheaves" is spelled ''scēabas'' in an early text, but later (and more commonly) as ''scēafas''.
The history of Old English can be subdivided into:
The  and  pronunciations are sometimes written  in modern editions.
Used in modern editions to distinguish from short .
There are also a number of extant prose works, such as sermons and saints' lives, biblical translations, and translated Latin works of the early Church Fathers, legal documents, such as laws and wills, and practical works on grammar, medicine, and geography.
That was a good king!
Anglo-Saxon literacy developed after Christianisation in the late 7th century.
The body of the word was so nearly the same in the two languages that only the endings would put obstacles in the way of mutual understanding.
That was a good king!
Unlike the previous two examples, this text is prose rather than poetry.
The eagerness of Vikings in the Danelaw to communicate with their southern Anglo-Saxon neighbours produced a friction that led to the erosion of the complicated inflectional word-endings.
The modern forms of Latin letters are used, including  in place of the insular G,  for long S, and others which may differ considerably from the insular script, notably ,  and .
The language of the Anglo-Saxon settlers appears not to have been significantly affected by the native British Celtic languages which it largely displaced.
The Old English Latin alphabet was introduced around the 9th century.
Otherwise, a knowledge of the history of the word is needed to predict the pronunciation.
, including its allophone .
See also Pronunciation of English ⟨th⟩.
Formerly the digraph  was used;  became more common during the 8th century, and was standard after 800.
Another source of loanwords was Old Norse, which came into contact with Old English via the Scandinavian rulers and settlers in the Danelaw from the late 9th century, and during the rule of Cnut and other Danish kings in the early 11th century.
The ''wh-''words were used only as interrogatives and as indefinite pronouns.
Norse cognate in scot-free)''' the while that you stood'''(endured)''' unfrith'''(turmoil)''' on-hand: now I, mid'''(with)''' God's '''''support''''', that unfrith totwemed'''(separated/dispelled)''' mid'''(with)''' my shot'''(financial contribution)'''.
More entered the language when the Anglo-Saxons were converted to Christianity and Latin-speaking priests became influential.
and ugg''' (induce loathing in, terrify; related to "ugly")''' earls.
There were not usually any silent letters – in the word ''cniht'', for example, both the  and  were pronounced, unlike the  and  in the modern ''knight''.
Modern editions of Old English manuscripts generally introduce some additional conventions.
It is most “important to recognize that in many words the English and Scandinavian language differed chiefly in their inflectional elements.
This was used until the end of the 12th century when continental Carolingian minuscule (also known as ''Caroline'') replaced the insular.
,  (in dialects having that sound).
, including its allophone  (but see '''b''').
(For details, see .)
Used in modern editions to distinguish from short .
In modern editions, wynn is replaced by , to prevent confusion with .
Additionally, modern editions often distinguish between velar and palatal  and  by placing dots above the palatals: , .
¶ I nam'''(took)''' me to mind the writs and the word that the Archbishop Lyfing me from the Pope brought of Rome, that I should ayewhere'''(everywhere)''' God's love'''(praise)''' uprear'''(promote)''', and unright'''(outlaw)''' lies, and full frith'''(peace)''' work'''(bring about)''' by the might that me God would'''(wished)''' to sell''''(give)'''.
The modern English plural ending ''-(e)s'' derives from the Old English ''-as'', but the latter applied only to "strong" masculine nouns in the nominative and accusative cases; different plural endings were used in other instances.
Norse borrowings are relatively rare in Old English literature, being mostly terms relating to government and administration.
how those athelings''' (noblemen)''' did ellen '''(fortitude/courage/zeal)''' freme''' (promote)'''.
For more details of these processes, see the main article, linked above.
It emerged over time out of the many dialects and languages of the colonising tribes, and it is perhaps only towards the later Anglo-Saxon period that these can be considered to have constituted a single national language.
The  pronunciation is sometimes written with a diacritic by modern editors: most commonly , sometimes  or .
Some modern editions use only thorn.
The first example is taken from the opening lines of the folk-epic ''Beowulf'', a poem of some 3,000 lines and the single greatest work of Old English.
It retained its position of prestige until the time of the Norman Conquest, after which English ceased for a time to be of importance as a literary language.
The translation is literal and represents the original poetic word order.
While indicating that the establishment of dates is an arbitrary process, Albert Baugh dates Old English from 450 to 1150, a period of full inflections, a synthetic language.
For details of the sound differences between the dialects, see Phonological history of Old English (dialects).
The portion of Mercia that was successfully defended, and all of Kent, were then integrated into Wessex under Alfred the Great.
In fact, what would become the standard forms of Middle English and of Modern English are descended from Mercian rather than West Saxon, while Scots developed from the Northumbrian dialect.
¶ Now, ne went'''(withdrew/changed)''' I not my shot'''(financial contribution, cf.
This usage is similar to ''what-ho!
Sometimes used for  (see , below).
Old English literature, though more abundant than literature of the continent before AD 1000, is nonetheless scant.
It is sometimes possible to give approximate dates for the borrowing of individual Latin words based on which patterns of sound change they have undergone.
In terms of geography the Northumbrian region lay north of the Humber River; the Mercian lay north of the Thames and South of the Humber River; West Saxon lay south and southwest of the Thames; and the smallest, Kentish region lay southeast of the Thames, a small corner of England.
Before a consonant letter the pronunciation is always  (word-initially) or  (after a vowel).
For sound changes before and after the Old English period, see Phonological history of English.
oth that''' (until that)''' him each of those umsitters''' (those "sitting" or dwelling roundabout)'''
With the unification of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms (outside the Danelaw) by Alfred the Great in the later 9th century, the language of government and literature became standardised around the West Saxon dialect (Early West Saxon).
However, various suggestions have been made concerning possible influence that Celtic may have had on developments in English syntax in the post-Old English period, such as the regular progressive construction and analytic word order, as well as the eventual development of the periphrastic auxiliary verb "do."
Macrons are used to indicate long vowels, where usually no distinction was made between long and short vowels in the originals.
The Old English period is followed by Middle English (12th to 15th century), Early Modern English (c. 1480 to 1650) and finally Modern English (after 1650).
Cædmon, the earliest English poet we know by name, served as a lay brother in the monastery at Whitby.
Probably velarised  (as in Modern English) when in coda position.
From around the 9th century, the runic system came to be supplanted by a (minuscule) half-uncial script of the Latin alphabet introduced by Irish Christian missionaries.
Some Mercian texts continued to be written, however, and the influence of Mercian is apparent in some of the translations produced under Alfred's programme, many of which were produced by Mercian scholars.
(an allophone of /f/)
The oldest Old English inscriptions were written using a runic system, but from about the 9th century this was replaced by a version of the Latin alphabet.
Sometimes stands for  after ,  .
Not present in Late West Saxon.
Tho'''(then)''' a man kithed'''(made known/couth to)''' me that us more harm '''''had''''' found'''(come upon)''' than us well liked'''(equalled)''': and tho'''(then)''' fore'''(travelled)''' I, meself, mid'''(with)''' those men that mid'''(with)''' me fore'''(travelled)''', into Denmark that to you most harm came of'''(from)''': and thatharm have I, mid'''(with)''' God's '''''support''''', afore'''(previously)''' forefangen'''(forestalled)''' that to you never henceforth thence none unfrith'''(breach of peace)''' ne come the while that ye me rightly hold'''(behold as king)''' and my life beeth.
Old English nouns had grammatical gender, a feature absent in modern English, which uses only natural gender.
A few letter pairs were used as digraphs, representing a single sound.
Nonetheless, the largest transfer of Latin-based (mainly Old French) words into English occurred after the Norman Conquest of 1066, and thus in the Middle English rather than the Old English period.
Due to the centralisation of power and the Viking invasions, there is relatively little written record of the non-Wessex dialects after Alfred's unification.
It maintains several distinct cases: the nominative, accusative, genitive, dative and (vestigially) instrumental.
In his supplementary article to the 1935 posthumous edition of Bright's ''Anglo-Saxon Reader'', Dr. James Hulbert writes:
It was once claimed that, owing to its position at the heart of the Kingdom of Wessex, the relics of Anglo-Saxon accent, idiom and vocabulary were best preserved in the dialect of Somerset.
Nearly all Anglo-Saxon authors are anonymous, with a few exceptions, such as Bede and Cædmon.
'', both an expression of surprise and a call to attention.
Besides singular and plural, the first- and second-person personal pronouns also retained dual forms, meaning "we (two)", "you (two)".
The number of Celtic loanwords introduced into the language is very small.
This passage describes how Hrothgar's legendary ancestor Scyld was found as a baby, washed ashore, and adopted by a noble family.
Spelling variations like  ~  ("land") suggest the short vowel may have had a rounded allophone  before  in some cases.
There is a limited corpus of runic inscriptions from the 5th to 7th centuries, but the oldest coherent runic texts (notably the Franks Casket) date to the 8th century.
Oft did Scyld Scefing of scather threats''' (troops)''',
In the earliest texts it also represented  (see '''þ''').
'''Old English''' () or '''Anglo-Saxon'''  is the earliest historical form of the English language, spoken in England and southern and eastern Scotland in the early Middle Ages.
Occurs in dialects that had such diphthongs.
Called  in Old English; now called eth or edh.
Some Latin words had already been borrowed into the Germanic languages before the ancestral Angles and Saxons left continental Europe for Britain.
Old English grammar is quite similar to that of modern German: nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs have many inflectional endings and forms, and word order is much freer.
Still, poetry is considered the heart of Old English literature.
The strength of the Viking influence on Old English appears from the fact that the indispensable elements of the language - pronouns, modals, comparatives, pronominal adverbs (like "hence" and "together"), conjunctions and prepositions - show the most marked Danish influence; the best evidence of Scandinavian influence appears in the extensive word borrowings for, as Jespersen indicates, no texts exist in either Scandinavia or in Northern England from this time to give certain evidence of an influence on syntax.
In Old English manuscripts, this letter usually took its insular form  (see also: yogh).
Many place-names in eastern and northern England are of Scandinavian origin.
Derived from the insular form of  with the addition of a cross-bar.
, including its allophone ; or , including its allophone , which occurs after .
The form of the verb varies with person (first, second and third), number (singular and plural), tense (present and past), and mood (indicative, subjunctive and imperative).
In alliteration, the first consonant in a word alliterates with the same consonant at the beginning of another word, as with .
Like other old Germanic languages, it is very different from Modern English and difficult for Modern English speakers to understand without study.
*Similarly, ''wh-'' forms were not used as relative pronouns.
A rare spelling for ; e.g.
Old English developed from a set of Anglo-Frisian or North Sea Germanic dialects originally spoken by Germanic tribes traditionally known as the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes.
Represented  in the earliest texts (see '''þ''').
of many maegths''' (clans; cf.
Old English also sometimes uses compound constructions to express other verbal aspects, the future and the passive voice; in these we see the beginnings of the compound tenses of Modern English.
This included most of present-day England, as well as part of what is now southeastern Scotland, which for several centuries belonged to the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria.
Sometimes stands for ,  or  after ,  (see palatal diphthongization).
, including its allophone
The Latin alphabet of the time still lacked the letters  and , and there was no  as distinct from ; moreover native Old English spellings did not use ,  or .
Old English is a West Germanic language, developing out of Ingvaeonic (also known as North Sea Germanic) dialects from the 5th century.
There was a gain in directness, in clarity, and in strength.”
However, one investigation found that many Neo-Old English texts published online bear little resemblance to the historical language and have many basic grammatical mistakes.
Old English should not be regarded as a single monolithic entity, just as Modern English is also not monolithic.
The oldest surviving text of Old English literature is ''Cædmon's Hymn'', composed between 658 and 680.
''betst'' ("best") is occasionally spelt ''bezt''.
The four main dialectal forms of Old English were Mercian, Northumbrian, Kentish, and West Saxon.
Irish cognate Mac-)''', of mead-settees atee '''(deprive)''',
Used for  in modern editions, to distinguish from short .
Used in modern editions to distinguish from short .
Unlike Modern English, Old English is a language rich in morphological diversity.
in fewship''' (destitute)''' found, he of this frover''' (comfort)''' abode,
*Late Old English (c. 900 to 1066), the final stage of the language leading up to the Norman conquest of England and the subsequent transition to Early Middle English.
Used in this way in early texts (before 800).
The letter wynn  is usually replaced with , but , eth and thorn are normally retained (except when eth is replaced by thorn).
Sith '''(since, as of when)''' erst''' (first)''' he worthed''' (became)'''
However, there were some important differences.
Old English was not static, and its usage covered a period of 700 years, from the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain in the 5th century to the late 11th century, some time after the Norman invasion.
A semi-fluent translation in Modern English would be:
The gain was greater than the loss.
The change to Old English from Old Norse was substantive, pervasive, and of a democratic character.
*There was no ''do''-support in questions and negatives.
Word-finally after  it is always .
Old English is one of the West Germanic languages, and its closest relatives are Old Frisian and Old Saxon.
It was West Saxon that formed the basis for the literary standard of the later Old English period, although the dominant forms of Middle and Modern English would develop mainly from Mercian.
Adjectives had both strong and weak sets of endings, the weak ones being used when a definite or possessive determiner was also present.
In the earliest texts  or  was used for this phoneme, but these were later replaced in this function by eth  and thorn .
It was, after all, a salutary influence.
"When I got home, I ate dinner") did not use a ''wh-''type conjunction, but rather used a ''th-''type correlative conjunction such as , otherwise meaning "then" (e.g.
(the phonetic realization of geminate )
It is considered to represent the "classical" form of Old English.
These words, like other adjectives, inflected for gender, number and case.
Like today, Old English had fewer strong verbs, and many of these have over time decayed into weak forms.
Of these, Northumbria south of the Tyne, and most of Mercia, were overrun by the Vikings during the 9th century.
The remaining 20 Latin letters were supplemented by four more:  (, modern ''ash'') and  (, now called eth or edh), which were modified Latin letters, and thorn  and wynn , which are borrowings from the futhorc.
The long variant may be shown in modern editions as ''īo''.
Eth was more common than thorn before Alfred's time.
, including its allophones
It was also through Irish Christian missionaries that the Latin alphabet was introduced and adapted for the writing of Old English, replacing the earlier runic system.
We of Gare-Danes''' (lit.
This language, or bloc of languages, spoken by the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, and pre-dating documented Old English or Anglo-Saxon, has also been called Primitive Old English.
*Prehistoric Old English (c. 450 to 650); for this period, Old English is mostly a reconstructed language as no literary witnesses survive (with the exception of limited epigraphic evidence).
Old Norse and Old English resembled each other closely like cousins and with some words in common, they roughly understood each other; in time the inflections melted away and the analytic pattern emerged.
Alfred advocated education in English alongside Latin, and had many works translated into the English language; some of them, such as Pope Gregory I's treatise ''Pastoral Care'', appear to have been translated by Alfred himself.
Description and notes
Another demonstrative was  ("this").
over whale-road''' (''kenning'' for "sea")''' hear should,
Like other historical languages, Old English has been used by scholars and enthusiasts of later periods to create texts either imitating Anglo-Saxon literature or deliberately transferring it to a different cultural context.
Vowels alliterate with any other vowel, as with  and .
There is also an Old English version of Wikipedia.
Perhaps around 85 per cent of Old English words are no longer in use, but those that survived, are basic elements of Modern English vocabulary.
In earlier texts by continental scribes, and also later in the north, /w/ was represented by  or .
*Sentences with subordinate clauses of the type "when X, Y" (e.g.
*Multiple negatives could stack up in a sentence, and intensified each other (negative concord).
Used in modern editions, to distinguish from short .
From then onward, thorn was used increasingly often at the start of words, while eth was normal in the middle and at the end of words, although usage varied in both cases.
The modern cognates of original words have been used whenever practical to give a close approximation of the feel of the original poem.
The speech of eastern and northern parts of England was subject to strong Old Norse influence due to Scandinavian rule and settlement beginning in the 9th century.
In the mixed population which existed in the Danelaw these endings must have led to much confusion, tending gradually to become obscured and finally lost.” This blending of peoples and languages happily resulted in “simplifying English grammar.”
For example, the words  ("sun"),  ("moon") and  ("woman/wife") were respectively feminine, masculine and neuter; this is reflected, among other things, in the form of the definite article used with these nouns:  ("the sun"), ''se mōna'' ("the moon"),  ("the woman/wife").
We have heard of majesty of the Spear-Danes, of those nation-kings in the days of yore, and how those noblemen promoted zeal.
Used in modern editions to distinguish from short .
Instead, the indeclinable word  was used, often preceded by (or replaced by) the appropriate form of the article/demonstrative .
Used in modern editions, to distinguish from short .
In Old English, however, nouns and their modifying words take appropriate endings depending on their case.
Doubled consonants are geminated; the geminate fricatives /,  and  cannot be voiced.
Norse was also widely spoken in the parts of England which fell under Danish law.
In the combinations , , , , the realization may have been a devoiced version of the second consonant.
A modern substitution for .
(For details, see .)
Compare e caudata, ę.
The exact nature of Old English  is not known; it may have been an alveolar approximant  as in most modern English, an alveolar flap , or an alveolar trill .
From that time on, the West Saxon dialect (then in the form now known as Early West Saxon) became standardised as the language of government, and as the basis for the many works of literature and religious materials produced or translated from Latin in that period.
For ease of reading, the passage has been divided into sentences while the pilcrows represent the original division.
Some were simply consequences of the greater level of nominal and verbal inflection, which meant that word order was generally freer.
Sometimes stands for  after ,  (see palatal diphthongization).
The literary standard, however, was based on the West Saxon dialect, away from the main area of Scandinavian influence; the impact of Norse may have been greater in the eastern and northern dialects.
This is a proclamation from King Cnut the Great to his earl Thorkell the Tall and the English people written in AD 1020.
In the text below, the letters that alliterate are bolded.
Mercian and Northumbrian are together referred to as ''Anglian''.
, including its allophone
Used in modern editions to distinguish from short .
Otherwise a knowledge of the history of the word in question is needed to predict the pronunciation.
