It measures just 0.05&nbsp;mm (thinner than paper), yet a Samsung staff member said that it is "technically possible to make the panel thinner".
The Super AMOLED display in the Galaxy S5, for example, was found to outperform all LCD displays on the market in terms of brightness and reflectance.
Prototypes have been made of flexible and rollable displays which use OLEDs' unique characteristics.
Pope's group also first observed direct current (DC) electroluminescence under vacuum on a single pure crystal of anthracene and on anthracene crystals doped with tetracene in 1963 using a small area silver electrode at 400 volts.
Possible examples include single crystal sapphire substrates treated with gold (Au) film anodes yielding lower work functions, operating voltages, electrical resistance values, and increasing lifetime of OLEDs.
Like ink jet material depositioning, inkjet etching (IJE) deposits precise amounts of solvent onto a substrate designed to selectively dissolve the substrate material and induce a structure or pattern.
This results in almost double the quantum efficiency of existing OLEDs.
It takes advantage of standard metal deposition, photolithography, and etching to create alignment marks commonly on glass or other device substrates.
In the same year, Dow Chemical researchers patented a method of preparing electroluminescent cells using high-voltage (500–1500 V) AC-driven (100–3000&nbsp;Hz) electrically insulated one millimetre thin layers of a melted phosphor consisting of ground anthracene powder, tetracene, and graphite powder.
The frequency of this radiation depends on the band gap of the material, in this case the difference in energy between the HOMO and LUMO.
Photolithography and etching removes some polymer layers to uncover conductive pads on the ICs.
Nokia has also introduced some OLED products including the N85 and the N86 8MP, both of which feature an AMOLED display.
In October 2008, Samsung showcased the world's thinnest OLED display, also the first to be "flappable" and bendable.
Ching W. Tang and Steven Van Slyke at Eastman Kodak reported the first OLED device in 1987.
Furthermore, OLED pixel colors appear correct and unshifted, even as the viewing angle approaches 90° from the normal.
Compared to a non-etched polymer layer, the structured polymer layer in the OLED structure from the IJE process helps to decrease the TIR of the OLED device.
This happens closer to the emissive layer, because in organic semiconductors holes are generally more mobile than electrons.
External quantum efficiency values of 20% and 19% have been reported for red (625&nbsp;nm) and green (530&nbsp;nm) diodes, respectively.
''), fluorescent and phosphorescent dyes and conjugated dendrimers.
Polymer OLEDs are quite efficient and require a relatively small amount of power for the amount of light produced.
; Transparent OLEDs: Transparent OLEDs use transparent or semi-transparent contacts on both sides of the device to create displays that can be made to be both top and bottom emitting (transparent).
On June 1, 2011, Mitsubishi installed a 6-meter OLED 'sphere' in Tokyo's Science Museum.
Philips Lighting have made OLED lighting samples under the brand name "Lumiblade" available online and Novaled AG based in Dresden, Germany, introduced a line of OLED desk lamps called "Victory" in September, 2011.
Similarly, hole only devices can be made by using a cathode made solely of aluminium, resulting in an energy barrier too large for efficient electron injection.
Emission intensity is enhanced when the IML thickness is 1.3–2.5&nbsp;nm.
This was exceeded in January 2008, when Samsung showcased the world's largest and thinnest OLED TV at the time, at 31&nbsp;inches (78&nbsp;cm) and 4.3&nbsp;mm.
; Color balance: Additionally, as the OLED material used to produce blue light degrades significantly more rapidly than the materials that produce other colors, blue light output will decrease relative to the other colors of light.
Organic vapour jet printing (OVJP) uses an inert carrier gas, such as argon or nitrogen, to transport evaporated organic molecules (as in organic vapour phase deposition).
Indium tin oxide (ITO) is commonly used as the anode material.
This is lower than the typical lifetime of LCD, LED or PDP technology.
CNET reviewed the LG 55EC9300 OLED Television in September 2014 and called it the "Best.
Thin polymer adhesive layers are applied to enhance resistance to particles and surface defects.
OLED displays were used in watches made by Fossil (JR-9465) and Diesel (DZ-7086).
Active-matrix OLEDs (AMOLED) require a thin-film transistor backplane to switch each individual pixel on or off, but allow for higher resolution and larger display sizes.
This technology can be used in Head-up displays, smart windows or augmented reality applications and has been used (with a black light absorbing backing) on some Samsung Galaxy phones such as the S4 Mini verified by Andre de-Guerin around June 2016
One example was the first light-emitting device synthesised by J. H. Burroughes ''et al.
Single carrier devices are typically used to study the kinetics and charge transport mechanisms of an organic material and can be useful when trying to study energy transfer processes.
This variation in the differential color output will change the color balance of the display and is much more noticeable than a decrease in overall luminance.
In low ambient light conditions (such as a dark room), an OLED screen can achieve a higher contrast ratio than an LCD, regardless of whether the LCD uses cold cathode fluorescent lamps or an LED backlight.
As current through the device is composed of only one type of charge carrier, either electrons or holes, recombination does not occur and no light is emitted.
at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge reporting a high efficiency green light-emitting polymer based device using 100&nbsp;nm thick films of poly(p-phenylene vinylene).
For example, a blue subpixel may be 100% larger than the green subpixel.
When looking at top-emitting OLEDs, thickness also plays a role when talking about index match layers (IMLs).
To cope with the hurdle related to the panel size, amorphous-silicon/microcrystalline-silicon backplanes have been reported with large display prototype demonstrations.
However, some manufacturers' displays aim to increase the lifespan of OLED displays, pushing their expected life past that of LCD displays by improving light outcoupling, thus achieving the same brightness at a lower drive current.
A typical conductive layer may consist of PEDOT:PSS as the HOMO level of this material generally lies between the workfunction of ITO and the HOMO of other commonly used polymers, reducing the energy barriers for hole injection.
Roll-to-roll vapor-deposition methods for organic devices do allow mass production of thousands of devices per minute for minimal cost; however, this technique also induces problems: devices with multiple layers can be challenging to make because of registration—lining up the different printed layers to the required degree of accuracy.
It is said that the chemical breakdown in the semiconductors occurs in four steps: 1) recombination of charge carriers through the absorption of UV light, 2) homolytic dissociation, 3) subsequent radical addition reactions that form  radicals, and 4) disproportionation between two radicals resulting in hydrogen-atom transfer reactions.
OLED devices are classified as bottom emission devices if light emitted passes through the transparent or semi-transparent bottom electrode and substrate on which the panel was manufactured.
Furthermore, plastic substrates are shatter-resistant, unlike the glass displays used in LCD devices.
This can be avoided partially by adjusting color balance, but this may require advanced control circuits and interaction with the user, which is unacceptable for users.
Due to the size limitation of the excimer laser used for LTPS, the AMOLED size was limited.
Mechanisms to decrease anode roughness for ITO/glass substrates include the use of thin films and self-assembled monolayers.
; Outdoor performance:As an emissive display technology, OLEDs rely completely upon converting electricity to light, unlike most LCDs which are to some extent reflective.
Therefore, improved sealing processes are important for practical manufacturing.
The search for efficient OLED materials has been extensively supported by simulation methods.
Electrostatic forces bring the electrons and the holes towards each other and they recombine forming an exciton, a bound state of the electron and hole.
The company is leading the world of OLED industry, generating $100.2 million out of the total $475 million revenues in the global OLED market in 2006.
Sony exhibited a 24.5" (62&nbsp;cm) prototype OLED 3D television during the Consumer Electronics Show in January 2010.
OLED layers are applied to the anode layer with conventional vapor deposition, and covered with a conductive metal electrode layer.
Applications in flexible signs and lighting are also being developed.
; Power consumption: While an OLED will consume around 40% of the power of an LCD displaying an image that is primarily black, for the majority of images it will consume 60–80% of the power of an LCD.
; Efficiency of blue OLEDs: Improvements to the efficiency and lifetime of blue OLEDs is vital to the success of OLEDs as replacements for LCD technology.
These contacts are the basis of charge injection in all modern OLED devices.
Removing the backlight also makes OLEDs lighter because some substrates are not needed.
Adding mobile ions to an OLED creates a light-emitting electrochemical cell (LEC) which has a slightly different mode of operation.
Alq3 has been used as a green emitter, electron transport material and as a host for yellow and red emitting dyes.
There are by now thousands of patents associated with OLEDs, both from larger corporations and smaller technology companies.
Inkjet etching can be used to selectively alter the polymeric layers of OLED structures to decrease overall TIR and increase out-coupling efficiency of the OLED.
It is believed that the self-assembly method used avoids the need to destroy bad backplanes as they can be pre-sorted at the manufacturing stage and the bad ICs replaced by micro-manipulators or other methods; where this is not possible the bad area can be cut off and the backplane area thus salvaged recycled for smaller displays such as on smart watches.
Polymer light-emitting diodes (PLED), also light-emitting polymers (LEP), involve an electroluminescent conductive polymer that emits light when connected to an external voltage.
The device consisted of a film of poly(N-vinylcarbazole) up to 2.2 micrometers thick located between two charge injecting electrodes.
This can lead to reduced battery life in mobile devices, when white backgrounds are used.
The panel has a contrast ratio of 1,000,000:1, a colour gamut of 107% NTSC, and a luminance of 200&nbsp;cd/m2 (peak luminance of 600&nbsp;cd/m2).
The proposed mechanism was either direct excitation of the dye molecules or excitation of electrons.
In January 2011 Samsung announced their Super AMOLED Plus displays, which offer several advances over the older Super AMOLED displays: real stripe matrix (50% more sub pixels), thinner form factor, brighter image and an 18% reduction in energy consumption.
As little as a speck of dust can ruin a screen during production.
The graded heterojunction architecture combines the benefits of both conventional architectures by improving charge injection while simultaneously balancing charge transport within the emissive region.
On August 13, 2013, Samsung announced availability of a 55-inch curved OLED TV (model KN55S9C) in the US at a price point of $8999.99.
DuPont stated in a press release in May 2010 that they can produce a 50-inch OLED TV in two minutes with a new printing technology.
On October 1, 2007, Sony announced that the 11-inch (28&nbsp;cm) model, now called the XEL-1, would be released commercially; the XEL-1 was first released in Japan in December 2007.
Coherent emission from a laser dye-doped tandem SM-OLED device, excited in the pulsed regime, has been demonstrated.
The video mic flag allowed video content and advertising to be shown on a broadcasters standard mic flag.
More commonly, though, manufacturers optimize the size of the R, G and B subpixels to reduce the current density through the subpixel in order to equalize lifetime at full luminance.
The use of macromolecular species like polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) in conjunction with the use of phosphorescent species such as Ir for printed OLEDs have exhibited brightnesses as high as 10,000&nbsp;cd/m2.
Similar components could form the basis of a molecular computer.
The emission is nearly diffraction limited with a spectral width similar to that of broadband dye lasers.
On September 6, 2013, Samsung launched its 55-inch curved OLED TV (model KE55S9C) in the United Kingdom with John Lewis.
IJE solvents are commonly organic instead of water based due to their non-acidic nature and ability to effectively dissolve materials at temperatures under the boiling point of water.
Pope's group reported in 1965 that in the absence of an external electric field, the electroluminescence in anthracene crystals is caused by the recombination of a thermalized electron and hole, and that the conducting level of anthracene is higher in energy than the exciton energy level.
This OLED featured the highest resolution at the time, of 6.22 million pixels.
Samsung's latest AMOLED smartphones use their Super AMOLED trademark, with the Samsung Wave S8500 and Samsung i9000 Galaxy S being launched in June 2010.
An alternative method to vacuum deposition is to deposit a Langmuir-Blodgett film.
In addition, the company adopted active matrix based technology for its low power consumption and high-resolution qualities.
In May 2008, Samsung unveiled an ultra-thin 12.1&nbsp;inch (30&nbsp;cm) laptop OLED display concept, with a 1,280×768 resolution with infinite contrast ratio.
According to Woo Jong Lee, Vice President of the Mobile Display Marketing Team at Samsung SDI, the company expected OLED displays to be used in notebook PCs as soon as 2010.
Phosphorescent organic light-emitting diodes make use of spin–orbit interactions to facilitate intersystem crossing between singlet and triplet states, thus obtaining emission from both singlet and triplet states and improving the internal efficiency.
Creating a battery that can be folded is another hurdle.
Statistically three triplet excitons will be formed for each singlet exciton.
Other manufacturers of OLED panels include Anwell Technologies Limited (Hong Kong), AU Optronics (Taiwan), Chimei Innolux Corporation (Taiwan), LG (Korea), and others.
A current of electrons flows through the device from cathode to anode, as electrons are injected into the LUMO of the organic layer at the cathode and withdrawn from the HOMO at the anode.
; Better picture quality: OLEDs enable a greater artificial contrast ratio (both dynamic and static) and wider viewing angle compared to LCDs, because OLED pixels emit light directly.
In January 2011, Sony announced the PlayStation Vita handheld game console (the successor to the PSP) will feature a 5-inch OLED screen.
; Lifespan: The biggest technical problem for OLEDs was the limited lifetime of the organic materials.
transfer-printing was capable to print onto target substrates up to 500mm X 400mm.
OLEDs are used to create digital displays in devices such as television screens, computer monitors, portable systems such as mobile phones, handheld game consoles and PDAs.
They are used as a thin film for full-spectrum colour displays.
For a high resolution display like a TV, a TFT backplane is necessary to drive the pixels correctly.
This allows cost-efficient pre-screening of materials, prior to expensive synthesis and experimental characterisation.
Some issues include: the lifetime of the OLED, rigidness of flexible foil substrates, and the lack of research in making more fabric like photonic textiles.
Experimental research has proven that the properties of the anode, specifically the anode/hole transport layer (HTL) interface topography plays a major role in the efficiency, performance, and lifetime of organic light emitting diodes.
The proposed mechanism was field-accelerated electron excitation of molecular fluorescence.
For example, electron only devices can be obtained by replacing ITO with a lower work function metal which increases the energy barrier of hole injection.
In April 2007, Sony announced it would manufacture 1000 11-inch (28&nbsp;cm) OLED TVs per month for market testing purposes.
A major area of research is the development of white OLED devices for use in solid-state lighting applications.
The production of small molecule devices and displays usually involves thermal evaporation in a vacuum.
Also, alternative substrates and anode materials are being considered to increase OLED performance and lifetime.
Degradation occurs because of the accumulation of nonradiative recombination centers and luminescence quenchers in the emissive zone.
Molecules commonly used in OLEDs include organometallic chelates (for example Alq3, used in the organic light-emitting device reported by Tang ''et al.
On December 26, 2011, LG officially announced the "world's largest 55" OLED panel" and featured it at CES 2012.
During operation, a voltage is applied across the OLED such that the anode is positive with respect to the cathode.
; Water damage: Water can instantly damage the organic materials of the displays.
This method is more suited to forming large-area films than thermal evaporation.
At the Consumer Electronics Show in 2012, Recom Group introduced the world's first video mic flag incorporating three 2.8" (7&nbsp;cm) OLED displays on a standard broadcaster's mic flag.
Also, low-molecular organic EL materials were employed.
Decay from triplet states (phosphorescence) is spin forbidden, increasing the timescale of the transition and limiting the internal efficiency of fluorescent devices.
The decay of this excited state results in a relaxation of the energy levels of the electron, accompanied by emission of radiation whose frequency is in the visible region.
As electrons and holes are fermions with half integer spin, an exciton may either be in a singlet state or a triplet state depending on how the spins of the electron and hole have been combined.
Scientists will be able to optimize substances to produce more powerful light emissions.
In late 2012, LG announces the launch of the 55EM9600 OLED television in Australia.
; Lightweight and flexible plastic substrates: OLED displays can be fabricated on flexible plastic substrates, leading to the possible fabrication of flexible organic light-emitting diodes for other new applications, such as roll-up displays embedded in fabrics or clothing.
However, an OLED can use more than three times as much power to display an image with a white background, such as a document or web site.
In OLEDs, light produced from the emissive layers of the OLED is partially transmitted out of the device and partially trapped inside the device by total internal reflection (TIR).
The project involves one laboratory and 10 companies including Sony Corp. NEDO said the project was aimed at developing a core technology to mass-produce 40&nbsp;inch or larger OLED displays in the late 2010s.
Their proposed mechanism involved electronic excitation at the contacts between the graphite particles and the anthracene molecules.
The use of OLEDs may be subject to patents held by Universal Display Corporation, Eastman Kodak, DuPont, General Electric, Royal Philips Electronics, numerous universities and others.
According to LG, OLED response times are up to 1,000 times faster than LCD, putting conservative estimates at under 10 μs (0.01 ms), which could theoretically accommodate refresh frequencies approaching 100&nbsp;kHz (100,000&nbsp;Hz).
Eventually, bendable, see-through displays could be stacked to produce 3D images with much greater contrast ratios and viewing angles than existing products.
Each currently is rated for about 25,000–40,000 hours to half brightness, depending on manufacturer and model.
This makes the production process more expensive and of limited use for large-area devices, than other processing techniques.
However, an inactive OLED element does not produce light or consume power, allowing true blacks.
The refractive value and the matching of the optical IMLs property, including the device structure parameters, also enhance the emission intensity at these thicknesses.
If this can be scaled up in terms of manufacturing, then the total cost of OLED TVs would be greatly reduced.
In October 2008, Sony published results of research it carried out with the Max Planck Institute over the possibility of mass-market bending displays, which could replace rigid LCDs and plasma screens.
TOLEDs can greatly improve contrast, making it much easier to view displays in bright sunlight.
Fluorescent dyes can be chosen to obtain light emission at different wavelengths, and compounds such as perylene, rubrene and quinacridone derivatives are often used.
; Inverted OLED: In contrast to a conventional OLED, in which the anode is placed on the substrate, an Inverted OLED uses a bottom cathode that can be connected to the drain end of an n-channel TFT especially for the low cost amorphous silicon TFT backplane useful in the manufacturing of AMOLED displays.
On January 8, 2013, at CES Samsung unveiled a unique curved 4K Ultra S9 OLED television, which they state provides an "IMAX-like experience" for viewers.
The metal cathode may still need to be deposited by thermal evaporation in vacuum.
; Bottom or top emission: Bottom or top distinction refers not to orientation of the OLED display, but to the direction that emitted light exits the device.
This trapped light is wave-guided along the interior of the device until it reaches an edge where it is dissipated by either absorption or emission.
It is transparent to visible light and has a high work function which promotes injection of holes into the HOMO level of the organic layer.
A technical writer at the Sydney Herald thinks foldable OLED smartphones could be as much as a decade away because of the cost of producing them.
In January 2015, LG Display signed a long term agreement with Universal Display Corporation for the supply of OLED materials and the right to use their patented OLED emitters.
In the FPD International, Samsung stated that its 40-inch OLED Panel is the largest size currently possible.
On February 17, 2011, Sony announced its 25" (63.5&nbsp;cm) OLED Professional Reference Monitor aimed at the Cinema and high end Drama Post Production market.
They further described the necessary energetic requirements (work functions) for hole and electron injecting electrode contacts.
Also in 1965, W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider of the National Research Council in Canada produced double injection recombination electroluminescence for the first time in an anthracene single crystal using hole and electron injecting electrodes, the forerunner of modern double-injection devices.
More recent developments in OLED architecture improves quantum efficiency (up to 19%) by using a graded heterojunction.
Roger Partridge made the first observation of electroluminescence from polymer films at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom.
; Stacked OLEDs: Stacked OLEDs use a pixel architecture that stacks the red, green, and blue subpixels on top of one another instead of next to one another, leading to substantial increase in gamut and color depth, and greatly reducing pixel gap.
At CES 2012, Samsung introduced the first 55" TV screen that uses Super OLED technology.
An additional photosensitive polymer layer is applied to the substrate to account for the topography caused by the printed ICs, reintroducing a flat surface.
Colour patterning can be accomplished by means of laser, such as radiation-induced sublimation transfer (RIST).
The device features a 1080p screen, measuring , that curves on the vertical axis in a rounded case.
However, as the application of subsequent layers tends to dissolve those already present, formation of multilayer structures is difficult with these methods.
Using this process, light-emitting devices with arbitrary patterns can be prepared.
By now it is possible to calculate important properties completely computationally, independent of experimental input.
The contrast ratio is 100,000:1, and the luminance is 200&nbsp;cd/m2.
However, fabrication of the OLED substrate is currently more costly than that of a TFT LCD, until mass production methods lower costs through scalability.
This allows printing arbitrary multilayer patterns without the use of solvents.
Samsung SDI announced in 2005 the world's largest OLED TV at the time, at .
Thus, they cannot show true black.
The results of the project were patented in 1975 and published in 1983.
The drive circuit was formed by low-temperature polysilicon TFTs.
Using response time compensation technologies, the fastest modern LCDs can reach response times as low as 1 ms for their fastest color transition, and are capable of refresh frequencies as high as 144&nbsp;Hz.
Researchers report luminescence from a single polymer molecule, representing the smallest possible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) device.
Anodes are picked based upon the quality of their optical transparency, electrical conductivity, and chemical stability.
In particular, blue OLEDs historically have had a lifetime of around 14,000 hours to half original brightness (five years at 8 hours a day) when used for flat-panel displays.
Although this scenario of illuminated clothing is highly plausible, challenges are still a road block.
This high flexibility in layer design, enabling distinct charge transport and charge blocking layers to be formed, is the main reason for the high efficiencies of the small molecule OLEDs.
At the Display 2008 exhibition, Sony demonstrated a 0.2&nbsp;mm thick 3.5&nbsp;inch (9&nbsp;cm) display with a resolution of 320×200 pixels and a 0.3&nbsp;mm thick 11&nbsp;inch (28&nbsp;cm) display with 960×540 pixels resolution, one-tenth the thickness of the XEL-1.
By 2004 Samsung, South Korea's largest conglomerate, was the world's largest OLED manufacturer, producing 40% of the OLED displays made in the world, and as of 2010 has a 98% share of the global AMOLED market.
OLED technology can also be found in digital media players such as the Creative ZEN V, the iriver clix, the Zune HD and the Sony Walkman X Series.
As well as conductive properties, different materials may be chosen to aid charge injection at electrodes by providing a more gradual electronic profile, or block a charge from reaching the opposite electrode and being wasted.
Due to their extremely fast response time, OLED displays can also be easily designed to be strobed, creating an effect similar to CRT flicker in order to avoid the sample-and-hold behavior seen on both LCDs and some OLED displays, which creates the perception of motion blur.
While unsubstituted poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) is typically insoluble, a number of PPVs and related poly(naphthalene vinylene)s (PNVs) that are soluble in organic solvents or water have been prepared via ring opening metathesis polymerization.
'', which involved a single layer of poly(p-phenylene vinylene).
OLEDs have been used in most Motorola and Samsung color cell phones, as well as some HTC, LG and Sony Ericsson models.
Such portable applications favor the high light output of OLEDs for readability in sunlight and their low power drain.
There are two main families of OLED: those based on small molecules and those employing polymers.
André Bernanose and co-workers at the Nancy-Université in France made the first observations of electroluminescence in organic materials in the early 1950s.
With 10,000 fc incident illumination (typical test condition for simulating outdoor illumination), that yields an approximate photopic contrast of 5:1.
However, due to supply shortages of the Samsung-produced displays, certain HTC models will use Sony's SLCD displays in the future, while the Google and Samsung Nexus S smartphone will use "Super Clear LCD" instead in some countries.
There is a relatively high failure rate when producing these screens.
However, polymers can be processed in solution, and spin coating is a common method of depositing thin polymer films.
Currently, other display technologies have the RGB (and RGBW) pixels mapped next to each other decreasing potential resolution.
Originally, the most basic polymer OLEDs consisted of a single organic layer.
Portable displays are also used intermittently, so the lower lifespan of organic displays is less of an issue.
Patternable organic light-emitting devices use a light or heat activated electroactive layer.
