It was during this time that he did his principal scholarly work, serving as an editor of the new American Law Review, reporting decisions of state supreme courts, and preparing a new edition of Kent's ''Commentaries'', which served practitioners as a compendium of case law, at a time when official reports were scarce and difficult to obtain.
Holmes rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel, but eschewed promotion in his regiment and served on the staff of the VI&nbsp;Corps during the Wilderness Campaign.
Holmes viewed Langdell's work as akin to the German philosophic idealism he had for so long resisted, opposing it with his own scientific materialism.
He enlisted in the Massachusetts militia in the spring of 1861, when the president first called for volunteers following the firing on Fort Sumter, but returned briefly to Harvard College to participate in commencement exercises.
Holmes himself expressed uncertainty about who had warned Lincoln ("Some say it was an enlisted man who shouted at Lincoln; others suggest it was General Wright who brusquely ordered Lincoln to safety.
His belief that law, properly speaking, was a set of generalizations from what judges had done in similar cases, determined his view of the Constitution of the United States.
Central to his thought was the notion that the law, as it had evolved in modern societies, concerned  with the material results of a defendant's actions.
The common law evolves because civilized society evolves, and judges share the common preconceptions of the governing class.
The true basis of the decision was often an "inarticulate major premise," however.
Holmes particularly admired and was close to his fellow officer in the 20th Massachusetts, Henry Livermore Abbott.
Holmes died of pneumonia in Washington, D.C. in 1935, two days short of his 94th birthday.
On his ninety-second birthday, newly inaugurated President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his wife Eleanor called on Holmes at his house in Washington.
He explored these theories in his 1881 book ''The Common Law.''
''Buck v. Bell'' was cited as a precedent by the opinion of the court (part VIII) in ''Roe v. Wade'', but not in support of abortion rights.
Holmes was moved to dissent.
Holmes is said to have shouted to Lincoln to take cover during the Battle of Fort Stevens, although this is commonly regarded as apocryphal.
Chief Justice Taft complained that "his opinions are short, and not very helpful."
In ''Schenck v. United States'', Holmes announced this doctrine for a unanimous Court, famously declaring that the First Amendment could not be understood to provide an absolute right, and would not protect a person "falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic."
Although Holmes did not dissent frequently — during his 29 years of service, he wrote only 72 separate opinions, whereas he penned 852 majority opinions —, his dissents were often prescient and acquired so much authority that he became known as "The Great Dissenter."
Holmes then went on to explain the importance of freedom of thought in a democracy:
Holmes sought to consciously reinvent the common law—to modernize it as a tool for adjusting to the changing nature of modern life, as judges of the past had done more or less unconsciously.
Holmes served on the court until January 12, 1932, when his brethren on the court, citing his advanced age, suggested that the time had come for him to step down.
Holmes's speeches were divided into two groups: public addresses, which he gathered into a slim volume, regularly updated, that he gave to friends and used as a visiting card, and less formal addresses to men's clubs, dinners, law schools, and Twentieth Regiment reunions.
A judge's task was to decide which of two parties before him would bear the cost of an injury.
Law was what the state would enforce, through violence if necessary; echoes of his experience in the Civil War were always present in his writings.
In 1920, in the case ''Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States'', Holmes ruled that any evidence obtained, even indirectly, from an illegal search was inadmissible in court.
The majority claimed to be following the precedents already set in Schenck and the companion cases in which Holmes had written for the Court, but Holmes insisted that the defendants' leaflets neither threatened to cause any harm, nor showed the specific intent to hinder the war effort.
By that time, at 90 years of age, he was the oldest justice to serve in the court's history.
As a justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, Holmes rejected the argument that the text of the Constitution should be applied directly to cases that came before the court, as if it were a statute.
As he wrote in one of his most famous decisions, his dissent in ''Abrams v. United States'' (1919), he regarded the United States Constitution as "an experiment, as all life is an experiment" and believed that as a consequence "we should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death."
This mysterious purpose explained the commitment to duty and honor that Holmes felt deeply himself, and that he thought was the birthright of a certain class of men.
Judges did not and should not consult any external system of morality, certainly not a system imposed by the Deity.
They never had children together.
Known as "Wendell" in his youth, Holmes, Henry James Jr. and William James became lifelong friends.
Holmes retired from the Court at the age of 90 years, making him the oldest Justice in the Supreme Court's history.
The most important of these was his friendship with the Anglo-Irish Claire Castletown, the Lady Castletown, whose family estate Doneraile he visited several times, and with whom he may have had a brief affair.
In a letter to a contemporary, Holmes made this comment on international comparisons: "Judge not a people by the ferocity of its men, but by the steadfastness of its women."''
Howe published several volumes of correspondence, beginning with Holmes's correspondence with Frederick Pollock, and a volume of Holmes's speeches, before his untimely death.
Holmes was widely admired during his last years, and on his ninetieth birthday was honored on one of the first coast-to-coast radio broadcasts, during which the Chief Justice, the Dean of Yale Law School, and the president of the American Bar Association read encomia; the Bar Association presented him with a gold medal.
Emerson famously replied, "If you strike at a king, you must kill him."
''The Common Law'' has been continuously in print since 1881, and remains an important contribution to jurisprudence.
"Therefore nothing but confusion can result from assuming that the rights of man in a moral sense are equally rights in the sense of the Constitution and the law."
He supported the Abolitionist movement that thrived in Boston society during the 1850s.
His philosophy represented a departure from the prevailing jurisprudence of the time: legal formalism, which held that law was an orderly system of rules from which decisions in particular cases could be deduced.
These views endeared Holmes to the later advocates of legal realism, and made him one of the early founders of law and economics jurisprudence.
The Wilson Administration was vigorously prosecuting those suspected of sympathies with the recent Russian Revolution, as well as opponents of the war against Germany.
He summarized his hard-won understanding in a series of lectures, collected and published as ''The Common Law'' in 1881.
Apparently learning that he was likely to publish this dissent, the Government (perhaps alerted by Justice Louis D. Brandeis, newly appointed by President Woodrow Wilson) abandoned the case, and it was dismissed by the Court.
She was described as devoted, witty, wise, tactful, and perceptive.
Holmes practiced admiralty law and commercial law in Boston for fifteen years.
Although Holmes evidently believed that he was adhering to his own precedent, some later commentators accused Holmes of inconsistency, even of seeking to curry favor with his young admirers.
An extensive selection of letters to Claire Castletown, in Ireland, is included in ''Honorable Justice, The Life of Oliver Wendell Holmes.''
In a series of opinions surrounding the WWI Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918, he held that the freedom of expression guaranteed by federal and state constitutions simply declared a common-law privilege for speech and the press, even when those expressions caused injury, but that privilege would be defeated by a showing of malice, or intent to do harm.
After his death, his personal effects included his Civil War Officer's uniform still stained with his blood and 'torn with shot' as well as the carefully wrapped Minié balls that had wounded him three times in separate battles.
Holmes espoused a form of moral skepticism and opposed the doctrine of natural law, marking a significant shift in American jurisprudence.
They were charged with violations of the 1918 amendments to the Espionage Act which were known as the Sedition Act of 1918, and which purported to make criticisms of the government and the war effort a crime.
In his Abrams dissent, Holmes did elaborate somewhat on the decision in ''Schenck'', roughly along the lines that Chafee had suggested.
In the book, Holmes set forth his view that the only source of law, properly speaking, was a judicial decision enforced by the state.
As Holmes stated at a talk upon receiving an honorary degree from Yale:
The book also remains controversial, for Holmes begins by rejecting various kinds of formalism in law.
Holmes' partner George Shattuck proposed him for the vacancy, Holmes quickly agreed, and there being no objection by the Council, took the oath of office on December 15, 1882.
On August 2, 1899, Holmes became Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court following the death of Walbridge A.
But for a certainty, the 6 foot 4 inch Lincoln, in frock coat and top hat, stood peering through field glasses from behind a parapet at the onrushing rebels....") and other sources state he likely was not present on the day Lincoln visited Fort Stevens.
Although there was no evidence that the attempts had succeeded, Holmes held for a unanimous Court that an attempt, purely by language, could be prosecuted in cases where the expression, in the circumstances in which it was uttered, posed a "clear and present danger" of causing some harm that the legislature had properly forbidden.
Holmes was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the son of the prominent writer and physician Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. and abolitionist Amelia Lee Jackson.
This argument would later be incorporated into his famous opinions concerning the First Amendment.
The Chief Justice then asked Holmes to write opinions in which they could be unanimous, upholding convictions in three similar cases, where there were jury findings that speeches or leaflets were published with an intent to obstruct the draft, a crime under the 1917 law.
During his senior year of college, at the outset of the American Civil War, Holmes enlisted in the fourth battalion, Massachusetts militia, then received a commission as first lieutenant in the Twentieth Regiment of Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry.
Although much criticized, ''Schenck'' remains an important precedent, and still governs cases in which expressions are intended to cause harm, or threaten to cause imminent lawless action.
He was one of only a handful of justices to be known as a scholar; ''The Journal of Legal Studies'' has identified Holmes as the third most cited American legal scholar of the 20th century.
The public addresses are Holmes's effort to express his personal philosophy in Emersonian, poetic terms.
Holmes is known for his pithy, short, and frequently quoted opinions.
If a construction worker throws a beam onto a crowded street:
In later opinions, the Supreme Court departed from this line of reasoning where the validity of a statute was in question, adopting the principle that a legislature could properly declare that some forms of speech posed a clear and present danger, regardless of the circumstances in which they were uttered.
His resignation, after only a few weeks and without notice, was resented by the law school faculty, giving rise to persisting estrangement.
''The Common Law'' is the only major scholarly work written by a practicing attorney.
On August 11, 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt nominated Holmes to a seat on the United States Supreme Court vacated by Justice Horace Gray, who had retired in July 1902 as a result of illness.
"The law is full of phraseology drawn from morals, and talks about ''rights'' and ''duties'', ''malice'', ''intent'', and ''negligence''—and nothing is easier in legal reasoning than to take these words in their moral sense."
"The law is the witness and external deposit of our moral life.
Hoar was a strenuous opponent of imperialism, and the legality of the annexation of Puerto Rico and the Philippines was expected to come before the Court.
He also published an address, "The Path of the Law," in which he enlarged upon his view of the law from the perspective of a practitioner concerned for the interests of his client, who might be a bad man unconcerned with moral absolutes.
In support of his argument that the interest of "public welfare" outweighs the interest of individuals in their bodily integrity, he argued:
In the summer of 1861 with his father's help he obtained a lieutenant's commission in the Twentieth Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry.
Holmes condemned the Wilson Administration's prosecution, and its insistence on draconian sentences for the defendants in passionate language: "Even if I am technically wrong regarding the defendants' intent and enough can be squeezed from these poor and puny anonymities to turn the color of legal litmus paper .
Notably, Alger Hiss clerked for Holmes during his last year on the Court.
In the opening paragraphs of the book, he famously summarized his own view of the history of the common law:
He attended lectures there for a single year, reading extensively in theoretical works, and then clerked for a year in his cousin Robert Morse's office.
These letters are closer to Holmes's conversation, and cast light upon the style he adopted in judicial opinions, which were often designed to read aloud.
Later that year, however, in ''Abrams v. United States'', Holmes was again in dissent.
It followed that constitutional principles adopted from the common law were evolving, as the law itself evolved: "A word in the Constitution is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged, but the skin of a living thought...."
During his service on the Massachusetts court, Holmes continued to develop and apply his views of the common law, usually following precedent faithfully.
Holmes repeated familiar arguments that statutes would not be struck down if they appeared on their face to have a reasonable basis.
They frequently advert to the Civil War and to death, and frequently express a hope that personal sacrifice, however pointless it may seem, serves to advance the human race toward some as-yet unforeseen goal.
Holmes said, "I think our morally tinted words have caused a great deal of confused thinking."
All of the speeches are reproduced in the third volume of ''The Collected Works of Justice Holmes''.
He reasoned that otherwise, police would have an incentive to circumvent the Fourth Amendment to obtain derivatives of the illegally obtained evidence, so any evidence resulting from this must be discouraged.
The felt necessities of the time, the prevalent moral and political theories, intuitions of public policy, avowed or unconscious, and even the prejudices which judges share with their fellow-men, have had a good deal more to do than syllogism in determining the rules by which men should be governed.
Lodge, like Roosevelt, was a strong supporter of imperialism, which Holmes was expected to support as well.
The argument made on her behalf was principally that the statute requiring sterilization of institutionalized persons was unconstitutional, itself a violation of what today is called "substantive due process."
In more than twenty-nine years on the Supreme Court bench, he ruled on cases spanning the whole range of federal law.
He continued to give speeches and to write articles that added to or extended his work on the common law, most notably "Privilege, Malice and Intent", in which he presented his view of the pragmatic basis of the common-law privileges extended to speech and the press, which could be defeated by a showing of malice, or of specific intent to harm.
George Washington University law professor Jeffrey Rosen summarized Holmes' views this way: "Holmes was a cold and brutally cynical man who had contempt for the masses and for the progressive laws he voted to uphold."
Fanny disliked Beacon Hill society, and devoted herself to embroidery.
Many of Holmes's closest male friends were in England and he corresponded with them regularly and at length, speaking usually of his work.
In the modern world, the advances made in biology and the social sciences should allow a better conscious determination of the results of individual acts and the proper measure of liability for them.
He was buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
In ''Abrams'', the majority opinion did rely on the clear-and-present-danger formulation of ''Schenck'', claiming that the leaflets showed the necessary intent, and ignoring the point that they were unlikely to have any effect.
In 1881, in ''The Common Law'', Holmes brought together into a coherent whole his earlier articles and lectures concerning the history of the common law, judicial decisions in England and the United States, which he interpreted from the perspective of a practicing lawyer.
Holmes accordingly grew up in an atmosphere of intellectual achievement, and early formed the ambition to be a man of letters like Emerson.
The law embodies the story of a nation's development through many centuries, and it cannot be dealt with as if it contained only the axioms and corollaries of a book of mathematics."
Congress established the "Holmes Devise" and the funds he left to the United States were used to create a garden at the Supreme Court's building, and to publish an edition of his collected works.
In the summer of 1864, Holmes returned to the family home in Boston, wrote poetry and debated philosophy with his friend William James, pursuing his debate with philosophic idealism, and considered reenlisting.
"The provisions of the Constitution are not mathematical formulas that have their essence in form, they are organic, living institutions transplanted from English soil.
A majority of the Court voted to uphold the convictions and sentences of ten and twenty years, to be followed by deportation.
Holmes argued that the evolving common law standard was that liability would fall upon a person whose conduct reflected prudence of a "reasonable man."
He was admitted to the bar in 1866, and after a long visit to London, to complete his education, went into law practice in Boston.
He believed instead "that men make their own laws; that these laws do not flow from some mysterious omnipresence in the sky, and that judges are not independent mouthpieces of the infinite...." "The common law is not a brooding omnipresence in the sky...." Rather than a set of abstract, rational, mathematical, or in any way unworldly set of principles, Holmes said that, "The prophecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious, are what I mean by the law."
The text of the Constitution itself, as originally understood, was not a set of rules, but only a directive to courts to consider the body of the common law when deciding cases that arose under the Constitution.
Dr. Holmes was a leading figure in Boston intellectual and literary circles, Mrs. Holmes was connected to the leading families; Henry James Sr., Ralph Waldo Emerson and other transcendentalists were family friends.
Howe's work formed the basis of much subsequent Holmes scholarship.
Nevertheless, in rejecting morality as a form of natural law outside of human enactments, and superior to them, Holmes was not rejecting moral principles that were the ''result'' of enforceable law.
On the bench, Holmes did vote to support the administration's position favoring the annexation of former Spanish colonies in the "Insular Cases."
Judges decided cases on the facts, and then wrote opinions afterward presenting a rationale for their decision.
He rejected as well the views of the German idealist philosophers, whose views were then widely held, and the philosophy taught at Harvard, that the opinions of judges could be harmonized in a purely logical system.
What counted as law, to a lawyer, was what judges did in particular cases.
Although later scholarship has shown the suit was collusive, and Carrie Buck was probably of normal intelligence, the record before the Supreme Court showed only that she had received a proper hearing in which she was represented by a competent guardian, and was able to press her suit in the federal courts.
The decisions of judges, viewed over time, determined the rules of conduct, the legal duties, by which all were bound.
Holmes's papers, donated to Harvard Law School, were kept closed for many years after his death, a circumstance that gave rise to somewhat fanciful accounts of his life.
His jurisprudence influenced much subsequent American legal thinking, including judicial consensus supporting New Deal regulatory law, and influential schools of pragmatism, critical legal studies, and law and economics.
This belief in the pronouncements of science concerning social welfare, although he later doubted its applicability to law in many cases, accounts for his enthusiastic endorsement of eugenics in his writings, and his opinion in the case of ''Buck v. Bell''.
She apparently had received the procedures required by due process of law in ample measure.
Holmes's executor, John Gorham Palfrey, diligently collected Holmes's published and unpublished papers and donated them (and their copyrights) to Harvard Law School.
Although the opinion and eugenics remains controversial, the decision in the case still stands.
"The life of the law has not been logic; it has been experience.
Harvard Law Professor Mark DeWolfe Howe undertook to edit the papers and was authorized by the school to publish them and to prepare a biography of Holmes.
He has been classed with the philosophic pragmatists, although pragmatism is what he attributed to the law, rather than his personal philosophy.
Noted for his long service, his concise and pithy opinions and his deference to the decisions of elected legislatures, he is one of the most widely cited United States Supreme Court justices in history, particularly for his "clear and present danger" opinion for a unanimous Court in the 1919 case of ''Schenck v. United States'', and is one of the most influential American common law judges, honored during his lifetime in Great Britain as well as the United States.
In 1989, the first full biography based on Holmes's papers was published, and several other biographies have followed.
This "objective standard" adopted by common-law judges, Holmes thought, reflected a shift in community standards, away from condemnation of a person's act toward an impersonal assessment of its value to the community.
Holmes, like most of his contemporaries, viewed the Bill of Rights as codifying privileges obtained over the centuries in English and American common law, and was able to establish that view in numerous opinions of the Court.
the most nominal punishment seems to be all that possibly could be inflicted, unless the defendants are to be made to suffer, not for what the indictment alleges, but for the creed that they avow.
This talk was widely reprinted and admired at the time, and may have contributed to the popular name given by the press to the 1st United States Volunteer Cavalry (the "Rough Riders") during the Spanish–American War.
Abrams and his co-defendants were charged with distributing leaflets that in Yiddish called for a "general strike" to protest the US intervention in Russia.
Only Holmes's legal writings were readily available during his life and in the first years after his death, but he confided his thoughts more freely in talks, often to limited audiences, and more than two thousand letters that have survived.
He saw much action, from the Peninsula Campaign to the Wilderness, suffering wounds at the Battle of Ball's Bluff, Antietam, and Chancellorsville, and suffered from a near-fatal case of dysentery.
He retired to his home in Boston after his three-year enlistment ended in 1864, weary and ill, his regiment disbanded.
Holmes in his earliest writings established a lifelong belief that the decisions of judges were consciously or unconsciously result-oriented, and reflected the evolving mores of the class and society from which judges were drawn.
While still in Harvard College he wrote essays on philosophic themes, and asked Emerson to read his attack on Plato's idealist philosophy.
Its history is the history of the moral development of the race.
Whenever he could, Holmes visited London during the social season of spring and summer, and during the years of his work as a lawyer and judge in Boston he formed romantic friendships with English women of the nobility, with whom he corresponded while at home in the United States.
Their significance is vital, not formal; it is to be gathered not simply by taking the words and a dictionary but by considering their origin and the line of their growth."
Holmes's early life was described in detail by Mark DeWolfe Howe, ''Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes--The Shaping Years, 1841-1870'' (1957).
He also served as an Associate Justice and as Chief Justice on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, and was Weld Professor of Law at the Harvard Law School, of which he was an alumnus.
Holmes accordingly argued that legal rules are not deduced through formal logic but rather emerge from an active process of human self-government.
Holmes's correspondence with women in Great Britain and the U.S. was at least as extensive, and in many ways more revealing, but these series of letters have not been published.
In the United States, letters to male friends Morris R. Cohen, Lewis Einstein, Felix Frankfurter, and Franklin Ford are similar, although the letters to Frankfurter are especially personal.
Holmes also insisted on the separation of "ought" and "is," which are obstacles in understanding the realities of the law.
Their marriage lasted until her death on April 30, 1929.
But by the fall, when it became clear that the war would soon end, Holmes enrolled in the Harvard Law School, "kicked into the law" by his father, as he later recalled.
A judge was obliged to choose between contending legal arguments, each posed in absolute terms, and the true basis of his decision was sometimes drawn from outside the law, when precedents were lacking or were evenly divided.
Holmes' summer house in Beverly, Massachusetts, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1972, recognition for his contributions to American jurisprudence.
Holmes famously contrasted his own scholarship with the abstract doctrines of Christopher Columbus Langdell, dean of Harvard Law School, who viewed the common law as a self-enclosed set of doctrines.
To the contrary, Justice Blackmun quoted it to justify that the constitutional right to abortion isn't unlimited.
At Harvard, he was a member of the Hasty Pudding and the Porcellian Club, both of which his father had also been a member.
Catherine Drinker Bowen's fictionalized biography ''Yankee from Olympus'' was a long-time bestseller, and the 1951 Hollywood motion picture ''The Magnificent Yankee'' was based on a biography of Holmes by Francis Biddle, who had been one of his secretaries.
As a result of Hoar's opposition, there was a delay in the vote for confirmation, but on December 2, 1902, Roosevelt resubmitted the nomination and Holmes was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate on December 4, receiving his commission the same day.
The dissent by Holmes permanently damaged his formerly close relationship with Theodore Roosevelt.
Profoundly influenced by his experience fighting in the American Civil War, Holmes helped move American legal thinking towards legal realism, as summed up in his maxim: "The life of the law has not been logic; it has been experience."
On Friday December 8, 1882, Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts associate justice Otis Lord decided to resign, however, giving outgoing Republican governor John Davis Long a chance to appoint his successor, if it could be done before the Massachusetts Governor's Council adjourned at 3 pm.
In the fall of 1882, Holmes became a professor at Harvard Law School, accepting an endowed professorship which had been created for him, largely through the efforts of Louis D. Brandeis.
These positions as well as his distinctive personality and writing style made him a popular figure, especially with American progressives.
However, he later disappointed Roosevelt by dissenting in ''Northern Securities Co. v. United States'', a major antitrust prosecution; the majority of the court, however, did rule against Holmes and sided with Theodore Roosevelt's belief that Northern Securities violated the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.
In the 1890s, at a time when "scientific" anthropology that spoke of racial differences was in vogue, his observations took on a bleakly Darwinist cast:
Holmes therefore brought himself into constant conflict with scholars who believed that legal duties rested upon "natural law," a moral order of the kind invoked by Christian theologians and other philosophic idealists.
Holmes was considered for a federal court judgeship in 1878 by President Rutherford B. Hayes, but Massachusetts Senator George Frisbie Hoar persuaded Hayes to nominate another candidate.
Holmes continued to dissent.
He formed his closest intellectual friendships with British men, and became one of the founders of what was soon called the "sociological" school of jurisprudence in Great Britain, followed a generation later by the "legal realist" school in America.
'''Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.''' (March 8, 1841 – March 6, 1935) was an American jurist who served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1902 to 1932, and as Acting Chief Justice of the United States January–February 1930.
He is remembered for prescient opinions on topics as widely separated as copyright, the law of contempt, the antitrust status of professional baseball, and the oath required for citizenship.
In his earlier writings he had expressly denied the utilitarian view that law was a set of commands of the sovereign, rules of conduct that became legal duties.
Chafee had criticized Holmes's opinion in ''Schenck'' for failing to express in more detail and more clearly the common-law doctrines upon which he relied.
Holmes received a brevet (honorary) promotion to colonel in recognition of his services during the war.
They did adopt and raise an orphaned cousin, Dorothy Upham.
In the Pudding, he served as Secretary and Poet, as his father also had.
He issued few constitutional opinions in these years, but carefully developed the principles of free expression as a common-law doctrine.
During his tenure on the Supreme Court, to which he was appointed by President Theodore Roosevelt, he supported efforts for economic regulation and advocated broad freedom of speech under the First Amendment.
Judges decided where and when the force of the state would be brought to bear, and judges in the modern world tended to consult facts and consequences when deciding what conduct to punish.
Holmes came to write three unanimous opinions for the Supreme Court that arose from prosecutions under the 1917 Espionage Act because in an earlier case, Baltzer v. United States, he had circulated a powerfully expressed dissent, when the majority had voted to uphold a conviction of immigrant socialists, who had circulated a petition criticizing the draft.
Holmes insistence on the material basis of law, on the facts of a case, has led some to characterize him as unfeeling, however.
Letters to friends in England such as Harold Laski and Frederick Pollock contain frank discussion of his decisions and his fellow justices.
Much of the scholarly literature addressing Holmes's opinions was written before much was known about his life, and before a coherent account of his views was available.
From Taft's departure on February 3, 1930 until Charles Evans Hughes took office on February 24, 1930, Holmes briefly acted as the Chief Justice and presided over court sessions.
The practice of it, in spite of popular jests, tends to make good citizens and good men.
When I emphasize the difference between law and morals I do so with reference to a single end, that of learning and understanding the law."
The Harvard Law Library eventually relented, and made available to scholars the extensive Holmes papers, collected and annotated by Mark DeWolfe Howe, who died before he was able to complete his own biography of the justice.
The nomination was made on the recommendation of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, the junior senator from Massachusetts, but was opposed by the senior senator and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, George Frisbie Hoar.
The United States Postal Service honored Holmes with a Prominent Americans series (1965–1978) 15¢ postage stamp.
In writing this dissent, Holmes may have been influenced by Zechariah Chafee's article "Freedom of Speech in War Time."
This later became known as the "fruit of the poisonous tree".
The defendants in this case were socialists and anarchists, recent immigrants from Russia who opposed the apparent efforts of the United States to intervene in the Russian Civil War.
