He described the Scots as a people "fearing His God's name, though deceived".
After a royalist uprising in March 1655, led by Sir John Penruddock, Cromwell (influenced by Lambert) divided England into military districts ruled by Army Major Generals who answered only to him.
All of them—except Cromwell, whose commission was given continued extensions and was allowed to remain in parliament—chose to renounce their military positions.
The troop was recruited to be a full regiment in the winter of 1642 and 1643, making up part of the Eastern Association under the Earl of Manchester.
Cromwell led his wing with great success at Naseby, again routing the Royalist cavalry.
* Elizabeth (1629–1658), married John Claypole.
Ultimately, however, Cromwell's failure to support his men, sacrificing them to his opponents, caused their demise.
Some point to his actions on entering Ireland.
At this stage, the group had an agenda of reformation: the executive checked by regular parliaments, and the moderate extension of liberty of conscience.
However, it should be noted that he landed in Dublin, a city with no Catholic population as they had been previously expelled.
Cromwell soon secured the submission of these and largely left them to their own affairs, intervening only to curb his fellow Puritans who were usurping control over the Maryland Colony at the Battle of the Severn, by his confirming the former Catholic proprietorship and edict of tolerance there.
Rather than opposing Parliament’s bill, Cromwell dissolved them on 22 January 1655.
A majority in both Houses pushed for a settlement that would pay off the Scottish army, disband much of the New Model Army, and restore Charles I in return for a Presbyterian settlement of the Church.
Cromwell also led a campaign against the Scottish army between 1650 and 1651.
Austin Woolrych explored the issue of "dictatorship" in depth, arguing that Cromwell was subject to two conflicting forces: his obligation to the army and his desire to achieve a lasting settlement by winning back the confidence of the political nation as a whole.
In 1657, Cromwell was offered the crown by Parliament as part of a revised constitutional settlement, presenting him with a dilemma since he had been "instrumental" in abolishing the monarchy.
His grandfather, his father, and two of his uncles had attended Lincoln's Inn, and Cromwell sent his son Richard there in 1647.
Cromwell declared, "A nobleman, a gentleman, a yeoman; the distinction of these: that is a good interest of the nation, and a great one!
His appeal rejected, Cromwell's veteran troops went on to invade Scotland.
Cromwell was much less hostile to Scottish Presbyterians, some of whom had been his allies in the First English Civil War, than he was to Irish Catholics.
In the early months after the execution of Charles I, Cromwell tried but failed to unite the original group of "Royal Independents" centred around St John and Saye and Sele, which had fractured during 1648.
Cromwell's hostility to the Irish was religious as well as political.
Cromwell and his troop then rode to, but arrived too late to take part in, the indecisive Battle of Edgehill on 23 October 1642.
Many of the Scottish prisoners of war taken in the campaigns died of disease, and others were sent as indentured labourers to the colonies.
During the 1980s the statue was relocated outside Wythenshawe Hall, which had been occupied by Cromwell's troops.
However, the Rump vacillated in setting election dates, and although it put in place a basic liberty of conscience, it failed to produce an alternative for tithes or dismantle other aspects of the existing religious settlement.
For example, after the battle of Preston, study of Psalms 17 and 105 led him to tell Parliament that "they that are implacable and will not leave troubling the land may be speedily destroyed out of the land".
Cromwell controversy continued into the 20th century.
As his mother was widowed, and his seven sisters unmarried, he would have been needed at home to help his family.
He was subsequently appointed governor of Ely and a colonel in the Eastern Association.
The first was "healing and settling" the nation after the chaos of the civil wars and the regicide, which meant establishing a stable form for the new government to take.
The suggestion was vetoed by King George V, not only because of his personal feelings but because he felt, given the anger caused by the erection of the statue outside Parliament, to give such a name to an expensive warship at a time of Irish political unrest was unwise.
Upon all of us there still lies 'the curse of Cromwell'.
He declared that "healing and settling" were the "great end of your meeting".
By the time of the Battle of Marston Moor in July 1644, Cromwell had risen to the rank of Lieutenant General of horse in Manchester's army.
This land would have generated an income of up to £300 a year, near the bottom of the range of gentry incomes.
During the battle, Cromwell switched his reserves from one side of the river Severn to the other and back again.
Afterwards it allegedly was owned by various people and was publicly exhibited several times.
* Bridget (1624–1662), married (1) Henry Ireton, (2) Charles Fleetwood.
As a younger son with many siblings, Robert inherited only a house at Huntingdon and a small amount of land.
These factors contributed to the brutality of the Cromwell military campaign in Ireland.
Afterwards, the head changed hands several times, including its sale in 1814 to Josiah Henry Wilkinson, before eventually being buried beneath the floor of the antechapel at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1960.
He was selected to take command of the English campaign in Ireland in 1649–50.
"...an attack on a king by one of his own subjects was taken to amount to a direct challenge to the monarch, to his divine right to rule, and thus to God's will."
Kilkenny surrendered on terms, as did many other towns like New Ross and Carlow, but Cromwell failed to take Waterford, and at the siege of Clonmel in May 1650 he lost up to 2,000 men in abortive assaults before the town surrendered.
Cromwell himself said of the slaughter at Drogheda in his first letter back to the Council of State: "I believe we put to the sword the whole number of the defendants.
Cromwell wrote afterwards that:
William Prynne the Presbyterian, in contrast to Cromwell the Congregationalist, was strongly opposed to the latter's pro-Jewish policy.
The marriage brought Cromwell into contact with Oliver St John and with leading members of the London merchant community, and behind them the influence of the Earls of Warwick and Holland.
Early biographers claim that he then attended Lincoln's Inn, but the Inn's archives retain no record of him.
I am persuaded that this is a righteous judgment of God upon these barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands in so much innocent blood and that it will tend to prevent the effusion of blood for the future, which are satisfactory grounds for such actions, which otherwise cannot but work remorse and regret"
In March, Cromwell was chosen by the Rump to command a campaign against them.
When Queen Victoria was invited to open the new Manchester Town Hall, she is alleged to have consented on condition that the statue of Cromwell be removed.
The statue remained, Victoria declined, and the town hall was instead opened by the Lord Mayor.
In this work, which was published between 1937 and 1947, Abbott began to argue that Cromwell was a proto-fascist.
However, many people began to question whether the body mutilated at Tyburn was in fact that of Cromwell.
Cromwell's conquest, unwelcome as it was, left no significant lasting legacy of bitterness in Scotland.
Charles I was executed on 30 January 1649.
On Tangye's death, the entire collection was donated to the Museum of London, where it can still be seen.
He had become a committed Puritan and had established important family links to leading families in London and Essex.
There were rebellions and mutinies following the debates, and in 1649, the Bishopsgate mutiny resulted in the execution of Leveller Robert Lockyer by firing squad.
Cromwell's new rights and powers were laid out in the Humble Petition and Advice, a legislative instrument which replaced the Instrument of Government.
The massacres at Drogheda and Wexford were in some ways typical of the day, especially in the context of the recently ended Thirty Years War, although there are few comparable incidents during the Civil Wars in England or Scotland, which were fought mainly between Protestant adversaries, albeit of differing denominations.
The success of his cavalry in breaking the ranks of the Royalist cavalry and then attacking their infantry from the rear at Marston Moor was a major factor in the Parliamentarian victory.
* Frances (1638–1720), married (1) Robert Rich (1634–1658), son of Robert Rich, 3rd Earl of Warwick, (2) Sir John Russell, 3rd Baronet
A key surviving statement of Cromwell's own views on the conquest of Ireland is his ''Declaration of the lord lieutenant of Ireland for the undeceiving of deluded and seduced people'' of January 1650.
This rebellion, although intended to be bloodless, was marked by massacres of English and Scottish Protestant settlers by Irish ("Gaels") and Old English in Ireland, and Highland Scot Catholics in Ireland.
Cromwell approved Thomas Brook's address to the House of Commons, which justified the trial and execution of the King on the basis of the Book of Numbers, chapter 35 and particularly verse 33 (''"The land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
During the first half of the 20th century, Cromwell's reputation was often influenced by the rise of fascism in Nazi Germany and in Italy.
But, most notably, the office of Lord Protector was still not to become hereditary, though Cromwell was now able to nominate his own successor.
Jasper was the uncle of Henry VII and great uncle of Henry VIII.
On four occasions in letters in 1648 he referred to the story of Gideon's defeat of the Midianites at Ain Harod.
Although Cromwell did not subscribe to Harrison's apocalyptic, Fifth Monarchist beliefs—which saw a sanhedrin as the starting point for Christ's rule on earth—he was attracted by the idea of an assembly made up of men chosen for their religious credentials.
Woolrych argued that the dictatorial elements of Cromwell's rule stemmed not so much from its military origins or the participation of army officers in civil government, as from his constant commitment to the interest of the people of God and his conviction that suppressing vice and encouraging virtue constituted the chief end of government.
As a ruler, he executed an aggressive and effective foreign policy.
Cromwell was born in Huntingdon on 25 April 1599 to Robert Cromwell and Elizabeth Steward.
This forced members of the House of Commons and the Lords, such as Manchester, to choose between civil office and military command.
However, the captain of Wexford castle surrendered during the middle of the negotiations, and in the confusion some of his troops began indiscriminate killing and looting.
However, on 3 September 1650, unexpectedly, Cromwell smashed the main army at the Battle of Dunbar, killing 4,000 Scottish soldiers, taking another 10,000 prisoner and then capturing the Scottish capital of Edinburgh.
With the help of Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery, Cromwell persuaded the Protestant Royalist troops in Cork to change sides and fight with the Parliament.
Although Cromwell's time spent on campaign in Ireland was limited, and although he did not take on executive powers until 1653, he is often the central focus of wider debates about whether, as historians such as Mark Levene and John Morrill suggest, the Commonwealth conducted a deliberate programme of ethnic cleansing in Ireland.
On the day after Pride's Purge, he became a determined supporter of those pushing for the king's trial and execution, believing that killing Charles was the only way to end the civil wars.
I do not think thirty of the whole number escaped with their lives."
From the middle of 1649 until 1651 Cromwell was away on campaign.
Clarendon famously declared that Cromwell "will be looked upon by posterity as a brave bad man".
In June 1647, a troop of cavalry under Cornet George Joyce seized the King from Parliament's imprisonment.
He argued that Cromwell's rise to power had been helped not only by his great spirit and energy, but also by his ruthlessness.
Cromwell and the rest of the "Grandees" disagreed with these sentiments in that they gave too much freedom to the people; they believed that the vote should only extend to the landowners.
After Cromwell's nephew was killed at Marston Moor he wrote a famous letter to his brother-in-law.
Cromwell and Fairfax took the formal surrender of the Royalists at Oxford in June.
Ireland, Fellow Commoner
In 1658 he was struck by a sudden bout of malarial fever, followed directly by illness symptomatic of a urinary or kidney complaint.
An example is ''The Perfect Politician'', which described how Cromwell "loved men more than books" and gave a nuanced assessment of him as an energetic campaigner for liberty of conscience brought down by pride and ambition.
There was no clear leadership from the various factions that jostled for power during the short-lived reinstated Commonwealth, so George Monck, the English governor of Scotland, at the head of New Model Army regiments was able to march on London, and restore the Long Parliament.
The event in part echoed a coronation, using many of its symbols and regalia, such as a purple ermine-lined robe, a sword of justice and a sceptre (but not a crown or an orb).
Cromwell's long-term religious motive for readmitting the Jews to England should not be doubted, after all he was serious enough to ban Christmas as a pagan festival.
The death warrant for Charles was eventually signed by 59 of the trying court's members, including Cromwell (who was the third to sign it).
Faced with the prospect of an Irish alliance with Charles II, Cromwell carried out a series of massacres to subdue the Irish.
The New Model Army, radicalised by the failure of the Parliament to pay the wages it was owed, petitioned against these changes, but the Commons declared the petition unlawful.
Late 20th century historians re-examined the nature of Cromwell's faith and of his authoritarian regime.
Cromwell himself in 1654 said, "I was by birth a gentleman, living neither in considerable height, nor yet in obscurity".
In particular, he created two baronages after the acceptance of the Humble Petition and Advice—Charles Howard was made Viscount Morpeth and Baron Gisland in July 1657 and Edmund Dunch was created Baron Burnell of East Wittenham in April 1658.
In the wake of the Commonwealth's conquest of the island of Ireland, the public practice of Catholicism was banned and Catholic priests were killed when captured.
The victory was of such a magnitude that Cromwell called it, "A high act of the Lord's Providence to us and one of the most signal mercies God hath done for England and His people".
In the Humble Petition it was called the Other House as the Commons could not agree on a suitable name.
The Scots' reply was robust: "would you have us to be sceptics in our religion?"
Of all the English dominions, Virginia was the most resentful of Cromwell's rule, and Cavalier emigration there mushroomed during the Protectorate.
Thus, even after a trial, it was difficult to get ordinary men to go along with it:
However, he also declared that: "as for the people, what thoughts they have in the matter of religion in their own breasts I cannot reach; but I shall think it my duty, if they walk honestly and peaceably, not to cause them in the least to suffer for the same."
Cromwell is still a figure of hatred in Ireland, his name being associated with massacre, religious persecution, and mass dispossession of the Catholic community there.
The reference to Jericho harks back to a previous occasion on which Cromwell had wrestled with his conscience when the news reached England of the defeat of an expedition against the Spanish-held island of Hispaniola in the West Indies in 1655—comparing himself to Achan, who had brought the Israelites defeat after bringing plunder back to camp after the capture of Jericho.
At the Battle of Langport on 10 July, Cromwell participated in the defeat of the last sizeable Royalist field army.
In this he was scathing about Catholicism, saying that "I shall not, where I have the power... suffer the exercise of the Mass."
Thomas Carlyle continued this reassessment of Cromwell in the 1840s, publishing an annotated collection of Cromwell's letters and speeches in which he described English Puritanism as "the last of all our Heroisms" while taking a negative view of his own era.
This second objective is also the context in which to see the constitutional experiment of the Major Generals that followed the dissolution of the first Protectorate Parliament.
In September 1649, he justified his sacking of Drogheda as revenge for the massacres of Protestant settlers in Ulster in 1641, calling the massacre "the righteous judgement of God on these barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands with so much innocent blood."
At first, the campaign went badly, as Cromwell's men were short of supplies and held up at fortifications manned by Scottish troops under David Leslie.
However, only St John was persuaded to retain his seat in Parliament.
Pressure from the Irish Nationalist Party forced the withdrawal of a motion to seek public funding for the project, and though the statue was eventually erected, it had to be funded privately by Lord Rosebery.
In October 1645, Cromwell besieged and took the wealthy and formidable Catholic fortress Basing House, later to be accused of killing 100 of its 300-man Royalist garrison after its surrender.
During this period, a series of Penal Laws were passed against Roman Catholics (a significant minority in England and Scotland but the vast majority in Ireland), and a substantial amount of their land was confiscated.
on 25 March 1960 the head of
They took up the suggestion of Major-General Thomas Harrison for a "sanhedrin" of saints.
Cromwell's paternal grandfather Sir Henry Williams was one of the two wealthiest landowners in Huntingdonshire.
Cromwell then marched north to deal with a pro-Royalist Scottish army (the Engagers) who had invaded England.
The family line continued through Richard Williams, alias Cromwell, (c. 1500–1544), Henry Williams, alias Cromwell, (c. 1524–6 January 1604), then to Oliver's father Robert Cromwell (c. 1560–1617), who married Elizabeth Steward (c. 1564–1654), probably in 1591.
The rule of the Commonwealth and Protectorate was, the Highlands aside, largely peaceful.
He was elected Member of Parliament for Huntingdon in 1628 and for Cambridge in the Short (1640) and Long (1640–49) Parliaments.
Later that year, he sought treatment for a variety of physical and emotional ailments, including ''valde melancholicus'' (depression), from the Swiss-born London doctor Theodore de Mayerne.
In December 1648, those Members of Parliament who wished to continue negotiations with the king were prevented from sitting for parliament by a troop of soldiers headed by Colonel Thomas Pride, an episode soon to be known as Pride's Purge.
Cromwell became the Member of Parliament for Huntingdon in the Parliament of 1628–1629, as a client of the Montagu family of Hinchingbrooke House.
Parliament had planned to re-conquer Ireland since 1641 and had already sent an invasion force there in 1647.
Cromwell demanded that no supplies were to be seized from the civilian inhabitants and that everything should be fairly purchased; "I do hereby warn....all Officers, Soldiers and others under my command not to do any wrong or violence toward Country People or any persons whatsoever, unless they be actually in arms or office with the enemy.....as they shall answer to the contrary at their utmost peril."
In February 1647 Cromwell suffered from an illness that kept him out of political life for over a month.
His nine-month military campaign was brief and effective, though it did not end the war in Ireland.
Cromwell had no formal training in military tactics, and followed the common practice of ranging his cavalry in three ranks and pressing forward, relying on impact rather than firepower.
Instead, Cromwell was ceremonially re-installed as Lord Protector on 26 June 1657 at Westminster Hall, sitting upon King Edward's Chair, which was moved specially from Westminster Abbey for the occasion.
Cromwell was sworn in as Lord Protector on 16 December 1653, with a ceremony in which he wore plain black clothing, rather than any monarchical regalia.
Then, once Cromwell had returned to England, the English Commissary, General Henry Ireton, adopted a deliberate policy of crop burning and starvation, which was responsible for the majority of an estimated 600,000 deaths out of a total Irish population of 1,400,000.
The First Protectorate Parliament had a property franchise of £200 per annum in real or personal property value set as the minimum value in which a male adult was to possess before he was eligible to vote for the representatives from the counties or shires in the House of Commons.
He was succeeded as Lord Protector by his son Richard.
During 1648, Cromwell's letters and speeches started to become heavily based on biblical imagery, many of them meditations on the meaning of particular passages.
By the end of the Cromwellian campaign and settlement there had been extensive dispossession of landowners who were Catholic, and a huge drop in population.
England's American colonies in this period consisted of the New England Confederation, the Providence Plantation, the Virginia Colony and the Maryland Colony.
The House of Commons representatives from the boroughs were elected by the burgesses or those borough residents who had the right to vote in municipal elections, and by the aldermen and councilors of the boroughs.
Cromwell gained experience in a number of successful actions in East Anglia in 1643, notably at the Battle of Gainsborough on 28 July.
Charles II barely escaped capture, and subsequently fled to exile in France and the Netherlands, where he would remain until 1660.
Despite failing to restore the Crown, this new constitution did set up many of the vestiges of the ancient constitution including a house of life peers (in place of the House of Lords).
Cromwell followed them south and caught them at Worcester on 3 September 1651.
Thus weakened, the remaining body of MPs, known as the Rump, agreed that Charles should be tried on a charge of treason.
Some historians argue that Cromwell never accepted that he was responsible for the killing of civilians in Ireland, claiming that he had acted harshly but only against those "in arms".
On 22 August 1620 at St Giles-without-Cripplegate, Fore Street, London, Cromwell married Elizabeth Bourchier (1598–1665).
In a war fought mostly by amateurs, these strengths were significant and are likely to have contributed to the discipline of his cavalry.
The following year, Charles II and his Scottish allies made a desperate attempt to invade England and capture London while Cromwell was engaged in Scotland.
I hope to render the English name as great and formidable as ever the Roman was.
The most likely cause of Cromwell's death was septicaemia following his urinary infection.
Preparations for an invasion of Ireland occupied Cromwell in the subsequent months.
He aimed to restore liberty of conscience and promote both outward and inward godliness throughout England.
Fairfax conspicuously refused to sign.
The castle at Carmarthen was destroyed by burning.
Cromwell was on the brink of evacuating his army by sea from Dunbar.
This facilitated further engagements in short order, which allowed greater intensity and quick reaction to battle developments.
At this time, Cromwell also fell into dispute with Major-General Lawrence Crawford, a Scottish Covenanter Presbyterian attached to Manchester's army, who objected to Cromwell's encouragement of unorthodox Independents and Anabaptists.
Historians such as John Morrill, Blair Worden and J. C. Davis have developed this theme, revealing the extent to which Cromwell’s writing and speeches are suffused with biblical references, and arguing that his radical actions were driven by his zeal for godly reformation.
Cromwell probably returned home to Huntingdon after his father's death.
Marston Moor secured the north of England for the Parliamentarians, but failed to end Royalist resistance.
A version of Edmund Ludlow’s ''Memoirs'', re-written by John Toland to excise the radical Puritanical elements and replace them with a Whiggish brand of republicanism, presented the Cromwellian Protectorate as a military tyranny.
He was also charged with familism by Scottish Presbyterian Samuel Rutherford in response to his letter to the House of Commons in 1645.
Although not entirely without ability, Richard had no power base in either Parliament or the Army, and was forced to resign in May 1659, ending the Protectorate.
In 1965 the Irish minister for lands stated that his policies were necessary to "undo the work of Cromwell"; circa 1997, Taoiseach Bertie Ahern demanded that a portrait of Cromwell be removed from a room in the Foreign Office before he began a meeting with Robin Cook.
In April 1645 the New Model Army finally took to the field, with Sir Thomas Fairfax in command and Cromwell as Lieutenant-General of cavalry and second-in-command.
In May 1647 Cromwell was sent to the army's headquarters in Saffron Walden to negotiate with them, but failed to agree.
However, there is evidence that Cromwell went through a period of personal crisis during the late 1620s and early 1630s.
Before joining Parliament's forces Cromwell's only military experience was in the trained bands, the local county militia.
Cromwell's experience at Newbury, where Manchester had let the King's army slip out of an encircling manoeuvre, led to a serious dispute with Manchester, whom he believed to be less than enthusiastic in his conduct of the war.
Cromwell had been connected to this group since before the outbreak of civil war in 1642 and had been closely associated with them during the 1640s.
The "Leveller" or "Agitator" movement was a political movement that emphasised popular sovereignty, extended suffrage, equality before the law, and religious tolerance.
He entered the English Civil War on the side of the "Roundheads" or Parliamentarians.
In 1628 he was elected to Parliament from the Huntingdonshire county town of Huntingdon.
Cromwell was still in the north of England, dealing with Royalist resistance, when these events took place, but then returned to London.
...upon all of these Cromwell's record was a lasting bane.
Proposals were drafted multiple times with different changes until finally the "Heads of Proposals" pleased Cromwell in principle and would allow for further negotiations.
"None of the officers charged with supervising the execution wanted to sign the order for the actual beheading, so they brought their dispute to Cromwell...Oliver seized a pen and scribbled out the order, and handed the pen to the second officer, Colonel Hacker who stooped to sign it.
Charles I surrendered to the Scots on 5 May 1646, effectively ending the First English Civil War.
The execution could now proceed."
Direct taxation was reduced slightly and peace was made with the Dutch, ending the First Anglo-Dutch War.
Cromwell was so angered by this that on 20 April 1653, supported by about forty musketeers, he cleared the chamber and dissolved the Parliament by force.
While a few of these commissioners were career politicians, most were zealous puritans who welcomed the major-generals with open arms and embraced their work with enthusiasm.
On the other hand, the worst atrocities committed in Ireland, such as mass evictions, killings and deportation of over 50,000 men, women and children as prisoners of war and indentured servants to Bermuda and Barbados, were carried out under the command of other generals after Cromwell had left for England.
He was buried with great ceremony, with an elaborate funeral based on that of James I, at Westminster Abbey, his daughter Elizabeth also being buried there.
It continues to be questioned whether the body mutilated at Tyburn was in fact that of Oliver Cromwell.
At Preston, Cromwell, in sole command for the first time and with an army of 9,000, won a decisive victory against an army twice as large.
A second Parliament was called later the same year, and became known as the Long Parliament.
The Putney Debates ultimately broke up without reaching a resolution.
The debates, and the escape of Charles I from Hampton Court on 12 November, are likely to have hardened Cromwell's resolve against the king.
I would rather have a plain russet-coated captain who knows what he fights for and loves what he knows than that which you call a gentleman and is nothing else".
The campaigns under Cromwell's successors Henry Ireton and Edmund Ludlow mostly consisted of long sieges of fortified cities and guerrilla warfare in the countryside.
The stories suggest that his bodily remains are buried in London, Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire or Yorkshire.
When he departed Ireland, they occupied most of the eastern and northern parts of the country.
Manchester later accused Cromwell of recruiting men of "low birth" as officers in the army, to which he replied: "If you choose godly honest men to be captains of horse, honest men will follow them&nbsp;...
