Australian olive oil is exported to Asia, Europe and the United States.
The EU regulates the use of different protected designation of origin labels for olive oils.
These presses are estimated to have had output of between 1,000 and 3,000&nbsp;tons of olive oil per season.
The taste of the olive oil is influenced by the varietals used to produce the oil and by the moment when the olives are harvested and ground (less ripe olives give more bitter and spicy flavors – riper olives give a sweeter sensation in the oil).
Oleuropein, together with other closely related compounds such as 10-hydroxyoleuropein, ligstroside and 10-hydroxyligstroside, are tyrosol esters of elenolic acid.
Olive oil consumption is thought to affect cardiovascular health.
A later source is the frequent mentions of oil in the Tanakh.
There is preliminary evidence that regular consumption of olive oil may lower risk of all-cause mortality and several chronic diseases.
* In one study, monounsaturated fats such as from olive oil benefited mood, decreased anger, and increased physical activity.
'''Olive oil''' is a fat obtained from the olive (the fruit of ''Olea europaea''; family Oleaceae), a traditional tree crop of the Mediterranean Basin.
Many Australian producers only make premium oils, while a number of corporate growers operate groves of a million trees or more and produce oils for the general market.
The Minoans used olive oil in religious ceremonies.
Eastern Orthodox Christians still use oil lamps in their churches, home prayer corners and in the cemeteries.
Evidence also suggests that olives were being grown in Crete as long ago as 2,500 BC.
Epidemiological studies indicate that a higher proportion of monounsaturated fats in the diet may be linked with a reduction in the risk of coronary heart disease.
The importance and antiquity of olive oil can be seen in the fact that the English word ''oil'' derives from c. 1175, ''olive oil'', from Anglo-Fr.
* ''Crude Olive Pomace Oil'' is the oil obtained by treating olive pomace (the leftover paste after the pressing of olives for virgin olive oils) with solvents or other physical treatments, to the exclusion of oils obtained by re-esterification processes and of any mixture with oils of other kinds.
Also, the pronounced taste of extra virgin olive oil is not a taste most people like to associate with their deep fried foods.
It is also used with foods to be eaten cold.
To achieve this possible benefit, olive oil is to replace a similar amount of saturated fat and not increase the total number of calories you eat in a day.
However the quality is still dependent on the weather.
The term ''virgin oil'' with reference to production method includes all grades of virgin olive oil, including ''Extra Virgin'', ''Virgin'', ''Ordinary Virgin'' and ''Lampante Virgin'' olive oil products, depending on quality (see below).
Olive oil is popular for use in massaging infants and toddlers, but scientific evidence of its efficacy is mixed.
In the United States, producers of olive oil may place the following restricted health claim on product labels:
These defects can occur for different reasons.
Olive oil contains phenolics, such as esters of tyrosol, hydroxytyrosol, oleocanthal and oleuropein, having acidic properties that give extra-virgin unprocessed olive oil its aroma and bitter, pungent taste.
* ''Lampante virgin oil'' is olive oil extracted by virgin (mechanical) methods but not suitable for human consumption without further refining; ''lampante'' is Italian for "glaring", referring to the earlier use of such oil for burning in lamps.
This paste is then malaxed (slowly churned or mixed) to allow the microscopic oil droplets to agglomerate.
Makeshift oil lamps can easily be made by soaking a ball of cotton in olive oil and forming it into a peak.
According to the historian Pliny the Elder, Italy had "excellent olive oil at reasonable prices" by the 1st century AD, "the best in the Mediterranean", he maintained.
''elaion'' "olive tree", which may have been borrowed through trade networks from the Semitic Phoenician use of ''el'yon'' meaning "superior", probably in recognized comparison to other vegetable or animal fats available at the time.
The researchers concluded that due to the negative outcome in adults, they do not recommend the use of olive oil for the treatment of dry skin and infant massage.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Latter-day Saints) and a number of other religions use olive oil when they need to consecrate an oil for anointings.
These grades are voluntary.
Olive oil, a multi-purpose product of Mycenaean Greece (c. 1600-1100 BC) at that time, was a chief export.
A commercial mill for non-sacramental use of oil was in use in the tribal Confederation and later in 1000 BC, the fertile crescent, an area consisting of present-day Palestine, Lebanon, and Israel.
Measured by quantitative analysis, acidity is a measure of the hydrolysis of the oil's triglycerides: as the oil degrades, more fatty acids are freed from the glycerides, increasing the level of free acidity and thereby increasing hydrolytic rancidity.
From its beginnings early in the 7th century BC, the cosmetic use of olive oil quickly spread to all of the Hellenic city states, together with athletes training in the nude, and lasted close to a thousand years despite its great expense.
In time, oils deteriorate and become stale.
Greece accounted for 11% of world production in 2013.
On March 15, 2011, the prosecutor's office in Florence, Italy, working in conjunction with the forestry department, indicted two managers and an officer of Carapelli, one of the brands of the Spanish company Grupo SOS (which recently changed its name to Deoleo).
Over 100 olive presses have been found in Tel Miqne (Ekron), where the Biblical Philistines also produced oil.
And God sets forth parables for mankind, and God is All-Knower of everything."
Recent genetic studies suggest that species used by modern cultivators descend from multiple wild populations, but a detailed history of domestication is not yet forthcoming.
The parable of His Light is as (if there were) a niche and within it a lamp: the lamp is in a glass, the glass as it were a brilliant star, lit from a blessed tree, an '''olive''', neither of the east nor of the west, whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it.
In some cases, colza oil (Swedish turnip) with added color and flavor has been labeled and sold as olive oil.
This stands true particularly when it is mixed with a lighter oil like sunflower, which "would have the further effect of reducing the already low levels of free fatty acids present in olive oil".
Major shippers are claimed to routinely adulterate olive oil so that only about 40% of olive oil sold as "extra virgin" in Italy actually meets the specification.
It also can be used for sautéing.
The peak is lit and then burns until all the oil is consumed, whereupon the rest of the cotton burns out.
Olive oils sold as the grades ''extra-virgin olive oil'' and ''virgin olive oil'' therefore cannot contain any refined oil.
On 3 January 2016 Bill Whitaker presented a program on CBS News including interviews with Mueller and with Italian authorities.
In April 2008, another operation impounded seven olive oil plants and arrested 40 people in nine provinces of northern and southern Italy for adding chlorophyll to sunflower and soybean oil, and selling it as extra virgin olive oil, both in Italy and abroad; 25,000 liters of the fake oil were seized and prevented from being exported.
An important issue often not realized in countries that do not produce olive oil is that the freshness makes a big difference.
75% of Spain's production derives from the region of Andalucía, particularly within Jaén province which produces 70% of olive oil in Spain.
The Roman Catholic, Orthodox and Anglican churches use olive oil for the Oil of Catechumens (used to bless and strengthen those preparing for Baptism) and Oil of the Sick (used to confer the Sacrament of Anointing of the Sick or Unction).
The charges involved falsified documents and food fraud.
Applying olive oil to the skin does not help prevent or reduce stretch marks.
He said that over 50% of olive oil sold in Italy was adulterated, as was 75-80% of that sold in the US.
Olive trees and oil production in the Eastern Mediterranean can be traced to archives of the ancient city-state Ebla (2600–2240 BC), which were located on the outskirts of the Syrian city Aleppo.
Sinuhe, the Egyptian exile who lived in northern Canaan about 1960 BC, wrote of abundant olive trees.
In this context, "acidity" is not chemical acidity in the sense of pH, but the percent (measured by weight) of free oleic acid.
Similar labels are permitted for foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids such as walnuts and hemp seed.
There have been allegations, particularly in Italy and Spain, that regulation can be sometimes lax and corrupt.
Tzidkiyahu was the last anointed King of Israel.
The most common are:
"God is the Light of the heavens and the earth.
The olive tree is native to the Mediterranean basin; wild olives were collected by Neolithic peoples as early as the 8th millennium BC.
Until 1500 BC, eastern coastal areas of the Mediterranean were most heavily cultivated.
: Limited and not conclusive scientific evidence suggests that eating about 2&nbsp;tbsp.
In 2000, Japan was the top importer of olive oil in Asia (13,000 tons annually) because consumers there believe both the ingestion and topical application of olive oil to be good for skin and health.
If uncompromised by heat, the flavor is stronger.
Refined olive oils are perfectly suited for deep frying foods and should be replaced after several uses.
* ''Virgin'' means the oil was produced by the use of mechanical means only, with no chemical treatment.
The United States is not a member of the IOC and is not subject to its authority, but on October 25, 2010, the U.S. Department of Agriculture adopted new voluntary olive oil grading standards that closely parallel those of the IOC, with some adjustments for the characteristics of olives grown in the U.S. Additionally, U.S. Customs regulations on "country of origin" state that if a non-origin nation is shown on the label, then the real origin must be shown on the same side of the label and in comparable size letters so as not to mislead the consumer.
The resulting oil is not "virgin" but "pomace oil".
In ancient Greece, the substance was used during massage, to prevent sports injuries, relieve muscle fatigue, and eliminate lactic acid buildup.
Nineteen people were arrested following the year-long joint probe by the police and Spanish tax authorities, part of what they call Operation Lucerna.
This leads to deteriorated taste.
* Raw material (olives) infected or battered
Olive oil is used throughout the world and is often associated with Mediterranean cuisine and diet.
The term "first press", sometimes found on bottle labels, is today meaningless, as there is no "second" press; it comes from ancient times of stone presses, when virgin oil was the one produced by battering the olives.
The oil produced by only physical (mechanical) means as described above is called virgin oil.
The largest production, however, is harvested in Apulia and Calabria.
God guides to His Light whom He wills.
The oil is then separated from the watery matter and fruit pulp with the use of a press (traditional method) or centrifugation (modern method).
The United States produces olive oil in California, Arizona, Texas, and Georgia.
This is done in specialised chemical plants, not in the oil mills.
After the first year, olive oil should be used for cooking, not for foods to be eaten cold, like salads.
This decision was announced November 1, 2004 after application to the FDA by producers.
Olive tree growing reached Iberia and Etruscan cities well before the 8th century BC through trade with the Phoenicians and Carthage, then was spread into Southern Gaul by the Celtic tribes during the 7th century BC.
One analysis of olive oil versus mineral oil found that, when used for infant massage, olive oil can be considered a safe alternative to sunflower, grapeseed and fractionated coconut oils.
Another use of oil in Jewish religion is for anointing the kings of the Kingdom of Israel, originating from King David.
However, one study noted that squalene, which is in olive oil, may contribute to relief of seborrheic dermatitis, acne, psoriasis or atopic dermatitis.
"In fact, olive oil labeled 'Italian' often comes from Turkey, Tunisia, Morocco, Spain, and Greece."
The point was made by Mueller that the profit margin on adulterated olive oil was three times that on the illegal narcotic drug cocaine.
Extra virgin olive oil is mostly used as a salad dressing and as an ingredient in salad dressings.
The International Olive Council (IOC) is an intergovernmental organisation of states that produce olives or products derived from olives, such as olive oil.
Other phenolic constituents include flavonoids, lignans and pinoresinol.
Remains of olive oil have been found in jugs over 4,000 years old in a tomb on the island of Naxos in the Aegean Sea.
* ''Refined Olive Oil'' is the olive oil obtained from any grade of virgin olive oil by refining methods which do not lead to alterations in the initial glyceridic structure.
Major Italian producers are known as "Città dell'Olio", "oil cities"; including Lucca, Florence and Siena, in Tuscany.
A cause-and-effect relationship has not been adequately established for consumption of olive oil and maintaining normal (fasting) blood concentrations of triglycerides, normal blood HDL-cholesterol concentrations, and normal blood glucose concentrations.
Whitaker reported that 3 samples of "extra virgin olive oil" had been bought in a US supermarket and tested; two of the three samples did not meet the required standard, and one of them—with a top-selling US brand—was exceptionally poor.
In Jewish observance, olive oil is the only fuel allowed to be used in the seven-branched Menorah in the Mishkan service during the Exodus of the tribes of Israel from Egypt, and later in the permanent Temple in Jerusalem.
Although candles can be used to light the hanukkiah, oil containers are preferred, to imitate the original Menorah.
A large part of U.S. olive oil imports come from Italy, Spain, and Turkey.
All production begins by transforming the olive fruit into olive paste by crushing or pressing.
This extensive fraud prompted the Italian government to mandate a new labeling law in 2007 for companies selling olive oil, under which every bottle of Italian olive oil would have to declare the farm and press on which it was produced, as well as display a precise breakdown of the oils used, for blended oils.
It is not clear when and where olive trees were first domesticated: in Asia Minor, in the Levant, or somewhere in the Mesopotamian Fertile Crescent.
In February 2008, however, EU officials took issue with the new law, stating that under EU rules such labeling should be voluntary rather than compulsory.
It can also be used for illumination (oil lamps) or as the base for soaps and detergents.
A menorah similar to the Menorah used in the Mishkan is now used during the holiday of Hanukkah that celebrates the miracle of the last of such containers being found during the re-dedication of the Temple (163 BC), when its contents lasted for far longer than they were expected to, allowing more time for more oil to be made.
''olio''), from Gk.
Fresh unfiltered olive oil usually has a slightly cloudy appearance, and is therefore sometimes called ''cloudy olive oil''.
Robin Lane Fox suggests that the Latin borrowing of Greek ''elaion'' for oil (Latin ''oleum'') is itself a marker for improved Greek varieties of oil-producing olive, already present in Italy as Latin was forming, brought by Euboean traders, whose presence in Latium is signaled by remains of their characteristic pottery, from the mid-8th century.
Archeological evidence shows that olives were turned into olive oil by 6000 BC and 4500 BC in present-day Israel.
There are many different olive varieties or olives, each with a particular flavor, texture, and shelf life that make them more or less suitable for different applications such as direct human consumption on bread or in salads, indirect consumption in domestic cooking or catering, or industrial uses such as animal feed or engineering applications.
Australia now produces a substantial amount of olive oil.
Olive trees were planted throughout the entire Mediterranean basin during evolution of the Roman republic and empire.
''olie'', from O.Fr.
The higher the temperature to which the olive oil is heated, the higher the risk of compromising its taste.
The glass has a metal holder that hangs from a bracket on the wall or sits on a table.
This form of olive oil used to be popular only among olive oil small scale producers but is now becoming "trendy", in line with consumer's demand for products that are perceived to be less processed.
Yet most major U.S. brands continue to put "imported from Italy" on the front label in large letters and other origins on the back in very small print.
''huile''), from L. ''oleum'' "oil, olive oil" (cf.
The Spartans and other Greeks used oil to rub themselves while exercising in the gymnasia.
Many ancient presses still exist in the Eastern Mediterranean region, and some dating to the Roman period are still in use today.
Choosing a cold-pressed olive oil can be similar to selecting a wine.
Carapelli lawyer Neri Pinucci said the company was not worried about the charges and that "the case is based on an irregularity in the documents."
It has been suggested that long-term consumption of small quantities of the polyphenol, oleocanthal, from olive oil may be responsible in part for the low incidence of heart disease associated with a Mediterranean diet.
When extra virgin olive oil is heated above , depending on its free fatty acid content, the unrefined particles within the oil are burned.
In North America, Italian and Spanish olive oils are the best-known, and top-quality extra-virgin olive oil from  Italy,  Spain, Portugal and Greece are sold at high prices, often in prestige packaging.
A very fresh oil, as available in an oil producing region, tastes noticeably different from the older oils available elsewhere.
Using tiny print to state the origin of blended oil is used as a legal loophole by manufacturers of adulterated and mixed olive oil.
Under EU rules, olive oil may be sold as Italian even if it only contains a small amount of Italian oil.
Police said the oils were blended in an industrial biodiesel plant and adulterated in a way to hide markers that would have revealed their true nature.
Another measure of the oil's chemical degradation is the peroxide value, which measures the degree to which the oil is oxidized damaged by free radicals, leading to ''oxidative'' rancidity.
This may be related to its ancient use as a medicinal agent and for cleansing athletes by slathering them in oil then scraping them.
Phenolic acids present in olive oil also add acidic sensory properties to aroma and flavor.
It is then further refined into ''Refined Olive Pomace Oil'' and once re-blended with virgin olive oils for taste, is then known as ''Olive Pomace Oil''.
In 2013, world production of virgin olive oil was 2.8 million tonnes (table), a 20% decrease from the 2012 world production of 3.5 million tonnes.
Journalist Tom Mueller has investigated crime and adulteration in the olive oil business, publishing the article "Slippery Business" in ''New Yorker'' magazine, followed by the 2011 book ''Extra Virginity''.
Although Italy is a net importer of olive oil, it produced 442,000 tonnes in 2013 or 16% of the world's production (table).
The IOC officially governs 95% of international production and holds great influence over the rest.
Lampante virgin oil can be used for industrial purposes, or refined (see below) to make it edible.
Olive oil is a source of at least 30 phenolic compounds, among which is elenolic acid, a marker for maturation of olives.
#Sometimes the produced oil will be filtered to eliminate remaining solid particles that may reduce the shelf life of the product.
Olive oil mixed with a perfuming agent such as balsam is consecrated by bishops as Sacred Chrism, which is used to confer the sacrament of Confirmation (as a symbol of the strengthening of the Holy Spirit), in the rites of Baptism and the ordination of priests and bishops, in the consecration of altars and churches, and, traditionally, in the anointing of monarchs at their coronation.
During this time, the oil was derived through hand-squeezing the berries and stored in special containers under guard of the priests.
The earliest surviving olive oil amphorae date to 3500 BC (Early Minoan times), though the production of olive oil is assumed to have started before 4000 BC.
Dynastic Egyptians before 2000 BC imported olive oil from Crete, Syria and Canaan and oil was an important item of commerce and wealth.
(سورة النور, An-Noor (The Light), Chapter #24, Verse #35)
A higher grade extra virgin olive oil is mostly dependent on favourable weather conditions; a drought during the flowering phase, for example, can result in a lower quality (virgin) oil.
One-year-old oil may be still pleasant to the taste, but it is less fragrant than fresh oil.
It is worth noting that olive trees produce well every couple of years so greater harvests occur in alternate years (the year in-between is when the tree yields less).
The oil is produced by pressing whole olives and is commonly used in cooking, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and soaps, and as a fuel for traditional oil lamps.
Certification is available, for a fee, from the USDA.
Some cosmetics also use olive oil as their base.
The refining process removes colour, odour and flavour from the olive oil, and leaves behind a very pure form of olive oil that is tasteless, colourless and odourless and extremely low in free fatty acids.
Extra Virgin olive oil has strict requirements and is checked for "sensory defects" that include: rancid, fusty, musty, winey (vinegary) and muddy sediment.
One parameter used to characterise an oil is its acidity.
It was reported that in the previous month 5,000 tons of adulterated olive oil had been sold in Italy, and that organised crime was heavily involved—the term "Agrimafia" was used.
Olive oil is also a natural and safe lubricant, and can be used to lubricate machinery that is used within the kitchen (grinders, blenders, cookware, etc.)
Labels may indicate the fact that the oil has ''not'' been filtered, suggesting a different taste.
The cultivation of olive trees in Crete became particularly intense in the post-palatial period and played an important role in the island's economy, as it did across the Mediterranean.
However, yet another study on adults found that topical treatment with olive oil "significantly damages the skin barrier" when compared to sunflower oil, and that it may make existing atopic dermatitis worse.
A 2014 meta-analysis concluded that an elevated consumption of olive oil is associated with reduced risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular events and stroke, while monounsaturated fatty acids of mixed animal and plant origin showed no significant effects.
In February 2012, an international olive oil scam was alleged by Spanish police to have taken place, in which palm, avocado, sunflower and other cheaper oils were passed off as Italian olive oil.
The label term "cold-extraction" on extra virgin olive oils indicates that the olive grinding and stirring was done at a temperature of maximum , as treatment in higher temperatures risks decreasing the olive oils' quality (texture, taste and aroma).
Another trial stated that olive oil lowered the risk of dermatitis for infants in all gestational stages when compared with emollient cream.
The first recorded oil extraction is known from the Hebrew Bible and took place during the Exodus from Egypt, during the 13th century BC.
There has been relatively little scientific work done on the effect of olive oil on acne and other skin conditions.
The flavor of these oils varies considerably and a particular oil may be more suited for a particular dish.
It was obtained by using only the first drop from a squeezed olive and was consecrated for use only in the Temple by the priests and stored in special containers.
Here some dozen documents dated 2400 BC describe lands of the king and the queen.
A vigil lamp consists of a votive glass containing a half-inch of water and filled the rest with olive oil.
A 2011 meta-analysis concluded that olive oil consumption may play a protective role against the development of any type of cancer, but could not clarify whether the beneficial effect is due to olive oil monounsaturated fatty acid content or its antioxidant components.
Olive oil is a usual offering to churches and cemeteries.
(23&nbsp;g) of olive oil daily may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease due to the monounsaturated fat in olive oil.
* Olive oil may be used in soap making, as lamp oil, a lubricant, or as a substitute for machine oil.
The wild olive tree originated in Asia Minor or in ancient Greece.
In March 2008, 400 Italian police officers conducted "Operation Golden Oil", arresting 23 people and confiscating 85 farms after an investigation revealed a large-scale scheme to relabel oils from other Mediterranean nations as Italian.
These belonged to a library of clay tablets perfectly preserved by having been baked in the fire that destroyed the palace.
The remaining paste (pomace) still contains a small quantity (about 5–10%) of oil that cannot be extracted by further pressing, but only with chemical solvents.
* Inadequate harvest, with contact between the olives and soil
After extraction the remnant solid substance, called pomace, still contains a small quantity of oil.
To douse the flame, the float is carefully pressed down into the oil.
Olive trees were certainly cultivated by the Late Minoan period (1500 BC) in Crete, and perhaps as early as the Early Minoan.
In a comprehensive scientific review by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in 2011, health claims on olive oil were approved for protection by its polyphenols against oxidation of blood lipids, and for the contribution to the maintenance of normal blood LDL-cholesterol levels by replacing saturated fats in the diet with oleic acid (Commission Regulation (EU) 432/2012 of 16 May 2012).
* Olive oil has also been used as both solvent and ligand in the synthesis of cadmium selenide quantum dots.
Olive oil was common in ancient Greek and Roman cuisine.
To classify its organoleptic qualities, olive oil is judged by a panel of trained tasters in a blind taste test.
The oils were not toxic and posed no health risk, according to a statement by the Guardia Civil.
The oil became a principal product of the Minoan civilization, where it is thought to have represented wealth.
In the Orthodox Church, olive oil is a product not consumed during lent or penance while Orthodox monks use it sparingly in their diet.
Extra virgin olive oil is virgin olive oil that satisfies specific high chemical and organoleptic criteria (low free acidity, no or very little organoleptic defects).
Olive oil also has religious symbolism for healing and strength and to consecration—setting a person or place apart for special work.
Olive oil has a long history of being used as a home remedy for skincare.
A cork float with a lit wick floats on the oil.
