While countries sometimes miss an Olympics due to a lack of qualified athletes, some choose to boycott a celebration of the Games for various reasons.
In 2000, Bahrain sent two women competitors for the first time: Fatema Hameed Gerashi and Mariam Mohamed Hadi Al Hilli.
The Games brought together 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events.
By the mid-1960s, sports federations started to ban the use of performance-enhancing drugs; in 1967 the IOC followed suit.
The IOC is only concerned with issues of citizenship and nationality after individual nations have granted citizenship to athletes.
There are recognised sports that have never been on an Olympic programme in any capacity, including chess and surfing.
This was attributed to two factors: one was the increased competition from cable channels, the second was the internet, which was able to display results and video in real time.
It was first proposed by poet and newspaper editor Panagiotis Soutsos in his poem "Dialogue of the Dead", published in 1833.
Greece is traditionally the first nation to enter in order to honour the origins of the Olympics.
Another date commonly cited is 426&nbsp;AD, when his successor, Theodosius II, ordered the destruction of all Greek temples.
In July 2010, ''The Independent'' reported: "Pressure is growing on the International Olympic Committee to kick out Saudi Arabia, who are likely to be the only major nation not to include women in their Olympic team for 2012.&nbsp;... Should Saudi Arabia&nbsp;... send a male-only team to London, we understand they will face protests from equal rights and women's groups which threaten to disrupt the Games".
There are sports recognised by the IOC that are not included on the Olympic program.
The president of the organising committee and the IOC president make their closing speeches, the Games are officially closed, and the Olympic flame is extinguished.
The athletes or teams who place first, second, or third in each event receive medals.
The winners receive gold medals, which were solid gold until 1912, then made of gilded silver and now gold-plated silver.
With the addition of women's boxing to the programme in the 2012 Summer Olympics, however, female athletes were able to compete in all the same sports as men.
The first, second, and third-place finishers in each event receive Olympic medals: gold, silver, and bronze, respectively.
Costs per athlete is on average USD 0.6 million for the Summer Games and USD 1.3 million for the Winter Games.
Over 13,000 athletes compete at the Summer and Winter Olympic Games in 33 different sports and nearly 400 events.
Greek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an Olympic Games.
This was primarily due to a shift in ideology toward expansion of the Games through corporate sponsorship and the sale of television rights.
Brundage's resistance to this revenue stream meant the IOC left organising committees to negotiate their own sponsorship contracts and use the Olympic symbols.
Brundage was president for over 20 years, and during his tenure he protected the Olympics from political involvement and the influence of advertising.
The presidential terms of Avery Brundage and Juan Antonio Samaranch were especially controversial.
French and English are the official languages of the Olympic Movement.
In 1948, Sir Ludwig Guttmann, determined to promote the rehabitation of soldiers after World War II, organised a multi-sport event between several hospitals to coincide with the 1948 London Olympics.
Months before each Games, the Olympic Flame is lit in Olympia in a ceremony that reflects ancient Greek rituals.
In August 2008, the government of Georgia called for a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics, set to be held in Sochi, Russia, in response to Russia's participation in the 2008 South Ossetia war.
In October 2009 the IOC voted to instate golf and rugby union as Olympic sports for the 2016 and 2020 Summer Olympic Games.
By 2010, only three countries had never sent female athletes to the Games: Brunei, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar.
George Averoff contributed generously for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the Games.
There are 35 federations represented at the IOC.
Large boycotts during the Cold War limited participation in the 1980 and 1984 Games.
If an athlete gains a new or second nationality, then they do not need to wait any designated amount of time before participating for the new or second nation.
Current Olympic sports, like badminton, basketball, and volleyball, first appeared on the programme as demonstration sports, and were later promoted to full Olympic sports.
The IOC-established drug testing regimen (now known as the Olympic Standard) has set the worldwide benchmark that other sporting federations attempt to emulate.
The cities were awash in corporations and merchants attempting to sell Olympic-related wares.
In the early 20th century, many Olympic athletes began using drugs to improve their athletic abilities.
The IOC originally resisted funding by corporate sponsors.
The Games attracted a broad international field of participants and generated great public interest.
* National Olympic Committees (NOCs) represent and regulate the Olympic Movement within each country.
This waiting period exists only for athletes who previously competed for one nation and want to compete for another.
There was also a prevailing concept of fairness, in which practising or training was considered tantamount to cheating.
In this ethos, a gentleman was one who became an all-rounder, not the best at one specific thing.
After 2012, Netherlands Antilles athletes can choose to represent either the Netherlands or Aruba.
The myth continues that after Heracles completed his twelve labours, he built the Olympic Stadium as an honour to Zeus.
In 1865 Hulley, Brookes and E.G.
This positive effect begins in the years leading up to the Games and might persist for several years afterwards, although not permanently.
The sale of the Olympic brand has been controversial.
The results of these efforts were mixed: ratings for the 2006 Winter Games were significantly lower than those for the 2002 Games, while there was a sharp increase in viewership for the 2008 Summer Olympics, and the 2012 Summer Games became the most watched event in US television history.
This meeting was held from 16 to 23 June 1894, at the University of Paris.
The argument is that the Games have become indistinguishable from any other commercialised sporting spectacle.
The terrorists killed two of the athletes soon after they had taken them hostage and killed the other nine during a failed liberation attempt.
Furthermore, at least four cities withdrew their bids for the 2022 Winter Olympics, citing the high costs or the lack of local support, resulting in only a two-city race between Almaty, Kazakhstan and Beijing, China.
While their efforts did result in increasing numbers of women Olympians, the IOC has been reluctant to take a strong position and threaten the discriminating countries with suspension or expulsion."
Returning home, Čáslavská was made an outcast by the Soviet government and was banned from competition and travelling.
When Nino Salukvadze of Georgia won the bronze medal in the 10&nbsp;metre air pistol competition, she stood on the medal podium with Natalia Paderina, a Russian shooter who had won the silver.
Olympic sports are governed by international sports federations (IFs) recognised by the IOC as the global supervisors of those sports.
For example, in 1904, Thomas Hicks, a gold medallist in the marathon, was given strychnine by his coach.
Samaranch helped to establish The Olympic Programme (TOP) in 1985, in order to create an Olympic brand.
A Danish cyclist, Knud Enemark Jensen, fell from his bicycle and later died.
Lagat said he started the citizenship process in late 2003 and did not expect to become an American citizen until after the Athens games.
Women were first allowed to compete at the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris, but at the 1992 Summer Olympics 35 countries were still fielding all-male delegations.
The next host nation then also briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theatre representative of its culture.
However, at the 2000 Summer Games in Sydney, NBC drew the lowest ratings for any Summer or Winter Olympics since 1968.
This idea is a modern myth because the Greeks never suspended their wars.
Chairman of the London organising committee, Lord Coe, said about the 2012 Summer Paralympics and Olympics in London that,
The other nations hosting the Summer Games twice are Germany, Australia, France and Greece.
119 NOCs (110 of the current 204 NOCs and 9 obsolete NOCs) have participated in at least one Winter Games, and twelve nations (Austria, Canada, Finland, France, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States) have participated in all twenty-two Winter Games to date.
This growth has created numerous challenges and controversies, including boycotts, doping, bribery, and a terrorist attack in 1972.
The 1999, it was reported that the Nagano Olympic bid committee had spent approximately $14 million to entertain the 62 IOC members and many of their companions.
Ravenstein founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association.
Much Wenlock still hosts the Wenlock Olympian Games, which were an inspiration to Pierre de Coubertin for the Olympic Games.
In 2008, Ali Al-Ahmed, director of the Institute for Gulf Affairs, likewise called for Saudi Arabia to be barred from the Games, describing its ban on women athletes as a violation of the International Olympic Committee charter.
Every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these three (or more) languages, or the main two depending on whether the host country is an English or French speaking country.
After the work of the evaluation commission, a list of candidates is presented to the General Session of the IOC, which must assemble in a country that does not have a candidate city in the running.
The IOC has often been criticised for being an intractable organisation, with several members on the committee for life.
The second-place finisher, Peter Norman of Australia, wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge in support of Smith and Carlos.
The modern '''Olympic Games''' or '''Olympics''' () are leading international sporting events featuring summer and winter sports competitions in which thousands of athletes from around the world participate in a variety of competitions.
According to legend, it was Heracles who first called the Games "Olympic" and established the custom of holding them every four years.
Athletes participated from Greece and the Ottoman Empire.
The IOC pursued an investigation which led to the resignation of four members and expulsion of six others.
However, if the NOCs and IF involved agree, then the IOC Executive Board may reduce or cancel this period.
The competition included several disciplines from the ancient Greek Olympics.
The Summer Olympics programme includes 26 sports, while the Winter Olympics programme features 15 sports.
The IOC intended for subsequent Games to be rotated to various host cities around the world.
As mandated by the Olympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games.
Among host cities, Lake Placid, Innsbruck and St. Moritz have played host to the Winter Olympic Games more than once, each holding that honour twice.
Once elected, the host city bid committee (together with the NOC of the respective country) signs a Host City Contract with the IOC, officially becoming an Olympic host nation and host city.
In 2010, the Olympic Games were complemented by the Youth Games, which give athletes between the ages of 14 and 18 the chance to compete.
By 2016, the Olympic Games will have been hosted by 44 cities in 23 countries, but by cities outside Europe and North America on only eight occasions.
Following its completion, he walked in a straight line for 200 steps and called this distance a "stadion" (, Latin: ''stadium'', "stage"), which later became a unit of distance.
Shortly thereafter, the Qatar Olympic Committee announced that it "hoped to send up to four female athletes in shooting and fencing" to the 2012 Summer Games in London.
In what became a much-publicised event from the Beijing Games, Salukvadze and Paderina embraced on the podium after the ceremony had ended.
He presented these ideas during the first Olympic Congress of the newly created International Olympic Committee.
The evaluation of the filled questionnaires by a specialised group provides the IOC with an overview of each applicant's project and their potential to host the Games.
During such revisions, sports can be excluded or included in the programme on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote of the members of the IOC.
The Russo-Georgian War between Georgia and Russia erupted on the opening day of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing.
Taiwan did not participate again until 1984, when it returned under the name of Chinese Taipei and with a special flag and anthem.
According to a report by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that was released at the time of the games, this cost will not boost Russia's national economy, but may attract business to Sochi and the southern Krasnodar region of Russia in the future as a result of improved services.
This finding suggests that hosting the Olympics might create opportunities for cities to influence local corporations in ways that benefit the local nonprofit sector and civil society.
In 1972 and 1976 a large number of African countries threatened the IOC with a boycott to force them to ban South Africa and Rhodesia, because of their segregationist regimes.
During the interwar period of the 1920s and 1930s, communist and socialist organisations in several countries, including the United States, attempted to counter what they called the "bourgeois" Olympics with the Workers Olympics.
Another criticism is that the Games are funded by host cities and national governments; the IOC incurs none of the cost, yet controls all the rights and profits from the Olympic symbols.
Flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction.
Several medallists in weightlifting and cross-country skiing were disqualified because of doping offences.
These sports are not considered Olympic sports, but they can be promoted to this status during a programme revision that occurs in the first IOC session following a celebration of the Olympic Games.
Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.
The evolution of the Olympic Movement during the 20th and 21st centuries has resulted in several changes to the Olympic Games.
Although it was intended that the same country host both the Winter and Summer Games in a given year, this idea was quickly abandoned.
A BBC documentary entitled ''Panorama: Buying the Games'', aired in August 2004, investigated the taking of bribes in the bidding process for the 2012 Summer Olympics.
The prospective host city applies to its country's National Olympic Committee; if more than one city from the same country submits a proposal to its NOC, the national committee typically holds an internal selection, since only one city per NOC can be presented to the International Olympic Committee for consideration.
During and after the Games eight athletes tested positive for a banned substance and were suspended, including shot putter Nadzeya Ostapchuk, who was stripped of her gold medal.
The motto was coined by Coubertin's friend, the Dominican priest Henri Didon OP, for a Paris youth gathering of 1891.
The process of selection is carried out in two phases that span a two-year period.
Therefore, it did not allow the formation of National Olympic Committees for Sint Maarten and Curaçao when they gained the same constitutional status as Aruba in 2010, although the IOC had recognised the Aruban Olympic Committee in 1986.
The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals.
During the Beijing games, 3,667 athletes were tested by the IOC under the auspices of the World Anti-Doping Agency.
The Games have also had significant negative effects on host communities; for example, the Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions reports that the Olympics displaced more than two million people over two decades, often disproportionately affecting disadvantaged groups.
In London over 6,000 Olympic and Paralympic athletes were tested.
The programme of the first modern Olympiad in Athens in 1896 was almost identical to that of the Liverpool Olympics.
There was a sharp increase in positive drug tests at the 2000 Summer Olympics and 2002 Winter Olympics.
Between 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival.
But by December 2014, ''The Guardian'' stated that Sochi "now feels like a ghost town", citing the spread-out nature of the stadiums and arenas, the still-unfinished construction, and the overall effects Russia's political and economic turmoil.
Conversely hosting (or even bidding for) the Olympics appears to increase the host country's exports, as the host or candidate country sends a signal about trade openness when bidding to host the Games.
At the Summer Games, the gymnastics competition was expanded from seven to nine nights, and a Champions Gala was added to draw greater interest.
Saudi Arabia included two female athletes in its delegation; Qatar, four; and Brunei, one (Maziah Mahusin, in the 400m hurdles).
The IOC allowed the formation of National Olympic Committees representing nations that did not meet the strict requirements for political sovereignty that other international organisations demand.
The first Summer Youth Games were held in Singapore from 14–26 August 2010, while the inaugural Winter Games were hosted in Innsbruck, Austria, two years later.
A German police officer and five terrorists also perished.
These sports were reviewed by the IOC Executive Board and then referred to the General Session in Singapore in July 2005.
Television companies were still relying on tape-delayed content, which was becoming outdated in the information era.
At the 2012 Olympic Games in London, Great Britain, for the first time in Olympic history, every country competing included female athletes.
Critics have argued that the Olympics have engaged in or caused erroneous anthropological and colonial knowledge production, erasure, commodification and appropriation of indigenous ceremonies and symbolism, theft and inappropriate display of indigenous objects, further encroachment on and support of the theft of indigenous lands, and neglect and/or intensification of poor social conditions for indigenous peoples.
Ultimately, no nation supported a boycott.
Three national flags are hoisted while the corresponding national anthems are played: the flag of the current host country; the flag of Greece, to honour the birthplace of the Olympic Games; and the flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Olympic Games.
The IOC also expanded the swimming and diving programs, both popular sports with a broad base of television viewers.
The Greek government also provided funding, which was expected to be recouped through the sale of tickets and from the sale of the first Olympic commemorative stamp set.
It could also be because an athlete is unable to qualify from within their original country.
It was not until the retirement of IOC president Avery Brundage, in 1972, that the IOC began to explore the potential of the television medium and the lucrative advertising markets available to them.
The Olympic Games are considered the world's foremost sports competition with more than 200 nations participating.
When the Summer Games were held in Munich, Germany, eleven members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken hostage by the Palestinian terrorist group Black September in what is now known as the Munich massacre.
The Olympic Movement uses symbols to represent the ideals embodied in the Olympic Charter.
Nations then enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's chosen language, with the host country's athletes being the last to enter.
In what is known as the Antwerp Ceremony, the mayor of the city that organised the Games transfers a special Olympic flag to the president of the IOC, who then passes it on to the mayor of the city hosting the next Olympic Games.
This boycott reduced the number of nations participating to 81, the lowest number since 1956.
During the 2004 Summer Olympics, which was hosted in Athens, Greece, the Greek flag entered the stadium first, while the Greek delegation entered last.
As is customary, the men's marathon medals (at the Summer Olympics) or the men's 50&nbsp;km cross-country skiing freestyle mass start medals (at the Winter Olympics) are presented as part of the Closing Ceremony, which take place later that day, in the Olympic Stadium, and are thus the last medal presentation of the Games.
Brunei had taken part in only three celebrations of the Games, sending a single athlete on each occasion, but Saudi Arabia and Qatar had been competing regularly with all-male teams.
For example, the United States Olympic Committee (USOC) is the NOC of the United States.
Pelops was famous for his chariot race with King Oenomaus of Pisatis.
The United States has hosted eight Olympic Games, four Summer and four Winter, more than any other nation.
Basketball player Becky Hammon was not being considered for the United States Olympic team but wanted to play in an Olympic Games, so she emigrated to Russia, where she already played in a domestic league during the WNBA offseason.
Host cities continue to compete ardently for the right to host the Games, even though there is no certainty that they will earn back their investments.
Both athletes were from Dubai's ruling family.
The Olympic motto, ''Citius, Altius, Fortius'', a Latin expression meaning "Faster, Higher, Stronger" was proposed by Pierre de Coubertin in 1894 and has been official since 1924.
When the St. Louis Games were celebrated roughly 650 athletes participated, but 580 were from the United States.
In 1859, Brookes changed the name to the Wenlock Olympian Games.
This village is intended to be a self-contained home for all the Olympic participants, and is furnished with cafeterias, health clinics, and locations for religious expression.
The ROC refused a proposed compromise that would have still allowed them to use the ROC flag and anthem as long as the name was changed.
The documentary claimed it was possible to bribe IOC members into voting for a particular candidate city.
Some sports that were featured in earlier Games were later dropped from the programme.
The opening ceremony of the Beijing Games reportedly cost $100&nbsp;million, with much of the cost incurred in the artistic segment.
In events contested by a single-elimination tournament (most notably boxing), third place might not be determined and both semifinal losers receive bronze medals.
The athlete may not qualify because there are already qualified athletes in the athlete's home country.
The advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage.
Both urine and blood tests were used to detect banned substances.
The only Olympic death linked to performance enhancing occurred at the 1960 Rome games.
The IOC has had to adapt to a variety of economic, political, and technological advancements.
After being narrowly defeated in their bid for the 2012 Summer Games, Parisian mayor Bertrand Delanoë specifically accused the British prime minister Tony Blair and the London Bid Committee (headed by former Olympic champion Sebastian Coe) of breaking the bid rules.
A prominent IOC member, Marc Hodler, strongly connected with the rival bid of Sion, Switzerland, alleged bribery of IOC officials by members of the Turin Organising Committee.
Athletes will sometimes become citizens of a different nation so they are able to compete in the Olympics.
The IOC also determines the Olympic programme, consisting of the sports to be contested at the Games.
In the winter Olympics, women are still unable to compete in the Nordic Combined.
In 2010, the International Olympic Committee announced it would "press" these countries to enable and facilitate the participation of women for the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Several athletes were barred from competition by their National Olympic Committees prior to the Games; only three athletes failed drug tests while in competition in Beijing.
The Soviet Union did not participate until the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki.
The Games were part of a cycle known as the Panhellenic Games, which included the Pythian Games, the Nemean Games, and the Isthmian Games.
After the medals are given out by an IOC member, the national flags of the three medallists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medallist's country plays.
The Los Angeles-based organising committee, led by Peter Ueberroth, was able to generate a surplus of US$225&nbsp;million, which was an unprecedented amount at that time.
Baron Pierre de Coubertin founded the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1894.
The Olympic Games held at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and the Louisiana Purchase Exposition at St. Louis in 1904 were side shows.
Greece, Australia, France, Great Britain, and Switzerland are the only countries to be represented at every Olympic Games since their inception in 1896.
Hammon received criticism from some Americans, including the US national team coach, even being called unpatriotic.
These Games will be shorter than the senior Games; the summer version will last twelve days, while the winter version will last nine days.
Although he was officially disqualified for being overweight, Miresmaeli was awarded US$125,000 in prize money by the Iranian government, an amount paid to all Iranian gold medal winners.
The Youth Olympic Games were conceived by IOC president Jacques Rogge in 2001 and approved during the 119th Congress of the IOC.
As of the 2012 Games in London, all of the current 204 NOCs have participated in at least one edition of the Olympic Summer Olympics, and athletes from Australia, France, Great Britain, Greece, and Switzerland have competed in all twenty-seven Summer Olympic Games.
The IOC responded by making a number of changes to the Olympic program.
The only sport on the Olympic programme that features men and women competing together is the equestrian disciplines.
A winter sports week (it was actually 11&nbsp;days) was held in 1924 in Chamonix, France, in connection with the Paris Games held three months later; this event became the first Winter Olympic Games.
For example, CBS paid US$375&nbsp;million for the rights of the 1998 Nagano Games, while NBC spent US$3.5&nbsp;billion for the broadcast rights of all the Olympic Games from 2000 to 2012.
Most of these rituals were established at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp.
Before the IOC took control of sponsorship, national organising committees were responsible for negotiating their own contracts for sponsorship and the use of the Olympic symbols.
The Oxford Olympics Study 2016 found that sports-related costs for the Summer Games since 1960 is on average USD 5.2 billion and for the Winter Games USD 3.1 billion.
Beginning in the 1970s, amateurism requirements were gradually phased out of the Olympic Charter.
The other language used at each Olympic Games is the language of the host country (or languages, if a country has more than one official language apart from French or English).
The origin of the Olympics is shrouded in mystery and legend; one of the most popular myths identifies Heracles and his father Zeus as the progenitors of the Games.
The most expensive Summer Games are London 2012 at USD 15 billion and the most expensive Winter Games are Sochi 2014 at USD 21.9 billion.
The opening ceremonies of the Games featured symbols of the day's events.
