This disease may be present throughout the growing period, but only manifests itself when the bulb is in storage.
White rot of onions, leeks, and garlic is caused by the soil-borne fungus ''Sclerotium cepivorum''.
* ''Allium cepa'' var.
The site should not be used for growing onions again for several years and should also be avoided for growing carrots, parsnips, and beans, which are also susceptible to the eelworm.
''bulbiferum'', and ''A.
Plants within this group form large single bulbs, and are grown from seed or seed-grown sets.
This gas diffuses through the air and soon reaches the eyes, where it activates sensory neurons.
Nitrogen and potash can be applied at regular intervals during the growing season, the last application of nitrogen being at least four weeks before harvesting.
Most onion cultivars are about 89% water, 4% sugar, 1% protein, 2% fibre, and 0.1% fat.
for the triploid onion, but this name has also been applied to the Egyptian onion.
The seeds are sown thinly in shallow drills, thinning the plants in stages.
The Aggregatum group of cultivars (''A.&nbsp;cepa''&nbsp;var.&nbsp;''aggregatum'') includes both shallots and potato onions.
* ''Allium cepa'' var.
''solaninum'' – Alef
This genus also contains several other species variously referred to as onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion (''Allium fistulosum''), the tree onion (''A.
I'itoi onion is a prolific multiplier onion cultivated in the Baboquivari Peak Wilderness, Arizona area.
The most closely related species include ''A.
This is caused by the release of a volatile gas, ''syn''-propanethial-S-oxide, which stimulates nerves in the eye creating a stinging sensation.
Large quantities of spores are produced and crust-like sclerotia may also develop.
The onion eelworm (''Ditylenchus dipsaci''), a tiny parasitic soil-living nematode, causes swollen, distorted foliage.
* ''Allium cepa'' var.
fistulosum''), as well as from ''A.
This makes them sweeter- and milder-tasting, but reduces their shelf life.
However, intermediate forms exist.
The seeds are glossy black and triangular in cross section.
A specific sulfenic acid, 1-propenesulfenic acid, is rapidly acted on by a second enzyme, the lacrimatory factor synthase (LFS), producing the ''syn''-propanethial-S-oxide.
Onions are available in fresh, frozen, canned, caramelized, pickled, and chopped forms.
Onions pickled in vinegar are eaten as a snack.
The only name unambiguously connected with the triploid onion is ''A.''
Sandy loams are good as they are low in sulphur, while clayey soils usually have a high sulphur content and produce pungent bulbs.
The subsequent investigation provided economists with a unique case study into the effects of futures trading on agricultural prices.
Symptoms can include contact dermatitis, intense itching, rhinoconjunctivitis, blurred vision, bronchial asthma, sweating, and anaphylaxis.
These bulbs are planted the following spring and grow into mature bulbs later in the year.
The symptoms often first occur where the bulb has been damaged and spread downwards in the affected scales.
These are traditionally a side serving in pubs and fish and chip shops throughout the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth.
Their layered nature makes them easy to hollow out once cooked, facilitating stuffing them.
It is a biennial plant, but is usually grown as an annual.
Phosphorus is often present in sufficient quantities, but may be applied before planting because of its low level of availability in cold soils.
The onion fly (''Delia antiqua'') lays eggs on the leaves and stems and on the ground close to onion, shallot, leek, and garlic plants.
Neck rot is a fungal disease affecting onions in storage.
No cure is known and affected plants should be uprooted and burned.
In the Middle Ages, onions were such an important food that people  paid their rent with onions, and even gave them as gifts.
cepa'', such as shallots and potato onions, produce multiple bulbs.
They were similarly used to raise fertility levels in dogs, cats, and cattle, but this was an error, as recent research has shown that onions are toxic to dogs, cats, guinea pigs, and many other animals.
This small-bulb type has a shallot-like flavor and is easy to grow and ideal for hot, dry climates.
Refrigerating the onions before use reduces the enzyme reaction rate and using a fan can blow the gas away from the eyes.
A number of hybrids are cultivated that have ''A.
Onions were even used in Egyptian burials, as evidenced by onion traces being found in the eye sockets of Ramesses IV.
''proliferum'' – (Moench) Regel
Most of these disorders are best treated by removing and burning affected plants.
Yellow onions turn a rich, dark brown when caramelized and give French onion soup its sweet flavour.
The majority of cultivars grown for dry bulbs, salad onions, and pickling onions belong to this group.
''&nbsp;×''proliferum''), and Canada onion (''A.&nbsp;canadense'').
Plants grown from sets are less prone to attack.
The larvae of the onion leaf miner or leek moth (''Acrolepiopsis assectella'') sometimes attack the foliage and may burrow down into the bulb.
In Bronze Age settlements, traces of onion remains were found alongside date stones and fig remains that date back to 5000 BC.
×''wakegi''), and the triploid onion (''A.''
Freshly cut onions often cause a stinging sensation in the eyes of people nearby, and often uncontrollable tears.
''aggregatum'' – G. Don
Most traditional European onions are referred to as "long-day" onions, producing bulbs only after 14 hours or more of daylight occurs.
fistulosum'', with the ''A.
The act remains in effect .
Onions contain phytochemical compounds such as phenolics that are under basic research to determine their possible properties in humans.
In suitable climates, certain cultivars can be sown in late summer and autumn to overwinter in the ground and produce early crops the following year.
This gas is produced by a chain of reactions which serve as a defense mechanism: chopping an onion causes damage to cells which releases enzymes called alliinases.
It was first officially described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 work ''Species Plantarum''.
While onions and other members of the genus ''Allium'' are commonly consumed by humans, they can be deadly for dogs, cats, guinea pigs, monkeys, and other animals.
This prohibition came into force after farmers complained about alleged market manipulation by Sam Seigel and Vincent Kosuga at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange two years earlier.
In the autumn (or in spring, in the case of overwintering onions), the foliage dies down and the outer layers of the bulb become dry and brittle.
Similar to garlic, onions can show an additional color after cutting.
It is caused by reactions of the amino acids with the sulfur compounds.
In dry weather, they can be left on the surface of the soil for a few days to dry out properly, then they can be placed in nets, roped into strings, or laid in layers in shallow boxes.
Spring onions or salad onions may be grown from the Welsh onion (''A.
cepa'' parent believed to be from the Aggregatum group of cultivars.
Roman gladiators were rubbed down with onions to firm up their muscles.
Ingestion results in anaemia caused by the distortion and rupture of red blood cells.
Irrespective of type, any cut pieces of onion are best tightly wrapped, stored away from other produce, and used within two to three days.
Considerable differences exist between onion varieties in polyphenol content, with shallots having the highest level, six times the amount found in Vidalia onions, the variety with the smallest amount.
If left in the soil over winter, the growing point in the middle of the bulb begins to develop in the spring.
* ''Allium cepa'' var.
Bulbs will multiply into clumps and can be harvested throughout the cooler months.
Sweet onions can be stored refrigerated; they have a shelf life around 1 month.
The name "wild onion" is applied to a number of ''Allium'' species, but ''A.
Being dehydrated, it has a long shelf life and is available in several varieties: yellow, red, and white.
It has been grown for centuries in Japan and China for use as a salad onion.
The onion plant has been grown and selectively bred in cultivation for at least 7,000 years.
The bases of the bulbs are attacked and become covered by a fluffy white mass of mycelia, which later produces small, globular black structures called sclerotia.
Hot temperatures or other stressful conditions cause them to "bolt", meaning that a flower stem begins to grow.
Young plants of ''A.
Onions may be grown from seed or from sets.
Archaeological and literary evidence such as the Book of Numbers 11:5 suggests that onions were probably being cultivated around 2000 years later in ancient Egypt, at the same time that leeks and garlic were cultivated.
'Pran' is grown extensively in the northern Indian provinces of Jammu and Kashmir.
The toxicity is caused by the sulfoxides present in raw and cooked onions, which many animals are unable to digest.
Potato onions differ from shallots in forming larger bulbs with fewer bulbs per cluster, and having a flattened (onion-like) shape.
The amount of sulfenic acids and LF released and the irritation effect differs among ''Allium'' species.
''bulbiferum'' – Regel
The genus ''Allium'' also contains a number of other species variously referred to as onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion (''A.&nbsp;fistulosum''), Egyptian onion (''A.
The more often one chops onions, the less one experiences eye irritation.
''multiplicans'' – L.H.
Fritsch & Matin) from Iran.
Onions require a high level of nutrients in the soil.
The range of diversity found among these cultivars includes variation in photoperiod (length of day that triggers bulbing), storage life, flavour, and skin colour.
Onions contain low amounts of essential nutrients (right table), are low in fats, and have an energy value of 166 kJ (40 kcal) per 100&nbsp;g (3.5&nbsp;oz).
×''proliferum''), Wakegi onion (''A.''
Bulbing usually takes place after 12 to 18 weeks.
In 2008, the New Zealand Crop and Food Institute created a strain of "no tears" onions by using gene-silencing biotechnology to prevent synthesis by the onions of the LFS enzyme.
Onions are commonly chopped and used as an ingredient in various hearty warm dishes, and may also be used as a main ingredient in their own right, for example in French onion soup or onion chutney.
The dehydrated product is available as kibbled, sliced, ring, minced, chopped, granulated, and powder forms.
They form aggregate clusters of small, narrowly ovoid to pear-shaped bulbs.
The typical toxic doses are  per kg (2.2&nbsp;lb) bodyweight for cats and  per kg for dogs.
Yellow or brown onions (called red in some European countries), are full-flavoured and are the onions of choice for everyday use.
''viviparum'' (Metzg.)
Onions were also prescribed by doctors in the early 16th century to help with infertility in women.
Pickled onions form part of a British pub ploughman's lunch, usually served with cheese and ale.
The vast majority of cultivars of ''A.&nbsp;cepa'' belong to the "common onion group" (''A.&nbsp;cepa''&nbsp;var.&nbsp;''cepa'') and are usually referred to simply as "onions".
In ancient Greece, athletes ate large quantities of onion because it was believed to lighten the balance of the blood.
Tops die back in the heat of summer and may return with heavy rains; bulbs can remain in the ground or be harvested and stored in a cool dry place for planting in the fall.
When an onion is harvested after bulbing has begun, but the onion is not yet mature, the plants are sometimes referred to as "summer" onions.
Various clones of the triploid onion are grown locally in different regions, such as 'Ljutika' in Croatia, and 'Pran', 'Poonch', and 'Srinagar' in the India-Kashmir region.
They are at their broadest about a quarter of the way up, beyond which they taper towards a blunt tip.
Young plants are killed and older ones produce soft bulbs.
The crop is prone to attack by a number of pests and diseases, particularly the onion fly, the onion eelworm, and various fungi cause rotting.
''proliferum'', ''A.
In this environment, cooking onions have a shelf life of three to four weeks and sweet onions one to two weeks.
Depending on the mature size and the purpose for which the onion is used, these may be referred to as pearl, boiler, or pickler onions, but differ from true pearl onions which are a different species.
Some authors have used the name ''A.
Tear glands produce tears to dilute and flush out the irritant.
Antifungal seed dressings are available and the disease can be minimised by preventing physical damage to the bulbs at harvesting, careful drying and curing of the mature onions, and correct storage in a cool, dry place with plenty of circulating air.
Allergic reactions may not occur in these individuals to the consumption of onions, perhaps because of the denaturing of the proteins involved during the cooking process.
Onions suffer from a number of plant disorders.
Where this is followed, the Egyptian onion is named ''A.''
Onions are a cool-weather crop and can be grown in USDA zones 3&nbsp;to&nbsp;9.
The bulbs can be gathered when needed to eat fresh, but if they will be kept in storage, they should be harvested after the leaves have died back naturally.
This color is pink-red.
In the autumn, the leaves die back and the outer scales of the bulb become dry and brittle, so the crop is then normally harvested.
A number of synonyms have appeared in its taxonomic history:
As the roots rot, the foliage turns yellow and wilts.
Shallots are the most important subgroup within this group and comprise the only cultivars cultivated commercially.
cepa'' is exclusively known from cultivation.
Finally, "short-day" onions, which have been developed in more recent times, are planted in mild-winter areas in the fall and form bulbs in the early spring, and require only 11–12 hours of daylight to stimulate bulb formation.
''cepa'' – Linnaeus
fistulosum'' rather than flattened on one side.
Modern varieties typically grow to a height of .
This group contains shallots and potato onions, also referred to as multiplier onions.
Onion skins have been used to produce a yellow-brown dye.
No cure for this fungal disease exists, so affected plants should be removed and destroyed and the ground used for unrelated crops in subsequent years.
Cooking onions and sweet onions are better stored at room temperature, optimally in a single layer, in mesh bags in a dry, cool, dark, well-ventilated location.
Onions are a staple in Indian cuisine, used as a thickening agent for curries and gravies.
It has been used to polish glass and copperware and to prevent rust on iron.
They are propagated almost exclusively from daughter bulbs, although reproduction from seed is possible.
cepa'', for example ''A.
cepa'' is known exclusively from cultivation, but related wild species occur in Central Asia.
The base of each leaf is a flattened, usually white sheath that grows out of a basal disc.
The most serious for the home gardener are likely to be the onion fly, stem and bulb eelworm, white rot, and neck rot.
From the underside of the disc, a bundle of fibrous roots extends for a short way into the soil.
Red onions have considerable content of anthocyanin pigments, with at least 25 different compounds identified representing 10% of total flavonoid content.
Yellow onions have the highest total flavonoid content, an amount 11 times higher than in white onions.
Also, they draw moisture from vegetables with which they are stored which may cause them to decay.
Bulbs from the onion family are thought to have been used as a food source for millennia.
''&nbsp;×''proliferum''), and the Canada onion (''Allium canadense'').
Pearl and boiler onions may be cooked as a vegetable rather than as an ingredient and pickler onions are often preserved in vinegar as a long-lasting relish.
White onions are the traditional onions used in classic Mexican cuisine; they have a golden colour when cooked and a particularly sweet flavour when sautéed.
Common onions range from the pungent varieties used for dried soups and onion powder to the mild and hearty sweet onions, such as the Vidalia from Georgia, USA, or Walla Walla from Washington that can be sliced and eaten raw on a sandwich.
* ''Allium cepa'' var.
Control measures may include crop rotation, the use of seed dressings, early sowing or planting, and the removal of infested plants.
Onions are cultivated and used around the world.
×''proliferum'' East Asian group.
They are fleshy, hollow, and cylindrical, with one flattened side.
They also used them to make into syrups, to form poultices, and in the preparation of dyes.
It is made from finely ground, dehydrated onions, mainly the pungent varieties of bulb onions, and has a strong odour.
Onion powder is a seasoning widely used when the fresh ingredient is not available.
They are very versatile and can be baked, boiled, braised, grilled, fried, roasted, sautéed, or eaten raw in salads.
Young plants may be harvested before bulbing occurs and used whole as spring onions or scallions.
The red onion (called purple in some European countries) is a good choice for fresh use when its colour livens up the dish; it is also used in grilling.
Routine care during the growing season involves keeping the rows free of competing weeds, especially when the plants are young.
Sick pets are sometimes fed with tinned baby foods, and any that contain onion should be avoided.
Most of the diversity within ''A.
The plants rarely flower; propagation is by division.
As the onion matures, food reserves begin to accumulate in the leaf bases and the bulb of the onion swells.
Historically, onions were often used for cromniomancy across Europe, Africa, and northern Asia, and they continue to be used for this practice in some rural areas.
It has previously been treated as a variety of ''A.
These resting structures remain in the soil to reinfect a future crop.
The plants are shallow-rooted and do not need a great deal of water when established.
vavilovii'' (Popov & Vved.)
Some varieties of ''A.
Additionally, onions may be bred and grown to mature at smaller sizes.
These break down amino acid sulfoxides and generate sulfenic acids.
The crop is harvested and dried and the onions are ready for use or storage.
fistulosum'' and ''A.
cepa'' occurs within this group, the most economically important ''Allium'' crop.
Eye irritation can be avoided by cutting onions under running water or submerged in a basin of water.
Workers who built the Egyptian pyramids may have been fed radishes and onions.
The bulbs are disfigured and rot, especially in wet weather.
The bulbs are smaller than those of common onions, and a single plant forms an aggregate cluster of several bulbs.
The onion is easily propagated, transported, and stored.
The onion plant has a fan of hollow, bluish-green leaves and the bulb at the base of the plant begins to swell when a certain day-length is reached.
Sweet onions have a greater water and sugar content than cooking onions.
They are pungent when chopped and contain certain chemical substances which irritate the eyes.
In time, a dry rot sets in and the bulb becomes a dry, mummified structure.
Onions were taken by the first European settlers to North America, where the Native Americans were already using wild onions in a number of ways, eating them raw or cooked in a variety of foods.
