From a largely ethnically British province, Ontario has rapidly become culturally very diverse.
The Premier chooses the cabinet or Executive Council whose members are deemed ministers of the Crown.
Its largest hub is at Pearson International Airport in Mississauga.
Some of the primary highways along the southern route are Highway 401, Highway 417, and Highway 400, while other provincial highways and regional roads inter-connect the remainder of the province.
It is affected by three air sources: cold, dry, arctic air from the north (dominant factor during the winter months, and for a longer part of the year in far northern Ontario); Pacific polar air crossing in from the western Canadian Prairies/US Northern Plains; and warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean.
*The thinly populated Canadian Shield in the northwestern and central portions, which comprises over half the land area of Ontario.
The move flummoxed a union representative, who seemed puzzled why a plant with capacity of 2 million tons per annum would be shut while Canada imported 8 million tons of steel last year.
In July 1912, the Conservative government of Sir James Whitney issued Regulation 17 which severely limited the availability of French-language schooling to the province's French-speaking minority.
The surrounding Great Lakes greatly influence the climatic region of southern Ontario.
Windsor (Windsor International Airport)
Prior to the arrival of the Europeans, the region was inhabited by Algonquian (Ojibwa, Cree and Algonquin) in the northern/western portions, and Iroquois and Wyandot (Huron) tribes more in the south/east.
Hamilton harbour, which can be seen as one drives the QEW Skyway bridge, is an industrial wasteland; US Steel-owned Stelco announced in fall 2013 that it would be shuttered in 2014, with the loss of 875 jobs.
*The virtually unpopulated Hudson Bay Lowlands in the extreme north and northeast, mainly swampy and sparsely forested.
Accordingly, rebellion in favour of responsible government rose in both regions; Louis-Joseph Papineau led the Lower Canada Rebellion and William Lyon Mackenzie led the Upper Canada Rebellion.
He recommended that self-government be granted and that Lower and Upper Canada be re-joined in an attempt to assimilate the French Canadians.
Ontario had a record 29 tornadoes in both 2006 and 2009.
The nationalist movement in Quebec, particularly after the election of the ''Parti Québécois'' in 1976, contributed to driving many businesses and English-speaking people out of Quebec to Ontario, and as a result Toronto surpassed Montreal as the largest city and economic centre of Canada.
The Toronto Transit Commission operates the province's only subway and streetcar system, one of the busiest in North America.
Ontario's steel industry was once centred on Hamilton.
Southern Ontario's limited supply of agricultural land is going out of production at an increasing rate.
Additionally, Amtrak rail connects Ontario with key New York cities including Buffalo, Albany, and New York City.
Ontario's rivers make it rich in hydroelectric energy.
It is Canada's most populous province by a large margin, accounting for nearly 40 percent of all Canadians, and is the second-largest province in total area.
Pelee Island and Middle Island in Lake Erie extend slightly farther.
In relation to natural increase or inter-provincial migration, immigration is a huge population growth force in Ontario, as it has been over the last two centuries.
French Canadians reacted with outrage, journalist Henri Bourassa denouncing the "Prussians of Ontario".
Marie, Sudbury, North Bay, Timmins, Windsor, London, and Kingston feed directly into larger airports in Toronto and Ottawa.
The population of Canada west of the St. Lawrence-Ottawa River confluence substantially increased during this period, a fact recognized by the Constitutional Act of 1791, which split Quebec into the Canadas: Upper Canada southwest of the St. Lawrence-Ottawa River confluence, and Lower Canada east of it.
A political stalemate between the French- and English-speaking legislators, as well as fear of aggression from the United States during and immediately after the American Civil War, led the political elite to hold a series of conferences in the 1860s to effect a broader federal union of all British North American colonies.
Construction employed more than 6.5 percent of the province's work force in June 2011.
Ontario's right to Northwestern Ontario was determined by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1884 and confirmed by the ''Canada (Ontario Boundary) Act, 1889'' of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
Almost all of Ontario's  border with the United States follows inland waterways: from the west at Lake of the Woods, eastward along the major rivers and lakes of the Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence River drainage system.
Mining and the forest products industry, notably pulp and paper, are vital to the economy of Northern Ontario.
The old titles of the chief law officers, the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General, remain in use.
BlackBerry once provided more than 19 percent of the local jobs and employed more than 13 percent of the entire local population before it supplied 9,500 layoffs in 2013.
The province has lost 300,000 manufacturing jobs in the decade from 2003, and the Bank of Canada noted that "while the energy and mining industries have benefitted from these movements, the pressure on the manufacturing sector has intensified, since many firms in this sector were already dealing with growing competition from low-cost economies such as China."
Neighbouring cities are home to product distribution, IT centres, and various manufacturing industries.
In the past, the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River were also a major passenger transportation route, but over the past half century passenger travel has been reduced to ferry services and sightseeing cruises.
Upon admission, students may get involved with regional student representation with the Canadian Federation of Students, the Canadian Alliance of Student Associations, the Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, or through the College Student Alliance in Ontario.
, Moody's bond-rating agency rated Ontario debt at AA2/stable, while S&P rated it AA-.
The same is true on the northern shore of Lake Superior, which cools hot humid air from the south, leading to cooler summer temperatures.
This loss represented approximately 18 percent of Ontario's Class 1 farmland being converted to urban purposes.
Despite these new plants coming online, Ontario has not yet fully recovered following massive layoffs caused by the global recession; its unemployment rate was 7.3 percent in May 2013, compared to 8.7 percent in January 2010 and roughly 6 percent in 2007.
Thunder Bay (Thunder Bay International Airport)
Important airports in the province include Toronto Pearson International Airport, which is the busiest airport in Canada, handling over 41 million passengers in 2015.
Algoma Steel still maintains a plant in Sault Ste Marie.
The majority of Ontarians are of English or other European descent including large Scottish, Irish and Italian communities.
The information technology sector is important, particularly in the ''Silicon Valley North'' section of Ottawa, as well as the Waterloo Region, where the world headquarters of Research in Motion (the developers of the BlackBerry smartphone) is located.
The Canadian constitution provides each province with the responsibility for higher education and there is no corresponding national federal ministry of higher education.
The post-World War II period was one of exceptional prosperity and growth.
Toronto was formally established as Ontario's provincial capital.
Regional commuter rail is limited to the provincially owned GO Transit, and serves a train-bus network spanning the Golden Horseshoe region.
A light-rail metro called the Confederation Line is under construction in Ottawa.
However, neither province had a constitutional requirement to protect its French- or English-speaking minority.
John Graves Simcoe was appointed Upper Canada's first Lieutenant governor in 1793.
Kellogg's plans to ship jobs to Thailand.
Many newly arrived immigrants and others moved west along the railway to the Prairie Provinces and British Columbia, sparsely settling Northern Ontario.
Ontario is Canada's leading manufacturing province, accounting for 52% of the total national manufacturing shipments in 2004.
The current Minister of Education is Liz Sandals, and the current minister of Training, Colleges and Universities is Reza Moridi.
This was replaced by "Yours to Discover" in 1982, apparently inspired by a tourism slogan, "Discover Ontario," dating back to 1927.
Despite its diverse range of power options, problems related to increasing consumption, lack of energy efficiency and aging nuclear reactors, Ontario has been forced in recent years to purchase power from its neighbours Quebec and Michigan to supplement its power needs during peak consumption periods.
The region was annexed to Quebec in 1774.
Northern Ontario is subdivided into two sub-regions: Northwestern Ontario and Northeastern Ontario.
Marie, and Thunder Bay.
It will have 13 stations on  and part of it will run under the city's Downtown and feature three underground stations.
Via Rail operates the inter-regional passenger train service on the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor, along with ''The Canadian'', a transcontinental rail service from Southern Ontario to Vancouver, and the Sudbury – White River train.
Major cities on or near the route include Kingston, Belleville, Peterborough, Oshawa, Toronto, Mississauga, Kitchener-Waterloo, Hamilton, London, Sarnia, and Windsor.
Four more northern districts were created between 1907 and 1912: Cochrane, Kenora, Sudbury and Timiskaming.
Point Pelee is a peninsula of Lake Erie in southwestern Ontario (near Windsor and Detroit, Michigan) that is the southernmost extent of Canada's mainland.
However, over the last 4 years, it has had upwards of 20 tornado touchdowns per year, with the highest frequency occurring in the Windsor-Essex&nbsp;– Chatham Kent area, though few are very destructive (the majority between F0 to F2 on the Fujita scale).
The highest point is Ishpatina Ridge at  above sea level located in Temagami, Northeastern Ontario.
Ontario has been the recipients of most immigration to Canada, largely immigrants from war-torn Europe in the 1950s and 1960s and following changes in federal immigration law, a massive influx of non-Europeans since the 1970s.
Mineral exploitation accelerated in the late 19th century, leading to the rise of important mining centres in the northeast, such as Sudbury, Cobalt and Timmins.
At other times of the year, hunting, skiing and snowmobiling are popular.
In December 2010, the snowbelt set a new record when it was hit by more than a metre of snow within 48 hours.
In 2006, Ford Motor Company announced between 25,000 and 30,000 layoffs phased until 2012; Ontario was spared the worst, but job losses were announced for the St. Thomas facility and the Windsor Casting plant.
In 2009, Ontario Power Generation generated 70 percent of the electricity of the province, of which 51 percent is nuclear, 39 percent is hydroelectric and 10 percent is fossil-fuel derived.
Tourism also plays a key role in border cities with large casinos, among them Windsor, Cornwall, Sarnia and Niagara Falls, the latter of which attracts millions of US and other international visitors.
The legislative buildings at Queen's Park are the seat of government.
The effects of these major air masses on temperature and precipitation depend mainly on latitude, proximity to major bodies of water and to a small extent, terrain relief.
His battles with the federal government greatly decentralized Canada, giving the provinces far more power than John A. Macdonald had intended.
When the Province of Canada was formed, its borders were not entirely clear, and Ontario claimed eventually to reach all the way to the Rocky Mountains and Arctic Ocean.
Sudbury (Sudbury Airport)
In the 2011 census, Ontario had a population of 12,851,821 living in 4,887,508 of its 5,308,785 total dwellings, a 5.7 percent change from its 2006 population of 12,160,282.
Bearskin Airlines also runs flights along the northerly east-west route, connecting Ottawa, North Bay, Sudbury, Sault Ste.
In the northeastern parts of Ontario, extending far as south as Kirkland Lake, the cold waters of Hudson Bay depress summer temperatures, making it cooler than other locations at similar latitudes.
In 2014, the section of Highway 401 between Toronto and Waterloo became the world's second-largest innovation corridor after California's Silicon Valley, employing nearly 280,000 tech workers from around the world and containing over 60% of Canada's high tech industry.
Severe thunderstorms peak in summer.
In addition, increasing rural severances provide ever-greater interference with agricultural production.
The Heinz plant in Leamington was taken over in fall 2013 by Warren Buffett and a Brazilian partner, following which it put 740 people out of work.
Important products include motor vehicles, iron, steel, food, electrical appliances, machinery, chemicals, and paper.
'''Ontario''' () is one of the ten provinces of Canada, located in east-central Canada.
OPG is not, however, responsible for the transmission of power, which is under the control of Hydro One.
Meanwhile, Ontario's numerous waterways aided travel and transportation into the interior and supplied water power for development.
Although the ''Legislative Assembly Act (R.S.O.
In April 2007, Ontario Member of Provincial Parliament Kim Craitor suggested that local brewers should be able to sell their beer in local corner stores; however, the motion was quickly rejected by Premier Dalton McGuinty.
Following the Westminster system, the leader of the party holding the most seats in the assembly is known as the "Premier and President of the Council" (Executive Council Act R.S.O.
Marie, Kitchener and Thunder Bay directly.
On December 10, 2013, Kellogg's announced layoffs for more than 509 workers at a cereal manufacture plant in London, Ontario.
This region has warm and sometimes hot summers with colder, longer winters, ample snowfall (even in regions not directly in the snowbelts) and annual precipitation similar to the rest of Southern Ontario.
In the 2011 federal election in Ontario the Conservatives were elected in 73 ridings, the NDP in 22, and the Liberals in 11.
Apple orchards are a common sight along the southern shore of Nottawasaga Bay (part of Georgian Bay) near Collingwood and along the northern shore of Lake Ontario near Cobourg.
The 1763 Treaty of Paris ended the Seven Years' War by awarding nearly all of France's North American possessions (New France) to Britain.
Snowfall accumulation can be high in some areas.
By the end of the century, Ontario vied with Quebec as the nation's leader in terms of growth in population, industry, arts and communications.
The title of Prime Minister of Ontario, correct in French (''le Premier ministre''), is permissible in English but now generally avoided in favour of the title "Premier" to avoid confusion with the Prime Minister of Canada.
Influenced by events in the United States, the government of Sir William Hearst introduced prohibition of alcoholic drinks in 1916 with the passing of the Ontario Temperance Act.
The current minister is Reza Moridi.
The ministry administers laws covering 22 public universities, 24 public colleges (21 Colleges of Applied Arts and Technology (CAATs) and three Institutes of Technology and Advanced Learning (ITALs)), 17 privately funded religious universities, and over 500 private career colleges.
(From 1988 to 1990, "Ontario Incredible" gave "Yours to Discover" a brief respite.)
This resentment spurred republican ideals and sowed the seeds for early Canadian nationalism.
Numerous French language services are available under the French Language Services Act of 1990 in designated areas where sizeable francophone populations exist.
On December 4, 2008 Toyota announced the grand opening of the RAV4 plant in Woodstock, and Honda also has plans to add an engine plant at its facility in Alliston.
However, these losses will be offset by Ford's recent announcement of a hybrid vehicle facility slated to begin production in 2007 at its Oakville plant and GM's re-introduction of the Camaro which will be produced in Oshawa.
Mike Lazaridis, one of the founders of RIM, founded in 1999 the Perimeter Institute, then in 2002 the Institute for Quantum Computing, then in 2013 Quantum Valley Investments, to plow a portion of the benefits of RIM back into research and development.
Most populations have settled in the larger urban centres.
The province is named after Lake Ontario, a term thought to be derived from ''Ontarí:io'', a Huron (Wyandot) word meaning "great lake", or possibly ''skanadario'', which means "beautiful water" in the Iroquoian languages.
Parliamentary self-government was granted in 1848.
Both Quebec and Ontario were required by section 93 of the British North America Act to safeguard existing educational rights and privileges of Protestant and the Catholic minority.
OC Transpo operates, in addition to bus service, Ontario's only light rail transit line, the O-Train in Ottawa.
He fought for provincial rights, weakening the power of the federal government in provincial matters, usually through well-argued appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
With no major mountain ranges blocking sinking Arctic air masses, temperatures of  are not uncommon; snowfall remains on the ground for sometimes over half the year.
The Saint Lawrence Seaway allows navigation to and from the Atlantic Ocean as far inland as Thunder Bay in Northwestern Ontario.
The three main parties are the centre-left Ontario Liberal Party, the centre-right Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario, and the social democratic Ontario New Democratic Party (NDP).
The region has warm to hot, humid summers and cold winters.
The sale and consumption of liquor, wine, and beer are still controlled by some of the most extreme laws in North America to ensure that strict community standards and revenue generation from the alcohol retail monopoly are upheld.
Dominion Bond Rating Service rated it AA(low) in January 2013.
Unrest in the colony began to chafe against the aristocratic Family Compact who governed while benefiting economically from the region's resources, and who did not allow elected bodies power.
In general, most of Ontario's climate is classified as humid continental.
As the following table shows, while the number of individual farms has steadily decreased and their overall size has shrunk at a lower rate, greater mechanization has supported increased supply to satisfy the ever increasing demands of a growing population base; this has also meant a gradual increase in the total amount of land used for growing crops.
The temperate and fertile Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence Valley in the south is part of the Eastern Great Lakes lowland forests ecoregion where the forest has now been largely replaced by agriculture, industrial and urban development.
File:O Train over Rideau by Wilder.JPG|A light rail O-Train crossing the Rideau River on the Trillium Line.
However, residents could distill and retain their own personal supply, and liquor producers could continue distillation and export for sale, allowing this already sizeable industry to strengthen further.
Samuel de Champlain reached Lake Huron in 1615, and French missionaries began to establish posts along the Great Lakes.
The northerly route, which was a major fur trade route, travels west from Montreal along the Ottawa River, then continues northwestward towards Manitoba.
In 2013, Statistics Canada estimated the province's population to be 13,537,994.
Toronto, the capital of Ontario, is the centre of Canada's financial services and banking industry.
The next climatic region is Central and Eastern Ontario which has a moderate humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dfb'').
Although both rebellions were put down in short order, the British government sent Lord Durham to investigate the causes of the unrest.
*Southern Ontario which is further sub-divided into four regions; Central Ontario (although not actually the province's geographic centre), Eastern Ontario, Golden Horseshoe and Southwestern Ontario (parts of which were formerly referred to as Western Ontario).
The province harnessed its water power to generate hydro-electric power and created the state-controlled Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario, later Ontario Hydro.
Urban sprawl and farmland severances contribute to the loss of thousands of acres of productive agricultural land in Ontario each year.
Publicly funded elementary and secondary schools are administered by the Ontario Ministry of Education, while colleges and universities are administered by the Ontario Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities.
The percentages given below add to more than 100 percent because of dual responses (e.g., "French and Canadian" response generates an entry both in the category "French Canadian" and in the category "Canadian").
The ''British North America Act'' took effect on July 1, 1867, establishing the Dominion of Canada, initially with four provinces: Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec and Ontario.
This gives some parts of southern Ontario milder winters than mid-continental areas at lower latitudes.
Ontario has three main climatic regions.
In 2011, 25.9 percent of the population consisted of visible minorities and 2.4 percent of the population was Aboriginal, mostly of First Nations and Metis descent.
Each of the three parties has received a majority mandate during a provincial election since 1990.
Accordingly, the two colonies were merged into the Province of Canada by the ''Act of Union 1840'', with the capital at Kingston, and Upper Canada becoming known as Canada West.
He consolidated and expanded Ontario's educational and provincial institutions, created districts in Northern Ontario, and fought to ensure that those parts of Northwestern Ontario not historically part of Upper Canada (the vast areas north and west of the Lake Superior-Hudson Bay watershed, known as the District of Keewatin) would become part of Ontario, a victory embodied in the ''Canada (Ontario Boundary) Act, 1889''.
File:Lakeshore West GO Train Westbound.jpg|A GO Transit commuter train.
Higher education in Ontario includes postsecondary education and skills training regulated by the Ministry of Training, Colleges, and Universities and provided by universities, colleges of applied arts and technology, and private career colleges.
Ontario is home to Niagara Falls, which supplies a large amount of electricity to the province.
Tourism contributes heavily to the economy of Central Ontario, peaking during the summer months owing to the abundance of fresh water recreation and wilderness found there in reasonable proximity to the major urban centres.
With a land area of , it had a population density of  in 2011.
Within Canadian federalism the division of responsibilities and taxing powers between the Ontario and Canadian governments creates the need for co-operation to fund and deliver higher education to students.
Tropical depression remnants occasionally bring heavy rains and winds in the south, but are rarely deadly.
There has been controversy over the Ring of Fire mineral deposit, and whether the province can afford to spend CAD$2.25bn on a road from the Trans-Canada Highway near Kenora to the deposit, currently valued at CAD$60bn.
French settlement was hampered by their hostilities with the Iroquois, who allied themselves with the British.
During the 17th century, the Algonquians and Hurons fought the Beaver Wars against the Iroquois.
During the Battle of York in 1813, American troops occupied the Town of York.
With Canada's acquisition of Rupert's Land, Ontario was interested in clearly defining its borders, especially since some of the new areas in which it was interested were rapidly growing.
Government subsidies followed shortly; Premier Kathleen Wynne offered CAD$200k to cushion the blow, and promised that another processed-food operator would soon be found.
Depressed economic conditions in the Maritime Provinces have also resulted in de-population of those provinces in the 20th century, with heavy migration into Ontario.
In 1872, the lawyer Oliver Mowat became Premier of Ontario and remained as premier until 1896.
Ontario's largest trading partner is the American state of Michigan.
Ottawa (Ottawa Macdonald–Cartier International Airport)
The Bruce Nuclear Generating Station, the largest nuclear power plant in the world, is also in Ontario and uses 8 CANDU reactors to generate electricity for the province.
Toronto (The Annex)
Ontario Northland provides rail service to destinations as far north as Moosonee near James Bay, connecting them with the south.
American troops in the War of 1812 invaded Upper Canada across the Niagara River and the Detroit River, but were defeated and pushed back by the British, Canadian fencibles and militias, and First Nations warriors.
Ottawa Macdonald-Cartier International Airport and Hamilton's John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport.
London, situated in Southern (Southwestern) Ontario, has the most lightning strikes per year in Canada, averaging 34 days of thunderstorm activity per year.
The French explorer Étienne Brûlé explored part of the area in 1610–12.
Beginning with Sir John A. Macdonald's National Policy (1879) and the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway (1875–1885) through Northern Ontario and the Canadian Prairies to British Columbia, Ontario manufacturing and industry flourished.
They both are responsible to the Legislature.
These are the Rainy River, the Pigeon River, Lake Superior, the St. Marys River, Lake Huron, the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, the Detroit River, Lake Erie, the Niagara River, Lake Ontario and along the St. Lawrence River from Kingston, Ontario, to the Quebec boundary just east of Cornwall, Ontario.
The area near Windsor is also very fertile.
Ontario has about 250,000 freshwater lakes.
Northern Ontario occupies roughly 87 percent of the surface area of the province; conversely Southern Ontario contains 94 percent of the population.
Freight rail is dominated by the founding cross-country Canadian National Railway and CP Rail companies, which during the 1990s sold many short rail lines from their vast network to private companies operating mostly in the south.
Canada's Federal Government is the largest single employer in the National Capital Region, which centres on the border cities of Ontario's Ottawa and Quebec's Gatineau.
Ontario is bordered by the province of Manitoba to the west, Hudson Bay and James Bay to the north, and Quebec to the east and northeast, and to the south by the US states of (from west to east) Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and New York.
The motor vehicle industry would go on to become the most lucrative industry for the Ontario economy during the 20th century.
File:Toronto Airport.jpg|Air Canada is the largest airline operating in Ontario.
Admission to many Ontario postsecondary institutions can be highly competitive.
Parts of Southwestern Ontario (generally south of a line from Sarnia-Toronto) have a moderate humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification ''Dfa''), similar to that of the inland Mid-Atlantic states and the Great Lakes portion of the Midwestern United States.
File:401 Gridlock.jpg|Highway 401 is the busiest highway in North America and among the busiest highways in the world.
Niagara Falls (NPCSH)
Despite the absence of any mountainous terrain in the province, there are large areas of uplands, particularly within the Canadian Shield which traverses the province from northwest to southeast and also above the Niagara Escarpment which crosses the south.
Transportation routes in Ontario evolved from early waterway travel and First Nations paths followed by European explorers.
Marie, Ontario, and Sarnia is the centre for petrochemical production.
The principal language of Ontario is English, the province's de facto official language, is spoken natively by about 70 percent of the province's population, according to the 2011 census.
The borders of Ontario, its new name in 1867, were provisionally expanded north and west.
Most of this region lies in the lee of the Great Lakes, making for abundant snow in some areas.
In 1973 the first slogan to appear on licence plates in Ontario was "Keep It Beautiful".
The availability of cheap electric power further facilitated the development of industry.
It is home to the nation's capital city, Ottawa, and the nation's most populous city, Toronto.
Along the eastern shores of Lake Superior and Lake Huron winter temperatures are slightly moderated but come with frequent heavy lake-effect snow squalls that increase seasonal snowfall totals upwards of  in some places.
