After a kill, the dominant female always feeds first, followed in turn by the other females, then males, then the young.
Beneath the internal muscle layer lies the body cavity.
Why this self-inflicted skin injury does not lead to bacterial infections is not yet understood (though likely related to the enzymes used to deteriorate the skin or facilitate the transfer of viable genetic material from male to female).
The solubility of these pigments is a useful diagnostic character: in all arthropods and tardigrades, the body pigment is soluble in ethanol.
*The Peripatopsidae exhibit relatively many characteristics that are perceived as original or "primitive".
Although the number of feet can vary considerably between species, their structure is basically very similar.
In such cases, for example at the age of three months in ''Macroperipatus torquatus'', the transferred sperm cells are kept in a special reservoir, where they can remain viable for longer periods.
Fossils have been found in Baltic amber, indicating that they were formerly more widespread in the Northern Hemisphere when conditions were more suitable.
All extant velvet worms are terrestrial (land-living) and prefer dark environments with high air humidity.
Air currents, formed by prey motion, are thought to be the primary mode of locating prey; the role of scent, if any, is unclear.
They have between 13 and 25 pairs of legs, behind or between the last of which is the genital opening (gonopore).
The two extant families of velvet worms are Peripatidae and Peripatopsidae.
(This distinctive construction identifies many early Cambrian fossils as early offshoots of the onychophoran lineage.)
The diaphragm is perforated in many places, enabling the exchange of fluids between the two cavities.
However, of most importance is gas exchange via fine unbranched tubes, the tracheae, which draw oxygen from the surface deep into the various organs, particularly the heart.
Tasmania has a protection programme that is unique worldwide: one region of forest has its own velvet worm conservation plan, which is tailored to a particular velvet worm species.
Dominance is achieved through aggression and maintained through submissive behaviour.
The digestive tract begins slightly behind the head, the mouth lying on the underside a little way from the frontmost point of the body.
Both groups also share a common skin-shedding mechanism (ecdysis) and molecular biological similarities.
Once hierarchy has been established, paired individuals will often cluster together to form an aggregate; this is fastest in male-female pairings, followed by pairs of females, then pairs of males.
Velvet worms have been known to live for up to six years.
It subsequently dries, shrinking, losing its stickiness, and becoming brittle.
They feed on almost any small invertebrates, including woodlice (Isopoda), termites (Isoptera), crickets (Gryllidae), book/bark lice (Psocoptera), cockroaches (Blattidae), millipedes and centipedes (Myriapoda), spiders (Araneae), various worms, and even large snails (Gastropoda).
This designation would imply that both velvet worms and water bears are not yet as highly developed as the arthropods.
In the case of smaller prey, they may opt not to slime it at all.
Unlike the arthropods, the velvet worms are unable to control the openings of their tracheae; the tracheae are always open, entailing considerable water loss in arid conditions.
The embryos develop from eggs only micrometres in size and are nourished in the uterus by their mother, hence the description "matrotrophic".
Nephrocytes absorb toxins or convert them into a form suitable for elimination by the nephridia.
Within these are a pair of large, heavily internally branched slime glands.
In the species ''Euperipatoides rowelli'', sperm is collected by these structures, and, when a female is encountered, the worm inserts its head in the vagina.
At their base is found a pair of simple eyes, except in a few blind species.
Hierarchy is quickly established among individuals from a single group, but not among organisms from different groups; these are substantially more aggressive and very rarely climb one another or form aggregates.
The actual locomotion is achieved less by the exertion of the leg muscles than by local changes of body length.
For this reason, velvet worms are dependent upon habitats with high air humidity.
The females of many viviparous species develop a placenta with which to provide the growing embryo with nutrients.
For example, in the first case, the rope-ladder nervous system would have developed in the two groups independently, while in the second case, it is a very old characteristic, which does not imply a particularly close relationship between the annelids and Panarthropoda.
Many countries offer no specific safeguards at all.
They share, among other things, a worm-like body; a thin and flexible outer skin; a layered musculature; paired waste-elimination organs; as well as a simply constructed brain and simple eyes.
The haemocoel is divided by a horizontal partition, the diaphragm, into two parts: the pericardial sinus along the back and the perivisceral sinus along the belly.
The body wall consists of a non-cellular outer skin, the cuticula; a single layer of epidermis cells forming an internal skin; and beneath this, usually three layers of muscle, which are embedded in connective tissues.
The saliva that they produce contains mucus and hydrolytic enzymes, which initiate in and outside the mouth digestion.
Within the Articulata hypothesis developed by Georges Cuvier, the velvet worms therefore formed an evolutionary link between the annelids and the arthropods: worm-like precursors first developed parapodia, which then developed further into stub feet as an intermediate link in the ultimate development of the arthropods' appendages.
The pouch is occupied by special cells called podocytes, which facilitate ultrafiltration of the blood through the partition between haemocoelom and nephridium.
They are found particularly in the rainforests of the tropics and temperate zones, where they live among moss cushions and leaf litter, under tree trunks and stones, in rotting wood or in termite tunnels.
The cuticle in the mandibles (and claws) is distinct from the rest of the body.
The young emerge from the eggs only a short time before birth.
This makes them of palaeontological interest, as they can help reconstruct the ancestral arthropod.
The primary threat comes from destruction and fragmentation of velvet worm habitat due to industrialisation, draining of wetlands, and slash-and-burn agriculture.
Subsequently, subordinate individuals begin to feed.
The jaws are divided into internal and external mandibles and their concave surface bears fine denticles.
Onychophora eat their dried slime when they can, which is appropriate, because it takes an onychophoran about 24 days to replenish an exhausted slime repository.
Velvet worms are negatively phototactical: they are repelled by bright light sources.
* On the belly side of the second head segment is the labrum, a mouth opening surrounded by sensitive "lips".
The animals grow to between 0.5 and 20&nbsp;cm (.2 to 8&nbsp;in), with the average being about 5&nbsp;cm (2 &nbsp;in), and have between 13 and 43 pairs of legs.
Pressure of their incompressible internal bodily fluid on the body wall provides rigidity, and muscles are able to act against it.
This perspective was expressed paradigmatically in the statement by the French zoologist A. Vandel:
The animals literally creep up on their prey, with their smooth, gradual and fluid movement escaping detection by predators.
One problem of the Ecdysozoa hypothesis is the velvet worms' subterminal mouth position: unlike in the Cycloneuralia, the mouth is not at the front end of the body, but lies further back under the belly.
Here, prey can be mechanically dismembered by the mandibles with their covering of fine toothlets.
Fertilization takes place internally, although the mode of sperm transmission varies widely.
This is also true for the Peripatidae, but in the case of the Peripatopsidae, the body pigment is insoluble in ethanol.
The slime glands themselves are deep inside the body cavity, each at the end of a tube more than half the length of the body.
They are longer, on average, than the Peripatopsidae and also have more leg pairs, numbering between 22 and 43—the gonopore is always between the penultimate pair.
Due to the continual risk of desiccation, often only a few hours per day are available for finding food.
These are also found on the two antennae, which can be regarded as the velvet worm's most important sensory organs.
In most species, for example in the genus ''Peripatus'', a package of sperm cells called the spermatophore is placed into the genital opening of the female.
But, in fact, some of these amber-borne specimens lack slime papillae and separate feet, thus may belong in the stem group.
A female can have between 1 and 23 offspring per year; development from fertilized ovum to adult takes between 6 and 17&nbsp;months and does not have a larval stage.
Within the connective tissue lie three continuous layers of unspecialised smooth muscular tissue.
In front of these, in many Australian species, are various dimples, the function of which is not yet clear.
According to more recent study, 82 species of Peripatidae and 115 species of Peripatopsidae have been described thus far.
The liquified innards of the prey animal are then sucked out using the pharynx.
Oxygen uptake occurs to an extent via simple diffusion through the entire body surface, with the coxal vesicles on the legs possibly being involved in some species.
Indigestible remnants arrive in the rear intestine, or rectum, which is once again lined with a cuticula and which opens at the anus, located on the underside near to the rear end.
The supply of food takes place either via a secretion from the mother directly into the uterus or via a genuine tissue connection between the epithelium of the uterus and the developing embryo, known as a placenta.
Due to certain similarities of form, the velvet worms were usually grouped with the water bears to form the taxon Protoarthropoda.
It is not clear to what extent the range varies with the species and other factors.
Subsequently, a soft part of the prey item (usually a joint membrane in arthropod prey) is identified, punctured with a bite from the jaws, and injected with saliva.
Potential victims can be detected from up to four centimetres away and are investigated by the gentle application of the antennae.
Distribution of the Peripatidae is restricted to the tropical and subtropical zones; in particular, they inhabit Central and northern South America, several Caribbean islands, West Africa, northern India, Malaysia, and various Indonesian islands.
Historically, all fossil Onychophora and lobopods were lumped into the taxon Xenusia, further subdivided by some authors to the Paleozoic Udeonychophora and the Mesozoic/Tertiary Ontonychophora; living Onychophora were termed Euonychophora.
Except in a few (typically subterranean) species, one simply constructed eye (ocellus) lies laterally, just underneath the head, behind each antenna.
The embryos found in the uterus of a single female do not necessarily have to be of the same age; it is quite possible for there to be offspring at different stages of development and descended from different males.
They share, among other things, an exoskeleton consisting of  α-chitin and non-collagenous proteins; gonads and waste-elimination organs enclosed in true coelom tissue; an open blood system with a tubular heart situated at the rear; an abdominal cavity divided into pericardial and perivisceral cavities; respiration via tracheae; and similar embryonic development.
The most energetically favourable prey are two-fifths the size of the hunting onychophoran.
In some cases, chunks of the prey item are bitten off and swallowed; undigestable components take around 18 hours to pass through the digestive tract.
Velvet worms are found in egg-laying (oviparous), egg-live-bearing (ovoviviparous) and live-bearing (viviparous) forms.
Apart from the pairs of legs, there are three further body appendages, which are at the head and comprise three segments:
Beneath this lies a thick layer of connective tissue, which is composed primarily of collagen fibres aligned either parallel or perpendicular to the body's longitudinal axis.
They are a lateral branch which has endured from ancient times until today, without important modifications.''
They move backward and forward in a longitudinal direction, tearing apart the prey, apparently moved in one direction by musculature and the other by hydrostatic pressure.
*Coxal vesicles are pouches located on the belly side of the leg, which can be everted and probably serve in water absorption.
These lie roughly in the centre of the body and secrete a sort of milky-white slime, which is used to ensnare prey and for defensive purposes.
The body gets longer and narrower as the animal picks up speed; the length of each leg also varies during each stride.
As the name ''haemocoel'' suggests, the body cavity is filled with a blood-like liquid in which all the organs are embedded; in this way, they can be easily supplied with nutrients circulating in the blood.
In this way, the various organs are supplied with nutrients before the blood finally returns to the pericardial sinus via the perforations in the diaphragm.
By 2011, some 180 modern species, comprising 49 genera, had been described; the actual number of species is probably about twice this.
Together, the velvet worms, arthropods, and water bears form a monophyletic taxon, the Panarthropoda, i.e., the three groups collectively cover all descendants of their last common ancestor.
The gestation period can amount to up to 15&nbsp;months, at the end of which the offspring emerge in an advanced stage of development.
They also occur in unforested grassland, if there exist sufficient crevices in the soil into which they can withdraw during the day, and in subterranean caves.
Ninety percent of the time involved in eating a specimen is spent ingesting it; re-ingestion of the slime used to trap the insect is performed while the onychophoran locates a suitable place to puncture the prey, and this phase accounts for around 8% of the feeding time, with the remaining time evenly split between examining, squirting, and injecting the prey.
However, the innervation shows that the homology is limited: the eyes of Onychophora form behind the antenna, whereas the opposite is true in arthropods.
This part of the locomotive cycle is the actual leg stroke that is responsible for forward movement.
This multi-level structure is responsible for the high flexibility of the outer skin, which enables the velvet worm to squeeze itself into the narrowest crevices.
The number of males reaches a peak after females start to leave the prey item.
The claws are made of sclerotised α-chitin, reinforced with phenols and chinons, and have a uniform composition – except that there is a higher concentration of calcium towards the tip, presumably affording greater strength.
The cuticula is about a micrometer thick and covered with fine villi.
At each moult, the shed skin is replaced by the epidermis, which lies immediately beneath it; unlike the cuticula, this consists of living cells.
Upon ejection, it forms a net of threads about twenty microns in diameter, with evenly spaced droplets of viscous adhesive fluid along their length.
In egg-laying species, whose gonoduct is uniformly constructed, the genital opening lies at the tip of a long egg-laying apparatus, the ovipositor.
Velvet worms are segmented creatures with a flattened cylindrical body cross-section and rows of unstructured body appendages known as lobopods (informally: stub feet).
Onychophora are the only organisms known to produce this latter substance.
Onychophora probably do not primarily use vision to detect their prey; although their tiny eyes do have a good image-forming capacity, their forward vision is obscured by their antennae; their nocturnal habit also limits the utility of eyesight.
The former encloses the tube-like heart, and the latter, the other organs.
In modern zoology, they are particularly renowned for their curious mating behaviour and for bearing live young.
The amoebocytes probably function in protection from bacteria and other foreign bodies; in some species, they also play a role in reproduction.
Another closely related group are the comparatively obscure water bears (Tardigrada); however, due to their very small size, these lack some characteristics of the velvet worms and arthropods, such as blood circulation and separate respiratory structures.
Formerly considered part of Tracheata, velvet worms are now considered close relatives of the Arthropoda and Tardigrada, with which they form the taxon Panarthropoda.
As previously mentioned, males of many Australian species exhibit special structures on the head, which apparently take over certain tasks in transferring sperm to the females.
If the annular muscles are contracted, the body cross-section is reduced, and the corresponding segment stretches, since its volume must remain constant due to the incompressible behaviour of the coelom's liquid contents; this is the usual mode of operation of the hydrostatic skeleton as also employed by other worms.
Segmentation, with two body appendages per segment, is also shared.
The outermost is shed during ecdysis, which exposes the next element in — which is fully formed, so does not need time to harden before it is used.
The timing of the pumping procedure can be divided into two parts: diastole and systole.
During the process, the female supports the male by keeping him clasped with the claws of her last pair of legs.
The throat itself is very muscular, serving to absorb the partially liquified food and to pump it, via the oesophagus, which forms the rear part of the front intestine, into the central intestine.
It appears that in at least some species, these serve in the transfer of sperm-cell packages (spermatophores).
This can be controlled using the annular and longitudinal muscles.
Each consists of a small pouch that is connected, via a flagellated conductor called a nephridioduct, to an opening at the base of the nearest leg known as a nephridiopore.
The colouration of Onychophora is generated by a range of pigments.
*True live-bearing species are found in both families, particularly in tropical regions with a stable climate and regular food supply throughout the year.
They show a peculiar distribution, with the peripatids being predominantly equatorial and tropical, while the peripatopsids are all found in what used to be Gondwana.
This predatory way of life is probably a consequence of the velvet worm's need to remain moist.
This so-called uricotelic excretory mode represents an adjustment to life on land and the associated necessity of dealing economically with water.
This is supported by the fossil record.
Although outwardly water-repellent, the cuticula is not able to prevent water loss by respiration, and, as a result, velvet worms can only live in microclimates with high humidity to avoid desiccation.
Due to their structural conservatism, the velvet worms were thus considered "living fossils".
On entering the central intestine, food particles are coated with a mucus-based peritrophic membrane, which serves to protect the lining of the intestine from damage by sharp-edged particles.
The low preservation potential of the non-mineralised Onychophora means that they have a sparse fossil record.
The composition of the urinary solution is modified in the nephridioduct by selective recovery of nutrients and water and by isolation of poison and waste materials, before it is excreted to the outside world via the nephridiopore.
Agriculture has apparently made available new habitats for velvet worms; in any case, they are found in man-made cocoa and banana plantations in South America and the Caribbean.
One squirt usually suffices to snare a prey item, although larger prey may be further immobilised by smaller squirts targeted at the limbs; additionally, the fangs of spiders are sometimes targeted.
The pharynx is specially adapted for sucking, to extract the innards; the arrangement of the jaws about the tongue and lip papillae ensures a tight seal and the establishment of suction.
Individual species are found in Central and South America; the Caribbean islands; equatorial West Africa and Southern Africa; northeastern India; Thailand; Indonesia and parts of Malaysia; New Guinea; Australia; and New Zealand.
The parapodia appendages found in annelids therefore correspond to the stump feet of the velvet worms.
Segmentation is apparently specified by the same gene as in other groups of animals and is activated in each case, during embryonic development, at the rear border of each segment and in the growth zone of the stub feet.
Experiments on the decay and compaction of onychophora demonstrate difficulties in interpreting fossils; certain parts of living onychophora are only visible in certain conditions.
In their present forms, the velvet worms are probably very closely related to the arthropods, a very extensive taxon that incorporates, for instance, the crustaceans, insects, and arachnids.
The jaws operate by moving backwards and forwards along the axis of the body (not in a side-to-side clipping motion as in arthropods), conceivably using a pairing of musculature and hydrostatic pressure.
Depending on their size, they eat on average every one to four weeks.
The onychophoran bites into the prey and injects saliva, which further reduces motion and initiates digestion of the prey item's innards.
It tastes "slightly bitter and at the same time somewhat astringent".
It also feels like dry velvet to the touch, for which its water-repellent nature is responsible.
The velvet worm's important predators are primarily various spiders and centipedes, along with rodents and birds, such as, in Central America, the Clay-coloured Thrush (''Turdus grayi'').
'''Velvet worms''' are ecdysozoan invertebrate animals of the phylum '''Onychophora''' (from Greek, ''onyches'', "claws"; and ''pherein'', "to carry") with approximately 200 species, the only phylum within animalia that is wholly endemic to terrestrial environments.
The heart itself is a tube of annular muscles consisting of epithelial tissues, with two lateral openings (ostia) per segment.
This places the annelids and Panarthropoda in two very different groups: the former in the Lophotrochozoa and the latter in the Ecdysozoa.
The papillae themselves are covered with tiny scales, lending the skin a velvety appearance (from which the common name is likely derived).
Velvet worms are ambush predators, hunting only by night, and are able to capture animals at least their own size, although it may take almost all of their slime-secreting capacity to capture a large prey item.
All genera are assigned to one of two families, the distribution ranges of which do not overlap but are separated by arid areas or oceans:
This releases the sperm cells, which then move freely through the haemocoel, penetrate the external wall of the ovaries and finally fertilize the ova.
They have been observed to spend up to ten minutes searching for removed prey, after which they return to their slime to eat it.
Deep within the oral cavity lie the sharp, crescent-shaped "jaws", or mandibles, which are strongly hardened and resemble the claws of the feet, with which they are serially homologous; early in development, the jaw appendages have a similar position and shape to the subsequent legs.
Maternal care is unknown.
Unlike the arthropods, velvet worms do not possess a rigid exoskeleton.
From this point of view, several common characteristics still support the Articulata hypothesis — segmented body; paired appendages on each segment; pairwise arrangement of waste-elimination organs in each segment; and above all, a rope-ladder-like nervous system based on a double nerve strand lying along the belly.
A penis-like structure has so far only been found in males of the genus ''Paraperipatus'' but has not yet been observed in action.
After feeding, individuals clean their antennae and mouth parts before re-joining the rest of their group.
This pumps the blood from the front end of the heart into the perivisceral sinus containing the organs.
Social hierarchy is established by a number of interactions: higher-ranking individuals will chase and bite their subordinates while the latter are trying to crawl on top of them.
In many Australian species, there exist dimples or special dagger- or axe-shaped structures on the head; the male of ''Florelliceps stutchburyae'' presses a long spine against the female's genital opening and probably positions its spermatophore there in this way.
*Ovipary occur solely in the Peripatopsidae, often in regions with erratic food supply or unsettled climate.
Modern taxonomy does not study criteria such as "higher" and "lower" states of development or distinctions between "main" and "side" branches—only family relationships indicated by cladistic methods are considered relevant.
However, each leg can also be shortened and bent by internal muscles.
These fossils, known collectively as the lobopodians, were marine and represent a grade from which arthropods, tardigrades, and Onychophora arose.
The embryos do not receive food directly from the mother, but are supplied instead by the moderate quantity of yolk contained in the eggs—they are therefore described as lecithotrophic.
Due to the stretching, the legs of the segment concerned are lifted and swung forward.
In some species, two different organs are found within the feet:
Local contraction of the longitudinal muscles then shortens the appropriate segment, and the legs, which are now in contact with the ground, are moved to the rear.
Sensory cells known as "sensills" on the "lips" or labrum respond to chemical stimuli and are known as chemoreceptors.
The stub feet that characterise the velvet worms are conical, baggy appendages of the body, which are internally hollow and have no joints.
Stem-group members include ''Ilyodes'' (=''Helenodora'', Carboniferous), ''Tertiapatus dominicanus'', and ''Succinipatopsis balticus'' (Tertiary); crown group representatives are known only from amber—there is a single, partial specimen from the Cretaceous, and a more comprehensive record in Eocene deposits from .
This investigation may last anywhere upwards of ten seconds, until the velvet worm makes a decision as to whether to attack it—or until it disturbs the prey and flees.
Skin injuries are usually accompanied by bacterial infections, which are almost always fatal.
Directly beside or behind this lie two pairs of special glands, which probably serve an auxiliary reproductive function; the rearmost glands are also known as anal glands.
Unlike the front intestine, this is not lined with a cuticula but instead consists only of a single layer of epithelial tissue, which does not exhibit conspicuous indentation as is found in other animals.
:''Onychophorans can be considered highly evolved annelids, adapted to terrestrial life, which announced prophetically the Arthropoda.
However, investigations into their developmental biology, particularly regarding the development of the head nerves, suggest that this was not always the case and that the mouth was originally terminal (situated at the tip of the body).
They are only found within the family Peripatidae and are named from ''coxa'', the Latin word for "hip".
* On the first head segment is a pair of slender antennae, which serve in sensory perception.
The tube both conducts the fluid and stores it until it is required.
This is probably also the original mode of development.
Modern systematic theories reject such conceptions of "primitive" and "highly developed" organisms and instead consider exclusively the historical relationships among the taxa.
The best-known is the type genus ''Peripatus'', which was described as early as 1825 and which, in English-speaking countries, stands representative for all velvet worms.
The females of many species are fertilized only once during their lives, which leads to copulation sometimes taking place before the reproductive organ of the females are fully developed.
Importantly, few of the Cambrian fossils bear features that distinctively unite them with the Onychophora; none can be confidently assigned to the onychophoran crown or even stem group.
They are considered to be ecologically equivalent to centipedes (Chilopoda).
Both oviparous and ovoviviparous, as well as genuinely viviparous, species exist, although the Peripatopsidae essentially lack a placenta.
Two species live in caves, a habitat to which their ability to squeeze themselves into the smallest cracks makes them exceptionally well-adapted and in which constant living conditions are guaranteed.
This may be related to the intense aggression between unrelated females.
The single vagina, to which both uteri are connected, runs outward to the gonopore.
