Singers and the roles they play are classified by voice type, based on the tessitura, agility, power and timbre of their voices.
The first known opera from Turkey (the Ottoman Empire) was ''Arshak II'', which was an Armenian opera composed by an ethnic Armenian composer Tigran Tchoukhajian in 1868 and partially performed in 1873.
London's ''Daily Telegraph'' agreed, describing ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' as "a genuine English opera, forerunner of many others, let us hope, and possibly significant of an advance towards a national lyric stage."
Another aspect of modernist opera is the shift away from long, suspended melodies, to short quick mottos, as first illustrated by Giuseppe Verdi in his ''Falstaff''.
Significantly, ''Dafne'' was an attempt to revive the classical Greek drama, part of the wider revival of antiquity characteristic of the Renaissance.
The orchestration of orchestra parts also developed over the 19th century.
The libretto was written by Joomart Bokonbaev, Jusup Turusbekov, and Kybanychbek Malikov.
(Philip Glass also makes use of atonality, though his style is generally described as minimalist, usually thought of as another 20th-century development.)
Smaller companies in the US have a more fragile existence, and they usually depend on a "patchwork quilt" of support from state and local governments, local businesses, and fundraisers.
In 1765 Melchior Grimm published "", an influential article for the Encyclopédie on lyric and opera librettos.
Nevertheless, some smaller companies have found ways of drawing new audiences.
In the first decade of the 21st century, the librettist of an early Birtwistle opera, Michael Nyman, has been focusing on composing operas, including ''Facing Goya'', ''Man and Boy: Dada'', and ''Love Counts''.
The first opera written in Russian was ''Tsefal i Prokris'' by the Italian composer Francesco Araja (1755).
In the late 17th century and early 18th century, the Theater am Gänsemarkt in Hamburg presented German operas by Keiser, Telemann and Handel.
The role of the hero was usually written for the high-pitched male castrato voice,which was produced by castration of the singer before puberty, which prevented a boy's larynx from being transformed at puberty.
Several composers of the period, including Niccolò Jommelli and Tommaso Traetta, attempted to put these ideals into practice.
It was composed by Vladimir Vlasov, Abdylas Maldybaev and Vladimir Fere.
'''Opera''' (; English plural: ''operas;'' Italian plural: ''opere'' ) is an art form in which singers and musicians perform a dramatic work combining text (libretto) and musical score, usually in a theatrical setting.
This opera, and the ones that would follow in Verdi's career, revolutionized Italian opera, changing it from merely a display of vocal fireworks, with Rossini's and Donizetti's works, to dramatic story-telling.
Other rock influenced musicals, such as ''Tommy'' (1969) and ''Jesus Christ Superstar'' (1971), ''Les Misérables'' (1980), ''Rent'' (1996), ''Spring Awakening'' (2006), and ''Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812'' (2012) employ various operatic conventions, such as through composition, recitative instead of dialogue, and leitmotifs.
A revived interest in opera occurred in the 1730s which is largely attributed to Thomas Arne, both for his own compositions and for alerting Handel to the commercial possibilities of large-scale works in English.
In some forms of opera, such as singspiel, opéra comique, operetta, and semi-opera, the recitative is mostly replaced by spoken dialogue.
Another exception are opera productions intended for a young audience, such as Humperdinck's ''Hansel and Gretel'' and some productions of Mozart's ''The Magic Flute''.
The most famous modern Hungarian opera is Béla Bartók's ''Duke Bluebeard's Castle''.
The Italian word ''opera'' means "work", both in the sense of the labour done and the result produced.
Examples of famous operas in the bel canto style include Rossini's ''Il barbiere di Siviglia'' and ''La Cenerentola'', as well as Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor''.
These pieces were encouraged by Oliver Cromwell because they were critical of Spain.
Opera would never be the same after Wagner and for many composers his legacy proved a heavy burden.
In Wagnerian operas such as ''Tristan'', the orchestra often played the recurrent musical themes or leitmotifs, a role which gave a prominence to the orchestra which "...elevated its status to that of a prima donna."
The French overture as found in Jean-Baptiste Lully's operas consist of a slow introduction in a marked "dotted rhythm", followed by a lively movement in fugato style.
Blow's immediate successor was the better known Henry Purcell.
Vocal duets, trios and other ensembles often occur, and choruses are used to comment on the action.
As government and private patronage of the arts decreased throughout the 20th century, new works were often commissioned and performed with smaller budgets, very often resulting in chamber-sized works, and short, one-act operas.
Traditional opera, often referred to as "number opera", consists of two modes of singing: recitative, the plot-driving passages sung in a style designed to imitate and emphasize the inflections of speech, and aria (an "air" or formal song) in which the characters express their emotions in a more structured melodic style.
With Wagner came an emphasis on vocal heft for his protagonist roles, with this vocal category described as ''Heldentenor''; this heroic voice had its more Italianate counterpart in such roles as Calaf in Puccini's ''Turandot''.
The tenor voice, from the Classical era onwards, has traditionally been assigned the role of male protagonist.
The members of the Camerata considered that the "chorus" parts of Greek dramas were originally sung, and possibly even the entire text of all roles; opera was thus conceived as a way of "restoring" this situation.
Nevertheless, native forms would develop in spite of this influence.
This was the equivalent of the German singspiel, where arias alternated with spoken dialogue.
These developments mirrored the growth of Russian nationalism across the artistic spectrum, as part of the more general Slavophilism movement.
Many opera companies have experienced a similar trend, and opera company websites are replete with attempts to attract a younger audience.
Yet most of the major German composers of the time, including Handel himself, as well as Graun, Hasse and later Gluck, chose to write most of their operas in foreign languages, especially Italian.
Also in the 20th century, American composers like Leonard Bernstein, George Gershwin, Gian Carlo Menotti, Douglas Moore, and Carlisle Floyd began to contribute English-language operas infused with touches of popular musical styles.
Male singers can be classified by vocal range as bass, bass-baritone, baritone, tenor and countertenor, and female singers as contralto, mezzo-soprano and soprano.
After WWII, opera scholarship improved, artists refocused on the original versions, and translations fell out of favor.
These terms, although not fully describing a singing voice, associate the singer's voice with the roles most suitable to the singer's vocal characteristics.
In traditional opera, singers do two types of singing: recitative, a speech-inflected style and arias, a more melodic style.
This was a style introduced by Pietro Mascagni's ''Cavalleria rusticana'' and Ruggero Leoncavallo's ''Pagliacci'' that came virtually to dominate the world's opera stages with such popular works as Giacomo Puccini's ''La bohème'', ''Tosca'', and ''Madama Butterfly''.
Notable examples in this style were produced by Monsigny, Philidor and, above all, Grétry.
Earlier, it was common for that part to be sung by any female voice, or even a castrato.
In the 1980s, supertitles (sometimes called surtitles) began to appear.
In this respect, jigs anticipate the ballad operas of the 18th century.
Before that, the vocal virtuosity, not range, was the priority, with soprano parts rarely extending above a high A (Handel, for example, only wrote one role extending to a high C), though the castrato Farinelli was alleged to possess a top D (his lower range was also extraordinary, extending to tenor C).
For the true contralto, the range of parts is more limited, which has given rise to the insider joke that contraltos only sing "witches, bitches, and britches" roles.
In the 18th century, Italian opera continued to dominate most of Europe (except France), attracting foreign composers such as George Frideric Handel.
A milestone for opera broadcasting in the U.S. was achieved on December 24, 1951, with the live broadcast of ''Amahl and the Night Visitors'', an opera in one act by Gian Carlo Menotti.
At the same time, the influence of Richard Wagner was felt as a challenge to the French tradition.
Since the days of Handel and Mozart, many composers have favored Italian as the language for the libretto of their operas.
Later Italian composers, such as Berio and Nono, have experimented with modernism.
After these, he continued to develop his style, composing perhaps the greatest French Grand Opera, ''Don Carlos'', and ending his career with two Shakespeare-inspired works, ''Otello'' and ''Falstaff'', which reveal how far Italian opera had grown in sophistication since the early 19th century.
The main characters of the play tend not to be involved in the musical scenes, which means that Purcell was rarely able to develop his characters through song.
During the early 1700s, some composers began to use the string orchestra to mark certain aria or recitatives "...as special"; by the 1720, most arias were accompanied by orchestra.
This situation continued throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, including in the work of Michael William Balfe, and the operas of the great Italian composers, as well as those of Mozart, Beethoven and Meyerbeer, continued to dominate the musical stage in England.
Perhaps the most obvious stylistic manifestation of modernism in opera is the development of atonality.
Titled ''Free Will'', it was created my members of the Internet group Opera By You.
Schoenberg's early musico-dramatic works, ''Erwartung'' (1909, premiered in 1924) and ''Die glückliche Hand'' display heavy use of chromatic harmony and dissonance in general.
After him, in the 19th century in Russia, there were written such operatic masterpieces as ''Rusalka'' and ''The Stone Guest'' by Alexander Dargomyzhsky, ''Boris Godunov'' and ''Khovanshchina'' by Modest Mussorgsky, ''Prince Igor'' by Alexander Borodin, ''Eugene Onegin'' and ''The Queen of Spades'' by Pyotr Tchaikovsky, and ''The Snow Maiden'' and ''Sadko'' by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov.
Olivier Messiaen's lengthy sacred drama ''Saint François d'Assise'' (1983) has also attracted widespread attention.
Monteverdi had moved to the city from Mantua and composed his last operas, ''Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria'' and ''L'incoronazione di Poppea'', for the Venetian theatre in the 1640s.
In 2007, Met performances were shown in over 424 theaters in 350 U.S. cities.
In Russian Eastern Europe, several national operas began to emerge.
This success was followed by ''The Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru'' (1658) and ''The History of Sir Francis Drake'' (1659).
In 19th-century opera, in some operas, the overture, ''Vorspiel'', ''Einleitung,'' Introduction, or whatever else it may be called, was the portion of the music which takes place before the curtain rises; a specific, rigid form was no longer required for the overture.
Mozart, in many ways Gluck's successor, combined a superb sense of drama, harmony, melody, and counterpoint to write a series of comedies, notably ''Così fan tutte'', ''The Marriage of Figaro'', and ''Don Giovanni'' (in collaboration with Lorenzo Da Ponte) which remain among the most-loved, popular and well-known operas today.
Wagner was one of the most revolutionary and controversial composers in musical history.
Despite the popularity of Italian opera seria throughout much of Europe during the Baroque period, Italian opera never gained much of a foothold in France, where its own national operatic tradition was more popular instead.
Another role for the orchestra during this period was playing an orchestral ritornello to mark the end of a singer's solo.
Fisher also notes the term ''Sinfonia avanti l'opera'' (literally, the "symphony before the opera") was "an early term for a sinfonia used to begin an opera, that is, as an overture as opposed to one serving to begin a later section of the work".
Before such elements were forced out of opera seria, many libretti had featured a separately unfolding comic plot as sort of an "opera-within-an-opera."
Wagner also brought a new philosophical dimension to opera in his works, which were usually based on stories from Germanic or Arthurian legend.
These motifs never are expanded upon, and just as the audience expects a character to launch into a long melody, a new character speaks, introducing a new phrase.
It also saw the advent of Grand Opera typified by the works of Auber and Meyerbeer.
Before the 1700s, Italian operas used a small string orchestra, but it rarely played to accompany the singers.
Gluck strove to achieve a "beautiful simplicity".
Following the bel canto era, a more direct, forceful style was rapidly popularized by Giuseppe Verdi, beginning with his biblical opera ''Nabucco''.
In Italian opera after about 1800, the "overture" became known as the ''sinfonia''.
Since the invention of radio and television, operas were also performed on (and written for) these mediums.
During the late 19th century, the Austrian composer Johann Strauss II, an admirer of the French-language operettas composed by Jacques Offenbach, composed several German-language operettas, the most famous of which was ''Die Fledermaus'', which is still regularly performed today.
Opera seria had its weaknesses and critics.
In rivalry with imported Italian opera productions, a separate French tradition was founded by the Italian Jean-Baptiste Lully at the court of King Louis XIV.
Schoenberg's theories have influenced (either directly or indirectly) significant numbers of opera composers ever since, even if they themselves did not compose using his techniques.
Although Arne imitated many elements of Italian opera, he was perhaps the only English composer at that time who was able to move beyond the Italian influences and create his own unique and distinctly English voice.
Well after his Rimsky-Korsakov-inspired works ''The Nightingale'' (1914), and ''Mavra'' (1922), Stravinsky continued to ignore serialist technique and eventually wrote a full-fledged 18th-century-style diatonic number opera ''The Rake's Progress'' (1951).
Because of this, operas such as ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' or ''Don Carlos'' are today deemed canonical in both their French and Italian versions.
These masques contained songs and dances.
This trend is part of the larger trend of greying audiences for classical music since the last decades of the 20th century.
His ''Der Freischütz'' (1821) shows his genius for creating a supernatural atmosphere.
Literally "beautiful singing", ''bel canto'' opera derives from the Italian stylistic singing school of the same name.
A later work by Peri, ''Euridice'', dating from 1600, is the first opera score to have survived to the present day.
In the 20th century, the traditions of Russian opera were developed by many composers including Sergei Rachmaninoff in his works ''The Miserly Knight'' and ''Francesca da Rimini'', Igor Stravinsky in ''Le Rossignol'', ''Mavra'', ''Oedipus rex'', and ''The Rake's Progress'', Sergei Prokofiev in ''The Gambler'', ''The Love for Three Oranges'', ''The Fiery Angel'', ''Betrothal in a Monastery'', and ''War and Peace''; as well as Dmitri Shostakovich in ''The Nose'' and ''Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District'', Edison Denisov in ''L'écume des jours'', and Alfred Schnittke in ''Life with an Idiot'' and ''Historia von D. Johann Fausten''.
It was fully staged in 1945 in Armenia.
For example, opera houses in Italy routinely staged Wagner in Italian.
As in Wagner's works, the orchestra plays a leading role in Debussy's unique opera ''Pelléas et Mélisande'' (1902) and there are no real arias, only recitative.
Weber, Mozart, and Wagner, in particular, were influenced by his ideals.
Francesco Algarotti's ''Essay on the Opera'' (1755) proved to be an inspiration for Christoph Willibald Gluck's reforms.
His resistance to serialism (an attitude he reversed following Schoenberg's death) proved to be an inspiration for many other composers.
Over time, some directors began to stand up and use hand and arm gestures to lead the performers.
Castrati such as Farinelli and Senesino, as well as female sopranos such as Faustina Bordoni, became in great demand throughout Europe as ''opera seria'' ruled the stage in every country except France.
The current emphasis on a wide vocal range was primarily an invention of the Classical period.
But the drama is understated, enigmatic and completely unWagnerian.
Starting with ''Cadmus et Hermione'', Lully and his librettist Quinault created ''tragédie en musique'', a form in which dance music and choral writing were particularly prominent.
The bass repertoire is wide and varied, stretching from the comedy of Leporello in ''Don Giovanni'' to the nobility of Wotan in Wagner's ''Ring Cycle,'' to the conflicted King Phillip of Verdi's ''Don Carlos''.
The development of Russian-language opera was supported by the Russian composers Vasily Pashkevich, Yevstigney Fomin and Alexey Verstovsky.
However, operatic modernism's use of atonality also sparked a backlash in the form of neoclassicism.
The overture was frequently followed by a series of dance tunes before the curtain rose.
In February 2015, concerns over English National Opera's business plan led to the Arts Council placing it "under special funding arrangements" in what ''The Independent'' termed "the unprecedented step" of threatening to withdraw public funding if the Council's concerns were not met by 2017.
Since 2006, the Met has broadcast live performances to several hundred movie screens all over the world.
Berlioz's epic masterpiece ''Les Troyens'', the culmination of the Gluckian tradition, was not given a full performance for almost a hundred years.
Many of Benjamin Britten's operas are scored for as few as 13 instrumentalists; Mark Adamo's two-act realization of ''Little Women'' is scored for 18 instrumentalists.
Also among the vanguard was the Russian Igor Stravinsky.
Italian opera held a great sway over German-speaking countries until the late 18th century.
Today, operas are only rarely performed in translation.
Another phenomenon of this period was the 'propaganda opera' celebrating revolutionary successes, e.g.
With the rise of recording technology, singers such as Enrico Caruso and Maria Callas became known to much wider audiences that went beyond the circle of opera fans.
This was an afterpiece which came at the end of a play.
''The Death of Klinghoffer'', ''Nixon in China'' and ''Doctor Atomic'' by John Adams, ''Dead Man Walking'' by Jake Heggie, and ''Anna Nicole'' by Mark-Anthony Turnage exemplify the dramatisation on stage of events in recent living memory, where characters portrayed in the opera were alive at the time of the premiere performance.
In the Baroque era, the musicians were usually directed by the harpsichord player, although the French composer Lully is known to have conducted with a long staff.
In it, Verdi blurs the distinction between the aria and recitative as it never before was, leading the opera to be "an unending string of duets".
They became so popular, however, that they were soon being offered as separate productions.
The terminology of the various kinds of operatic voices is described in detail below.
Inigo Jones became the quintessential designer of these productions, and this style was to dominate the English stage for three centuries.
The countertenor is commonly encountered in opera, sometimes singing parts written for castrati&nbsp;– men neutered at a young age specifically to give them a higher singing range.)
These afforded great opportunity for virtuosic singing and during the golden age of ''opera seria'' the singer really became the star.
It uses three generally homophonic movements: fast–slow–fast.
''Porgy and Bess'' (1935), influenced by jazz styles, and ''Candide'' (1956), with its sweeping, lyrical passages and farcical parodies of opera, both opened on Broadway but became accepted as part of the opera repertory.
The first Kyrgyz opera, ''Ai-Churek'', premiered in Moscow at the Bolshoi Theatre on 26 May 1939, during Kyrgyz Art Decade.
The words of an opera are known as the libretto (literally "small book").
The bel canto opera movement flourished in the early 19th century and is exemplified by the operas of Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti, Pacini, Mercadante and many others.
This fashion of opera directed opera from Verdi, onward, exercising tremendous influence on his successors Giacomo Puccini, Richard Strauss, and Benjamin Britten.
One reason for this was an attempt to attract members of the growing merchant class, newly wealthy, but still not as cultured as the nobility, to the public opera houses.
Arne was the first English composer to experiment with Italian-style all-sung comic opera, with his greatest success being ''Thomas and Sally'' in 1760.
Yet another sub-classification can be made according to acting skills or requirements, for example the ''Basso Buffo'' who often must be a specialist in patter as well as a comic actor.
However, in 1656, the dramatist Sir William Davenant produced ''The Siege of Rhodes''.
Over the 18th century, arias were increasingly accompanied by the orchestra.
In 2013 season the festival streamed all six of its productions online.
On the other hand, Richard Strauss accepted Wagnerian ideas but took them in wholly new directions, along with incorporating the new form introduced by Verdi.
The Metropolitan Opera in the US reports that the average age of its audience is now 60.
San Francisco Opera began prerecorded video transmissions in March 2008.
During the 19th century, parallel operatic traditions emerged in central and eastern Europe, particularly in Russia and Bohemia.
Although none of the major opera houses "...use traditional, Broadway-style sound reinforcement, in which most if not all singers are equipped with radio microphones mixed to a series of unsightly loudspeakers scattered throughout the theatre", many use a sound reinforcement system for acoustic enhancement, and for subtle boosting of offstage voices, child singers, onstage dialogue, and sound effects (e.g., church bells in ''Tosca'' or thunder effects in Wagnerian operas).
Wagner's operas were scored with unprecedented scope and complexity, adding more brass instruments and huge ensemble sizes: indeed, his score to ''Das Rheingold'' calls for six harps.
The role of the male hero was usually entrusted to a castrato, and by the 18th century, when Italian opera was performed throughout Europe, leading castrati who possessed extraordinary vocal virtuosity, such as Senesino and Farinelli, became international stars.
The 20th century saw many experiments with modern styles, such as atonality and serialism (Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg), Neoclassicism (Igor Stravinsky), and Minimalism (Philip Glass and John Adams).
"The biggest chunk of operatic training is in linguistics and musicianship," explains mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick.
This is evident in his first reform opera, ''Orfeo ed Euridice'', where his non-virtuosic vocal melodies are supported by simple harmonies and a richer orchestra presence throughout.
The production was transmitted via satellite to 105 countries.
Knowledge of European languages, especially Italian, French, and German, is today an important part of the training for professional singers.
''La traviata'' was also novel.
Subtitles in one or more languages have become standard in opera broadcasts, simulcasts, and DVD editions.
Although supertitles were first almost universally condemned as a distraction, today many opera houses provide either supertitles, generally projected above the theatre's proscenium arch, or individual seat screens where spectators can choose from more than one language.
Rossini's ''Guillaume Tell'' helped found the new genre of Grand Opera, a form whose most famous exponent was another foreigner, Giacomo Meyerbeer.
The popularity of opera continued through the verismo era in Italy and contemporary French opera through to Giacomo Puccini and Richard Strauss in the early 20th century.
His modernized ballad opera, ''Love in a Village'' (1762), began a vogue for pastiche opera that lasted well into the 19th century.
By the 19th century, ''accompagnato'' had gained the upper hand, the orchestra played a much bigger role, and Wagner revolutionized opera by abolishing almost all distinction between aria and recitative in his quest for what Wagner termed "endless melody".
Ukrainian opera was developed by Semen Hulak-Artemovsky (1813-1873) whose most famous work ''Zaporozhets za Dunayem'' (A Cossack Beyond the Danube) is regularly performed around the world.
Composers such as Strauss, Britten, Shostakovich and Stravinsky adopted and expanded upon this style.
This overture style was also used in English opera, most notably in Henry Purcell's ''Dido and Æneas''.
Rather than long, suspended melodies, ''Falstaff'' contains many little motifs and mottos, that, rather than being expanded upon, are introduced and subsequently dropped, only to be brought up again later.
By the time Wagnerian operas were introduced, the complexity of the works and the huge orchestras used to play them gave the conductor an increasingly important role.
At the turn of the century, a distinct national opera movement also began to emerge in Georgia under the leadership Zacharia Paliashvili, who fused local folk songs and stories with 19th-century Romantic classical themes.
In the 20th century, other operas created by Polish composers included ''King Roger'' by Karol Szymanowski and ''Ubu Rex'' by Krzysztof Penderecki.
Opera composers such as Domenico Sarro, Leonardo Vinci, Giambattista Pergolesi, Leonardo Leo, and Johann Adolf Hasse added new instruments to the opera orchestra and gave the instruments new roles.
The first of these, ''Rigoletto'', proved the most daring and revolutionary.
In the 18th century, Lully's most important successor was Jean-Philippe Rameau, who composed five ''tragédies en musique'' as well as numerous works in other genres such as opéra-ballet, all notable for their rich orchestration and harmonic daring.
Major opera companies have begun presenting their performances in local cinemas throughout the United States and many other countries.
About 1683, John Blow composed ''Venus and Adonis'', often thought of as the first true English-language opera.
In the second half of the 19th century, Jacques Offenbach created operetta with witty and cynical works such as ''Orphée aux enfers'', as well as the opera ''Les Contes d'Hoffmann''; Charles Gounod scored a massive success with ''Faust''; and Bizet composed ''Carmen'', which, once audiences learned to accept its blend of Romanticism and realism, became the most popular of all opéra comiques.
European opera houses and festivals including the Royal Opera in London, La Scala in Milan, the Salzburg Festival, La Fenice in Venice, and the Maggio Musicale in Florence have also transmitted their productions to theaters in cities around the world since 2006, including 90 cities in the U.S.
In 1637, the idea of a "season" (Carnival) of publicly attended operas supported by ticket sales emerged in Venice.
In the 20th century, English opera began to assert more independence, with works of Ralph Vaughan Williams and in particular Benjamin Britten, who in a series of works that remain in standard repertory today, revealed an excellent flair for the dramatic and superb musicality.
The first to succeed however, was Gluck.
In the 18th century, a number of Italian sopranos gained international renown and often engaged in fierce rivalry, as was the case with Faustina Bordoni and Francesca Cuzzoni, who started a fist fight with one another during a performance of a Handel opera.
Operatic modernism truly began in the operas of two Viennese composers, Arnold Schoenberg and his student Alban Berg, both composers and advocates of atonality and its later development (as worked out by Schoenberg), dodecaphony.
After Rameau's death, the German Gluck was persuaded to produce six operas for the Parisian stage in the 1770s.
A subtle type of sound electronic reinforcement called acoustic enhancement is used in some modern concert halls and theatres where operas are performed.
The Metropolitan Opera began a series of live high-definition video transmissions to cinemas around the world in 2006.
In the 1800s, during the Classical period, the first violinist, also known as the concertmaster, would lead the orchestra while sitting.
Chinese contemporary classical opera, a Chinese language form of Western style opera that is distinct from traditional Chinese opera, has had operas dating back to ''The White Haired Girl'' in 1945.
It tells the story of courtesan, and is often cited as one of the first "realistic" operas, because rather than featuring great kings and figures from literature, it focuses on the tragedies of ordinary life and society.
It was frequently libellous and scandalous and consisted in the main of dialogue set to music arranged from popular tunes.
This is carried out in detail in the ''Fach'' system of German speaking countries, where historically opera and spoken drama were often put on by the same repertory company.
In between the bass and the tenor is the baritone, which also varies in weight from say, Guglielmo in Mozart's ''Così fan tutte'' to Posa in Verdi's ''Don Carlos''; the actual designation "baritone" was not standard until the mid-19th century.
But Mozart's contribution to ''opera seria'' was more mixed; by his time it was dying away, and in spite of such fine works as ''Idomeneo'' and ''La clemenza di Tito'', he would not succeed in bringing the art form back to life again.
"I have to understand not only what I'm singing, but what everyone else is singing.
The performance is typically given in an opera house, accompanied by an orchestra or smaller musical ensemble, which since the early 19th century has been led by a conductor.
Following Purcell, the popularity of opera in England dwindled for several decades.
Other Ukrainian opera composers include Mykola Lysenko (''Taras Bulba'' and ''Natalka Poltavka''), Heorhiy Maiboroda, and Yuliy Meitus.
Despite the success of his masterwork ''Dido and Aeneas'' (1689), in which the action is furthered by the use of Italian-style recitative, much of Purcell's best work was not involved in the composing of typical opera, but instead he usually worked within the constraints of the semi-opera format, where isolated scenes and masques are contained within the structure of a spoken play, such as Shakespeare in Purcell's ''The Fairy-Queen'' (1692) and Beaumont and Fletcher in ''The Prophetess'' (1690) and ''Bonduca'' (1696).
Other composers who made individual contributions to German opera in the early 20th century include Alexander von Zemlinsky, Erich Korngold, Franz Schreker, Paul Hindemith, Kurt Weill and the Italian-born Ferruccio Busoni.
Composers such as Richard Strauss, Claude Debussy, Giacomo Puccini, Paul Hindemith, Benjamin Britten and Hans Pfitzner pushed Wagnerian harmony further with a more extreme use of chromaticism and greater use of dissonance.
