silvaticum'') instead of ''P.
It also refers to opium's potential as a poison.
Opium contains two main groups of alkaloids.
During the Qing dynasty, China opened itself to foreign trade under the Canton System through the port of Guangzhou (Canton), with traders from the East India Company visiting the port by the 1690s.
The Sumerian, Assyrian, Egyptian, Indian, Minoan, Greek, Roman, Persian and Arab Empires all made widespread use of opium, which was the most potent form of pain relief then available, allowing ancient surgeons to perform prolonged surgical procedures.
Worldwide production in 2006 was 6610 metric tons—about one-fifth the level of production in 1906.
Despite drastic penalties and continued prohibition of opium until 1860, opium importation rose steadily from 200 chests per year under the Yongzheng Emperor to 1,000 under the Qianlong Emperor, 4,000 under the Jiaqing Emperor, and 30,000 under the Daoguang Emperor.
One acre harvested in this way can produce three to five kilograms of raw opium.
If allowed to mature, poppy pods (poppy straw) can be crushed and used to produce lower quantities of morphinans.
Legal opium importation from India and Turkey is conducted by Mallinckrodt, Noramco, Abbott Laboratories, Purdue Pharma, and Cody Laboratories Inc. in the United States, and legal opium production is conducted by GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Johnson Matthey, and Mayne in Tasmania, Australia; Sanofi Aventis in France; Shionogi Pharmaceutical in Japan; and MacFarlan Smith in the United Kingdom.
Use of opium as a cure-all was reflected in the formulation of mithridatium described in the 1728 ''Chambers Cyclopedia'', which included true opium in the mixture.
Between 150,000 and 200,000 opiate addicts lived in the United States in the late 19th century and between two-thirds and three-quarters of these addicts were women.
If given in controlled doses, modern opiates can be an effective treatment for neuropathic pain and other forms of chronic pain.
Morphine is converted into heroin by a simple chemical reaction with acetic anhydride, followed by a varying degree of purification.
Portuguese traders also brought opium from the independent Malwa states of western India, although by 1820, the British were able to restrict this trade by charging "pass duty" on the opium when it was forced to pass through Bombay to reach an ''entrepot''.
Purified morphine and heroin became widely available for injection and patent medicines containing opiates reached a peak in recreational use.
Beginning in 1773, the British government began enacting oversight of the company's operations, and in response to the Indian Rebellion of 1857, this policy culminated in the establishment of direct rule over the presidencies and provinces of British India.
Extensive textual and pictorial sources also show that poppy cultivation and opium consumption were widespread in Safavid Iran and Mughal India.
A famous speech was made by Gladstone in Parliament against the First Opium War.
These missionaries were generally outraged over the British government's Royal Commission on Opium visiting India but not China.
Through selective breeding of the ''Papaver somniferum'' plant, the content of the phenanthrene alkaloids morphine, codeine, and to a lesser extent thebaine has been greatly increased.
Legal opium production in India is much more traditional.
Crude laboratories in the field are capable of refining opium into morphine base by a simple acid-base extraction.
Among white Europeans, opium was more frequently consumed as laudanum or in patent medicines.
Samuel Clarke, China Inland Mission in Kweiyang; the Rev.
This is a weaker solution than laudanum, an alcoholic tincture which was prevalently used as a pain medication and sleeping aid.
'''Opium''' ('''poppy tears''', with the scientific name: ''Lachryma papaveris'') is the dried latex obtained from the opium poppy (scientific name: ''Papaver somniferum'').
Because opiates were viewed as more humane than punishment or restraint, they were often used to treat the mentally ill.
In the past, smokers would use a specially designed opium pipe which had a removable knob-like pipe-bowl of fired earthenware attached by a metal fitting to a long, cylindrical stem.
Opium trade became more regular by the 17th century, when it was mixed with tobacco for smoking, and addiction was first recognized.
As of 2008, opium was collected by farmers who were licensed to grow  of opium poppies, who to maintain their licences needed to sell 56 kilograms of unadulterated raw opium paste.
somniferum'', were also used for production of opiates from their capsules and stems.
Such results are viewed as false positive indications of drug use and were the basis of a legal defense.
During this time of popularity, users called opium "God's Own Medicine."
In 1924, 62 nations participated in a meeting of the Commission.
The name "Paracelsus" was a pseudonym signifying him the equal or better of Aulus Cornelius Celsus, whose text, which described the use of opium or a similar preparation, had recently been translated and reintroduced to medieval Europe.
There has been criticism of the Senlis report findings by Macfarlan Smith, who argue that though they produce morphine in Europe, they were never asked to contribute to the report.
The remnant opium trade primarily served Southeast Asia, but spread to American soldiers during the Vietnam War, with 20 percent of soldiers regarding themselves as addicted during the peak of the epidemic in 1971.
Opium poppies are popular and attractive garden plants, whose flowers vary greatly in color, size and form.
Part of the proposal is to overcome the "80–20 rule" that requires the U.S. to purchase 80 percent of its legal opium from India and Turkey to include Afghanistan, by establishing a second-tier system of supply control that complements the current INCB regulated supply and demand system by providing poppy-based medicines to countries who cannot meet their demand under the current regulations.
Trade in opium was standardized, with production of balls of raw opium, 1.1 to 1.6 kilograms, 30 percent water content, wrapped in poppy leaves and petals, and shipped in chests of 60–65 kilograms (one picul).
The Persian physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi ("Rhazes", 845–930 CE) maintained a laboratory and school in Baghdad, and was a student and critic of Galen; he made use of opium in anesthesia and recommended its use for the treatment of melancholy in ''Fi ma-la-yahdara al-tabib'', "In the Absence of a Physician", a home medical manual directed toward ordinary citizens for self-treatment if a doctor was not available.
Subsequently, laudanum became the basis of many popular patent medicines of the 19th century.
In 1705, Wang Shizhen wrote, "nowadays, from nobility and gentlemen down to slaves and women, all are addicted to tobacco."
A figure of the Minoan "goddess of the narcotics", wearing a crown of three opium poppies,  BCE, was recovered from the Sanctuary of Gazi, Crete, together with a simple smoking apparatus.
Opium farming also increased, peaking in 1930 when the League of Nations singled China out as the primary source of illicit opium in East and Southeast Asia.
Opium production in that country has increased rapidly since, reaching an all-time high in 2006.
It was hoped that Ma Fuxiang would have improved the situation, since Chinese Muslims were well known for opposition to smoking opium.
Importation of opium peaked in 1879 at 6,700 tons, and by 1906, China was producing 85 percent of the world's opium, some 35,000 tons, and 27 percent of its adult male population regularly used opium13.5million people consuming 39,000 tons of opium yearly.
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu used opium in the 14th-century Ottoman Empire to treat migraine headaches, sciatica, and other painful ailments.
By 1902, sales made up 5 percent of the company's profits, and "heroinism" had attracted media attention.
Pharmacists that were found to have prescribed opium for illegitimate causes and anyone found to have sold opium without proper qualifications would be prosecuted.
A common name for males in Afghanistan is "Redey", which in Pashto means "poppy".
Scientific evidence of the pernicious nature of opium use was largely undocumented in the 1890s, when Protestant missionaries in China decided to strengthen their opposition to the trade by compiling data which would demonstrate the harm the drug did.
Opium-producing nations are required to designate a government agency to take physical possession of licit opium crops as soon as possible after harvest and conduct all wholesaling and exporting through that agency.
One reason for the increase in opiate consumption in the United States during the 19th century was the prescribing and dispensing of legal opiates by physicians and pharmacists to women with "female complaints" (mostly to relieve menstrual pain and hysteria).
In modern times, much of the thebaine, which often serves as the raw material for the synthesis for hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and other semisynthetic opiates, originates from extracting ''Papaver orientale'' or ''Papaver bracteatum''.
The abuse of opium in the United States began in the late 19th century and was largely stigmatized with Chinese immigrants.
The first known cultivation of opium poppies was in Mesopotamia, approximately 3400 BCE, by Sumerians, who called the plant ''hul gil'', the "joy plant".
The renowned Andalusian ophthalmologic surgeon Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi ("Abulcasis", 936–1013 CE) relied on opium and mandrake as surgical anaesthetics and wrote a treatise, ''al-Tasrif'', that influenced medical thought well into the 16th century.
General Ma had been using the bank, a branch of the Government of China's exchequer, to arrange for silver currency to be transported to Baotou to use it to sponsor the trade.
Globally, opium has gradually been superseded by a variety of purified, semi-synthetic, and synthetic opioids with progressively stronger effects, and by other general anesthetics.
He and James Laidlaw Maxwell appealed to the London Missionary Conference of 1888 and the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 to condemn the continuation of the trade.
After regularly producing 70 percent of the world's opium, Afghanistan decreased production to 74 tons per year under a ban by the Taliban in 2000, a move which cut production by 94 percent.
A massive destruction of opium by an emissary of the Chinese Daoguang Emperor in an attempt to stop opium imports led to the First Opium War (18391842), in which Britain defeated China.
Today, opium is regulated by the Drug Enforcement Administration under the Controlled Substances Act.
There was an extensive and complicated system of BEIC agencies involved in the supervision and management of opium production and distribution in India.
In Egypt, the use of opium was generally restricted to priests, magicians, and warriors, its invention is credited to Thoth, and it was said to have been given by Isis to Ra as treatment for a headache.
Between 400 and 1200 CE, Arab traders introduced opium to China.
The smoking of opium does not involve the burning of the material as might be imagined.
In England, the home director of the China Inland Mission, Benjamin Broomhall, was an active opponent of the opium trade, writing two books to promote the banning of opium smoking: ''The Truth about Opium Smoking'' and ''The Chinese Opium Smoker''.
The program was counted as a substantial success, with a cessation of direct British opium exports to China (but not Hong Kong) and most provinces declared free of opium production.
According to DEA statistics, Afghanistan's production of oven-dried opium increased to 1,278 tons in 2002, more than doubled by 2003, and nearly doubled again during 2004.
These pods can be boiled in water to produce a bitter tea that induces a long-lasting intoxication ''(See Poppy tea)''.
"Dope" and "tar" can also refer to heroin.
In 2006, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime estimated production to have risen 59 percent to  in cultivation, yielding 6,100 tons of opium, 82 percent of the world's supply.
The British government has contradicted the Home Office's suggestion that opium cultivation can be legalized in Afghanistan for exports to the United Kingdom, helping lower poverty and internal fighting while helping the NHS to meet the high demand for morphine and heroin.
Phenanthrenes such as morphine, codeine, and thebaine are the main psychoactive constituents.
The smoker would lie on his or her side in order to guide the pipe-bowl and the tiny pill of opium over the stream of heat rising from the chimney of the oil lamp and inhale the vaporized opium fumes as needed.
However, by 1861, Wang Tao wrote that opium was used even by rich peasants, and even a small village without a rice store would have a shop where opium was sold.
Morphine was the first pharmaceutical isolated from a natural product, and this success encouraged the isolation of other alkaloids: by 1820, isolations of noscapine, strychnine, veratrine, colchicine, caffeine, and quinine were reported.
Global regulation of opium began with the stigmatization of Chinese immigrants and opium dens in San Francisco, California.
Remaining opium production shifted south of the Chinese border into the Golden Triangle region.
Opium was prohibited in many countries during the early 20th century, leading to the modern pattern of opium production as a precursor for illegal recreational drugs or tightly regulated legal prescription drugs.
somniferum'' for inducing sleep and relieving pain.
Codeine was isolated in 1832 by Pierre Jean Robiquet.
Relative to other preparations of heroin, it has been associated with a dramatically decreased rate of HIV transmission among intravenous drug users (4 percent in Los Angeles vs. 40 percent in New York) due to technical requirements of injection, although it is also associated with greater risk of venous sclerosis and necrotizing fasciitis.
Recreational use of opium elsewhere in the world remained rare into late in the 19th century, as indicated by ambivalent reports of opium usage.
In 1573, for instance, a Venetian visitor to the Ottoman Empire observed many of the Turkish natives of Constantinople regularly drank a "certain black water made with opium" that makes them feel good, but to which they become so addicted, if they try to go without, they will "quickly die".
American missionary Hampden Coit DuBose acted as first president.
Some competition came from the newly independent United States, which began to compete in Guangzhou, selling Turkish opium in the 1820s.
In South American countries, opium poppies are technically illegal, but nonetheless appear in some nurseries as ornamentals.
Opium production has led to rising tensions in Afghan villages.
As the power of the Roman Empire declined, the lands to the south, and east of the Mediterranean Sea became incorporated into the Islamic Empires.
His hostility to opium stemmed from the effects of opium brought upon his sister Helen.
During this time the use of opium had little negative connotation and was used freely until 1882 when a law was passed to confine opium smoking to specific dens.
In late 2004, the U.S. government estimated that 206,000 hectares were under poppy cultivation, 4.5 percent of the country's total cropland, and produced 4,200 metric tons of opium, 76 percent of the world's supply, yielding 60 percent of Afghanistan's gross domestic product.
Tincture of opium has been prescribed for, among other things, severe diarrhea.
One study in postaddicts found heroin to be approximately 2.2 times more potent than morphine by weight with a similar duration; at these relative quantities, they could distinguish the drugs subjectively but had no preference.
Chronic opium addicts in 1906 China or modern-day Iran consume an average of eight grams of opium daily.
The program relied on the turning of public sentiment against opium, with mass meetings at which opium paraphernalia were publicly burned, as well as coercive legal action and the granting of police powers to organizations such as the Fujian Anti-Opium Society.
In China, recreational use began in the 15th century, but was limited by its rarity and expense.
Poppies also frequently adorned statues of Apollo, Asklepios, Pluto, Demeter, Aphrodite, Kybele and Isis, symbolizing nocturnal oblivion.
This classic text was translated into Latin in 1175 and later into many other languages and remained authoritative into the 17th century.
Tablets found at Nippur, a Sumerian spiritual center south of Baghdad, described the collection of poppy juice in the morning and its use in production of opium.
Besides Afghanistan, smaller quantities of opium are produced in Pakistan, the Golden Triangle region of Southeast Asia (particularly Burma), Colombia, Guatemala, and Mexico.
Preparations of the drug such as oxycodone with paracetamol and extended release oxycodone remain popular to this day.
This process was developed in the UK during World War II, when wartime shortages of many essential drugs encouraged innovation in pharmaceutical processing.
In 1909, the International Opium Commission was founded, and by 1914, 34 nations had agreed that the production and importation of opium should be diminished.
Numerous finds of ''P.
In 1888, Broomhall formed and became secretary of the Christian Union for the Severance of the British Empire with the Opium Traffic and editor of its periodical, ''National Righteousness''.
In 2002, they were seeking to expand through eastern United States.
To make opium extract, 20 parts water are combined with 1 part raw opium which has been boiled for 5 minutes (the latter to ease mixing).
Isoquinolines such as papaverine and noscapine have no significant central nervous system effects, and are not regulated under the Controlled Substances Act.
Opium poppy cultivation in the United Kingdom does not need a licence, but a licence is required for those wishing to extract opium for medicinal products.
Both analgesia and drug addiction are functions of the mu opioid receptor, the class of opioid receptor first identified as responsive to morphine.
Therefore, the British tried to encourage Chinese opium use to enhance their balance, and they delivered it from Indian provinces under British control.
Ma Fuxiang officially prohibited opium and made it illegal in Ningxia, but the Guominjun reversed his policy; by 1933, people from every level of society were abusing the drug, and Ningxia was left in destitution.
Opium extract (''extractum opii'') finally can be made by macerating raw opium with water.
Compared to other chemicals available to 18th century regular physicians, opium was a benign alternative to the arsenics, mercuries, or emetics, and it was remarkably successful in alleviating a wide range of ailments.
The alkaloids are then recovered via acid-base extraction and purified.
''Laudanum'' was originally the 16th-century term for a medicine associated with a particular physician that was widely well-regarded, but became standardized as "tincture of opium", a solution of opium in ethanol, which Paracelsus has been credited with developing.
Legal opium production is allowed under the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and other international drug treaties, subject to strict supervision by the law enforcement agencies of individual countries.
This act and the stigma of a demon drug on opium, led to the criminalization of people that used opium-based products.
No drug has been found that can match the painkilling effect of opioids without also duplicating much of their addictive potential.
Avicenna describes several methods of delivery and recommendations for doses of the drug.
The Mediterranean region contains the earliest archeological evidence of human use; the oldest known seeds date back to more than 5000 BCE in the Neolithic age with purposes such as food, anaesthetics, and ritual.
Widespread medical use of unprocessed opium continued through the American Civil War before giving way to morphine and its successors, which could be injected at a precisely controlled dosage.
The illegal sale of opium became one of the world's most valuable single commodity trades and has been called "the most long continued and systematic international crime of modern times".
Opium production continued under the Babylonians and Egyptians.
Cultivation continued in the Middle East by the Assyrians, who also collected poppy juice in the morning after scoring the pods with an iron scoop; they called the juice ''aratpa-pal'', possibly the root of ''Papaver''.
By 1905 all Australian states and territories had passed similar laws making prohibitions to Opium sale.
From the earliest finds, opium has appeared to have ritual significance, and anthropologists have speculated ancient priests may have used the drug as a proof of healing power.
This association of opium with sex continued in China until the end of the 19th century.
If these doctors were found to be prescribing opiates without just cause, then they could lose their license to practice or prescribe drugs.
Opium is said to have been used for recreational purposes from the 14th century onwards in Muslim societies.
For farmers, the crop can be up to ten times more profitable than wheat.
Despite the historically negative view of opium as a cause of addiction, the use of morphine and other derivatives isolated from opium in the treatment of chronic pain has been reestablished.
Gladstone was fiercely against both of the Opium Wars Britain waged in China in the First Opium War initiated in 1840 and the Second Opium War initiated in 1857, denounced British violence against Chinese, and was ardently opposed to the British trade in opium to China.
French sailors provided another major group of opium smokers, having gotten the habit while in French Indochina, where the drug was promoted and monopolized by the colonial government as a source of revenue.
Many techniques of drug treatment exist, including pharmacologically based treatments with naltrexone, methadone, or ibogaine.
Confirmation by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry will distinguish amongst opium and variants including poppy seeds, heroin, and morphine and codeine pharmaceuticals by measuring the morphine:codeine ratio and looking for the presence of noscapine and acetylcodeine, the latter of which is only found in illicitly produced heroin, and heroin metabolites such as 6-monoacetylmorphine.
Opium was banned completely in 1799, and this prohibition continued until 1860.
The traditional opium pipe is known as a "dream stick".
The World Health Organization has estimated that current production of opium would need to increase fivefold to account for total global medical need.
Opium was used with poison hemlock to put people quickly and painlessly to death, but it was also used in medicine.
The use of diethyl ether and chloroform for general anesthesia began in 1846–1847, and rapidly displaced the use of opiates and tropane alkaloids from Solanaceae due to their relative safety.
Gladstone criticized it as "a war more unjust in its origin, a war more calculated in its progress to cover this country with permanent disgrace".
From 1880 to the beginning of the Communist era, the British attempted to discourage the use of opium in China, but this effectively promoted the use of  morphine, heroin, and cocaine, further exacerbating the problem of addiction.
In late 2006, the British government permitted the pharmaceutical company MacFarlan Smith (a Johnson Matthey company) to cultivate opium poppies in England for medicinal reasons, after Macfarlan Smith's primary source, India, decided to increase the price of export opium latex.
Arthur Gostick Shorrock, English Baptist Mission in Taiyuan; and the Rev.
setigerum'' from Bronze Age and Iron Age settlements have also been reported.
The average is around 1500 rupees () per kilogram.
Purification of chemical constituents is done in India for domestic production, but typically done abroad by foreign importers.
Although millennia older, the production of poppy head decoctions can be seen as a quick and dirty variant of the Kábáy poppy straw process, which since its publication in 1930 has become the major method of obtaining licit opium alkaloids worldwide, as discussed under the Wikipedia Morphine article.
One study of British heroin addicts found a 12-fold excess mortality ratio (1.8 percent of the group dying per year).
Because of the low social status of immigrant workers, contemporary writers and media had little trouble portraying opium dens as seats of vice, white slavery, gambling, knife- and revolver-fights, and a source for drugs causing deadly overdoses, with the potential to addict and corrupt the white population.
The production of opium has not changed since ancient times.
Opium production has fallen since 1906, when 41,000 tons were produced, but because 39,000 tons of that year's opium were consumed in China, overall usage in the rest of the world was much lower.
Chinese production mainly trades with and profits from North America.
A counternarcotics law passed in December 2005 requires Afghanistan to develop registries or regulations for tracking, storing, and owning acetic anhydride.
Accordingly, the missionaries first organized the Anti-Opium League in China among their colleagues in every mission station in China.
The great advantage of purified morphine was that a patient could be treated with a known dose—whereas with raw plant material, as Gabriel Fallopius once lamented, "if soporifics are weak they do not help; if they are strong they are exceedingly dangerous."
Vinum opii is made by combining sugar, white wine, cinnamon, and cloves.
The effects could last up to twelve hours.
In 1980, 2,000 tons of opium supplied all legal and illegal uses.
Some additional money is made by drying the poppy heads and collecting poppy seeds, and a small fraction of opium beyond the quota may be consumed locally or diverted to the black market.
In Eastern culture, opium is more commonly used in the form of paregoric to treat diarrhea.
In the 1660s, laudanum was recommended for pain, sleeplessness, and diarrhea by Thomas Sydenham, the renowned "father of English medicine" or "English Hippocrates", to whom is attributed the quote, "Among the remedies which it has pleased Almighty God to give to man to relieve his sufferings, none is so universal and so efficacious as opium."
Power shifted from remote to high-end smugglers and opium traders.
Opium is mentioned in the most important medical texts of the ancient world, including the Ebers Papyrus and the writings of Dioscorides, Galen, and Avicenna.
Because addiction was viewed as a medical problem rather than an indulgence, doctors were permitted to allow patients to wean themselves off opiates rather than cutting off any opiate use altogether.
The leading legal production method is the Gregory process, whereby the entire poppy, excluding roots and leaves, is mashed and stewed in dilute acid solutions.
Opium prohibition began in 1729, when the Qing Yongzheng Emperor  disturbed by ''madak'' smoking at court and carrying out the government's role of upholding Confucian virtues, officially prohibited the sale of opium, except for a small amount for medicinal purposes.
This allowed the company to exercise a monopoly over opium production and export in India, to encourage ryots to cultivate the cash crops of indigo and opium with cash advances, and to prohibit the "hoarding" of rice.
Addicts sometimes turned to missionaries for treatment for their addiction, though many associated these foreigners with the drug trade.
The British queen Victoria, not willing to replace the cheap opium with costly silver, began the First Opium War in 1840, the British winning Hong Kong and trade concessions in the first of a series of Unequal Treaties.
Action against opium farmers centred upon a highly repressive incarnation of law enforcement in which rural populations had their property destroyed, their land confiscated and/or were publicly tortured, humiliated and executed.
However, despite its medicinal values in these cases, it was noted that in cases of psychosis, it could cause anger or depression, and due to the drug's euphoric effects, it could cause depressed patients to become more depressed after the effects wore off because they would get used to being high.
Tobacco in that time was frequently mixed with other herbs (this continues with clove cigarettes to the modern day), and opium was one component in the mixture.
This is to allow trends in consumption to be monitored and production quotas allotted.
Poppy seeds are a common and flavorsome topping for breads and cakes.
Outsourcing became a huge factor for survival for many smugglers and opium farmers.
Until the full ban on opium based products came into effect just after the turn of the century, physicians in the US considered opium a miracle drug that could help with many ailments.
After 1860, opium use continued to increase with widespread domestic production in China.
Morphine is the most prevalent and important alkaloid in opium, consisting of 10–16 percent of the total, and is responsible for most of its harmful effects such as lung edema, respiratory difficulties, coma, or cardiac or respiratory collapse.
Smoking and possession was prohibited in 1908.
Oil poppies, an alternative strain of ''P.
Opium latex contains approximately 12 percent of the analgesic alkaloid morphine, which is processed chemically to produce heroin and other synthetic opioids for medicinal use and for the illegal drug trade.
Intravenous injection of opiates is most used:  by comparison with injection, "dragon chasing" (heating of heroin with barbital on a piece of foil), and madak and "ack ack" (smoking of cigarettes containing tobacco mixed with heroin powder) are only 40 percent and 20 percent efficient, respectively.
Following passage of a Colonial Australian law in 1895, Queensland's Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 addressed opium addiction among Aboriginal people, though it soon became a general vehicle for depriving them of basic rights by administrative regulation.
This proposal is to license Afghan farmers to produce opium for the world pharmaceutical market, and thereby solve another problem, that of chronic underuse of potent analgesics where required within developing nations.
When Broomhall was dying, his son Marshall read to him from ''The Times'' the welcome news that an agreement had been signed ensuring the end of the opium trade within two years.
After the 1757 Battle of Plassey and 1764 Battle of Buxar, the British East India Company gained the power to act as ''diwan'' of Bengal, Bihar, and Odisha ''(See company rule in India)''.
Dr. George Beard in 1869 proposed his theory of neurasthenia, a hereditary nervous system deficiency that could predispose an individual to addiction.
The latex also contains the closely related opiates codeine and thebaine, and non-analgesic alkaloids such as papaverine and noscapine.
This organization, which had elected national officers and held an annual national meeting, was instrumental in gathering data from every Western-trained medical doctor in China, which was then published as William Hector Park compiled ''Opinions of Over 100 Physicians on the Use of Opium in China'' (Shanghai: American Presbyterian Mission Press, 1899).
In 1923, an officer of the Bank of China from Baotou found out that Ma Fuxiang was assisting the drug trade in opium which helped finance his military expenses.
This act put taxes and restrictions on the sale and prescription of opium, as well as trying to stigmatize the opium poppy and its derivatives as "demon drugs," to try and scare people away from them.
The price of opium is around  per kilo.
