In the biological disciplines, opportunistic behavior is studied in fields such as evolutionary biology, ecology, epidemiology, and etiology, where moral or judgmental overtones do not apply (see also opportunistic pathogens, opportunistic predation, phoresis, and parasitism).
It can also be viewed as a striving to realize or express certain principles.
The opportunist seeks to gain personal advantage when an opportunity presents itself, putting self-interest ahead of some other interest, in a way contrary either to a ''previously established'' principle or another principle that ought to have ''higher priority''.
Spiritual opportunism refers to the exploitation of spiritual ideas (or of the spirituality of others, or of spiritual authority): for personal gain, partisan interests or selfish motives.
Most politicians are "opportunists" to some extent at least (they aim to utilize political opportunities creatively to their advantage, and have to try new initiatives), but the controversies surrounding the concept concern the exact relationship between "seizing a political opportunity" and the ''political principles'' being espoused.
However, in principle examples could also be constructed where opportunist behaviour unintentionally serves other, broader interests (such as when, in their rush to take selfish advantage of a situation, the opportunist actors create more opportunities for other actors at the same time – the "bandwaggon" or "food chain" effect; see also Pareto optimality).
This may be tolerated, to the extent that the selfish purpose of the opportunist is compatible with, or does not conflict with, the goals and intentions of the group.
Legal opportunism can involve practices such as the following:
Opportunism is facilitated if for any reason there is a low level of awareness that it is happening.
It is often difficult for an outsider to understand why an action or an idea is (or is not) "opportunist", because the outsider does not know the whole story, or the whole context, or the true intention behind it.
Often, legal opportunism is enabled because a rule must be ''interpreted'' in order to ''apply'' it, where the chosen interpretation is precisely the one that favours one's self-interest.
It may be regarded as undesirable and unwanted, or indeed a breach of trust or good faith, if that is not the case.
*are made to serve partisan interests, contrary to the real intention of the beliefs.
''Perceptions'' of the strengths and vulnerabilities of others and oneself may play an important role.
*'''Competition''': in a situation of intense conflict, competition or war, it may be that people will do anything to survive, win, retain support, or defend themselves, never mind the principles, ideals or beliefs they had.
*Capitalist society is of itself aimless and amorphous with regard to the purposes of human life, lacking any shared, consensual ethic.
Ordinary laws and "rules of the game" break down, creating new opportunities for those positioned to take advantage of them.
These factors influence the capacity to know "where to draw the line" appropriately, and regulate one's own behaviour so that it remains consistent.
*Although people necessarily have to cooperate to survive, the way they go about this is highly contradictory, and involves "character masks", because there is also constant competition among individuals, businesses and social classes for money, power and prestige.
It could involve deliberately withholding or distorting important business information, shirking (doing less work than agreed), or failing to fulfill formal or informal promises and obligations.
In macrobiology, opportunist behaviour by an organism generally means that it is able to seize and use ''diverse'' opportunities in its environment to survive and grow.
Thus, in a new stage of evolution, a long-existing behaviour, culture, or physical characteristic can respond to a wholly new opportunity and acquire a new role.
*Regulating all the conflicting interests and values, the capitalist state enforces the constraints of a legal system, but this legal system splits ''moral'' value and ''economic'' value into separate compartments, as well as splitting public and private spheres.
The sociology and psychology of human opportunism is somewhat related to the study of gambling behaviour, and centres on the way people respond to risk and opportunity, and what kind of motivation and organizational culture is involved.
The political philosophy of Niccolò Machiavelli as described in ''The Prince'' is often regarded as a classic manual of opportunist scheming.
It is likely that the possibilities for opportunist behaviour are promoted in contexts where there is not only an incentive to engage in them, but also where it is also extremely difficult for some reason to remain behaviourally consistent, or where ordinary constraints on behaviour are lacking.
Strong emotions and desires may also play a role, and much may depend on how permissive a person, group or organization is (see permissive society).
Professionals may, to a great extent, make their own judgements, interpretations, and decisions about the exact approach to take—without an explicit rule that they must perform in a specific way.
In 19th-century Italian politics, it meant "exploiting the prevailing circumstances or opportunities to gain immediate advantage for oneself or one's own group".
*'''Advantages''': the prevalence of opportunist behaviour is likely to be influenced by the perception that the pay-off or advantage of engaging in it, outweighs possible disadvantages or penalties.
For the sake of doing something that will work, or that successfully solves the problem, a previously agreed principle is knowingly compromised or disregarded - with the justification that alternative actions would, overall, have a worse effect.
This competition is rarely a level playing field.
Criticism  of opportunism usually refers to a situation where beliefs and principles are tested or challenged.
*Trying to sway legal opinion about a case by using arguments or utterances that appeal to the audience, but have substantively nothing to do with the case at hand.
In Latin, ''opportunus'' means opportune or favourable (''opportunitas'' = opportunity); the word itself is a contraction of ''ob portus'' ("toward the harbour/entrance") or ''oppositum portus'' ("facing the harbour/entrance").
*take a risk for the purpose of gaining/maintaining influence, support, wealth or popularity, although taking this risk is inconsistent with the principles being espoused.
The phenomenon of intellectual opportunism is frequently associated by its critics with careerism.
*'''Awareness''': if people are for some or other reason deceiving themselves about the real consequences of their actions, they are more likely to initiate or condone opportunist behaviour; if they were more aware, that wouldn't happen to the same extent.
*do not really express what people's lives are about, but are in some way an "artificial add-on".
The behaviour, culture or body part of a species that long ago evolved to serve a particular purpose or function may subsequently lend itself to a very ''different'' positive purpose or function that helps the species to survive.
This may be accepted or tolerated, or it may be criticized because the concerns of others are not adequately taken into consideration (or because it is contrary to authentic sexual love).
Usually, legal opportunism is understood to occur ''legally'': it is itself not necessarily a "crime" (a violation of the law or an unlawful act), but it could be considered "immoral" ("there ought to be a law against it").
Nevertheless, some Marxists claim that Marx's theory of capitalism does imply a substantive theory of opportunism.
Other social groupings may try to prevent social opportunism, by imposing strict preconditions of participation to ward off opportunists, or with the aid of rules prohibiting opportunist behaviour.
In human behaviour generally, opportunism concerns the relationship between what people do, and their basic principles when faced with opportunities and challenges.
Thus, the British Conservative statesman Stanley Baldwin is supposed to have quipped:
However, others argue that this reflects a narrow view of economic opportunism, because there are many more ways that economic actors can take selfish advantage of other economic actors, even if they do not violate the law.
Much also depends on the beliefs people happen to have about themselves and the world they live in, and on the morale of an organization.
It makes it possible for private owners of capital to claim more resources than they have themselves produced or contributed to society.
In game theory, therefore, opportunism is ''not'' defined as being ''intrinsically'' and ''necessarily'' always a good thing or a bad thing; it could be either.
Market trade is compatible with a great variety of moral norms, religions and political systems, and indeed supporters of the free market claim that this is exactly its advantage: people can choose their own values, buying and selling as they wish within a basic legal framework accepted by all.
Normally this assumes some degree of intellectual flexibility, agility or persuasiveness.
Thus, to use those resources or contacts for some selfish aim, paradoxically the social opportunist necessarily has to gain entry, join in and participate socially; there is no other way to gain access to or extract what he wants for himself.
*'''Predicaments''':The propensity of opportunist behaviour is influenced by the general ''life-situations'' that people find themselves in.
Opportunist behaviour can be ''self-reinforcing'': if there is a lot of opportunism, then not to be opportunist oneself would mean that competitors take advantage of that, and therefore people can be forced into an opportunist role as a defensive strategy.
It turns out to have ''new'' advantages or potential benefits the species previously never used—and, therefore, the species retains an adaptation even if the ''original'' purpose it served is long gone.
As a style of human behaviour, opportunism has the connotation of a lack of integrity, or doing something that is out of character (inconsistent).
In other words, they try to optimize the feeding intake of their colony.
The social opportunist participates in a group, cooperates with it or associates with it, not primarily because he wants to "contribute", give or share something to the group, or because he values being part of it as an intrinsic good, but only because he wants to get some advantage out of the participation for himself.
In this case, opportunist behaviour may be facilitated, especially if precise rules for how a resource should be distributed are lacking, or if it is unclear who really owns it, or if proper use cannot be enforced.
Information asymmetry is not simply a problem in trade, but occurs in every sphere of life, and thus some capitalize on the ignorance of others.
In professional ethics, the concept of opportunism plays a role in defining criteria for professional integrity.
In choosing or seizing  opportunities, human opportunism is most likely to occur where:
In transaction cost economics, opportunism means self-interest seeking with guile, involving some kind of deliberate deceit and the absence of moral restraint.
This is enabled by the ownership or control of assets, money and credit that investors use to extract unearned income from the work of others who have to sell their work capacity to survive.
Groups, gatherings, associations, or organizations that operate on the basis of voluntary or involuntary association, or in an atmosphere of mutual trust, may provide resources or contacts to their participants that are:
There are four main sources of political opportunism: suivisme (a specific political methodology that is applied to maintain or increase political influence), populism, risk management, and "means become ends".
Thus, the opportunity exploited for selfish ends can itself exist either because an action is taken, or because of deliberate inaction (when action should really have been taken).
Since there are many dubious ways to manipulate the applicability of legal rules and procedures for selfish purposes, a ''general'' definition of legal opportunism (one which covers all cases) is exceptionally difficult.
* Conditional on actually participating in the social setting.
Some people regard an opportunist stance positively as a legitimate choice, which can be the lesser evil.
Moralists may have a distaste for opportunism, insofar as opportunism implies the violation of a moral principle.
However, it is more likely that the English expression was directly borrowed from the French term, when it began to refer specifically to the opportunist Republicans, since the term first entered the English language in the early 1870s.
More specifically, it refers to deliberately manipulating legal arrangements for purposes they were not meant for, guided by self-interested motives.
The propensity to engage in such kinds of behaviours depends a great deal on the presence of absence of personal characteristics such as integrity, moral character, personal insight or self-awareness, personal flexibility and balance.
The law should serve them, and not the other way around; or, there is "one rule for them, and another rule for other people."
Sexual opportunism is sometimes also defined as the use of sexual favours for selfish purposes ''quite unrelated'' to the sexual activity, in which case taking a sexual opportunity is merely the ''means'' to achieve a quite different purpose, for example to advance one's career or obtain status or money.
Human opportunism should not be confused with "seeking opportunities" as such, or "making use of opportunities when they arise".
Any candidate for such an ethic, such as a religion, is only as influential as the power that exists to assert it, but even so its norms are constantly contradicted in practice.
*In some cases, "tinkering with" bad legislation, formalities or rulings "after the fact": after it is proved that a legal rule previously established is definitely unjust, wrong, inapplicable, mistaken etc.
This causes alienation, and it creates a specific motivational structure.
Consequently, the participation by the opportunist is substantively only a "means" that serves some other, selfish purpose.
In providing a service, a professional may have personal discretion (choice or leeway) about how to provide the service.
This may be regarded as unfair competition.
Social opportunism refers to the use of opportunities for social contact only for selfish purposes or motives.
This could be due to deliberate disinformation.
Examples might be a gold rush and the tragedy of the commons.
Greed is frequently mentioned as a primary motive for economic opportunism.
This could be considered as inconsistent with the real intentions of the religious belief, or it might show lack of respect for the spiritual autonomy of others.
'''Opportunism''' is the conscious policy and practice of taking  advantage of circumstances – with little regard for principles, or with what the consequences are for others.
Capitalism makes human development conditional on the unbridled pursuit of self-enrichment.
If the situation is one where shared rules are lacking, where it is quite uncertain what the relevant rule to apply is, or where everything is very uncertain or chaotic, plenty of scope exists for opportunist behaviour.
Psychologically, it follows that opportunism always assumes a basic ability to make one's own choices, and decide to act in a way that serves one's own interest.
*refuse to respond to an opportunity, only because responding to it might forfeit influence, support, wealth or popularity, even although taking the opportunity would in truth be consistent with the principles being subscribed to.
Kenneth Arrow explains that markets require trust to operate effectively, but that trust may not be spontaneously generated by market activity:
*Exploiting legal loopholes or ambiguities for personal gain or to the advantage of a particular organization.
Its main claim is that opportunism is not simply an aberration or impediment to the efficient functioning of capitalism, but an ''integral and necessary characteristic'' of it; capitalist market activity ''promotes'' opportunist moves in all sorts of ways.
Inversely, if people perceive a legal framework as arbitrary, obstructive or irrelevant, they are tempted to search for opportunities to find ways "around the law", without formally ''breaking'' the law.
*Capitalist society is itself founded on the exploitation of the labour of others and on unequal exchange.
*take advantage of an opportunity to increase influence, support, wealth or popularity, although it is not consistent with the principles being upheld.
In microbiology, opportunism refers to the ability of a normally non-pathogenic microorganism to act as a pathogen in certain circumstances.
* People are pressured to choose and act.
Opportunist actions are expedient actions guided primarily by self-interested motives.
People would not normally trade, if they did not expect to gain something by it; the fact that they do trade normally presupposes at least a respect for the basic rights of the party being traded with.
*'''Information''': opportunism is facilitated in the absence of relevant information, knowledge or awareness about the interests and values involved in a situation or activity, making it difficult to identify and judge all the consequences in pursuing an opportunity.
These businessmen are motivated by their dislike for the idea that there could ever be anything ''wrong'' with capitalizing on opportunities.
Owning property is rewarded more and more, and working to create it is rewarded less and less.
Thus, substantively, opportunism refers to someone who acts on opportunities in a self-interested, biased or one-sided manner that ''conflicts'' or ''contrasts'' in some way with a (more general) rule, law, norm, or principle.
It promotes an inability to respond adequately to the needs of others except in the form of self-interested trade-offs.
* Relevant internal or external controls on their behaviour are absent.
Supporters of traditional religions such as Christianity, Islam, Hinduism or Buddhism sometimes complain that people (such as New Age enthusiasts) seek out spiritual beliefs ''that serve only themselves'', as a form of "spiritual opportunism".
However, the boundary between "legitimate self-interest" and "undesirable (or anti-social) selfishness" can be difficult to define; the definition may depend on one's point of view, or position in life.
The term spiritual opportunism is also used in the sense of casting around for suitable spiritual beliefs  borrowed and cobbled together in some way to justify, condemn or "make sense of" particular ways of behaving, usually with some partisan or ulterior motive.
Personalities and beliefs are shaped by the specific environment where they form.
When human knowledge becomes a tradeable good in a market of ideas, all sorts of opportunities arise for huckstering, swindling, haggling and hustling with information in ways which are regarded as unprincipled, dubious or involve deceit of some sort.
There exists no agreed general, scientific definition or theory of economic opportunism; the literature usually considers only specific cases and contexts.
Nevertheless, the gains or benefits of trading activity (and indeed the losses), although entirely legal, might be distributed very ''unequally'' or in ways not anticipated by previous understandings, and thus accusations of "economic opportunism" can arise nevertheless in many different settings.
*Applying or referring to legal procedures not for the sake of obtaining justice (or so that justice is served), but mainly with the aim of making money out of it, or promote one’s own position, or to place competitors at a disadvantage.
The term intellectual opportunism—the pursuit of intellectual opportunities with a selfish, ulterior motive not consistent with relevant principles—refers to certain self-serving tendencies of the human intellect, often involving professional producers and disseminators of ideas, who work with idea-formation all the time.
In this game-theoretical sense, Paul Seabright defines opportunism as "the behaviour of those who seek to benefit from the efforts of others without contributing anything themselves."
Market trade supplies no universal morality of its own, except the law of contract and basic practical requirements to settle transactions, while at the same time legal rules, however precise in their formulation, cannot control every detail of transactions and the interpretation (or implications) thereof.
Hence opportunist behaviour is usually regarded ''at least'' as questionable or dubious, and ''at most'' as unjustifiable or completely illegitimate.
This promotes personal qualities such as egoism and selfishness, where people try to "privatize the gains and socialize the losses."
The term "political opportunism" is often used in a pejorative sense, mainly because it connotes the ''abandonment'' of principles or compromising political goals.
Game theory can, for example, model the effects of information asymmetry, where people have unequal access to relevant information, so that those who "do know" can take advantage of those who "don't know".
*reneging (in contracts), where a contractual agreement, promise, intention or understanding of a deal is not fully honoured by a party to the contract, for selfish motives, because it is possible "to get away with it" and/or because there is an incentive to do so.
In fact, "opportunism" as a political term began to be used widely among Marxists, when the parliamentarians from the leading party of the Second International, the German Social Democratic Party, voted in favour of the war credits necessary at the beginning of World War I.  Marxist critics argued that this policy was a total abandonment of socialist principles, especially the principle of anti-militarism and the international solidarity of the working class.
Opportunist ''micro-organisms'' (such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa) are ones that, when they invade the host organism, can cause infection in the host organism, but cause real disease only if the natural defenses, resistance or immune system of the host organism are lowered (see opportunistic infection).
Since economic opportunism must be assessed against some relevant norm or principle, controversy about what that norm or principle should be, makes a general definition difficult.
Usually though, it is assumed, that the game theorist is able to "stand outside" the different interests being studied, to view the situation objectively – in a detached, uninvolved, impartial and unbiased way.
The fact that the self-interested action evokes this conflict, often implies that the tendency to use opportunities to advantage is ''excessive'' or ''improper'', the corollary being a deficiency of character or at least a lack of propriety.
In game theory, opportunism concerns the contradictory relationships between altruistic and self-interested behaviour, where the different kinds of common and sectional interests existing in a situation are used mainly to make gains for oneself.
If there are only weak sanctions against unprincipled behaviour, this creates a setting where opportunist behaviour can flourish, and if the positions of people are very unequal (in terms of power, wealth, status, knowledge or strength) the possibility exists that some will take advantage of the disadvantage of others.
Such a situation can be exploited with opportunist motives that are contrary to the stated ethics of a profession.
In a clinical or scientific sense, sexual opportunism is often straightforwardly described as observable sexual promiscuity or the observable propensity to engage in casual sex,  whatever the motive.
Opportunism is facilitated if the situation permits an actor to appropriate the gains or advantages to be had from an activity to themselves, while shifting the costs, blame and disadvantages to others.
Glenn R. Parker claims that the five most discussed examples of ''economic'' opportunism are:
Some animals also show this behavior for group-foraging.
They all have different interests, and are likely to take advantage of others, when they sense they can get away with it.
Typical of legal opportunists is that they accept or approve of the application of legal rules when it suits their own interest but reject or disapprove of the application when the rules are against their interest (or if taking self-interested action would mean ''breaking'' the law).
It occurs in trading activities especially where rules and sanctions are lacking, and where the opportunist actor has great power to influence an outcome by the attitude he assumes in practice.
Opportunism refers rather to a specific way of responding to opportunities, which involves the element of self-interestedness plus disregard for relevant (ethical) principles, or for intended or previously agreed goals, or for the shared concerns of a group.
If one single opportunity or need occurs, the organism can "improvise" a response to it with whatever resources it has available, even if what it can do is ''not the best possible'' strategy.
*Capitalist society constantly reorganizes the structure of human cooperation, so that, more and more, people produce things they do not need themselves, or that are surplus to their own requirements, and can therefore be appropriated by others for personal gain.
The Australian stingless bee Tetragonula carbonaria, for instance, has several workers search for an area full of rich resources, and will then recruit heavily in this area until the resources are depleted."
*are not an organic, sincere or authentic expression of the real nature of the people who contrived them.
Although human opportunism often has a strong negative (pejorative) moral connotation (in contrast to e.g.
*'''Success''': opportunism often involves the presence of a very strong desire to be popular, to exercise influence or to succeed in making gains.
Political integrity typically demands an appropriate combination of principled positions and political flexibility that produces a morally consistent behavior in specific circumstances.
* Provided and shared only because of their cooperation, or being together.
In turn, that creates a total environment where opportunism can flourish – including ''within'' the socialist movement.
*'''Power''': according to Lord Acton's famous dictum, "all power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely".
Legal opportunism is a wide area of human activity, which refers generally to a type of abuse of the ''proper intention'' of legal arrangements (the "spirit of the law" as distinguished from the letter of the law).
However, the moral dilemma implied by opportunism concerns the ''conflict'' of self-interest with the interests of others, or with following a principle: either to do what one wants, or to do "what is the right thing to do".
*Deliberately "embellishing" selective evidence relevant to a legal situation, to benefit one's own position, in ways that are not strictly illegal.
Opportunism is the conscious policy and practice of taking selfish advantage of circumstances.
Spiritual opportunism sometimes refers also to the practice of proselytizing one's spiritual beliefs when any opportunity to do so arises, for the purpose of winning over, or persuading others, about the superiority of these beliefs.
In this context, the spiritual opportunist may engage in various actions, themselves not directly related to the spiritual beliefs, with the specific aim of convincing others of the superiority of his own belief system – it may effectively amount to "buying their support".
Taking a realistic or practical approach to a problem can involve "weak" forms of opportunism.
Life can be viewed as presenting "an endless series of opportunities", where the pattern of one's responses defines who or what one is (individual identity).
The "good faith" of people is then taken advantage of, in ways that involve some kind of deceit, or some dubious, selfish motive.
If this is the case, relevant trading obligations (or civil obligations) are usually considered as not being (fully) met or honored, in the pursuit of economic self-interest.
In that case, the sexual opportunist is considered to lack sexual and/or personal integrity.
*last-period exploitation, when it is known that competitors or stakeholders are not able to respond to a suitably timed selfish action.
*shirking, involving some kind of negligence, or failure to acquit oneself of a duty (or a responsibility) previous agreed or implied (see also efficiency wages).
That motivation can promote the urge to win something "by any means necessary", even if it means to "cut corners" and do things not consistent with relevant principles.
It also depends on the ability to judge the consequences of different courses of action correctly.
Somewhat confusingly, opportunism is sometimes also redefined by businessmen simply as the theory of discovering and pursuing opportunities.
Opportunism is regarded as unhealthy, as a disorder or as a character deficiency, if selfishly pursuing an opportunity is blatantly anti-social (involves disregard for the needs, wishes and interests of others).
Both the element of risk and opportunity play a role.
If people are for some reason motivated "to do anything at all to achieve success", they are more likely to engage in opportunist behaviour for that very reason.
Hence the term opportunism often has the pejorative connotation of morally unsound behaviour, or behaviour that sacrifices a greater good for the sake of gaining an advantage for oneself or one's own group.
In other words, religion becomes a means to achieve something that is alien to it, or things are projected into religion that do not belong there.
Because it is only selfish, the implication is usually that obligations to other participants in the given social setting are not (fully) met or honoured.
Typically, opportunist political behavior is criticized for being short-sighted or narrow-minded.
Self-interest may be followed because it is unclear or undecided what other interests are at stake, or because a shared morality is lacking.
*'''Resources''': if a new bonanza (an abundantly available resource, or market) is discovered, accessible or opened up, people may try to "grab what they can" without regard to the consequences for others, perhaps with the thought that if they do not avail themselves of this opportunity, others will (and that if others do, it disadvantages them).
*Making or changing laws, primarily to benefit the position of the law-makers themselves.
This power can be used in a self-interested manner, exploiting opportunities to benefit the position of the religious authority or its supporters in society.
To the extent that the feelings, wishes, intentions, purposes, interests or norms of others are not adequately considered in the pursuit of sexual gratification, it then conflicts with some or other principle for appropriate behaviour, and it may involve deceit or dishonesty (for example, the deliberate exploitation of sexual innocence).
The term "opportunism" is often used in politics and political science, and by activists campaigning for a cause.
The way things appear can give an impression which is quite different from the real motivation that is behind it.
Opportunism or "opportunistic behavior" is an important concept in such fields of study as biology, transaction cost economics, game theory, ethics, psychology, sociology and politics.
*a trend of thought, or a political tendency, seeking to make political capital out of situations with the main aim being that of gaining more influence, prestige or support, instead of truly winning people over to a principled position or improving their political understanding.
*the practice of abandoning or compromising in reality some important political principles that were previously held, in the process of trying to increase one's political power and influence.
If some actors in a game are placed at a disadvantage in some way, for any reason, it becomes an opportunity for other actors to capitalize on that fact, by using the disadvantage of others to improve their own position – under conditions where actors both compete and cooperate in different areas.
Thus, opportunism involves compromising some or other principle normally upheld.
*Making or changing laws not for the good of the country as a whole, but to benefit a particular interest group in the country.
In turn, that presupposes at least some basic self-motivation, inner direction, inventiveness and behavioural freedom; subjectively, an opportunist must at least be able to recognize and respond to opportunities when they are there.
Consequently, it becomes necessary—for the sake of preserving professional integrity—to explicate "guiding norms" that define the boundaries of acceptable practice, or to divide up roles in such a way that different people in an organization can effectively check and control what their colleagues actually do ("to keep them honest").
In that case, opportunist behaviour does not seem to have much adverse effect or consequence, at least in the short term, compared to the much greater benefits of engaging in it.
The English term "opportunism" is possibly borrowed originally from the Italian expression ''opportunismo''.
*lack any deeper principled foundation, and are more an "eclectic, self-serving concoction"
According to this redefinition, "opportunism" is a euphemism for "entrepreneurship".
While it formally regards all citizens as equal and free, in reality people are very unequally positioned with respect to their social status, power, knowledge and wealth, and consequently also their freedoms.
This may not be abusive, but it often gives rise to criticisms or accusations that the given spiritual beliefs:
*a political style of aiming to increase one's political influence at almost any price, or a political style that involves seizing every and any opportunity to extend political influence, whenever such opportunities arise.
If one's own position is strong and secure, it may be much easier to be an opportunist – because if it would result in losses and failures, those losses and failures can be easily sustained given the resources available.
In the early 19th century, the term "opportunist" as noun or adjective was already known and used in several European languages, but initially it rarely referred to political processes or to a political tendency.
To be opportunist in behaviour, a person or group must:
