The results of such modeling of multi-mode fiber approximately agree with the predictions of geometric optics, if the fiber core is large enough to support more than a few modes.
They can also be used in environments where explosive fumes are present, without danger of ignition.
In (poly)crystalline materials such as metals and ceramics, in addition to pores, most of the internal surfaces or interfaces are in the form of grain boundaries that separate tiny regions of crystalline order.
The mating mechanism can be ''push and click'', ''turn and latch'' (''bayonet mount''), or ''screw-in'' (''threaded'').
A typical connector is installed by preparing the fiber end and inserting it into the rear of the connector body.
The coatings protect the very delicate strands of glass fiber—about the size of a human hair—and allow it to survive the rigors of manufacturing, proof testing, cabling and installation.
Phosphate glasses can be advantageous over silica glasses for optical fibers with a high concentration of doping rare earth ions.
Optical fibers may be connected to each other by connectors or by ''splicing'', that is, joining two fibers together to form a continuous optical waveguide.
Gases such as silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4) or germanium tetrachloride (GeCl4) are injected with oxygen in the end of the tube.
They correctly and systematically theorized the light-loss properties for optical fiber, and pointed out the right material to use for such fibers&nbsp;— silica glass with high purity.
relationship between the index and the distance from the axis.
Multi-mode fiber, by comparison, is manufactured with core diameters as small as 50 micrometers and as large as hundreds of micrometers.
Such remarkably low losses are possible only because ultra-pure silicon is available, it being essential for manufacturing integrated circuits and discrete transistors.
With properly polished single-mode fibers, the emitted beam has an almost perfect Gaussian shape—even in the far field—if a good lens is used.
An example of a heavy metal fluoride glass is the ZBLAN glass group, composed of zirconium, barium, lanthanum, aluminium, and sodium fluorides.
APC fiber ends have low back reflection even when disconnected.
Light travels fastest in a vacuum, such as in outer space.
The gases are then heated by means of an external hydrogen burner, bringing the temperature of the gas up to 1,900&nbsp;K (1,600&nbsp;°C, 3,000&nbsp;°F), where the tetrachlorides react with oxygen to produce silica or germania (germanium dioxide) particles.
A particularly useful feature of such fiber optic sensors is that they can, if required, provide distributed sensing over distances of up to one meter.
Modern optical fibers, where the glass fiber is coated with a transparent cladding to offer a more suitable refractive index, appeared later in the decade.
Optical fibers can be used as sensors to measure strain, temperature, pressure and other quantities by modifying a fiber so that the property to measure modulates the intensity, phase, polarization, wavelength, or transit time of light in the fiber.
The design of any optically transparent device requires the selection of materials based upon knowledge of its properties and limitations.
These are extremely versatile compounds, in that they can be crystalline or amorphous, metallic or semiconducting, and conductors of ions or electrons.
It is often necessary to align an optical fiber with another optical fiber, or with an optoelectronic device such as a light-emitting diode, a laser diode, or a modulator.
An '''optical fiber''' (or '''optical fibre''') is a flexible, transparent fiber made by drawing glass (silica) or plastic to a diameter slightly thicker than that of a human hair.
Joining lengths of optical fiber often proves to be more complex than joining electrical wire or cable and involves careful cleaving of the fibers, perfect alignment of the fiber cores, and the splicing of these aligned fiber cores.
The ends are ''cleaved'' (cut) with a precision cleaver to make them perpendicular, and are placed into special holders in the fusion splicer.
Modulation of the light source to transmit a signal also slightly widens the frequency band of the transmitted light.
Si-O bond) in the far-infrared, or one of its harmonics.
Because of these properties silica fibers are the material of choice in many optical applications, such as communications (except for very short distances with plastic optical fiber), fiber lasers, fiber amplifiers, and fiber-optic sensors.
This allows long distances to be spanned with few repeaters.
In vapor axial deposition, a short ''seed rod'' is used, and a porous preform, whose length is not limited by the size of the source rod, is built up on its end.
Silica and fluoride glasses usually have refractive indices of about 1.5, but some materials such as the chalcogenides can have indices as high as 3.
an aluminosilicate, germanosilicate, phosphosilicate or borosilicate glass).
Fibers have many uses in remote sensing.
This return signal is digitally processed to detect disturbances and trip an alarm if an intrusion has occurred.
;Low attenuation loss over long distances: Attenuation loss can be as low as 0.2&nbsp;dB/km in optical fiber cables, allowing transmission over long distances without the need for repeaters.
Both wavelengths of light are transmitted through the doped fiber, which transfers energy from the second pump wavelength to the signal wave.
The open fiber control system, which ensures laser eye safety in the event of a broken fiber, can also effectively halt propagation of the fiber fuse.
Rays that meet the boundary at a low angle are refracted from the core into the cladding, and do not convey light and hence information along the fiber.
This creates a problem when the cable is bent around corners or wound around a spool, making FTTX installations more complicated.
Even simple cleaving (breaking) of the ends of the fiber can provide nicely flat surfaces with acceptable optical quality.
CSELT also developed an early technique for splicing optical fibers, called Springroove.
Thus, although heavy metal fluoride glasses (HMFG) exhibit very low optical attenuation, they are not only difficult to manufacture, but are quite fragile, and have poor resistance to moisture and other environmental attacks.
Their main technological application is as optical waveguides in both planar and fiber form.
Light scattering depends on the wavelength of the light being scattered.
Time delay can be determined using a device such as an ''optical time-domain reflectometer''.
This problem can be overcome in a number of ways, including the use of a relatively short length of fiber that has the opposite refractive index gradient.
For single-mode fiber, fiber ends are typically polished with a slight curvature that makes the mated connectors touch only at their cores.
This has the effect that, over long distances and at high modulation speeds, the different frequencies of light can take different times to arrive at the receiver, ultimately making the signal impossible to discern, and requiring extra repeaters.
Today’s glass optical fiber draw processes employ a dual-layer coating approach.
In a laboratory environment, a bare fiber end is coupled using a fiber launch system, which uses a microscope objective lens to focus the light down to a fine point.
Optical fiber can be used to transmit power using a photovoltaic cell to convert the light into electricity.
The first fiber optic semi-flexible gastroscope was patented by Basil Hirschowitz, C. Wilbur Peters, and Lawrence E. Curtiss, researchers at the University of Michigan, in 1956.
With good beams, 70 to 90% coupling efficiency can be achieved.
Fiber supporting only one mode is called ''single-mode'' or ''mono-mode fiber''.
In June 2013, researchers demonstrated transmission of 400 Gbit/s over a single channel using 4-mode orbital angular momentum multiplexing.
This discovery earned Kao the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2009.
Their best attribute is that they lack the absorption band associated with the hydroxyl (OH) group (3,200–3,600&nbsp;cm−1; i.e., 2,777–3,125&nbsp;nm or 2.78–3.13 μm), which is present in nearly all oxide-based glasses.
The principle was first used for internal medical examinations by Heinrich Lamm in the following decade.
Optical fibers can be strung on poles alongside high voltage power cables.
An optical fiber doped with certain rare earth elements such as erbium can be used as the gain medium of a laser or optical amplifier.
The larger the index of refraction, the slower light travels in that medium.
Multi-fiber cable usually uses colored coatings and/or buffers to identify each strand.
Modern cables come in a wide variety of sheathings and armor, designed for applications such as direct burial in trenches, high voltage isolation, dual use as power lines, installation in conduit, lashing to aerial telephone poles, submarine installation, and insertion in paved streets.
;Electrical insulator: Optical fibers do not conduct electricity, preventing problems with ground loops and conduction of lightning.
Photonic-crystal fiber is made with a regular pattern of index variation (often in the form of cylindrical holes that run along the length of the fiber).
Attenuation in modern optical cables is far less than in electrical copper cables, leading to long-haul fiber connections with repeater distances of .
Glass optical fibers are almost always made from silica, but some other materials, such as fluorozirconate, fluoroaluminate, and chalcogenide glasses as well as crystalline materials like sapphire, are used for longer-wavelength infrared or other specialized applications.
(The fiber in this case will probably travel a longer route, and there will be additional delays due to communication equipment switching and the process of encoding and decoding the voice onto the fiber).
Fiber optic coatings are applied using one of two methods: ''wet-on-dry'' and ''wet-on-wet''.
In simpler terms, there is a maximum angle from the fiber axis at which light may enter the fiber so that it will propagate, or travel, in the core of the fiber.
In wet-on-dry, the fiber passes through a primary coating application, which is then UV cured—then through the secondary coating application, which is subsequently cured.
It was an advanced form of telecommunications, but subject to atmospheric interferences and impractical until the secure transport of light that would be offered by fiber-optical systems.
Over time or in extreme conditions, these factors combine to cause microscopic flaws in the glass fiber to propagate, which can ultimately result in fiber failure.
Thus, much research has gone into both limiting the attenuation and maximizing the amplification of the optical signal.
Attenuation in fiber optics, also known as transmission loss, is the reduction in intensity of the light beam (or signal) as it travels through the transmission medium.
Guiding of light by refraction, the principle that makes fiber optics possible, was first demonstrated by Daniel Colladon and Jacques Babinet in Paris in the early 1840s.
Rough and irregular surfaces, even at the molecular level, can cause light rays to be reflected in random directions.
In particular, the preform for the test-fiber shown in the figure was not polished well, and cracks are seen with the confocal optical microscope.
Both the fiber core and cladding are typically doped, so that the entire assembly (core and cladding) is effectively the same compound (e.g.
The fiber ends are aligned and held together by a precision-made sleeve, often using a clear index-matching gel that enhances the transmission of light across the joint.
Polarization-maintaining fiber is a unique type of fiber that is commonly used in fiber optic sensors due to its ability to maintain the polarization of the light inserted into it.
These include polarization-maintaining fiber and fiber designed to suppress whispering gallery mode propagation.
They are used as light guides in medical and other applications where bright light needs to be shone on a target without a clear line-of-sight path.
These include mid-IR spectroscopy, fiber optic sensors, thermometry, and imaging.
These can be implemented by various micro- and nanofabrication technologies, such that they do not exceed the microscopic boundary of the fiber tip, allowing such applications as insertion into blood vessels via hypodermic needle.
Silica fiber also has high mechanical strength against both pulling and even bending, provided that the fiber is not too thick and that the surfaces have been well prepared during processing.
For short distance application, such as a network in an office building (see FTTO), fiber-optic cabling can save space in cable ducts.
Fibers are terminated in connectors that hold the fiber end precisely and securely.
A precision translation stage (micro-positioning table) is used to move the lens, fiber, or device to allow the coupling efficiency to be optimized.
The glass medium supports a host of nonlinear optical interactions, and the long interaction lengths possible in fiber facilitate a variety of phenomena, which are harnessed for applications and fundamental investigation.
The light is transmitted along a fiber optic sensor cable placed on a fence, pipeline, or communication cabling, and the returned signal is monitored and analyzed for disturbances.
This is called diffuse reflection or scattering, and it is typically characterized by wide variety of reflection angles.
This can involve either carefully aligning the fiber and placing it in contact with the device, or can use a lens to allow coupling over an air gap.
Silica can be drawn into fibers at reasonably high temperatures, and has a fairly broad glass transformation range.
At high optical powers, scattering can also be caused by nonlinear optical processes in the fiber.
In some buildings, optical fibers route sunlight from the roof to other parts of the building (see nonimaging optics).
The preform, however constructed, is placed in a device known as a drawing tower, where the preform tip is heated and the optical fiber is pulled out as a string.
Even more bendable fibers have been developed.
Reflection and transmission of light waves occur because the frequencies of the light waves do not match the natural resonant frequencies of vibration of the objects.
Similarly, the scattering of light in optical quality glass fiber is caused by molecular level irregularities (compositional fluctuations) in the glass structure.
Swarovski boutiques use optical fibers to illuminate their crystal showcases from many different angles while only employing one light source.
Such fiber is called ''multi-mode fiber'', from the electromagnetic analysis (see below).
Aspheric lenses are typically used.
Because of their low viscosity, it is very difficult to completely avoid crystallization while processing it through the glass transition (or drawing the fiber from the melt).
In commercial terms, usage of the glass yarns are more cost effective while no loss in mechanical durability of the cable.
For example, most high-definition televisions offer a digital audio optical connection.
A mix of fluoride glass and phosphate glass is fluorophosphate glass.
Such fiber uses diffraction effects instead of or in addition to total internal reflection, to confine light to the fiber's core.
In the 1990s, terminating fiber optic cables was labor-intensive.
They are advantageous especially in the mid-infrared (2,000–5,000&nbsp;nm) range.
The cost of small fiber-count pole-mounted cables has greatly decreased due to the high demand for fiber to the home (FTTH) installations in Japan and South Korea.
;Security of information passed down the cable: Copper can be tapped with very little chance of detection.
The Italian research center CSELT worked with Corning to develop practical optical fiber cables, resulting in the first metropolitan fiber optic cable being deployed in Torino in 1977.
Large efforts put forth in the development of various types of silica fibers have further increased the performance of such fibers over other materials.
In situations, such as undersea cables, where high power levels might be used without the need for open fiber control, a "fiber fuse" protection device at the transmitter can break the circuit to keep damage to a minimum.
Three key characteristics of fiber optic waveguides can be affected by environmental conditions: strength, attenuation and resistance to losses caused by microbending.
Optical fibers have a wide number of applications.
A spectrometer analyzes substances by bouncing light off and through them.
Temporary or semi-permanent connections are made by means of specialized optical fiber connectors.
The field of applied science and engineering concerned with the design and application of optical fibers is known as '''fiber optics'''.
Instead, especially in single-mode fibers, a significant fraction of the energy in the bound mode travels in the cladding as an evanescent wave.
Light travels through the fiber core, bouncing back and forth off the boundary between the core and cladding.
Also, fluoride fibers can be used for guided lightwave transmission in media such as YAG (yttrium aluminium garnet) lasers at 2.9 μm, as required for medical applications (e.g.
Sometimes a metallic armor layer is added to provide extra protection.
Another important feature of cable is cable's ability to withstand horizontally applied force.
The doped fiber is optically pumped with a second laser wavelength that is coupled into the line in addition to the signal wave.
A few years later they produced a fiber with only 4&nbsp;dB/km attenuation using germanium dioxide as the core dopant.
Silica is also relatively chemically inert.
Various polish profiles are used, depending on the type of fiber and the application.
This phenomenon has given rise to the production of transparent ceramic materials.
The first working fiber-optical data transmission system was demonstrated by German physicist Manfred Börner at Telefunken Research Labs in Ulm in 1965, which was followed by the first patent application for this technology in 1966.
This type of fiber can be bent with a radius as low as 7.5&nbsp;mm without adverse impact.
In outside vapor deposition the glass is deposited onto a solid rod, which is removed before further processing.
An important aspect of a fiber optic communication is that of extension of the fiber optic cables such that the losses brought about by joining two different cables is kept to a minimum.
The porous preform is consolidated into a transparent, solid preform by heating to about 1,800&nbsp;K (1,500&nbsp;°C, 2,800&nbsp;°F).
Charles K. Kao and George A. Hockham of the British company Standard Telephones and Cables (STC) were the first to promote the idea that the attenuation in optical fibers could be reduced below 20 decibels per kilometer (dB/km), making fibers a practical communication medium.
NASA used fiber optics in the television cameras that were sent to the moon.
Plastic optical fibers (POF) are commonly step-index multi-mode fibers with a core diameter of 0.5 millimeters or larger.
In the near-infrared (near IR) portion of the spectrum, particularly around 1.5 μm, silica can have extremely low absorption and scattering losses of the order of 0.2&nbsp;dB/km.
Multi-mode fibers generally have a wider core diameter and are used for short-distance communication links and for applications where high power must be transmitted.
Those two steps help save money on labor, especially on large projects.
However, such low losses were never realized in practice, and the fragility and high cost of fluoride fibers made them less than ideal as primary candidates.
The combination of moisture and scratches accelerates the aging and deterioration of fiber strength.
Such joints typically have higher optical loss and are less robust than fusion splices, especially if the gel is used.
Fusion splicing is done with a specialized instrument.
The per-channel light signals propagating in the fiber have been modulated at rates as high as 111 gigabits per second (Gbit/s) by NTT, although 10 or 40&nbsp;Gbit/s is typical in deployed systems.
All splicing techniques involve installing an enclosure that protects the splice.
Fibers are used instead of metal wires because signals travel along them with lesser amounts of loss; in addition, fibers are also immune to electromagnetic interference, a problem from which metal wires suffer excessively.
They proposed that the attenuation in fibers available at the time was caused by impurities that could be removed, rather than by fundamental physical effects such as scattering.
The index of refraction (or refractive index) is a way of measuring the speed of light in a material.
The number of parts per connector, polishing of the fibers, and the need to oven-bake the epoxy in each connector made terminating fiber optic cables difficult.
The most familiar polymorph (see figure) comprises molecules of P4O10.
Thus, multi-phonon absorption occurs when two or more phonons simultaneously interact to produce electric dipole moments with which the incident radiation may couple.
The refractive index of fibers varies slightly with the frequency of light, and light sources are not perfectly monochromatic.
Bendable fiber may also be resistant to fiber hacking, in which the signal in a fiber is surreptitiously monitored by bending the fiber and detecting the leakage.
Medical endoscopes are used for minimally invasive exploratory or surgical procedures.
A fiber-optic connector is basically a rigid cylindrical barrel surrounded by a sleeve that holds the barrel in its mating socket.
Later, the utility of fluoride fibers for various other applications was discovered.
with germanium dioxide (GeO2) or aluminium oxide (Al2O3)) or to lower it (e.g.
Indeed, one emerging school of thought is that a glass is simply the limiting case of a polycrystalline solid.
HMFGs were initially slated for optical fiber applications, because the intrinsic losses of a mid-IR fiber could in principle be lower than those of silica fibers, which are transparent only up to about 2 μm.
In the process of developing the gastroscope, Curtiss produced the first glass-clad fibers; previous optical fibers had relied on air or impractical oils and waxes as the low-index cladding material.
The normalized frequency ''V'' for this fiber should be less than the first zero of the Bessel function ''J''0 (approximately 2.405).
Such low attenuation ushered in the era of optical fiber telecommunication.
External fiber optic coatings protect glass optical fiber from environmental conditions that can affect the fiber’s performance and long-term durability.
In particular, it is not hygroscopic (does not absorb water).
Fiber optic coatings protect the glass fibers from scratches that could lead to strength degradation.
Common uses for fiber optic sensors includes advanced intrusion detection security systems.
This reduces cross-talk between the fibers, or reduces flare in fiber bundle imaging applications.
Doping is also possible with laser-active ions (for example, rare earth-doped fibers) in order to obtain active fibers to be used, for example, in fiber amplifiers or laser applications.
Silica glass can be doped with various materials.
In some applications, the sensor is itself an optical fiber.
Fiber with a core diameter less than about ten times the wavelength of the propagating light cannot be modeled using geometric optics.
The critical angle (minimum angle for total internal reflection) is determined by the difference in index of refraction between the core and cladding materials.
Extrinsic fiber optic sensors use an optical fiber cable, normally a multi-mode one, to transmit modulated light from either a non-fiber optical sensor—or an electronic sensor connected to an optical transmitter.
It was invented by Gerhard Bernsee of Schott Glass in Germany in 1973.
Typically the size of the fiber mode is much larger than the size of the mode in a laser diode or a silicon optical chip.
An outer secondary coating protects the primary coating against mechanical damage and acts as a barrier to lateral forces.
The lens needs to be large enough to support the full numerical aperture of the fiber, and must not introduce aberrations in the beam.
As an optical waveguide, the fiber supports one or more confined transverse modes by which light can propagate along the fiber.
The emerging field of photonic crystals led to the development in 1991 of photonic-crystal fiber, which guides light by diffraction from a periodic structure, rather than by total internal reflection.
Optical fibers are connected to terminal equipment by optical fiber connectors.
These coatings are UV-cured urethane acrylate composite or polyimide materials applied to the outside of the fiber during the drawing process.
This process is repeated until a sufficient amount of material has been deposited.
The complexity of this process makes fiber splicing much more difficult than splicing copper wire.
In practical fibers, the cladding is usually coated with a tough resin coating and an additional ''buffer'' layer, which may be further surrounded by a ''jacket'' layer, usually plastic.
Fiber with large core diameter (greater than 10&nbsp;micrometers) may be analyzed by geometrical optics.
POF typically have higher attenuation coefficients than glass fibers, 1&nbsp;dB/m or higher, and this high attenuation limits the range of POF-based systems.
When light traveling in an optically dense medium hits a boundary at a steep angle (larger than the critical angle for the boundary), the light is completely reflected.
This same phenomenon is seen as one of the limiting factors in the transparency of IR missile domes.
The most common type of single-mode fiber has a core diameter of 8–10 micrometers and is designed for use in the near infrared.
Single-mode fiber has a small NA.
When the reaction conditions are chosen to allow this reaction to occur in the gas phase throughout the tube volume, in contrast to earlier techniques where the reaction occurred only on the glass surface, this technique is called ''modified chemical vapor deposition (MCVD)''.
One other advantage is that fusion splicing and cleaving of silica fibers is relatively effective.
Glass containing chalcogenides can be used to make fibers for far infrared transmission.
Fibers that support many propagation paths or transverse modes are called multi-mode fibers (MMF), while those that support a single mode are called single-mode fibers (SMF).
Some of the most popular connectors are pre-polished at the factory, and include a gel inside the connector.
Fiber optic coatings are applied in concentric layers to prevent damage to the fiber during the drawing application and to maximize fiber strength and microbend resistance.
