In fact, nest-building is a leading cause in young orangutans leaving their mother for the first time.
The word appeared in several German-language descriptions of Indonesian zoology in the 17th century.
She has been re-socialised to live with other orang-utans.
The species display significant sexual dimorphism; females typically stand  tall and weigh around , while flanged adult males stand  tall and weigh .
The largest known primate, ''Gigantopithecus'', was also a member of Ponginae and lived in China, India and Vietnam from 5&nbsp;mya to 100,000&nbsp;years ago.
European explorers in Borneo hunted them extensively during the 19th century.
Since their hip joints have the same flexibility as their shoulder and arm joints, orangutans have less restriction in the movements of their legs than humans have.
Orangutans are juveniles from about two to five years of age and will start to temporarily move away from their mothers.
They can live over 30&nbsp;years in both the wild and captivity.
This subfamily also included the extinct genera ''Lufengpithecus'', which lived in southern China and Thailand 2–8&nbsp;mya, and ''Sivapithecus'', which lived India and Pakistan from 12.5&nbsp;mya until 8.5&nbsp;mya.
Doing this increases the stability of the nest and forms the final act of nest-building.
Males will make long calls, both to attract females and advertise themselves to other males.
*** ''Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii'' – southwest populations
In addition, the Bornean species is divided into three subspecies.
The word was first attested in English in 1691 in the form ''orang-outang'', and variants with ''-ng'' instead of ''-n'' as in the Malay original are found in many languages.
Scientists hope the data they collect will help researchers learn about socialising patterns, such as whether the apes learn behaviours through trial and error or by mimicry, and point to new conservation strategies.
Their feet have four long toes and an opposable big toe.
Fruit is the most important component of an orangutan's diet; however, the apes will also eat vegetation, bark, honey, insects and even bird eggs.
pygmaeus'' would take precedence for the northwest Bornean taxon).
Resident males may form consortships with females that can last days, weeks or months after copulation.
Since 1996, they have been divided into two species: the Bornean orangutan (''P.
Lacépède used the term ''Pongo'' for the genus following the German botanist Friedrich von Wurmb who sent a skeleton from the Indies to Europe.
abelii'') were found to be avid users of insect and seed-extraction tools when compared to other wild orangutans.
Males mature at around 15&nbsp;years of age, by which time they have fully descended testicles and can reproduce.
The '''orangutans''' (also spelled '''orang-utan''', '''orangutang''', or '''orang-utang''') are the two exclusively Asian species of extant great apes.
The nest is then built by pulling together branches under them and joining them at a point.
Adolescent orangutans will socialize with their peers while still having contact with their mothers.
A male orangutan has an arm span of about .
In addition, orangutans may add additional features, such as "pillows", "blankets", "roofs" and "bunk-beds" to their nests.
pygmaeus'' subspecies, thus leaving the east Bornean populations unnamed.
Female orangutans also have a 22– to 30-day menstrual cycle.
This orangutan, though, was raised in captivity and may have suffered from a skewed species identity, and forced copulation is a standard mating strategy for low-ranking male orangutans.
Though largely hairless, their faces can develop some hair in males, giving them a moustache.
Orangutans are the most arboreal of the great apes, spending nearly all their time in the trees.
In December 2014, Argentina became the first country to recognize a non-human primate as having legal rights when it ruled that an orangutan named Sandra at the Buenos Aires Zoo must be moved to a sanctuary in Brazil in order to provide her "partial or controlled freedom".
These orangutans developed a tool kit for use in foraging that consisted of both insect-extraction tools for use in the hollows of trees and seed-extraction tools for harvesting seeds from hard-husked fruit.
The fruits tend to be abundant, so competition is low and individuals may engage in social interactions.
pygmaeus'' has not been established beyond doubts, and may be from the population currently listed as ''P.
A persistent folktale on Sumatra and Borneo and in popular culture, is that male orangutans display sexual attraction to human women, and may even forcibly copulate with them.
It is audited by a multinational auditor company and operates a number of large projects, such as the Nyaru Menteng Rehabilitation Program founded by conservationist Lone Drøscher Nielsen.
Within apes (superfamily Hominoidea), the gibbons diverged during the early Miocene (between 19.7 and 24.1&nbsp;mya, according to molecular evidence) and the orangutans split from the African great ape lineage between 15.7 and 19.3&nbsp;mya.
Their fingers and toes are curved, allowing them to get a better grip on branches.
According to the World Wildlife Fund, half of the habitat of the Bornean orangutan has been lost since 1994.
The mother will carry the infant during travelling, as well as feed it and sleep with it in the same night nest.
Galdikas is considered to be one of Leakey's Angels, along with Jane Goodall and Dian Fossey.
This phase lasts until a male can challenge and displace a dominant, resident male from his home range.
They use leaves to amplify the kiss squeak sounds they produce.
Orangutans are among the most intelligent primates.
The table below shows a breakdown of the species and subspecies and their estimated populations from the report:
Orangutans communicate with various sounds.
Northeast Bornean orangutan
The loss of "h" in Utan and the shift from n to -ng has been taken to suggest that the term entered English through Portuguese.
Mother orangutans are killed so their infants can be sold as pets, and many of these infants die without the help of their mother.
Males without them are known as unflanged males in contrast to the more developed flanged males.
Orangutans are the most arboreal of the great apes and spend most of their time in trees.
In addition, evidence of sophisticated tool manufacture and use in the wild was reported from a population of orangutans in Suaq Balimbing (''Pongo abelii'') in 1996.
After this, orangutans stand and braid the tips of branches into the mattress.
In addition, some fossils described under the name ''P.&nbsp;hooijeri'' have been found in Vietnam, and multiple fossil subspecies have been described from several parts of southeastern Asia.
Little was known about their behaviour until the field studies of Birutė Galdikas, who became a leading authority on the apes.
Interactions between adult females range from friendly to avoidance to antagonistic.
Orangutans live a more solitary lifestyle than the other great apes.
Northwest Bornean orangutan
wurmbii'' would be a junior synonym of ''P.
The orangutans at Suaq Balimbing live in dense groups and are socially tolerant; this creates good conditions for social transmission.
Based on genome sequencing, the two extant orangutan species evidently diverged around 400,000&nbsp;years ago.
They also tend to be consortships between an adult male and female.
Unflanged and flanged males have two different mating strategies.
Transient males and females move widely.
Orangutan bones are secretly traded in souvenir shops in several cities in Kalimantan, Indonesia.
Orangutans are thought to be the sole fruit disperser for some plant species including the climber species ''Strychnos ignatii'' which contains the toxic alkaloid strychnine.
However, they exhibit arrested development by not developing the distinctive cheek pads, pronounced throat pouches, long fur, or long-calls until they are between 15 and 20&nbsp;years old.
Ficus fruits are commonly eaten and are easy to harvest and digest.
Taxonomy of genus ''Pongo''
It works to bring different stakeholders together to achieve conservation of the species and its habitat.
A study of orangutan symbolic capability was conducted from 1973 to 1975 by zoologist Gary L. Shapiro with Aazk, a juvenile female orangutan at the Fresno City Zoo (now Chaffee Zoo) in Fresno, California.
The only serious, but anecdotal, report of such an incident taking place, is primatologist Birutė Galdikas' report that her cook was sexually assaulted by a male orangutan.
Both orangutan species are considered to be endangered, with the Sumatran orangutan being critically endangered.
Female orangutans experience their first ovulatory cycle around 5.8–11.1&nbsp;years.
The orangutans adjusted their tools according to the nature of the task at hand, and preference was given to oral tool use.
Both sexes will try to intimidate conspecifics with a series of low guttural noises known collectively as the "rolling call".
The evidence suggested the differences were cultural: first, the extent of the differences increased with distance, suggesting cultural diffusion was occurring, and second, the size of the orangutans' cultural repertoire increased according to the amount of social contact present within the group.
Juveniles are usually weaned at about four years of age.
Some folk tales involve orangutans mating with and kidnapping humans.
In addition, Zoo Atlanta has a touch-screen computer where their two Sumatran orangutans play games.
Unlike gorillas and chimpanzees, orangutans are not true knuckle-walkers, and are instead fist-walkers.
Orangutans live in primary and old secondary forests, particularly dipterocarp forests and peat swamp forests.
Northeast Bornean orangutan
** Bornean orangutan (''Pongo pygmaeus'')
After the foundation has been built, the orangutan bends smaller, leafy branches onto the foundation; this serves the purpose of and is termed the "mattress".
Bornean orangutans consume at least 317&nbsp;different food items that include young leaves, shoots, bark, insects, honey and bird eggs.
The largest of these is the Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation, founded by conservationist Willie Smits.
He is now believed to have been describing gorillas, but in the 18th century, the terms orangutan and pongo were used for all great apes.
An orangutan has a large, bulky body, a thick neck, very long, strong arms, short, bowed legs, and no tail.
The name of the genus, ''Pongo'', comes from a 16th-century account by Andrew Battell, an English sailor held prisoner by the Portuguese in Angola, which describes two anthropoid "monsters" named Pongo and Engeco.
This may be because they cannot ensure they will sire a female's next offspring because she does not immediately begin ovulating again after her infant dies.
Resident females live with their offspring in defined home ranges that overlap with those of other adult females, which may be their immediate relatives.
Orangutans are opportunistic foragers, and their diets vary markedly from month to month.
A 2007 study by the Government of Indonesia noted a total wild population of 61,234&nbsp;orangutans, 54,567 of which were found on the island of Borneo in 2004.
Orangutans also use plants of the genus ''Commelina'' as an anti-inflammatory balm.
Adult males dominate sub-adult males.
Resident males may have overlapping ranges and interactions between them tend to be hostile.
Orangutans are also known to blow raspberries.
The orangutan has a large head with a prominent mouth area.
Central Bornean orangutan
Phylogeny of superfamily Hominoidea
In the following months, the time an infant spends with its mother decreases.
Subsequently, the Bornean species would have its genome sequenced.
Field studies of the apes were pioneered by primatologist Birutė Galdikas.
Together with a long lactation period, orangutans also have a long birth interval.
They compared geographic variations in tool use related to the processing of ''Neesia'' fruit.
Both resident and transient orangutans aggregate on large fruiting trees to feed.
The orangutans are also the only surviving species of the subfamily Ponginae, which also included several other species, such as the three extinct species of the genus ''Gigantopithecus'', including the largest known primate ''Gigantopithecus blacki''.
In Malaysia, conservation areas include Semenggoh Wildlife Centre in Sarawak and Matang Wildlife Centre also in Sarawak, and the Sepilok Orang Utan Sanctuary near Sandakan in Sabah.
Orangutan hands are similar to human hands; they have four long fingers and an opposable thumb.
Experiments suggest they can figure out some invisible displacement problems with a representational strategy.
A female often has an older offspring with her to help in socializing the infant.
*** ''Pongo pygmaeus morio'' – east populations
The two orangutan species are the only extant members of the subfamily Ponginae.
In late March 2012, some of the last Sumatran orangutans in northern Sumatra were reported to be threatened with approaching forest fires and might be wiped out entirely within a matter of weeks.
Orangutans usually travel alone, but they may travel in small groups in their subadult years.
During that time, Shapiro instructed ex-captive orangutans in the acquisition and use of signs following the techniques of psychologists R. Allen Gardner and Beatrix Gardner, who taught the chimpanzee, Washoe, in the late 1960s.
Orangutans can grasp things with both their hands and their feet.
The study employed the techniques of psychologist David Premack, who used plastic tokens to teach linguistic skills to the chimpanzee, Sarah.
Those calls may also suppress development in younger males.
If confirmed, ''abelii'' would be a subspecies of ''P.&nbsp;wurmbii'' (Tiedeman, 1808).
For his dissertation study, Shapiro examined the factors influencing sign learning by four juvenile orangutans over a 15-month period.
Estimates between 2000 and 2003 found 7,300&nbsp;Sumatran orangutans and between 45,000 and 69,000&nbsp;Bornean orangutans remain in the wild.
Unlike many other primates, male orangutans do not seem to practice infanticide.
To further confuse, the name ''P.
Their hair is typically reddish-brown, instead of the brown or black hair typical of chimpanzees and gorillas.
Several conservation and rehabilitation organisations are dedicated to the survival of orangutans in the wild.
Primatologist Carel P. van Schaik and biological anthropologist Cheryl D. Knott further investigated tool use in different wild orangutan populations.
The social structure of the orangutan can be best described as solitary but social.
The likely origin of the word comes specifically from the Banjarese variety of Malay.
The scientists suggested these differences are cultural.
This spelling (and pronunciation) has remained in use in English up to the present, but has come to be regarded as incorrect.
Since 2004, several pet orangutans were confiscated by local authorities and sent to rehabilitation centres.
Conservation organisations such as Orangutan Land Trust work with the palm oil industry to improve sustainability and encourages the industry to establish conservation areas for orangutans.
The first attestation of the word to name the Asian ape is in Dutch physician Jacobus Bontius' 1631 ''Historiae naturalis et medicae Indiae orientalis'' – he reported that Malays had informed him the ape was able to talk, but preferred not to "lest he be compelled to labour".
morio'', as well as some suggested junior synonyms, may be junior synonyms of the ''P.
The population currently listed as ''P.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;wurmbii'' may be closer to the Sumatran orangutan than the other Bornean orangutan subspecies.
s. The absence of tigers on Borneo may explain why Bornean orangutans can be found on the ground more often than their Sumatran relatives.
Initially, a suitable tree is located, orangutans being selective about sites though many tree species are used.
When an orangutan reaches the age of two, its climbing skills improve and it will travel through the canopy holding hands with other orangutans, a behaviour known as "buddy travel".
In 1869, British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace, co-creator of modern evolutionary theory, published his account of Malaysia's wildlife: ''The Malay Archipelago: The Land of the Orang-Utan and the Bird of Paradise''.
pygmaeus wurmbii'') in Tuanan, Borneo, were reported to use tools in acoustic communication.
Both species can be found in mountainous and lowland swampy areas.
Males disperse much farther from their mothers and enter into a transient phase.
This species is now found only in the northern part of Sumatra, with most of the population inhabiting the Leuser Ecosystem.
(2014) suggest that Bontius' account referred not to apes (which were not known from Java) but rather to humans suffering some serious medical condition (most likely endemic cretinism) and that his use of the word was misunderstood by Nicolaes Tulp, who was the first to use the term in a publication.
Dominant adult males have distinctive cheek pads and produce long calls that attract females and intimidate rivals.
Wild orangutans (''P.
The populations on the two islands were classified as subspecies until 1996, when they were elevated to full species status, and the three distinct populations on Borneo were elevated to subspecies.
Further evidence that highly social orangutans are more likely to exhibit cultural behaviours came from a study of leaf-carrying behaviours of ex-captive orangutans that were being rehabilitated on the island of Kaja in Borneo.
The Sumatran orangutan genome was sequenced in January 2011.
** Sumatran orangutan (''Pongo abelii'')
It does not appear to have any effect on orangutans except for excessive saliva production.
These apes likely lived in drier and cooler environments than orangutans do today.
Shapiro continued to examine the linguistic and learning abilities of ex-captive orangutans in Tanjung Puting National Park, in Indonesian Borneo, between 1978 and 1980.
However, the joint and tendon arrangement in the orangutans' hands produces two adaptations that are significant for arboreal locomotion.
There may even be distinctive cultures within populations.
Other habitats used by orangutans include grasslands, cultivated fields, gardens, young secondary forest, and shallow lakes.
The comparison has shown these two species diverged around 400,000&nbsp;years ago, more recently than was previously thought.
wurmbii'' (in which case ''P.
Younger males do not have these characteristics and resemble adult females.
Flanged males attract oestrous females with their characteristic long calls.
A decade-long study of urine and faecal samples at the Gunung Palung Orangutan Conservation Project in West Kalimantan has shown that orangutans give birth during and after the high fruit season (though not every year), during which they consume various abundant fruits, totalling up to 11,000 calories per day.
A major factor in that period of time has been the conversion of vast areas of tropical forest to palm oil plantations in response to international demand.
In the low-fruit season, they eat whatever fruit is available in addition to tree bark and leaves, with daily intake at only 2,000 calories.
The researchers hope these data may help conservationists save the endangered ape, and also prove useful in further understanding of human genetic diseases.
Orangutan societies are made up of resident and transient individuals of both sexes.
Additionally, without the use of the thumb, the fingers and hands can grip tightly around objects with a small diameter by resting the tops of the fingers against the inside of the palm, creating a double-locked grip.
However, this behaviour ends at adulthood.
Sumatran orangutan populations declined by 80% in 75 years.
Males and females differ in size and appearance.
Orangutans are very technically adept nest builders, making a new nest each evening in only in 5 to 6 minutes and choosing branches which they know can support their body weight.
In 2003, researchers from six different orangutan field sites who used the same behavioural coding scheme compared the behaviours of the animals from the different sites.
Female orangutans have eight-year intervals between births, the longest interbirth intervals among the great apes.
Europeans became aware of the existence of the orangutan possibly as early as the 17th&nbsp;century.
Male orangutans play almost no role in raising the young.
There are three main reasons for this dietary behaviour: for the addition of mineral nutrients to their diet; for the ingestion of clay minerals that can absorb toxic substances; or to treat a disorder such as diarrhoea.
Classified in the genus '''''Pongo''''', orangutans were considered to be one species.
Since being freed, the orangutan, named Pony, has been living with the Borneo Orangutan Survival Foundation.
There are even stories of hunters being seduced by female orangutans.
Regardless, the type locality of ''P.
Tool use in orangutans was observed by primatologist Birutė Galdikas in ex-captive populations.
The apes have been extensively studied for their learning abilities.
A number of organisations are working for the rescue, rehabilitation and reintroduction of orangutans.
Orangutans are the first nonhuman species documented to do so.
These occur earlier in females with more body fat.
Orangutans will also form travelling groups with members moving between different food sources.
Threats to wild orangutan populations include poaching, habitat destruction, and the illegal pet trade.
These are carefully constructed; young orangutans learn from observing their mother's nest-building behaviour.
Lowland dipterocarp forests are preferred by orangutans because of their plentiful fruit.
However, they do not seem to have any special social bonds with them.
Although animal rights groups interpreted the ruling as applicable to all species in captivity, legal specialists considered the ruling only applicable to hominid apes due to their genetic similarities to humans.
Native to Indonesia and Malaysia, orangutans are currently found in only the rainforests of Borneo and Sumatra.
Infants make soft hoots when distressed.
Sumatran orangutans live at elevations as high as 1500&nbsp;m (4921&nbsp;ft), while Bornean orangutans live no higher than 1000&nbsp;m (3281&nbsp;ft).
The orangutan was shaved and chained for sexual purposes.
