From 1998 onward the march was banned from Garvaghy Road and the Catholic area was sealed-off with large barricades.
Despite these early Protestant migrants, it was only during the early 1820s that a larger wave of Irish migrants, many of them Protestants, came to the Ottawa valley region.
There have been intermittent violent clashes during the march since the 19th century.
Partly as a result of this atrocity, the Orange Order quickly grew and large numbers of gentry with experience gained in the yeomanry came into the movement.
For a few years, there was an annual major standoff at Drumcree and widespread loyalist violence.
The contribution of women to the Orange Order is recognised in the song "Ladies Orange Lodges O!
The Peep o' Day Boys quickly regrouped and opened fire on the Defenders.
From 1921 to 1969, every Prime Minister of Northern Ireland was an Orangeman and member of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP); all but three Cabinet Ministers were Orangemen; all but one unionist Senators were Orangemen; and 87 of the 95 MPs who did not become Cabinet Ministers were Orangemen.
All but a handful of the Orange Order parades, at so called "interface areas" where the two communities live next to each other, are peaceful.
The Order was heavily involved in opposition to Gladstone's first Irish Home Rule Bill 1886, and was instrumental in the formation of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP).
The situation in Portadown was likened to a "war zone" and a "siege".
It has the power to arbitrate in disputes between Grand Lodges, and in internal disputes when invited.
This opposition was rooted in the large contingent of Protestant clergymen who are built into the power structure of the Order.
At the start the Orange Order was a "parallel organisation" to the Defenders in that it was a secret oath-bound society that used passwords and signs.
He should cultivate truth and justice, brotherly kindness and charity, devotion and piety, concord and unity, and obedience to the laws; his deportment should be gentle and compassionate, kind and courteous; he should seek the society of the virtuous, and avoid that of the evil; he should honour and diligently study the Holy Scriptures, and make them the rule of his faith and practice; he should love, uphold, and defend the Protestant religion, and sincerely desire and endeavour to propagate its doctrines and precepts; he should strenuously oppose the fatal errors and doctrines of the Church of Rome and other Non-Reformed faiths, and scrupulously avoid countenancing (by his presence or otherwise) any act or ceremony of Roman Catholic or other non-Reformed Worship; he should, by all lawful means, resist the ascendancy, encroachments, and the extension of their power, ever abstaining from all uncharitable words, actions, or sentiments towards all those who do not practice the Reformed and Christian Faith; he should remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, and attend the public worship of God, and diligently train up his offspring, and all under his control, in the fear of God, and in the Protestant faith; he should never take the name of God in vain, but abstain from all cursing and profane language, and use every opportunity of discouraging those, and all other sinful practices, in others; his conduct should be guided by wisdom and prudence, and marked by honesty, temperance, and sobriety, the glory of God and the welfare of man, the honour of his Sovereign, and the good of his country, should be the motives of his actions.
The Fourth Home Rule Act was passed as the Government of Ireland Act 1920; the six northeastern counties of Ulster became Northern Ireland and the other twenty-six counties became Southern Ireland.
The denomination of the church is quite often rotated, depending on local demographics.
It was sewn in the tunic of Private Andrew Alexander of the 50th Regiment.
He was expelled from the Order.
The Royal Black Institution was formed out of the Orange Order two years after the founding of the parent body.
Some evangelical groups have claimed that the Orange Order is still influenced by freemasonry.
In a 2011 survey of 1,500 Orangemen throughout Northern Ireland, over 60% believed that "most Catholics are IRA sympathizers".
An Orange Order spokesman refused to condemn McIlwaine's membership of the Order.
There was apparently a split in the group in the early 1920s.
The Order, from its very inception, was an overtly political organisation.
These parades along with St George's day; Reformation Sunday and Remembrance Sunday go to and from church.
After partition the Order declined rapidly in the Republic of Ireland.
The homeland and birthplace of the Defenders was mid-Ulster and here they failed to participate in the rebellion, having been cowed into submission and surrounded by their Protestant neighbours who had been armed by the government.
A former Grand Master of the Order, also called William Blacker, and a former County Grand Master of Belfast, Robert Hugh Wallace have questioned this statement, saying whoever the Governor believed were the "lawless banditti", they could not have been Orangemen as there were no lodges in existence at the time of his speech.
Since the 1690s commemorations—state-sponsored and those held by the lower classes—had been held throughout Ireland celebrating key dates in the Williamite War such as the Battle of the Boyne, Siege of Derry and the Siege of Cork.
The Order has been prominent in commemorating Ulster's war dead, particularly Orangemen and particularly those who died in the Battle of the Somme (1916) during World War I.
Many Scottish Orangemen were also convicted for loyalist paramilitary activity, and some Orange meetings were used to raise funds for loyalist prisoners' welfare groups.
Grand Secretary Drew Nelson claims that a statistical analysis shows that this campaign began in the last years of the 1980s and continues to the present.
The Order accepted the invitation and was to parade with their wives and children alongside Chinese, Filipino and African community groups in an event designed to recognise and celebrate cultural diversity.
McIlwaine was also pictured acting as a steward at a 2014 Orange march.
The Laws and Constitutions of the Loyal Orange Institution of Scotland of 1986 state, "No ex-Roman Catholic will be admitted into the Institution unless he is a Communicant in a Protestant Church for a reasonable period."
In 2007, a banner commemorating UDA member Joe Bratty appeared at an Orange march.
Orangism developed throughout the region’s Protestant communities, including Bristol, Lachute- Brownsburg, Shawville and Quyon.
Their Orange lodge refused to expel them.
In the late 1990s, Stoneyford Orange Hall was reported to be a focal point for the Orange Volunteers.
By 1870, when there were about 930 Orange lodges in the Canadian province of Ontario, there were only 43 in the entire eastern United States.
Likewise, the "Constitution, Laws and Ordinances of the Loyal Orange Institution of Ireland" (1967) state, "No person who at any time has been a Roman Catholic&nbsp;… shall be admitted into the Institution, except after permission given by a vote of seventy five per cent of the members present founded on testimonials of good character …" In the 19th century, Rev.
It is held on the Saturday before the Twelfth as the day is not a holiday in the Republic of Ireland.
In the grounds of the Ulster Tower Thiepval, which commemorates the men of the Ulster Division who died in the Battle of the Somme, a smaller monument pays homage to the Orangemen who died in the war.
The Orange Institution commemorates the civil and religious privileges conferred on Protestants by William of Orange, the Dutch prince who became King of England, Scotland, and Ireland in the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
It is headed by the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland, which was established in 1798.
This includes Gusty Spence, Robert Bates, Davy Payne, David Ervine, John Bingham, George Seawright, Richard Jameson, Billy McCaughey, Robert McConnell and Ernie Elliott.
Eric Kaufmann, in his book ''The New Unionism'', writes: "The Orange Order actually took a firm stand against violence and paramilitarism throughout the Troubles.
Over 300 Orangemen were killed during the conflict, the vast majority of them members of the security forces.
An Orangeman and DUP election candidate with links to the Real UFF in Antrim was jailed in 2013 for his part in a sectarian attack on a Polish family.
Members of the UDA/UFF appeared at Drumcree with banners supporting the Orangemen.
The Order was the force behind the UUP no-confidence votes in reformist Prime Ministers O'Neill (1969), Chichester-Clark (1969–71) and Faulkner (1972–74).
The locations used for the annual Twelfth parades are located throughout the six counties of Northern Ireland with County Down having the most venues with thirty three.Counties Armagh and Fermanangh having a smaller population both have twelve host venues.
The Orange Order in England is strongest in Liverpool including Toxteth and Garston.
Membership of the Order was historically lower in areas where Protestants are in the majority, and vice versa.
Portadown Orangemen allowed known militants such as George Seawright to take part in a 6 July 1986 march, contrary to a prior agreement.
The Independent Orange Institution was formed in 1903 by Thomas Sloane, who opposed the main Order's domination by Unionist Party politicians and the upper classes.
It has also been claimed that paramilitary groups approach certain bands asking the band to carry a flag of their organization with financial assistance sometimes offered for doing so.
The Order considers important the Fourth Commandment, and that it forbids Christians to work, or engage in non-religious activity generally, on Sundays.
British Israelism, which claims that the British people are descended from the Israelites and that Queen Elizabeth II is a direct descendant of the Biblical King David, has from time to time been advanced in Orange publications.
DUP leader Ian Paisley had been clashing with the Order since 1951, when the Order banned members of Paisley's Free Presbyterian Church from acting as Orange chaplains and later, from the 1970s, when it openly endorsed the UUP against the DUP.
The Apprentice Boys of Derry exist for their acts during the siege of Derry from James II.
In 1915 John Amate Atayi, a member of the Lagos Fine Blues LOL 801 moved to Lome, Togo, for work.
The banner of ''Old Boyne Island Heroes'' Orange lodge bears the names of John Bingham and Shankill Butcher Robert Bates, who were both members.
At the outbreak of The Troubles in 1969, the Order encouraged its members to join the Northern Ireland security forces.
Throughout the 1780s, sectarian tension had been building in County Armagh, largely due to the relaxation of the Penal Laws.
In a 2011 survey of Orangemen throughout Northern Ireland, 58% said they should be allowed to march through Irish nationalist and Catholic areas with no restrictions; 20% said they should negotiate with residents first.
During the 1970s an Orangeman—Roddy MacDonald—was the UDA's 'commander' in Scotland.
In 1911 some Orangemen began to arm themselves and train as militias.
In 2007, 12,000 Orangemen and women marched along Edinburgh's Royal Mile to celebrate the 300th anniversary of the Act of Union.
Some people believe that this will ultimately result in a healing of the split which led to the Independent Orange Institution breaking away from the mainstream Order.
David Armstrong, spoke out against the invitation.
Some smaller villages such as Cushendall, Rostrevor, Crossmaglen and Draperstown are not marched in at all and areas with a sizeable population like Coalisland and Dungiven have never been the host for a major Twelfth parade.
Today Nelson McCausland MLA and Gordon Lucy, Director of the Ulster Society are the more prominent members within the lodge membership.
Due to its close links with the UUP, the Orange Order was able to exert great influence.
The halls often host community groups such as credit unions, local marching bands, Ulster-Scots and other cultural groups as well as religious missions and unionist political parties.
Irish nationalist historians Thomas A. Jackson and John Mitchel argued that the government's goal was to hinder the United Irishmen by fomenting sectarianism, thereby creating disunity and disorder under pretence of "passion for the Protestant religion".
Orangemen were recruited into the yeomanry to help fight the rebellion and "proved an invaluable addition to government forces".
The Order was an important component in the founding of the Liverpool Protestant Party in 1909, keeping an association until the party's demise in 1974.
After this the activities of the Orange Order were banned for a time, the Order dissolved, and most members joined Masonic lodges.
The few American lodges were founded by newly arriving Protestant Irish immigrants in coastal cities such as Philadelphia and New York.
As well as Catholics, non-Credal and non-Trinitarian Christians are also banned.
The likelihood of Irish Catholic members holding the balance of power in the Westminster Parliament further increased the alarm of Orangemen in Ireland, as O'Connell's 'Repeal' movement aimed to bring about the restoration of a separate Irish Parliament in Dublin, which would have a Catholic majority, thereby ending to the Protestant Ascendancy.
This includes members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), Unitarians, Orthodox Christians, and some branches of Quakers.
The incident led to a more concerted effort by residents to have the marches banned from the area.
In Ulster, most of the United Irish commanders and many of the rebels were Protestant.
Unionism is thus opposed to, for example, the unification of Ireland and Scottish independence.
Despite this hierarchy, private lodges are basically autonomous as long as they generally obey the rules of the Institution.
In February 2008 it was announced that the Orange Order was to be granted nearly €250,000 from the Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs.
Here he founded the Lome Defenders of the Truth LOL 867, under warrant of the Grand Orange Lodge of England.
In the October 2010 issue of ''The Orange Standard'', Grand Master Robert Saulters referred to 'dissident' Irish republican paramilitaries as the "Roman Catholic IRA".
Thomas Knox, British military commander in Ulster, wrote in August 1796 that "As for the Orangemen, we have rather a difficult card to play...we must to a certain degree uphold them, for with all their licentiousness, on them we must rely for the preservation of our lives and properties should critical times occur".
From this moment on, the Orange Order re-emerged in a new and even more militant form.
In 1845 the ban was again lifted, but the notorious Battle of Dolly's Brae between Orangemen and Ribbonmen in 1849 led to a ban on Orange marches which remained in place for several decades.
The sectarian attacks on them were so severe that Grand Masters of the Orange Order convened to find ways of reducing them.
A distinct women's organisation grew up out of the Orange Order.
It also has a significant presence in the Scottish Lowlands and lodges throughout the Commonwealth and United States.
The Black Institution holds its Southport parade on the first Saturday in August.
After the battle had ended, the Peep o' Days marched into Loughgall, and in the house of James Sloan they founded the Orange Order, which was to be a Protestant defence association made up of lodges.
Shortly after the election, Grand Master Robert Saulters called for a "single unionist party" to maintain the union.
The dispute led to a short-lived boycott of businesses owned by Orangemen and their supporters elsewhere in the region, as well as to a marked decrease in the Order's membership.
These followed a tradition started in Elizabethan England of celebrating key events in the Protestant calendar.
It is based mainly in County Antrim.
The first Orange Lodge in Nigeria was the Lagos Fine Blues LOL 801, which was first listed in 1907 in the returns of Woolwhich District 64 to the Grand Orange Lodge of England.
Orange marches through mainly Catholic and nationalist neighbourhoods in Northern Ireland are controversial and have often led to violence.
Between 1922 and 1972, the UUP was consistently the largest party in the Northern Ireland Parliament, and all Prime Ministers of Northern Ireland and the vast majority of senior UUP figures were members of the Order.
The Order sees itself as defending Protestant civil and religious liberties, whilst critics accuse the Order of being sectarian, triumphalist and supremacist.
One instance, publicised in a 7 October 1816 edition of the ''Boston Commercial Gazette'', included the murder of a Catholic priest and several members of the congregation of Dumreilly parish in County Cavan on 25 May 1816.
For example, several lodges have failed to expel members convicted of murder despite a rule stating that anyone convicted of a serious crime should be expelled, and Portadown lodges have negotiated with the Parades Commission in defiance of Grand Lodge policy that the Commission should not be acknowledged.
When a contingent of Defenders from County Tyrone arrived on 21 September, however, they were "determined to fight".
The response from Orangemen was strong.
The Scullabogue Barn massacre saw over 100 non-combatant (mostly Protestant) men, women, and children imprisoned in a barn which was then set alight, with the Catholic rebels ensuring none escaped, not even a child who it is claimed managed to break out only for a rebel to kill with his pike.
According to Ruth Dudley Edwards and two former Grand Masters, Orangemen were among the first to contribute to repair funds for Catholic property damaged in the rebellion.
In 2005, controversy was generated when the organisers of Cork's St Patrick's Day parade invited representatives of the Orange Order to parade in the celebrations, part of the year-long celebration of Cork's position of European Capital of Culture.
There are many parades on and around 1 July in commemoration of the Somme, although the war memorial aspect is more obvious in some parades than others.
In September 1795, at a crossroads known as "The Diamond" near Loughgall, Defenders and Peep o' Day Boys gathered to fight each other.
Within two months, 7,000 Catholics had been driven out of County Armagh.
The United Irishmen saw the Defenders as potential allies, and between 1794 and 1796 they formed a coalition.
Many of these immigrants saw themselves as returning to the land of their forefathers (see Plantation of Ulster).
''Te Ara: The Encyclopaedia of New Zealand'' argues that New Zealand Orangeism, along with other Protestant and anti-Catholic organisations, faded from the 1920s.
In 2006, three Liverpool Orangemen were jailed for possession of weapons and UVF membership.
The Orange Order in Liverpool holds its annual Twelfth parade in Southport, a seaside town north of Liverpool.
As a Protestant society, it does not accept non-Protestants as members unless they convert and adhere to the principles of Orangeism, nor does it accept Protestants married to Catholics.
Many Masonic traditions survive, such as the organisation of the Order into lodges.
Its presence in Liverpool dates to at least 1819, when the first parade was held to mark the anniversary of the Battle of the Boyne, on 12 July.
These families spread across the valley, settling towns near Shawville, Quebec.
In 2012, it was stated that estimated membership of the Orange Order was around 34,000.
In 2015, the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland made a submission to the Northern Ireland Department of Arts, Culture and Leisure opposing the introduction of an Irish Language Bill.
The women's order is parallel to the male order, and participates in its parades as much as the males apart from 'all male' parades and 'all ladies' parades respectively.
Although it is a separate organisation, one of the requirements for membership in the Royal Black is membership of the Orange Order and to be no less than 17 years old.
The Independent Order originally had radical tendencies, especially in the area of labour relations, but this soon faded.
They are all entitled to protection by the laws of the country."
This self-governing entity within the United Kingdom was confirmed in its status under the terms of the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, and in its borders by the Boundary Commission agreement of 1925.
In 1825 a bill banning unlawful associations – largely directed at Daniel O'Connell and his Catholic Association, compelled the Orangemen once more to dissolve their association.
The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) attracted the most seats in an election for the first time in 2003.
He won't drop litter and he will be keen on recycling".
There are several memorial lodges, and a number of banners which depict the Battle of the Somme, war memorials, or other commemorative images.
There are currently two Orange Lodges in New York City, one in Manhattan and the other in the Bronx.
Other people were warned by notices not to inform on local Orangemen or "I will Blow your Soul to the Low hils of Hell And Burn the House you are in".
Called the Association of Loyal Orangewomen of Ireland, this organisation was revived in December 1911 having been dormant since the late 1880s.
Other parades are held by individual Districts of the Province – in all approximately 30 parades a year.
These gangs eventually reorganised as the Protestant Peep o' Day Boys and the Catholic Defenders, with the next decade in County Armagh marked by fierce sectarian conflict between both groups, which escalated and spread into neighbouring counties.
According to the State prosecutor in the court record, "the Orange celebration was until then unknown in the country".
The office of the "Supreme Grand Secretary" was at 229 Rhode Island Avenue, Washington, D.C..
Of the approximately 700 Orange halls in Ireland, 282 have been targeted by arsonists since the beginning of the Troubles in 1968.
Now one larger parade is hosted by a different town every year.
They all appear to have died out some time in the 1960s, due to political unrest.
Since 2001, things have been relatively calm, but the Order still campaigns for the right to march on Garvaghy Road.
As such the Order only accepts those who confess a belief in a Protestant religion.
One major outcome of the United Irishmen rebellion was the 1800 Act of Union that merged the Irish Parliament with that of Westminster, creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
The region's earliest Protestant settlement occurred when fifteen families from County Tipperary settled in the valley in Carleton County after 1818.
In the early nineteenth century, Orangemen were heavily involved in violent conflict with an Irish Catholic secret society called the Ribbonmen.
They smuggled homemade weaponry to Drumcree, apparently unhindered by the Orangemen, and attacked police lines.
At this time, the most contentious part of the march was the outward leg along Obins Street.
Private lodges may disobey policies laid down by senior lodges without consequence.
Breaking these can lead to suspension of the lodge's warrant – essentially the dissolution of the lodge – by the Grand Lodge, but this rarely occurs.
That year, Orangemen formed a paramilitary group called the Orange Volunteers.
The principal pledge of these lodges was to defend "the King and his heirs so long as he or they support the Protestant Ascendancy".
Most jurisdictions require both the spouse and parents of potential applicants to be Protestant, although the Grand Lodge can be appealed to make exceptions for converts.
In the trials that followed the massacres, evidence was recorded of anti-Orange sentiments being expressed by the rebels at Scullabogue.
The Order takes as its basis the Open Bible and historical Reformed documents such as the Presbyterian Westminster Confession, Anglican 39 Articles and other Protestant creeds.
The highlights of the Orange year are the parades leading up to the celebrations on the Twelfth of July.
There are still Orange lodges in nine counties of the Republic of Ireland – counties Cavan, Cork, Donegal, Dublin, Laois, Leitrim, Louth, Monaghan and Wicklow, but most either do not parade or travel to other areas to do so.
It was also claimed that if an attempt had been made then "the whole of Ulster would be as bad as Antrim and Down", where the United Irishmen rebellion was at its strongest.
The Orange Institution in Ireland has the structure of a pyramid.
There were plans for a range of Diamond Dan merchandise designed to appeal to children.
The first Orange lodge was established in nearby Dyan, and its first grand master was James Sloan of Loughgall.
Mohawk chief Dr Oronhyatekha, an Oxford scholar, was also a member.
In the 1950s and 60s the Independents focussed primarily on religious issues, especially the maintenance of Sunday as a holy day.
One unlikely location is Petersfield in Hampshire, probably because the town square has an equestrian statue of King William 3.
A number of prominent loyalist militants were members of the Orange Order at the same time.
The 50th was mainly Irish; many of its members were Orangemen belonging to the Regimental lodge and they had secretly decided to retain their lodge warrant when they had been ordered to surrender all military warrants, believing that the order would eventually be rescinded and that the warrant would be useful in Australia.
In 1913 the Ulster Unionist Council decided to bring these groups under central control, creating the Ulster Volunteer Force, an Ulster-wide militia dedicated to resisting Home Rule.
The arrival of large numbers of British troops to fight the New Zealand land wars of the 1860s provided a boost for New Zealand Orangeism, and in 1867 a North Island Grand Lodge was formed.
Local MP Louise Ellman called for them to be expelled from the Order.
After the outbreak of "the Troubles" in 1969, the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland encouraged Orangemen to join the Northern Ireland security forces, especially the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and the British Army's Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR).
The Order supported a plot in 1836 by Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland and Imperial Grand Master of the Orange Order, to take the throne in place of Victoria; once the plot was revealed the House of Commons called upon King William IV to disband the Order.
The Orange Order has been criticized for associating with loyalist paramilitary groups such as the UVF and UDA, which are classified as terrorist organizations.
The New Zealand Order is unusual in having mixed-gender lodges, and at one point had a female Grand Master.
Paul Butler, a prominent member of Sinn Féin, has said the arson is a "campaign against properties belonging to the Orange Order and other loyal institutions" by nationalists.
One of the very few landed gentry that joined the Orange Order at the outset, William Blacker, was unhappy with some of the outcomes of the Battle of the Diamond.
On 19 July 1823 the Unlawful Oaths Bill was passed, banning all oath-bound societies in Ireland.
After further Protestant settlement throughout the 1830s and 40s, the Pontiac region's Orange Lodges developed into the largest rural contingent of Orangism in the Province.
The Orange Order had a central place in the new state of Northern Ireland.
40% of Grand Lodge delegates oppose official policy while 60% are in favour.
The Institution also holds a Junior parade there on Whit Monday.
The main goal of these talks was to foster greater unity between the two parties, in the run-up to the May 2010 general election.
The Order's political influence suffered greatly after the unionist-controlled government of Northern Ireland was abolished in 1973.
This was in response to a speech the year before by Eamonn de Valera in the Irish Free State claiming that Ireland was a "Catholic nation" in a debate about protests against Protestant woman Letitia Dunbar-Harrison being appointed as County Librarian in County Mayo.
The Twelfth, however, remains in places a deeply divisive issue, not least because of the alleged triumphalism, anti-Catholicism and anti-Irish nationalism of the Orange Order.
A large shipment of rifles was imported from Germany to arm them in April 1914, in what became known as the Larne gun-running.
Following a wave of loyalist violence, the march was allowed through.
In 1912 the Third Home Rule Bill was introduced in the British House of Commons.
Most early members were from Ireland, but later many English, Scots, Italians and other Protestant Europeans joined the Order, as well as Mohawk Native Americans.
Toronto was the epicentre of Canadian Orangeism: most mayors were Orange until the 1950s, and Toronto Orangemen battled against Ottawa-driven initiatives like bilingualism and Catholic immigration.
However, the Grand Lodges of Ireland and Scotland have always been the largest by far.
There was however, uproar when it was revealed in the middle of the 'Marching Season' that Diamond Dan was a repaint of illustrator Dan Bailey's well-known "Super Guy" character (often used by British computer magazines), and taken without his permission, leading to the character being lampooned as "Bootleg Billy".
For example, prominent loyalist John Gregg was a member of ''Cloughfern Young Conquerors'' band, while Coleraine-based ''Freeman Memorial'' band was named after a UVF member who was killed by his own bomb.
In 1997, security forces locked down the Catholic area and forced the march through, citing loyalist threats.
Most of those opposed to Grand Lodge policy are from areas facing parade restrictions like Portadown District, Bellaghy, Derry City and Lower Ormeau.
