The national PCPI in 2013 was $44,765.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Oregon ranked 41st out of the 50 states in taxes per capita in 2005 with an average amount paid of 1,791.45.
Eventually politicians from the south agreed to allow Oregon to enter as a "free" state, in exchange for opening slavery to the southwest United States.
From the 1970s to the 1990s, the Blazers were one of the most successful teams in the NBA in terms of both win-loss record and attendance.
The Portland Timbers play at Providence Park, just west of downtown Portland.
The case made its way to the Oregon Supreme Court where Holmes won and Ford was required to release the children.
Oregon native Matt Groening, creator of ''The Simpsons'', has incorporated many references from his hometown of Portland into the TV series.
Oregon claims the D River as the shortest river in the world, though the state of Montana makes the same claim of its Roe River.
Under his leadership, the state overwhelmingly approved a ballot measure in 1902 that created the initiative and referendum for citizens to introduce or approve proposed laws or amendments to the state constitution directly, making Oregon the first state to adopt such a system.
The state's most populous ethnic group, non-Hispanic white, has declined from 95.8% in 1970 to 77.8% in 2012.
Governors in Oregon serve four-year terms and are limited to two consecutive terms, but an unlimited number of total terms.
Oregon also has four teams in the fledgling International Basketball League: the Portland Chinooks, Central Oregon Hotshots, Salem Stampede, and the Eugene Chargers.
Oregon occasionally hosts film shoots.
Joaquin Miller explained in ''Sunset'' magazine, in 1904, how Oregon's name was derived:
The southwestern portion of the state, particularly the Rogue Valley, has a Mediterranean climate with drier and sunnier winters and hotter summers, similar to Northern California.
The other statewide officers are Treasurer, Attorney General, Superintendent, and Labor Commissioner.
Intel was the largest employer in Oregon until 2008.
Approximately 62% of Oregon residents are wholly or partly of English, Welsh, Irish or Scottish ancestry.
Even the shift in recent years towards finished goods such as paper and building materials has not slowed the decline of the timber industry in the state.
Hispanics or Latinos made up 11.7% of the total population.
The debate over whether to move to annual sessions is a long-standing battle in Oregon politics, but the voters have resisted the move from citizen legislators to professional lawmakers.
Hydroelectric power, food, and lumber provided by Oregon helped fuel the development of the West, although the periodic fluctuations in the U.S. building industry have hurt the state's economy on multiple occasions.
Oregon's climate is generally mild.
By the 16th&nbsp;century, Oregon was home to many Native American groups, including the Coquille (Ko-Kwell), Bannock, Chasta, Chinook, Kalapuya, Klamath, Molalla, Nez Perce, Takelma, Tillamook and Umpqua.
Oregon is home to several large datacenters that take advantage of cheap power and a climate in Central Oregon conducive to reducing cooling costs.
Oregon is also one of four major world hazelnut growing regions, and produces 95% of the domestic hazelnuts in the United States.
Another early use of the name, spelled ''Ouragon'', was in a 1765 petition by Major Robert Rogers to the Kingdom of Great Britain.
* Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde
In 2003, Oregon was 28th in the U.S. by GDP.
Oregon also contains the largest community of Russian Old Believers to be found in the United States.
The Lottery Fund, which has grown steadily since the lottery was approved in 1984, exceeded expectations in the 2007 fiscal years, at $604&nbsp;million.
Oregon is one of only five states that have no sales tax.
Oregon supports seven public universities and one affiliate in the state.
The distribution, sales, and consumption of alcoholic beverages are regulated in the state by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.
The state's urban Portland State University has Oregon's second largest enrollment.
The last vote, for 1993's Measure 1, was defeated by a 75–25% margin.
Slavery played a major part in Oregon's history and even influenced its path to statehood.
News & World Report'' and ''Forbes''.
The Oregon Shakespeare Festival, held in Ashland, is a tourist draw for Southern Oregon.
The state has three regional universities: Western Oregon University in Monmouth, Southern Oregon University in Ashland, and Eastern Oregon University in La Grande.
* Coquille Indian Tribe
These meetings were precursors to an all-citizen meeting in 1843, which instituted a provisional government headed by an executive committee made up of David Hill, Alanson Beers, and Joseph Gale.
According to the Oregon Tourism Commission (doing business as Travel Oregon), present-day Oregonians  pronounce the state's name as "or-uh-gun, never or-ee-gone."
There are some areas in Oregon where humans find themselves living in the same area as wildlife.
The five largest school districts as of 2007 were: Portland Public Schools (46,262 students); Salem-Keizer School District (40,106); Beaverton School District (37,821); Hillsboro School District (20,401); and Eugene School District (18,025).
Since then, Oregon has cut its higher education budget and now ranks 46th in the country in state spending per student.
File:Crater lake oregon.jpg|An aerial view of Crater Lake
Medford is also home to the national headquarters of the Fortune 1000 company, Lithia Motors.
Oregon has three national park sites: Crater Lake National Park in the southern part of the Cascades, John Day Fossil Beds National Monument, and Lewis and Clark National and State Historical Parks.
The territory's request for statehood was delayed several times, as Congress argued among themselves whether it should be admitted as a "free" or "slave" state.
As of the census of 2010, Oregon had a population of 3,831,074, which is an increase of 409,675, or 12%, since the year 2000.
Oregon's highest recorded temperature is  at Pendleton on August&nbsp;10, 1898, and the lowest recorded temperature is  at Seneca on February&nbsp;10, 1933.
The United States District Court for the District of Oregon hears federal cases in the state.
The table below lists the averages for selected areas of Oregon, including the largest cities and largest coastal city Astoria.
Eugene, Salem and Hillsboro have minor-league baseball teams.
While wine and beer are available in most grocery stores, few stores sell hard liquor.
Among them, 90.7% were occupied.
The tall conifers, mainly Douglas fir, along Oregon's rainy west coast contrast with the lighter-timbered and fire-prone pine and juniper forests covering portions to the east.
In 2011, Amazon began operating a datacenter in northeastern Oregon near Boardman.
The relative humidity of Western Oregon is high except during summer days, which are semi-dry to semi-humid; Eastern Oregon typically sees low humidity year-round.
However, 2007 legislation forced tuition increases to cap at 3% per year, and funded the university system far beyond the governor's requested budget.
French Canadian and métis trappers and missionaries arrived in the eastern part of the state in the late 18th and early 19th&nbsp;centuries, many having travelled as members of Lewis and Clark and the 1811 Astor expeditions.
* Burns Paiute Tribe
The parallel 42° north delineates the southern boundary with California and Nevada.
Intel has been a top employer in Oregon since 1974.
Industrial expansion began in earnest following the 1933–1937 construction of the Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River.
Volunteer cavalry recruited in California were sent north to Oregon to keep peace and protect the populace.
The majority of the diversity in Oregon is in the Portland metropolitan area.
File:Oregon population map 2000.png|Map of Oregon's population density
The name, Oregon, is rounded down phonetically, from ''Aure il agua''—Oragua, Or-a-gon, Oregon—given probably by the same Portuguese navigator that named the Farallones after his first officer, and it literally, in a large way, means cascades: 'Hear the waters.'
The population density was .
As of December 2014, the state's official unemployment rate was 6.7%.
* Marine mammals include seals, sea lions, humpback, killer whales, gray whales, blue whales, sperm whale, pacific whitesided dolphin, and bottlenose dolphin.
File:Public-Lands-Western-US.png|Nearly half of Oregon's land is held by the U.S. Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management
The eastern two-thirds of the state beyond the Cascade Mountains typically votes Republican; in 2000 and 2004, George W. Bush carried every county east of the Cascades.
In 2005, Oregon ranked third among U.S. states with 303 wineries.
With 609,456 residents (2013 estimate), Portland is the largest city in Oregon and ranks 29th in the U.S.   Its metro population of 2,314,554 (2013 estimate) is 24th.
The term "orejón" comes from the historical chronicle ''Relación de la Alta y Baja California'' (1598) written by the new Spaniard Rodrigo Motezuma and made reference to the Columbia river when the Spanish explorers penetrated into the actual north american territory that became part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain.
While slaves were present they were not recorded as slaves on documents, due to slavery's illegal status.
Oregon voters have been resolute in their opposition to a sales tax, voting proposals down each of the nine times they have been presented.
* Typical tree species include the Douglas fir, the state tree, as well as redwood, ponderosa pine (generally east of the Cascades), western red cedar, and hemlock.
* Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians
Oregon farmers and ranchers also produce cattle, sheep, dairy products, eggs and poultry.
Another account, endorsed as the "most plausible explanation" in the book ''Oregon Geographic Names'', was advanced by George R. Stewart in a 1944 article in ''American Speech''.
The recession and dot-com bust of 2001 hit the region hard; many high technology employers reduced the number of their employees or went out of business.
The climate varies with dense evergreen mixed forests spreading across much of the west, and a high desert sprawling to the east.
* Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians
The Willamette Valley in western Oregon is the state's most densely populated area, home to eight of the ten most populous cities.
High technology industries located in Silicon Forest have been a major employer since the 1970s.
In following years, the primary election to select party candidates was adopted in 1904, and in 1908 the Oregon Constitution was amended to include recall of public officials.
Due to regional similarities in climate and soil, the grapes planted in Oregon are often the same varieties found in the French regions of Alsace and Burgundy.
Oregon is home to a wide variety of private colleges.
Oregon has supported Democratic candidates in the last seven elections.
More recently, 2004's Measure 37 reflects a backlash against such land-use laws.
To the south, near the California-Oregon border, is the community of Ashland, home of the Tony Award-winning Oregon Shakespeare Festival.
'''Oregon''' ( ) is a state in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States.
Portland is home to one of the West's largest trade book publishing houses, Graphic Arts Center Publishing.
Until 2011, the only major professional sports team in Oregon was the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association.
Western Oregon's climate is heavily influenced by the Pacific Ocean.
The largest ancestry groups in the state are:
File:Trilliumlake.jpg|Mount Hood, with Trillium Lake in the foreground
Nike's Beaverton campus is continuously ranked as a top employer in the Portland area-along with competitor Adidas.
In the northeastern region of the state, particularly around Pendleton, both irrigated and dry land wheat is grown.
Reed College; Concordia University; Lewis & Clark College; Multnomah Bible College; Portland Bible College; Warner Pacific College; Cascade College; the National University of Natural Medicine; and Western Seminary, a theological graduate school; are also in Portland.
Doctor Ira Babcock of Jason Lee's Methodist Mission was elected supreme judge.
At , Mount Hood is the state's highest point, and Crater Lake National Park is Oregon's only national park.
Francis Drake made his way to Nehalem Bay in 1579 and spent 5 weeks in the middle of summer repairing his ship and claimed the land between 38-48 degrees N latitude as a Symbolic Sovereign Act for England.
In a 2009 Gallup poll, 69% of Oregonians identified themselves as being Christian.
The Columbia is one of North America's largest rivers, and one of two rivers to cut through the Cascades (the Klamath River in Southern Oregon is the other).
+ '''Oregon Racial Breakdown of Population'''
Oregon Initiative 71, passed in 2010, mandates the Legislature to begin meeting every year, for 160 days in odd-numbered years, and 35 days in even-numbered years.
Fifty-five percent of state revenues are spent on public education, 23% on human services (child protective services, Medicaid, and senior services), 17% on public safety, and 5% on other services.
Oregon (among other western states and territories) is in the 9th Court of Appeals.
As of January 2009, the largest employer in Oregon is Providence Health & Services, a non-profit.
File:Portland panorama3.jpg|Portland
At the time, the River of the West was thought to rise in western Minnesota and flow west through the Great Plains.
While the history of the wine production in Oregon can be traced to before Prohibition, it became a significant industry beginning in the 1970s.
The border between the United States and British North America was set at the 49th parallel.
Oregon is  north to south at longest distance, and  east to west at longest distance.
The effects of this decline have included Weyerhaeuser's acquisition of Portland-based Willamette Industries in January 2002, the relocation of Louisiana-Pacific's corporate headquarters from Portland to Nashville, and the decline of former lumber company towns such as Gilchrist.
Settlement increased with the Donation Land Claim Act of 1850 and the forced relocation of the native population to Indian reservations in Oregon.
The state has an oceanic climate west of the Cascade mountain range.
The Northwest Tibetan Cultural Association is headquartered in Portland.
The term referred to the then-mythical River of the West (the Columbia River).
About 46% of the state is covered in forest, mostly west of the Cascades where up to 80% of the land is forest.
Babcock chaired two meetings in 1842 at Champoeg, (half way between Lee's mission and Oregon City), to discuss wolves and other animals of contemporary concern.
The capital of Oregon is Salem, the second most populous of its cities, with 160,614 residents (2013 estimate).
In the 2006 general election, voters restricted the use of eminent domain and extended the state's discount prescription drug coverage.
It remains the only state, with the exception of Washington, where voting by mail is the only method of voting.
OSU receives more annual funding for research than all other public higher education institutions in Oregon combined.
Typical of a western state, Oregon is home to a unique and diverse array of wildlife.
Despite these changes, Oregon still leads the United States in softwood lumber production; in 2011,  was produced in Oregon, compared with  in Washington,  in Georgia, and  in Mississippi.
In the 20th&nbsp;century, numerous hydroelectric dams were constructed along the Columbia, with major impacts on salmon, transportation and commerce, electric power, and flood control.
Stopping on the way, at the junction of the Snake River, he posted a claim to the region for Great Britain and the North West Company.
In recorded history, mentions of the land date to as early as the 16th&nbsp;century.
The Eugene Emeralds the Salem-Keizer Volcanoes and the Hillsboro Hops all play in the Single-A Northwest League.
The state also supports 17 community colleges.
Thus, Oregon is an Alcoholic beverage control state.
As of 2010, the state had 561,698 students in public primary and secondary schools.
The Oregon Institute of Technology has its campus in Klamath Falls.
Google has a large datacenter in The Dalles and Facebook has built a large datacenter in Prineville.
Of the state's total population, 22.6% was under the age 18, and 77.4% were 18 or older.
* There are many species of mammals that live in the state, which include, but are not limited to, opossums, shrews, moles, little pocket mice, great basin pocket mice, dark kangaroo mouse, California kangaroo rat, chisel-toothed kangaroo rat, ord's kangaroo rat,bats, rabbits, pikas, mountain beavers, chipmunks, western gray squirrels, yellow-bellied marmots, beavers, porcupines, coyotes, wolves, red foxes, common grey fox, kit fox,black bears, raccoons, badgers, skunks, cougars, bobcats, lynxes, deer, elk, and moose.
Oregon has the fifth highest personal income tax in the nation.
Movies filmed in Oregon include: ''Animal House'', ''Free Willy'', ''The General'', ''The Goonies'', ''Kindergarten Cop'', ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'', and ''Stand By Me''.
A few local governments levy sales taxes on services: the city of Ashland, for example, collects a 5% sales tax on prepared food.
Oregon's largest for-profit employer is Intel, located in the Silicon Forest area on Portland's west side.
During Oregon's history it has adopted many electoral reforms proposed during the Progressive Era, through the efforts of William S. U'Ren and his Direct Legislation League.
Like all US states, Oregon is represented by two U.S.
Recent legislatures have had to be called into special session repeatedly to address revenue shortfalls resulting from economic downturns, bringing to a head the need for more frequent legislative sessions.
The bombing site is now called the Mitchell Recreation Area.
He directed that some 200 Red River Colony settlers be relocated to HBC farms near Fort Vancouver, (the James Sinclair expedition), in an attempt to hold Columbia District.
* 8.4% Scandinavian: (4.1% Norwegian American, 3.1% Swedish, & 1.2% Danish)
It is home to three public research universities: The University of Oregon (UO) in Eugene and Oregon State University (OSU) in Corvallis, both classified as research universities with very high research activity, and Portland State University which is classified as a research university with high research activity.
In 2004 and 2006, Democrats won control of the state Senate and then the House.
The eastern two thirds of Oregon have cold, snowy winters and very dry summers; much of it is semiarid to arid like the rest of the Great Basin, though the Blue Mountains are wet enough to support extensive forests.
Since the 1980 census, Oregon has had five Congressional districts.
Also in 1811, New Yorker John Jacob Astor financed the establishment of Fort Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River as a western outpost to his Pacific Fur Company; this was the first permanent European settlement in Oregon.
Oregon has one of the largest salmon-fishing industries in the world, although ocean fisheries have reduced the river fisheries in recent years.
Ponderosa pine are more common in the Blue Mountains in the eastern part of the state and firs are more common in the west.
It is one of only three states of the contiguous United States to have a coastline on the Pacific Ocean, and the proximity to the ocean heavily influences the state's mild winter climate, despite the latitude.
The Timbers have a strong following, with the team regularly selling out its games.
This chronicle is the first topographical and linguistic source with respect to the place name Oregon.
Oregon has no lieutenant governor; in the event that the office of governor is vacated, Article V, Section 8a of the Oregon Constitution specifies that the Secretary of State is first in line for succession.
The largest reported ancestry groups in Oregon are: German (22.5%), English (14.0%), Irish (13.2%), Scandinavian (8.4%) and American (5.0%).
The state's second medical school, the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific, Northwest, is located in Lebanon.
In his 1765 petition, Rogers wrote:
was filmed and had its premiere in Portland.
This government was the first acting public government of the Oregon Country before annexation by the government of the United States.
The spinoffs and startups that were produced by these two companies led to the establishment in that area of the so-called Silicon Forest.
In 2000, Ballot Measure 86 converted the "kicker" law from statute to the Oregon Constitution, and changed some of its provisions.
In 2010, biotechnology giant Genentech opened a $400-million facility in Hillsboro to expand its production capabilities.
The Treaty of 1818 established joint British and American occupancy of the region west of the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean.
The state also has a minimum corporate tax of only $10 a year, amounting to 5.6% of the General Fund in the 2005–7 biennium; data about which businesses pay the minimum is not available to the public.
The Blazers play in the Moda Center in Portland's Lloyd District, which also is home to the Portland Winterhawks of the junior Western Hockey League and the Arena Football League's Portland Steel.
The evidence of this French Canadian presence can be found in the numerous names of French origin in that part of the state, including Malheur Lake and the Malheur River, the Grande Ronde and Deschutes rivers, and the city of La Grande.
In the southern part of the state, Medford is a rapidly growing metro area, which is home to The Rogue Valley International-Medford Airport, the third-busiest airport in the state.
But despite the fact that Russians account for only 1.4% of the population, Russian is the third most spoken language in Oregon after English and Spanish.
The Thorns, who also play at Providence Park, won the league's first championship, and have been by far the NWSL's attendance leader in all three of its seasons to date.
In 2010, 78.5% of the population was white alone (meaning of no other race and non-Hispanic), 1.7% was black or African American alone, 1.1% was Native American or Alaska native alone, 3.6% was Asian alone, 0.3% was Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander alone, 0.1% was another race alone, and 2.9% was multiracial.
The court has courthouses in Portland, Eugene, Medford, and Pendleton.
Oregon's mean elevation is .
Both schools have had recent success in other sports as well: Oregon State won back-to-back college baseball championships in 2006 and 2007, and the University of Oregon won back-to-back NCAA men's cross country championships in 2007 and 2008.
Party registration in Oregon, 1950–2006
* Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs
Oregon lies in two time zones.
Oregon is one of six states with a revenue limit.
Oregonians have voted for the Democratic Presidential candidate in every election since 1988.
Intel's creation and expansion of several facilities in eastern Washington County continued the growth that Tektronix had started.
Open Source Development Labs made news in 2004 when they hired Linus Torvalds, developer of the Linux kernel.
This gives Oregon a reputation of being relatively "snowless".
The biennial Oregon Legislative Assembly consists of a thirty-member Senate and a sixty-member House.
Portland has had minor-league baseball teams in the past, including the Portland Beavers and Portland Rockies, who played most recently at Providence Park when it was known as PGE Park.
Oregon is home to many breweries and Portland has the largest number of breweries of any city in the world.
Abundant alders in the west fix nitrogen for the conifers.
As a result, the state relies on property and income taxes for its revenue.
Concentrations of Mexican-Americans are highest in Malheur and Jefferson counties.
The total is currently 676, which represents growth of 12% over 2013.
Since 2009, the state has had two Democratic Senators, Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley.
After being drafted by the Detroit Lions in 2002, former Oregon Ducks quarterback Joey Harrington distributed "Orygun" stickers to members of the media as a reminder of how to pronounce the name of his home state.
