Differences were reported on the brain changes associated with men and women during stimulation.
Scholars state "many couples are locked into the idea that orgasms should be achieved only through intercourse vaginal sex" and that "even the word ''foreplay'' suggests that any other form of sexual stimulation is merely preparation for the 'main event.'...
A person may experience multiple orgasms, or an involuntary orgasm, such as in the case of rape or other sexual assault.
Masters and Johnson found that men took about four minutes to reach orgasm with their partners.
They eventually increase in speed and intensity as the orgasm approaches, until a final "plateau" (the orgasmic) pleasure sustained for several seconds.
In the study, a vaginal orgasm (as opposed to a clitoral orgasm) was defined as being triggered solely by penile–vaginal intercourse.
During the study, six fully ejaculatory orgasms were experienced in 36 minutes, with no apparent refractory period.
Ryan and Jethá use this as evidence for their theory that partible paternity and promiscuity were common for early modern humans.
observed a single male individual producing multiple orgasms without elevated prolactin response.
Although sexual function and sexuality after spinal cord injury is very often impacted, this injury does not deprive one of sexual feelings such as sexual arousal and erotic desires.
Another possible reason for the lack or absence of a refractory period in men may be an increased infusion of the hormone oxytocin.
Evolutionary psychologists Christopher Ryan and Cacilda Jethá, in their discussion of the female orgasm, address how long it takes for females to achieve orgasm compared to males, and females' ability to have multiple orgasms, hypothesizing how especially well suited to multiple partners and insemination this is.
In some instances, the series of regular contractions is followed by a few additional contractions or shudders at irregular intervals.
There is some debate whether certain types of sexual sensations should be accurately classified as orgasms, including female orgasms caused by G-spot stimulation alone, and the demonstration of extended or continuous orgasms lasting several minutes or even an hour.
This reaches a peak at orgasm when the female brain's emotion centers are effectively closed down to produce an almost trance-like state.
Costa theorizes that vaginal orgasm is more prevalent among women with a prominent tubercle of the upper lip.
According to one study, by Herbert Otto, which questioned 213 women, 29% of them had experienced an orgasm of this kind at one time or another.
So disagreement arises as to whether the experiment conducted by Mosovich & Tallaferro casts a new light on the nature of orgasm.
It has also been shown that oxytocin is produced when a man or woman's nipples are stimulated and become erect.
(1976), and others.
Males who experience dry orgasms can often produce multiple orgasms, as the refractory period is reduced.
However, though the experiences are different, male orgasms by penile stimulation are also centered in the prostate gland.
In 2008, they published the first complete 3D sonography of the stimulated clitoris, and republished it in 2009 with new research, demonstrating the ways in which erectile tissue of the clitoris engorges and surrounds the vagina, arguing that women may be able to achieve vaginal orgasm via stimulation of the G-spot because the highly innervated clitoris is pulled closely to the anterior wall of the vagina when the woman is sexually aroused and during vaginal penetration.
However, the same changes in brain activity were observed in both sexes in which the brain regions associated with behavioral control, fear and anxiety shut down.
There is some research suggesting that greater resting heart rate variability is associated with orgasms through penile-vaginal intercourse without additional simultaneous clitoral stimulation.
Elsewhere in the body, myofibroblasts of the nipple-areolar complex contract, causing erection of the nipples and contraction of the areolar diameter, reaching their maximum at the start of orgasm.
As orgasm becomes imminent, the outer third of the vagina tightens and narrows, while overall the vagina lengthens and dilates and also becomes congested from engorged soft tissue.
In the late 1980s and after, Rosemary Basson proposed a more cyclical alternative to what had largely been viewed as linear progression.
Sex educator Rebecca Chalker states that only one part of the clitoris, the urethral sponge, is in contact with the penis, fingers, or a dildo in the vagina.
If a male experiences erection and ejaculation but no orgasm, he is said to have sexual anhedonia (a condition in which an individual cannot feel pleasure from an orgasm) or ejaculatory anhedonia.
Quite the opposite; in her methods and in her writing, she advocates and demonstrates a commitment to the careful application of evolutionary theory to the study of human behavior," stated Meredith L. Chivers.
The female promiscuity explanation of female sexuality was echoed at least 12 years earlier by other evolutionary biologists, and there is increasing scientific awareness of the female proceptive phase.
This is categorized as the sudden discharge of accumulated sexual tension during the sexual response cycle, resulting in rhythmic muscular contractions in the pelvic region.
Tantric sex, which is not the same as Buddhist tantra (Vajrayana), is the ancient Indian spiritual tradition of sexual practices.
Masters and Johnson's research into the female sexual response cycle, as well as Shere Hite's, generally supported Kinsey's findings about female orgasm.
"Negative experiences in sexual relationships and overall well-being" are associated with sexual dysfunction.
Direct stimulation of the clitoris, G-spot area, or both, during anal sex can help some women enjoy the activity and reach orgasm from it.
The symptoms last for up to a week.
They quote primate sexuality specialist Alan Dixson in saying that the monogamy-maintenance explanation for female orgasm "seems far-fetched" because "females of other primate species, and particularly those with multimale-multifemale promiscuous mating systems such as macaques and chimpanzees, exhibit orgasmic responses in the absence of such bonding or the formation of stable family units."
The length of a man's orgasm has been estimated at 10–15 seconds on average, though it is possible for them to last up to 30 seconds.
Female orgasms by means other than clitoral or vaginal/G-spot stimulation are less prevalent in scientific literature and most scientists contend that no distinction should be made between "types" of female orgasm.
In ''FRAGMENT: Supposed to be an Epithalamium of Francis Ravaillac and Charlotte Cordé'', Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822), "a translator of extraordinary range and versatility", wrote the phrase "No life can equal such a death."
While researchers such as Geoffrey Miller, Helen Fisher, Meredith Small and Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "have viewed the clitoral orgasm as a legitimate adaptation in its own right, with major implications for female sexual behavior and sexual evolution," others, such as Donald Symons and Stephen Jay Gould, have asserted that the clitoris is vestigial or nonadaptive, and that the female orgasm serves no particular evolutionary function.
Masters and Johnson argued that, in the first stage, "accessory organs contract and the male can feel the ejaculation coming; two to three seconds later the ejaculation occurs, which the man cannot constrain, delay, or in any way control" and that, in the second stage, "the male feels pleasurable contractions during ejaculation, reporting greater pleasure tied to a greater volume of ejaculate".
...Because women reach orgasm through intercourse less consistently than men, they are more likely than men to have faked an orgasm".
They reported that, unlike females, "for the man the resolution phase includes a superimposed refractory period" and added that "many males below the age of 30, but relatively few thereafter, have the ability to ejaculate frequently and are subject to only very short refractory periods during the resolution phase".
Rather than orgasm being the peak of the sexual experience, she suggested that it is just one point in the circle and that people could feel sexually satisfied at any stage, reducing the focus on climax as an end-goal of all sexual activity.
Orgasm in non-human animals has been studied significantly less than orgasm in humans, but research on the subject is ongoing.
This is usually accompanied by ejaculation, but it is possible, though also rare, for men to orgasm without ejaculation (known as a "dry orgasm") or to ejaculate without reaching orgasm (which may be a case of delayed ejaculation, a nocturnal emission or a case of anorgasmic ejaculation).
Women's orgasms are preceded by erection of the clitoris and moistening of the opening of the vagina.
Some studies, using ultrasound, have found physiological evidence of the G-spot in women who report having orgasms during vaginal intercourse, but O'Connell suggests that the clitoris's interconnected relationship with the vagina is the physiological explanation for the conjectured G-spot.
At least one scientific study supports these claims, although cabergoline is a hormone-altering drug and has many potential side effects.
They are often associated with other involuntary actions, including muscular spasms in multiple areas of the body, a general euphoric sensation and, frequently, body movements and vocalizations.
French researchers Odile Buisson and Pierre Foldès reported similar findings to that of O'Connell's.
Morris suggested that the relative difficulty in achieving female orgasm, in comparison to the male's, might be favorable in Darwinian evolution by leading the female to select mates who bear qualities like patience, care, imagination, intelligence, as opposed to qualities like size and aggression, which pertain to mate selection in other primates.
They found that using this metric they could distinguish from rest, voluntary muscular contractions, and even unsuccessful orgasm attempts.
There are many physiological responses during sexual activity, including a relaxed state created by prolactin, as well as changes in the central nervous system such as a temporary decrease in the metabolic activity of large parts of the cerebral cortex while there is no change or increased metabolic activity in the limbic (i.e., "bordering") areas of the brain.
Orgasm may also be achieved by the use of a sex toy, such as a sensual vibrator or an erotic electrostimulation.
It is believed that the exact feeling of "orgasm" varies from one man to another.
They argue that the presence of this particular frequency of contractions can distinguish between voluntary contraction of these muscles and spontaneous involuntary contractions, and appears to more accurately correlate with orgasm as opposed to other metrics like heart rate that only measure excitation.
On the other hand, Dixson states that "Gibbons, which are primarily monogamous, do not exhibit obvious signs of female orgasm."
Initial reports indicated that it was difficult to observe the effects of orgasm on men using PET scan, because the duration of male orgasm was shorter.
An involuntary orgasm from forced sexual contact often results in feelings of shame caused by internalization of victim-blaming attitudes.
The sperm are transmitted up the vas deferens from the testicles, into the prostate gland as well as through the seminal vesicles to produce what is known as semen.
'''Orgasm''' (from Greek ὀργασμός ''orgasmos'' "excitement, swelling"; also '''sexual climax''') is the sudden discharge of accumulated sexual excitement during the sexual response cycle, resulting in rhythmic muscular contractions in the pelvic region characterized by sexual pleasure.
Research has shown that like in women, the emotional centers of a man's brain also deactivate during orgasm, but to a lesser extent than in women.
In 1973, Irving Singer theorized that there are three types of female orgasms; he categorized these as vulval, uterine, and blended, but because he was a philosopher, "these categories were generated from descriptions of orgasm in literature rather than laboratory studies".
The mechanics of male orgasm are similar in most male mammals.
A man might refrain from ejaculation by putting pressure on the perineum, about halfway between the scrotum and the anus, just before ejaculating.
O'Connell used MRI technology to define the true size and shape of the clitoris, suggesting that it extends into the anterior wall of the vagina (see above).
Sex counselor Ian Kerner stated, "It's a myth that using the penis is the main way to pleasure a woman."
Brain changes were observed and compared between states of rest, sexual stimulation, faked orgasm, and actual orgasm.
It is believed that the amount by which oxytocin is increased may affect the length of each refractory period.
Men may also achieve orgasm by stimulation of the prostate (see below).
As a woman nears orgasm, the clitoral glans retracts under the clitoral hood, and the labia minora (inner lips) become darker.
The first major national surveys of sexual behavior were the Kinsey Reports.
Experienced by males and females, orgasms are controlled by the involuntary or autonomic nervous system.
In her model, desire feeds arousal and orgasm, and is in turn fueled by the rest of the orgasmic cycle.
It has not been approved for treating sexual dysfunction.
His research indicates that "a prominent and sharply raised lip tubercle has been associated with greater odds (odds ratio = 12.3) of ever having a vaginal orgasm, and also with greater past month vaginal orgasm consistency (an effect driven by the women who never had a vaginal orgasm), than less prominent lip tubercle categories."
It's a region, it's a convergence of many different structures."
However, there are areas in the anterior vaginal wall and between the top junction of the labia minora and the urethra that are especially sensitive.
Sex toys designed for prostate stimulation are, according to Wibowo and Wassersug, one of the means that help men achieve multiple orgasms.
As a man nears orgasm during stimulation of the penis, he feels an intense and highly pleasurable pulsating sensation of neuromuscular euphoria.
Although orgasm dysfunction can have psychological components, physiological factors often play a role.
For some women, on some occasions, these contractions begin soon after the woman reports that the orgasm has started and continue at intervals of about one second with initially increasing, and then reducing, intensity.
Therefore, orgasm increases the chances of conceiving with males of a high genetic quality.
The disorder has ceased to be recognized as a medical condition since the 1920s.
Masters and Johnson argued that all women are potentially multiply orgasmic, but that multiply orgasmic men are rare, and stated that "the female is capable of rapid return to orgasm immediately following an orgasmic experience, if restimulated before tensions have dropped below plateau phase response levels".
The British biologists Baker and Bellis have suggested that the female orgasm may have a peristalsis or "upsuck" action (similar to the esophagus' ability to swallow when upside down), resulting in the retaining of favorable sperm and making conception more likely.
In one controlled study by Vance and Wagner (1976), independent raters could not differentiate written descriptions of male versus female orgasm experiences".
These reports continue to be cited.
They concluded that some females have more extensive clitoral tissues and nerves than others, especially having observed this in young cadavers as compared to elderly ones, and therefore whereas the majority of females can only achieve orgasm by direct stimulation of the external parts of the clitoris, the stimulation of the more generalized tissues of the clitoris via intercourse may be sufficient for others.
In addition to observing that the majority of their female subjects could only have clitoral orgasms, they found that both clitoral and vaginal orgasms had the same stages of physical response.
Psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich, in his 1927 book ''Die Funktion des Orgasmus'' (published in English in 1980 as ''Genitality in the Theory and Therapy of Neurosis'') was the first to make orgasm central to the concept of mental health, and defined neurosis in terms of blocks to having orgastic potency.
Anorgasmia is significantly more common in women than in men, which has been attributed to the lack of sex education with regard to women's bodies, especially in sex-negative cultures, such as clitoral stimulation usually being key for women to orgasm.
During her orgasm, her pelvic muscles contracted and her cervix repeatedly dipped into a pool of semen in the vaginal fornix, as if to ensure that sperm would proceed by the external orifice of the uterus, making conception more likely.
In addition to physical stimulation, orgasm can be achieved from psychological arousal alone, such as during dreaming (nocturnal emission for males or females) or by orgasm control.
Possible explanations for the G-spot were examined by Masters and Johnson, who were the first researchers to determine that the clitoral structures surround and extend along and within the labia.
A woman experiences full orgasm when her uterus, vagina, anus, and pelvic muscles undergo a series of rhythmic contractions.
Advocates of tantric and neotantric sex who claim that Western culture focuses too much on the goal of climactic orgasm, which reduces the ability to have intense pleasure during other moments of the sexual experience, suggest that eliminating this enables a richer, fuller and more intense connection.
It is also common for men to not reach orgasm as receptive partners solely from anal sex, and it may be that it is typical that receptive male partners do not reach orgasm solely by this activity.
The observation that women tend to reach orgasm more easily when they are ovulating also suggests that it is tied to increasing fertility.
This variation in ability to orgasm, generally thought to be psychosocial, was found to be 34% to 45% genetic.
The greatest concentration of vaginal nerve endings are at the lower third (near the entrance) of the vagina.
Discussions of female orgasm are complicated by orgasms in women typically being divided into two categories: clitoral orgasm and vaginal (or G-spot) orgasm.
The truth is that both are sexual and both are reproductive."
In the study, women reported their past month frequency of different sexual behaviors and corresponding orgasm rates and completed the Defense Style Questionnaire (DSQ-40), which is associated with various psychopathologies.
The G-spot is more of a thing like New York City is a thing.
Orgasm, and sexual activity as a whole, are physical activities that can require exertion of many major bodily systems.
Anecdotal reports on cabergoline suggest it may be able to eliminate the refractory period altogether, allowing men to experience multiple ejaculatory orgasms in rapid succession.
Supporting a distinct G-spot is a study by Rutgers University, published 2011, which was the first to map the female genitals onto the sensory portion of the brain; brain scans showed that the brain registered distinct feelings between stimulating the clitoris, the cervix and the vaginal wall&nbsp;– where the G-spot is reported to be&nbsp;– when several women stimulated themselves in a functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) machine.
In other cases, the woman reports having an orgasm, but no pelvic contractions are measured at all.
These effects impact cultural views of orgasm, such as the beliefs that orgasm and the frequency/consistency of it are important or irrelevant for satisfaction in a sexual relationship, and theories about the biological and evolutionary functions of orgasm.
Research by Randy Thornhill et al.
Except for in cases of a dry orgasm, contraction of the sphincter and prostate force stored semen to be expelled through the penis's urethral opening.
An orgasm before functions to strengthen the filter.
There have been very few studies correlating orgasm and brain activity in real time.
For example, modern findings support distinction between ejaculation and male orgasm.
Indirect stimulation of the clitoris through anal penetration may be caused by the shared sensory nerves; especially the pudendal nerve, which gives off the inferior anal nerves and divides into two terminal branches: the perineal nerve and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris.
For this reason, there are views on both sides as to whether these can be accurately defined as orgasms.
Brain scans on both sexes have shown that the pleasure centers of a man's brain show more intense activity than in women during orgasm.
While stroking the clitoris, the parts of the female brain responsible for processing fear, anxiety and behavioral control start to relax and reduce in activity.
indicates that female orgasm is more frequent during intercourse with a male partner with low fluctuating asymmetry.
The prostate produces a secretion that forms one of the components of ejaculate.
He said that the "male biologists who fretted over the adaptionist questions simply assumed that a deeply vaginal site, nearer the region of fertilization, would offer greater selective benefit" due to their Darwinian, ''summum bonum'' beliefs about enhanced reproductive success.
Masters and Johnson equated male orgasm and ejaculation and maintained the necessity for a refractory period between orgasms.
At least twenty-six definitions of orgasm were listed in the journal ''Clinical Psychology Review''.
Ejaculation may continue for a few seconds after the euphoric sensation gradually tapers off.
On rare occasions, stimulation of the breast area during sexual intercourse or foreplay, or solely having the breasts fondled, creates mild to intense orgasms, sometimes referred to as a ''breast orgasm'' or ''nipple orgasm'', in some women.
A follow-up in 2001 which focused more specifically on cardiovascular health found that having sex three or more times a week was associated with a 50% reduction in the risk of heart attack or stroke.
The study, examining 4000 women, was published in ''Biology Letters'', a Royal Society journal.
They assert that since the front wall of the vagina is inextricably linked with the internal parts of the clitoris, stimulating the vagina without activating the clitoris may be next to impossible.
suggest that women's vaginal orgasm consistency is associated with being told in childhood or adolescence that the vagina is the important zone for inducing female orgasm.
If orgasm is desired, anorgasmia may be attributed to an inability to relax.
Prostate stimulation can produce a "deeper" orgasm, described by some men as more widespread and intense, longer-lasting, and allowing for greater feelings of ecstasy than orgasm elicited by penile stimulation only.
Human brain wave patterns show distinct changes during orgasm, which indicate the importance of the limbic system in the orgasmic response.
Vaginal and clitoral atrophy and dryness affects up to 50%–60% of postmenopausal women.
Juno rejects this thought; they agree to ask the opinion of Tiresias ("who had known Venus/Love in both ways," having lived seven years as a female).
However, Gould acknowledged that "most female orgasms emanate from a clitoral, rather than vaginal (or some other), site" and stated that his nonadaptive belief "has been widely misunderstood as a denial of either the adaptive value of female orgasm in general, or even as a claim that female orgasms lack significance in some broader sense".
She stated that emotions of anxiety, defensiveness and the failure of communication can interfere with desire and orgasm.
Author Jack Morin, however, has postulated that "anal orgasm" has nothing to do with the prostate orgasm, although the two are often confused.
It attributes a different value to orgasm than traditional cultural approaches to sexuality.
Achieving orgasm solely by anal stimulation is rare among women.
Other proposed factors include how well women focus mentally on vaginal sensations during penile-vaginal intercourse, the greater duration of intercourse, and preference for above-average penis length.
There has been little scientific study of multiple orgasm in men.
He explained that although he accepts that "clitoral orgasm plays a pleasurable and central role in female sexuality and its joys," "all these favorable attributes, however, emerge just as clearly and just as easily, whether the clitoral site of orgasm arose as a spandrel or an adaptation".
"Lloyd is by no means against evolutionary psychology.
Some doctors speculate that the frequency of POIS "in the population may be greater than has been reported in the academic literature", and that many POIS sufferers are undiagnosed.
While Freud provided no evidence for this basic assumption, the consequences of this theory were considerable.
This does not normally affect the intensity of pleasure, but merely shortens the duration.
For Shelley, orgasm was "the almost involuntary consequences of a state of abandonment in the society of a person of surpassing attractions".
If males were motivated by, and taken to the point of, orgasm in the same way as females, those advantageous qualities would not be needed, since self-interest would be enough.
Edward Ellerker Williams, the last love of Shelley's life, was remembered by the poet in "The Boat on the Serchio", which has been considered as possibly "the grandest portrayal of orgasm in literature":
Generally, the more practices engaged in, the higher a woman's chance of having an orgasm.
In antiquity, Latin literature addressed the subject as much as Greek literature: Book III of Ovid's ''Metamorphoses'' retells a discussion between Jove and Juno, in which the former states: "The sense of pleasure in the male is far / More dull and dead, than what you females share."
They assert that they have identified "the first objective and quantitative measure that has a strong correspondence with the subjective experience that orgasm ultimately is" and state that the measure of contractions that occur at a frequency of 8–13&nbsp;Hz is specific to orgasm.
Some women exhibit a sex flush, a reddening of the skin over much of the body due to increased blood flow to the skin.
A 1994 Learning Channel documentary on sex had fiber optic cameras inside the vagina of a woman while she had sexual intercourse.
By contrast, Nancy Tuana, at the 2002 conference for ''Canadian Society of Women in Philosophy'', argues that the clitoris is unnecessary in reproduction, but that this is why it has been "historically ignored", mainly because of "a fear of pleasure.
A 1994 study by Laumann et al.
Though generally reported that women do not experience a refractory period and thus can experience an additional orgasm, or multiple orgasms, soon after the first one, some sources state that both men and women experience a refractory period because women may also experience a period after orgasm in which further sexual stimulation does not produce excitement.
A scientific study to successfully document natural, fully ejaculatory, multiple orgasms in an adult man was conducted at Rutgers University in 1995.
Moreover, "vaginally anorgasmic women had immature defenses scores comparable to those of established (depression, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and obsessive–compulsive disorder) outpatient psychiatric groups."
Paroxysm was regarded as a medical treatment, and not a sexual release.
Later, P. Haake et al.
He cites research concluding that women reach orgasm about 25% of the time with intercourse, compared with 81% of the time during oral sex (cunnilingus).
There are theories that the female orgasm might increase fertility.
Jorge Luis Borges, in the same vision, wrote in one of the several footnotes of "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" that one of the churches of Tlön claims Platonically that "All men, in the vertiginous moment of coitus, are the same man.
The clitoris is homologous to the penis; that is, they both develop from the same embryonic structure.
Other studies suggest that women exposed to lower levels of prenatal androgens are more likely to experience orgasm during vaginal intercourse than other women.
The health effects surrounding the human orgasm are diverse.
Unlike them, Craber et al.
A woman's orgasm may last slightly longer or much longer than a man's.
Further studies in this direction were carried out by Sem-Jacobsen (1968), Heath (1972), Cohen et al.
In novel ''Lady Chatterley's Lover'' (1928), by D. H. Lawrence, we can find an explicit narrative of a sexual act between a couple: "As he began to move, in the sudden helpless orgasm there awoke in her strange thrills rippling inside her..."
The literature started with the argument that female orgasm is a byproduct of shared early male ontogeny, where male orgasm is an adaptation.
Scientific literature focuses on the psychology of female orgasm significantly more than it does on the psychology of male orgasm, which "appears to reflect the assumption that female orgasm is psychologically more complex than male orgasm," but "the limited empirical evidence available suggests that male and female orgasm may bear more similarities than differences.
O'Connell et al., who performed dissections on the female genitals of cadavers and used photography to map the structure of nerves in the clitoris, were already aware that the clitoris is more than just its glans and asserted in 1998 that there is more erectile tissue associated with the clitoris than is generally described in anatomical textbooks.
Evolutionary biologist Robin Baker argues in ''Sperm Wars'' that occurrence and timing of orgasms are all a part of the female body's unconscious strategy to collect and retain sperm from more evolutionarily fit men.
However, a subsequent report by Rudie Kortekaas, et al.
"The pudendal nerve connects the clitoris, the pelvic nerve carries signals from the vagina, the hypogastric nerve connects with the cervix and uterus, and the vagus nerve travels from the cervix and uterus without passing through the spinal cord (making it possible for some women to achieve orgasm even though they have had complete spinal cord injuries)."
In 1982, Ladas, Whipple and Perry also proposed three categories: the tenting type (derived from clitoral stimulation), the A-frame type (derived from G-spot stimulation), and the blended type (derived from clitoral and G-spot stimulation).
Women's orgasms have been estimated to last, on average, approximately 20 seconds, and to consist of a series of muscular contractions in the pelvic area that includes the vagina, the uterus, and the anus.
He "criticized Freud and other theorists for projecting male constructs of sexuality onto women" and "viewed the clitoris as the main center of sexual response" and the vagina as "relatively unimportant" for sexual satisfaction, relaying that "few women inserted fingers or objects into their vaginas when they masturbated".
Desmond Morris proposed that orgasm might facilitate conception by exhausting the female and keeping her horizontal, thus preventing the sperm from leaking out.
This can, however, lead to retrograde ejaculation, i.e., redirecting semen into the urinary bladder rather than through the urethra to the outside.
The duration of orgasm varies considerably among different mammal species.
In their 2009 published study, the "coronal planes during perineal contraction and finger penetration demonstrated a close relationship between the root of the clitoris and the anterior vaginal wall".
"I think that the bulk of the evidence shows that the G-spot is not a particular thing," stated Barry Komisaruk, head of the research findings.
For some women, the clitoris is very sensitive after climax, making additional stimulation initially painful.
One study examined 12 healthy women using a positron emission tomography (PET) scanner while they were being stimulated by their partners.
This can last anywhere from less than a minute to several hours or days, depending on age and other individual factors.
"It's not like saying, 'What is the thyroid gland?'
Komisaruk cited one reason for this possibility to be oxytocin, which is also released during labor and triggers uterus contractions.
Nipple stimulation triggers uterine contractions, which then produce a sensation in the genital area of the brain.
Their work included women and men, and, unlike Alfred Kinsey in 1948 and 1953, tried to determine the physiological stages before and after orgasm.
Men had an orgasm in 95% of encounters and women in 69%.
Other modern authors have chosen to represent the orgasm without metaphors.
In the 1970s, Helen Singer Kaplan added the category of desire to the cycle, which she argued precedes sexual excitation.
