A distinctive gang culture underpins many, but not all, organized groups; this may develop through recruiting strategies, social learning processes in the corrective system experienced by youth, family or peer involvement in crime, and the coercive actions of criminal authority figures.
They were for the most part non-ideological, predominantly ethnically based, used violence and intimidation, and adhered to their own codes of law."
Preoccupation with methods of accumulating profit highlight the lack of legitimate means to achieve economic or social advantage, as does the organization of white-collar crime or political corruption (though it is debatable whether these are based on wealth, power or both).
For example, some jurisdictions allow insider trading.
Terms used in other jurisdictions include hundi, hawala, poe kuan, informal funds transfer, underground banking, parallel banking, informal funds transfer and money/value transfer.
More recently copyright holders have demanded that states provide criminal sanctions for all types of copyright infringement.
* willing to use illegal violence and bribery;
Money laundering is bad for international and domestic trade, banking reputations and for effective governments and rule of law.
These may also be defined by age (typically youth) or peer group influences, and the permanence or consistency of their criminal activity.
Organized crime groups generate large amounts of money by activities such as drug trafficking, arms smuggling and financial crime.
Organized crime in the Unites States first came to prominence in the Old West and historians such as Brian J. Robb and Erin H. Turner traced the first organized crime syndicates to the Coschise Cowboy Gang and the Wild Bunch.
Other organizations—including states, militaries, police forces, and corporations—may sometimes use organized-crime methods to conduct their activities, but their powers derive from their status as formal social institutions.
Furthering the approach of both Cressey and Albini, Ianni and Ianni studied Italian-American crime syndicates in New York and other cities.
According to criminologist Paul Lunde, "Piracy and banditry were to the preindustrial world what organized crime is to modern society."
However some have found these to be loose rather than well-defined and lacking persistent focus, there was relatively low cohesion, few shared goals and little organizational structure.
Individuals or pairs.
Some espouse that all organized crime operates at an international level, though there is currently no international court capable of trying offenses resulting from such activities (the International Criminal Court’s remit extends only to dealing with people accused of offenses against humanity, e.g., genocide).
Links to insurgents
Downes and Rock (1988) on Parker’s analysis: strain theory applies, labeling theory (from experience with police and courts), control theory (involvement in trouble from early childhood and the eventual decision that the costs outweigh the benefits) and conflict theories.
Where the upper- and lower-classes live in close proximity this can result in feelings of anger, hostility, social injustice and frustration.
The terms "forced prostitution" or "enforced prostitution" appear in international and humanitarian conventions but have been insufficiently understood and inconsistently applied.
There is also a clear military, political, or economic motivation.
Heroin: Source countries / production: three major regions known as the Golden Triangle (Burma, Laos, Thailand), Golden Crescent (Afghanistan) and Central and South America.
Revenge killings, armed robberies, violent disputes over controlled territories and offenses against members of the public must also be considered when looking at the dynamic between different criminal organizations and their (at times) conflicting needs.
Murder has evolved from the honor and vengeance killings of the Yakuza or Sicilian mafia which placed large physical and symbolic importance on the act of murder, its purposes and consequences, to a much less discriminate form of expressing power, enforcing criminal authority, achieving retribution or eliminating competition.
Others stress the importance of power, profit and perpetuity, defining organized criminal behavior as:
Role models include drug dealers, thieves and pimps, as they have achieved success and wealth not otherwise available through socially-provided opportunities.
The level of taxation taken by a nation-state, rates of unemployment, mean household incomes and level of satisfaction with government and other economic factors all contribute to the likelihood of criminals to participate in tax evasion.
Unstable supply of range of illicit goods.
'''Internet fraud''' refers to the actual use of Internet services to present fraudulent solicitations to prospective victims, to conduct fraudulent transactions, or to transmit the proceeds of fraud to financial institutions or to others connected with the scheme.
* hierarchical: few elites and many operatives;
The newest growth sectors for organized crime are identity theft and online extortion.
The ability for organized criminals to operate fraudulent financial accounts, utilize illicit offshore bank accounts, access tax havens or tax shelters, and operating goods smuggling syndicates to evade importation taxes help ensure financial sustainability, security from law enforcement, general anonymity and the continuation of their operations.
While bureaucratic operations emphasize business processes and strongly authoritarian hierarchies, these are based on enforcing power relationships rather than an overlying aim of protectionism, sustainability or growth.
Also called ‘heavy soaping’.
Miller (1992) defines a street gang as “a self-formed association of peers, united by mutual interests, with identifiable leadership and internal organization, who act collectively or as individuals to achieve specific purposes, including the conduct of illegal activity and control of a particular territory, facility, or enterprise."
* the higher the position, the closer the kinship relationship;
People smuggling generally takes place with the consent of the person or persons being smuggled, and common reasons for individuals seeking to be smuggled include employment and economic opportunity, personal and/or familial betterment, and escape from persecution or conflict.
Some studied street gangs involved in drug dealing - finding that their structure and behavior had a degree of organizational rationality.
For example, in failed states that can no longer perform basic functions such as education, security, or governance (usually due to fractious violence or to extreme poverty), organised crime, governance and war sometimes complement each other.
If crime is seen as a function of anomie, organized behavior produces stability, increases protection or security, and may be directly proportional to market forces as expressed by entrepreneurship- or risk-based approaches.
Organized crime groups provide a range of illegal services and goods.
There is a tendency to distinguish organized crime from other forms of crime, such as white-collar crime, financial crimes, political crimes, war crime, state crimes, and treason.
According to Clarke, the civilian realm is also at risk, noting that the security breaches have already gone beyond stolen credit card numbers, and that potential targets can also include the electric power grid, trains, or the stock market.
In the past criminal organizations have naturally limited themselves by their need to expand, putting them in competition with each other.
Bell's theory of the 'queer ladder of mobility' hypothesized that 'ethnic succession' (the attainment of power and control by one more marginalized ethnic group over other less marginalized groups) occurs by promoting the perpetration of criminal activities within a disenfranchised or oppressed demographic.
Cyber espionage is the practice of obtaining confidential, sensitive, proprietary or classified information from individuals, competitors, groups, or governments using illegal exploitation methods on internet, networks, software and/or computers.
Today criminal organizations are increasingly working together, realizing that it is better to work in cooperation rather than in competition with each other (once again, consolidating power).
A state of unrestrained political corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning "rule by thieves".
Each participant is interested in furthering his own welfare.
* perpetration of ''serious criminal offense''s;
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that organized crime groups held $322 billion in assets in 2005.
'Alternative remittance' is only one of a number of terms used to describe the practice of transferring value, including money, from one country to another.
This model conforms to social learning theory or differential association in that there are clear associations and interaction between criminals where knowledge may be shared, or values enforced, however it is argued that rational choice is not represented in this.
Power, water, fuel, communications, and transportation infrastructure all may be vulnerable to sabotage.
It is a form of information warfare sometimes seen as analogous to conventional warfare although this analogy is controversial for both its accuracy and its political motivation.
* the leadership group are assigned to legal or illegal enterprises, but not both; and,
Worms and Trojan horses, like viruses, may harm a computer system's data or performance.
* family operates as a social unit, with social and business functions merged;
The networks are characterized by a loose system of power relations.
Gangs and traditional criminal organizations cannot be universally linked (Decker, 1998),  however there are clear benefits to both the adult and youth organization through their association.
* serious crime: offense punishable by at least four years in prison; and,
* operations on an international or transnational level;
Shared norms, value and loyalties were low, structures "chaotic", little role differentiation or clear distribution of labor.
Unsecured information may be intercepted and modified, making espionage possible internationally.
The economic effects of organized crime have been approached from a number of both theoretical and empirical positions, however the nature of such activity allows for misrepresentation.
It involves creating false paper trails, converting cash into assets by cash purchases.
Six of those must be satisfied and the four in italics are mandatory.
* specialized division of labor: to achieve organization goal;
One of the most important trends to emerge in criminological thinking about OC in recent years is the suggestion that it is not, in a formal sense, ‘organized’ at all.
The Cochise Cowboys, though loosely organized, were unique for their criminal operations in the Mexican border, in which they would steal and sell cattle as well smuggled contraband goods in between the countries.
Means of money laundering:
One of the most infamous crime bossos in the Victorian underworld was Adam Worth, who was nicknamed "the Napoleon of the criminal world" or "the Napoleon of Crime", became the inspiration behind the popular character of Professor Moriarty.
At its most basic, a remittance service involves a sender, a beneficiary and two intermediaries.
Most are debt slaves, largely in South Asia, who are under debt bondage incurred by lenders, sometimes even for generations.
This theory sees criminal behavior as reflective of an individual, internal calculation by the criminal that the benefits associated with offending (whether financial or otherwise) outweigh the perceived risks.
The accumulation of social, economic and political power  have sustained themselves as a core concerns of all criminal organizations:
This theory also developed to include the strengths and weaknesses of reinforcement, which in the context of continuing criminal enterprises may be used to help understand propensities for certain crimes or victims, level of integration into the mainstream culture and likelihood of recidivism / success in rehabilitation.
Organized crime groups also victimize individuals by car theft (either for dismantling at "chop shops" or for export), art theft, bank robbery, burglary, jewelery and gems theft and heists, computer hacking, credit card fraud, economic espionage, embezzlement, identity theft, and securities fraud ("pump and dump" scam).
The networks of criminals involved with the crimes did not exhibit organizational cohesion.
For success, there must be:
Funds can be moved quickly, cheaply and securely between locations that often don't have established banking networks or modern forms of electronic funds transfers available.
Developed/high technology regions
Criminals violate the law because they belong to a unique subculture - the counter-culture - their values and norms conflicting with those of the working-, middle- or upper-classes upon which criminal laws are based.
Note that some forms of corporate corruption may not actually be criminal if they are not specifically illegal under a given system of laws.
Rules of conduct and behavioral aspects of power and networks and roles include the following:
Activities of organized crime include loansharking of money at very high interest rates, assassination, blackmailing, bombings, bookmaking and illegal gambling, confidence tricks, copyright infringement, counterfeiting of intellectual property, fencing, kidnapping, prostitution, smuggling, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, oil smuggling,  antiquities smuggling, organ trafficking, contract killing, identity document forgery, money laundering, point shaving, price fixing, illegal dumping of toxic waste, illegal trading of nuclear materials, military equipment smuggling, nuclear weapons smuggling, passport fraud, providing illegal immigration and cheap labor, people smuggling, trading in endangered species, and trafficking in human beings.
Whilst almost universally considered under civil procedure, the impact and intent of organized criminal operations in this area of crime has been the subject of much debate.
If a network operates primarily from one jurisdiction and carries out its illicit operations there and in some other jurisdictions it is ‘international,' though it may be appropriate to use the term ‘transnational’ only to label the activities of a major crime group that is centered in no one jurisdiction but operating in many.
They all had links to a national network via Meyer Lansky, who was powerful, but there was no evidence that Lansky or anyone else exercised centralized control over them.
It uses violence and corruption to achieve its ends: “OC when group primarily focused on illegal profits systematically commit crimes that adversely affect society and are capable of successfully shielding their activities, in particular by being willing to use physical violence or eliminate individuals by way of corruption.”
It is frequently accomplished through ruthless disregard of any law, including offenses against the person and frequently in connection with political corruption.” (UN) “A criminal organization shall mean a lasting, structured association of two or more persons, acting in concert with a view to committing crimes or other offenses which are punishable by deprivation of liberty or a detention order of a maximum of at least four years or a more serious penalty, whether such crimes or offenses are an end in themselves or a means of obtaining material benefits and, if necessary, of improperly influencing the operation of public authorities.” (UE) Not all groups exhibit the same characteristics of structure.
For the most part, within a village, members kept crime at very low rates; however, outsiders such as pirates, highwaymen, and bandits attacked trade routes and roads, at times severely disrupting commerce, raising costs, insurance rates and prices to the consumer.
OC groups were violent and aimed at making money but because of the lack of structure and fragmentation of objectives, they were ‘disorganized’.
Due to the escalating violence of Mexico's drug war, a report issued by the United States Department of Justice characterizes the Mexican drug cartels as the "greatest organized crime threat to the United States".
The term "Parliamentary Mafiocracy" has been used to describe democratic countries whose political, social and economic institutions come under the control of a few families and business oligarchs.
Criminals learn through associations with one another.
As Lunde states, "Barbarian conquerors, whether Vandals, Goths, Norsemen, Turks or Mongols are not normally thought of as organized crime groups, yet they share many features associated with thriving criminal organizations.
Family or hierarchy
* Integration: (also called ‘spin dry): Making it into clean taxable income by real-estate transactions, sham loans, foreign bank complicity and false import and export transactions.
Local corruption/influence.
A '''criminal organization''' or gang can also be referred to as a '''mafia''', '''mob''', or '''crime syndicate'''; the network, subculture and community of criminals may be referred to as the '''underworld'''.
Common definitions of '''terrorism''' refer only to those violent acts which are intended to create fear (terror), are perpetrated for a religious, political or ideological goal, deliberately target or disregard the safety of non-combatants (e.g., neutral military personnel or civilians), and are committed by non-government agencies.
The sender wishes to send a remittance to the beneficiary, often in the country of origin where the sender previously resided.
* exertion of influence on politics, media, public administration, judicial authorities or the economy; and,
Their perversity and violence in respect of relationships is often remarkable, but they are characterized by their focus on the connections between their members, their associates and their victims; and,
This may ultimately lead to a competitive advantage for some groups, however it is inaccurate to adopt this as the only determinant of classification in organized crime.
Evidence includes: lack of centralized control, absence of formal lines of communication, fragmented organizational structure.
It is a mistake in using the term ‘OC’ as though it denotes a clear and well-defined phenomenon.
Structures are formal and rational with allocated tasks, limits on entrance, and influence the rules established for organizational maintenance and sustainability.
In the UK, police estimate that organized crime involves up to 38,000 people operating in 6,000 various groups.
In this context, the role of risk is also easily understandable, however it is debatable whether the underlying motivation should be seen as true entrepreneurship  or entrepreneurship as a product of some social disadvantage.
Activity has focused on the importation of cheap or unfree labor, involvement with union and public officials (political corruption), and counterfeiting.
While corruption may facilitate criminal enterprise such as drug trafficking, money laundering, and human trafficking, it is not restricted to these activities.
In many cases gang members graduate from youth gangs to highly developed OC groups, with some already in contact with such syndicates and through this we see a greater propensity for imitation.
It is considered "the first attack on critical industrial infrastructure that sits at the foundation of modern economies," notes the ''New York Times.''
Organized crime groups may be a combination of all three.
For example, Seattle’s crime network in the 1970s and 80s consisted of groups of businessmen, politicians and of law enforcement officers.
* the scale of organized crime precluding it from being a cash business - groups have little option but to convert its proceeds into legitimate funds and do so by investment, by developing legitimate businesses and purchasing property;
The commission of violent crime may form part of a criminal organization's 'tools' used to achieve criminogenic goals (for example, its threatening, authoritative, coercive, terror-inducing, or rebellious role), due to psychosocial factors (cultural conflict, aggression, rebellion against authority, access to illicit substances, counter-cultural dynamic), or may, in and of itself, be crime rationally chosen by individual criminals and the groups they form.
Organized crime groups seek out corrupt public officials in executive, law enforcement, and judicial roles so that their activities can avoid, or at least receive early warnings about, investigation and prosecution.
Sutherland goes further to say that deviancy is contingent on conflicting groups within society, and that such groups struggle over the means to define what is criminal or deviant within society.
Notable groups include Al-Qaeda, Animal Liberation Front, Army of God, Black Liberation Army, The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the Lord, Earth Liberation Front, Irish Republican Army, Kurdistan Workers' Party, Lashkar e Toiba, May 19th Communist Organization, The Order, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Symbionese Liberation Army, Taliban, United Freedom Front  and Weather Underground..
The term is understood as and often used interchangeably with migrant smuggling, which is defined by the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime as "...the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a state party of which the person is not a national".
* an identified market; and,
Too much emphasis had been placed on the Mafia as controlling OC.
Official numbers of individuals in sexual slavery worldwide vary.
Today, crime is sometimes thought of as an urban phenomenon, but for most of human history it was the rural interfaces that encountered the majority of crime (bearing in mind the fact that for most of human history, rural areas were the vast majority of inhabited places).
Opportunism is also a key factor – the organized criminal or criminal group is likely to frequently reorder the criminal associations they maintain, the types of crimes they perpetrate, and how they function in the public arena (recruitment, reputation, etc.)
Whilst early organized crime was dominated by the Irish Mob (early 1800s), they were relatively substituted by the Sicilian Mafia and Italian-American Mafia, the Aryan Brotherhood (1960s onwards), Colombian Medellin cartel and Cali cartel (mid-1970s - 1990s), and more recently the Mexican Tijuana Cartel (late 1980s onwards), Mexican Los Zetas (late 1990s to onwards), the Russian Mafia (1988 onwards), terrorism-related organized crime Al-Qaeda (1988 onwards), the Taliban (1994 onwards), and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (2010s to onwards) .
Some definitions also include acts of unlawful violence and war, especially crimes against humanity (''See The Nuremberg Trials''), Allied authorities deeming the German Nazi Party, its paramilitary and police organizations, and numerous associations subsidiary to the Nazi Party "criminal organizations".
* a lack of effective financial regulation in parts of the global economy.
Furthermore, organized crime using the Internet is much harder to trace down for the police (even though they increasingly deploy cybercops) since most police forces and law enforcement agencies operate within a local or national jurisdiction while the Internet makes it easier for criminal organizations to operate across such boundaries without detection.
with the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (the ''Palermo Convention'') having a similar definition:
This theory treats all individuals as rational operators, committing criminal acts after consideration of all associated risks (detection and punishment) compared with the rewards of crimes (personal, financial etc.).
This distinction is not always apparent and academics continue to debate the matter.
* group assigns leadership positions to a central group of family members, including fictive godparental relationship reinforcement;
Donald Cressey’s Cosa Nostra model studied Mafia families exclusively and this limits his broader findings.
Entrepreneurial/transactional
In mid July 2010, security experts discovered a malicious software program that had infiltrated factory computers and had spread to plants around the world.
This practice has increased over the past few decades and today now accounts for a significant portion of illegal immigration in countries around the world.
They are adaptable and change to meet the demands of their changing environments and circumstances.
This has been used as the basis for numerous meta-theories of organized crime through its integration of social learning, cultural deviance, and criminogenic motivations.
In such areas, conflict between groups, fighting, "turf wars", and theft promote solidarity and cohesion.
They are invariably legitimate and legal in many countries, although concerns have arisen in the recent decade that they could be used to circumvent anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing controls that now operate across the global financial services sector.
The dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe that saw the downfall of the Communist Bloc created a breeding ground for criminal organizations.
The most common destinations for victims of human trafficking are Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the United States, according to a report by UNODC.
'''People smuggling''' is defined as "the facilitation, transportation, attempted transportation or illegal entry of a person or persons across an international border, in violation of one or more countries laws, either clandestinely or through deception, such as the use of fraudulent documents".
All observed networks and a degree of persistence, and there may be utility in focusing on the identification of organizing roles of people and events rather than the group’s structure.
* the use discipline or control;
* organizations open systems: High levels of interdependence between themselves and the environment in which they operate.
Research has focused on whether the gangs have formal structures, clear hierarchies and leadership in comparison with adult groups, and whether they are rational in pursuit of their goals, though positions on structures, hierarchies and defined roles are conflicting.
These activities are troubling because they discourage consumers from using the Internet for e-commerce.
* Underground banking (flying money), involves clandestine ‘bankers’ around the world.
It is the inadequate supply of legitimate opportunities that constrains the ability for the individual to pursue valued societal goals and reduces the likelihood that using legitimate opportunities will enable them to satisfy such goals (due to their position in society).
These groups also form their own symbolic identity or public representation which are recognizable by the community at large (include colors, symbols, patches, flags and tattoos).
In some cases, government officials have broad or poorly defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal actions.
* Placement: (also called immersion) groups ‘smurf’ small amounts at a time to avoid suspicion; physical disposal of money by moving crime funds into the legitimate financial system; may involve bank complicity, mixing licit and illicit funds, cash purchases and smuggling currency to safe havens.
Particular risks arise from the irregular forms of record-keeping which are often employed and the possibility that the laws of those countries in which they operate may not be fully complied with.
No ethnic group is more disposed to gang involvement than another, rather it is the status of being marginalized, alienated or rejected that makes some groups more vulnerable to gang formation,  and this would also be accounted for in the effect of social exclusion,  especially in terms of recruitment and retention.
Social disorganization theory is intended to be applied to neighborhood level street crime, thus the context of gang activity, loosely formed criminal associations or networks, socioeconomic demographic impacts, legitimate access to public resources, employment or education, and mobility give it relevance to organized crime.
This subculture shares an alternative lifestyle, language and culture, and is generally typified by being tough, taking care of their own affairs and rejecting government authority.
This also explains the propensity of criminal organizations to develop protection rackets, to coerce through the use of violence, aggression and threatening behavior (at times termed 'terrorism').
Some organized crime groups defraud national, state, or local governments by bid rigging public projects, counterfeiting money, smuggling or manufacturing untaxed alcohol (bootlegging) or cigarettes (buttlegging), and providing immigrant workers to avoid taxes.
It is through modeling organized crime as a counter-cultural avenue to success that such organizations are sustained.
Political corruption is the use of legislated powers by government officials for illegitimate private gain.
The benefits of participating in organized crime (higher financial rewards, greater socioeconomic control and influence, protection of the family or significant others, perceived freedoms from 'oppressive' laws or norms) contribute greatly to the psychology behind highly organized group offending.
There are suggestions that due to the continuing decline in opium production in South East Asia, traffickers may begin to look to Afghanistan as a source of heroin."
Victims of identity theft (those whose identity has been assumed by the identity thief) can suffer adverse consequences if held accountable for the perpetrator's actions, as can organizations and individuals who are defrauded by the identity thief, and to that extent are also victims.
Many argue this misinterprets and overstates the role of ethnicity in organized crime.
Neither are illegal acts by private persons or corporations not directly involved with the government.
There is a tendency away from centralization of power and reliance upon family ties towards a fragmentation of structures and informality of relationships in crime groups.
The success of organized crime groups is therefore dependent upon the strength of their communication and the enforcement of their value systems, the recruitment and training processes employed to sustain, build or fill gaps in criminal operations.
The term "computer virus" may be used as an overarching phrase to include all types of true viruses, malware, including computer worms, Trojan horses, most rootkits, spyware, dishonest adware and other malicious and unwanted software (though all are technically unique), and proves to be quite financially lucrative for criminal organizations, offering greater opportunities for fraud and extortion whilst increasing security, secrecy and anonymity.
While some crime involved well-known criminal hierarchies in the city, criminal activity was not subject to central management by these hierarchies nor by other controlling groups, nor were activities limited to a finite number of objectives.
* ''motivated by the pursuit of profit and/or power,''
He used this position to eliminate competition and consolidate power within the city of Boston which led to the imprisonment of several senior organized crime figures including Gennaro Angiulo, underboss of the Patriarca crime family.
Vertical integration
Article 61 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) requires that signatory countries establish criminal procedures and penalties in cases of willful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.
It is distinctively disorganized.
As most organized crime is perpetrated in the liminal state between legitimate and illegitimate markets, these economic factors must adjusted to ensure the optimal amount of taxation without promoting the practice of tax evasion.
Cohen (1955): working class teenagers joined gangs due to frustration of inability to achieve status and goals of the middle class; Cloward and Ohlin (1960): blocked opportunity, but unequal distribution of opportunities lead to creating different types of gangs (that is, some focused on robbery and property theft, some on fighting and conflict and some were retreatists focusing on drug taking); Spergel (1966) was one of the first criminologists to focus on ''evidence-based practice'' rather than intuition into gang life and culture.
It is the fastest growing criminal industry and is predicted to eventually outgrow drug trafficking.
Politically and economical unstable
* the use violence or other intimidation;
It is generally used where value is sent through 'informal' channels, as distinct from conventional banks.
This is of little use to them unless they can disguise it and convert it into funds that are available for investment into legitimate enterprise.
Contemporary organized crime may be very different from traditional Mafia style, particularly in terms of the distribution and centralization of power, authority structures and the concept of 'control' over one's territory and organization.
There is no one way in which they are organized or how they operate.
Email fraud, advance-fee fraud, romance scams, employment scams, and other phishing scams are the most common and most widely used forms of identity theft, though with the advent of social networking fake websites, accounts and other fraudulent or deceitful activity has become commonplace.
Criminal organizations therefore gravitate around illegal avenues of production, profit-making, protectionism or social control and attempt (by increasing their operations or membership) to make these acceptable.
The policy aim in this area is to make the financial markets transparent, and minimize the circulation of criminal money and its cost upon legitimate markets.
Legal substitution of goods or services may (by increasing competition) force the dynamic of organized criminal operations to adjust, as will deterrence measures (reducing demand), and the restriction of resources (controlling the ability to supply or produce to supply).
* It often involves otherwise legitimate banks and professionals.
* organizations as natural systems: Participants may regard the organisation as an end in itself, not merely a means to some other end.
The recently established Cyber Command is currently debating whether such activities as commercial espionage or theft of intellectual property are criminal activities or actual "breaches of national security."
The rapid growth of money laundering is due to:
which has become just as critical to military operations as land, sea, air, and space."
The entrepreneurial model looks at either the individual criminal, or a smaller group of organized criminals, that capitalize off the more fluid 'group-association' of contemporary organized crime.
This is probably the smallest proportion of slaves to the rest of the world's population in history.
