The Logos (and the Holy Spirit also) however, does share in the divinity of God.
Sent to Greece on some ecclesiastical mission, he paid a visit to Caesarea, where he was heartily welcomed and was ordained a priest, that no further cause for criticism might be given Demetrius, who had strongly disapproved his preaching before ordination while at Caesarea.
"Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary-interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion."
In his exegesis, Origen sought to discover the deeper meaning implied in the scriptures.
By far the most important work of Origen on textual criticism was the ''Hexapla'', a comparative study of various translations of the Old Testament.
The work is noteworthy as the first endeavor to present Christianity as a complete theory of the universe, and was designed to remove the difficulties felt by many Christians concerning the essential basis of their faith.
Three commentaries on New Testament books survive in large measure.
Of the 32 books in the ''Commentary on John'', only nine have been preserved.
As a theologian, in ''De principiis'' (''On First Principles''), he articulated one of the first philosophical expositions of Christian doctrine.
The Logos eventually took flesh and was born of the Virgin Mary, becoming the God-man Jesus Christ.
This revelation, the external self-emanation of God, is expressed by Origen in various ways, the Logos being only one of many.
Henry Chadwick points out that, while the story may be true, it seems unlikely, given that Origen's exposition of Matthew 19:12 "strongly deplored any literal interpretation of the words".
Eusebius reports that he was summoned from there to Antioch at the behest of the empress mother Julia Avita Mamaea "to discuss Christian philosophy and doctrine with her."
The incarnation of the Logos, moreover, was necessary since otherwise he would not be intelligible to sensual man; but the indwelling of the Logos remained a mystery, which could be represented only by the analogy of his indwelling in the saints; nor could Origen fully explain it.
Study of ''On First Principles'' has occupied centre stage in studies of Origen since the fourth century.
The activity of the Logos was conceived by Origen in Platonic fashion, as the world soul, wherein God manifested his omnipotence.
The ''Hexapla'' has been referred to by later manuscripts and authors, and represented the precursor to the parallel bible.
Those whose love diminished the least became angels.
Emperor Decius, believing the plague to be a product of magic, caused by the failure of Christians to recognise him as Divine, began Christian persecutions.
The freedom of the will is an essential fact of the reason, notwithstanding the foreknowledge of God.
There also exists a Latin translation of the commentary by an unknown translator which covers Matthew 16.13-27.66.
Eusebius recounted how Origen suffered "bodily tortures and torments under the iron collar and in the dungeon; and how for many days with his feet stretched four spaces in the stocks" Though he did not die while being tortured, he died three years later due to injuries sustained at the age of 69.
The other is ''Dialogue of Origen with Heraclides and the Bishops with him concerning the Father and the Son and the soul''.
The defense of the unity of God against the Gnostics led Origen to maintain the subordination of the Logos to God, and the doctrine of the eternal generation is later.
He was a rigid adherent of scripture, making no statement without adducing some scriptural basis.
i, iv.1, the small commentary on Canticles, and the second book of the large commentary on the same, the twentieth book of the commentary on Ezekiel, and the commentary on Hosea.
It is perhaps written for his more advanced pupils at Alexandria and probably composed between 212 and 215.
To him the scriptures were divinely inspired, as was proved both by the fulfillment of prophecy and by the immediate impression which the scriptures made on those who read them.
God so ordered the universe that all individual acts work together toward one cosmic end which culminates in himself.
His first creative act was the divine spirit, as an independent existence; and partial reflexes of the Logos were the created rational beings, who, as they had to revert to the perfect God as their background, must likewise be perfect; yet their perfection, unlike in kind with that of God, the Logos, and the divine spirit, had to be attained.
At Alexandria, Heraclas became head of Origen's school, and shortly afterward, on the death of Demetrius, was consecrated bishop.
(2), Psalms 36-38 (9), Canticles (2), Isaiah (9), Jeremiah (7 Greek, 2 Latin, 12 Greek and Latin), Ezekiel (14), and Luke (39).
The means of attainment of this end were described by Origen in different ways, the most important of which was his concept of a purifying fire which should cleanse the world of evil and thus lead to cosmic renovation.
But the persecution still raged, and the young teacher visited imprisoned Christians, attended the courts, and comforted the condemned, himself preserved from persecution because the persecution was probably limited only to converts to Christianity.
This time Origen did not escape the Decian persecution.
Origen's chief aim was the practical exposition of the text, verse by verse; and while in such books as Leviticus and Numbers he sought to allegorise the wealth of material in the prophets seldom rendered it necessary for him to seek meanings deeper than the surface afforded.
In Christ, God, hitherto manifest only as the Lord, appeared as the Father.
Likewise as to Origen's anthropology, man conceived in the image of God is able by imitating God in good works to become like God, if he first recognises his own weakness and trusts all to the divine goodness.
Neither the source nor the object of these attacks is known, though the latter may have been connected with Novatianism (a strict refusal to accept Christians who had denied their faith under persecution).
He proposes the question whether it was not originally perfect with God but, emanating from him, at his command assumed a material body.
Here, in conformity with local usage based on Jewish custom, Origen, though not ordained, preached and interpreted the scriptures at the request of the bishops Alexander of Jerusalem and Theoctistus of Caesarea.
But the school had far outgrown the strength of a single man; the catechumens pressed eagerly for elementary instruction, and the baptised sought for interpretation of the Bible.
A later legend, recounted by Jerome and numerous itineraries, places his death and burial at Tyre, but to this little value can be attached.
His teachings on the pre-existence of souls, the final reconciliation of all creatures, including perhaps even the devil (the apokatastasis), and the subordination of God the Son to God the Father, were rejected by Christian orthodoxy.
Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information regarding the texts which became the New Testament.
Origen was born in Alexandria to Christian parents.
The name of his mother is unknown.
Through the worlds which follow each other in eternal succession, the spirits are able to return to Paradise.
Before the known world was created by God, he created a great number of spiritual intelligences.
About 230, Origen entered on the fateful journey which was to compel him to give up his work at Alexandria and embittered the next years of his life.
He acquired it because of his severe ascetical practices.
In Origen Christianity blended with the pagan philosophy in which lived the desire for truth and the longing after God.
There are 205, and possibly 279, homilies of Origen that are extant either in Greek or in Latin translations.
He speaks of a "remarkable body", and in his opinion that the mortal body of Jesus was transformed by God into an ethereal and divine body, Origen approximated the Docetism that he otherwise abhorred.
He forms a bridge between the created and uncreated, and only through him, as the visible representative of divine wisdom, can the inconceivable and incorporeal God be known.
The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the ''Ecclesiastical History'' HE of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen’s list at HE 6:25.
Patristic scholar Mark J Edwards has argued that many of Origen's positions are more properly Aristotelian than strictly Platonic (for instance, his philosophical anthropology).
In ''Against Celsus'', Origen drew freely on the Greek philosophers and poets as well as the Bible to provide a rational basis for holding the Christian faith.
'''Origen''' (; , ''Ōrigénēs''), or '''Origen Adamantius''' (, ''Ōrigénēs Adamántios''; 184/185 – 253/254), was a scholar, ascetic, and early Christian theologian who was born and spent the first half of his career in Alexandria.
In the first book the author considers God, the Logos, the Holy Ghost, reason, and the angels; in the second the world and man (including the incarnation of the Logos, the soul, free will, and eschatology); in the third, the doctrine of sin and redemption; and in the fourth, the scriptures; the whole being concluded with a résumé of the entire system.
The ultimate aim of God in the creation of matter out of nothing was not punishment, but the upraising of the fallen spirits.
After his return from Athens, he succeeded in converting Beryllus, bishop of Bostra, from his adoptionistic (i.e., belief that Jesus was born human and only became divine after his baptism) views to the orthodox faith; yet in these very years (about 240) probably occurred the attacks on Origen's own orthodoxy which compelled him to defend himself in writing to Pope Fabian and many bishops.
According to Epiphanius, Origen wrote about 6,000 works (''i.e.
Between 232-235, while in Caesarea in Palestine, Origen wrote ''On Prayer''.
'', rolls or chapters).
In 2012, 29 unpublished homilies by Origen were discovered in the Bavarian State Library.
6:14, 7:31, 34, 9:20-21, 10:9, besides a few other fragments.
Combining the Stoic doctrine of a universe without beginning with the biblical doctrine of the beginning and the end of the world, he conceived of the visible world as the stages of an eternal cosmic process, affording also an explanation of the diversity of human fortunes, rewards, and punishments.
One is ''On the Pascha''.
He is likewise unchangeable, and transcends space and time.
The strong ethical import of this cosmic process can not remain unnoticed.
Unlike many church fathers, he was never canonised as a saint because some of his teachings directly contradicted the teachings attributed to the apostles, notably the Apostles Paul and John.
From about this period (212–213) dates Origen's acquaintance with Ambrose of Alexandria, whom he was instrumental in converting from Valentinianism to orthodoxy.
The exegetical writings of Origen fall into three classes:
At the request of Ambrose, he now began a huge commentary on the ''Bible'', beginning with John, and continuing with Genesis, Psalms 1–25, and Lamentations, besides brief exegeses of selected texts (forming the ten books of his ''Stromateis''), two books on the resurrection, and the work ''On First Principles''.
The return to original being through divine reason is the object of the entire cosmic process.
He was one of the greatest biblical scholars of the early Church, having written commentaries on most of the books of the Bible, though few are extant.
Thus, when the doctrine was promulgated in Arabia that the soul died and decayed with the body, being restored to life only at the resurrection (see soul sleep), appeal was made to Origen, who journeyed to Arabia, and successfully battled this doctrine.
The ''Dialogus de recta in Deum fide'', the ''Philosophumena'' attributed to Hippolytus of Rome, and the ''Commentary on Job'' by Julian the Arian have also been ascribed to him.
Yet he constrained himself from breaking entirely with the distinct celestial hopes and representations of Paradise prevalent in the Church.
Homilies on almost the entire Bible were prepared by Origen.
The Logos, eternally creative, forms an endless series of finite, comprehensible worlds, which are mutually alternative.
The term "of the same substance with the Father" was not employed.
After an introduction on the object, necessity, and advantage of prayer, ends with an exegesis of the Lord's Prayer, concluding with remarks on the position, place, and attitude to be assumed during prayer, as well as on the classes of prayer.
Of the non-extant commentaries, there is limited evidence of their arrangement.
The culmination of this gradual revelation is the universal revelation of Christ.
The first, partly preserved in the Latin translation of Rufinus, is addressed to friends in Alexandria.
One, however, who remained perfectly devoted to God became, through love, one with the Word (Logos) of God.
Forgeries of the writings of Origen made in his lifetime are discussed by Rufinus in ''De adulteratione librorum Origenis''.
By a further spiritualisation, Origen could call God himself this consuming fire.
The Emperor Justinian denied apocatastasis, making it the ninth of the ten doctrines in his edict against Origen in 545, and later that year, the doctrine was the fourteenth of the fifteen at the council in Constantinople that condemned Origen.
Eusebius reported that Origen, following  literally, castrated himself.
During the past century, scholars have often questioned this, surmising that this may have been a rumor circulated by his detractors.
He was anathematised at the Second Council of Constantinople.
This text can be found online.
While the Logos is substantially a unity, he comprehends a multiplicity of concepts, so that Origen terms him, in Platonic fashion, "essence of essences" and "idea of ideas".
Three centuries later his very name was stricken from the books of the Church; yet in the monasteries of the Greeks his influence still lived on, as the spiritual father of Greek monasticism.
The reason, illumined by the divine Logos, which is able to search the secret depths of the divine nature, remains as the only source of knowledge.
Holding that the Church, as being in possession of the mysteries, affords the only means of salvation, he was indifferent to her external organisation, although he spoke sometimes of the office-bearers as the pillars of the Church, and of their heavy duties and responsibilities.
In it, Origen warns against any trifling with idolatry and emphasises the duty of suffering martyrdom manfully; while in the second part he explains the meaning of martyrdom.
When, however, the confusion in Alexandria subsided, Demetrius recalled Origen, probably in 216.
Creation came into existence only through the Logos, and God's nearest approach to the world is the command to create.
Origen had many admirers and followers, one in particular, Dionysius of Alexandria, who caused controversy throughout Libya in 259 due to his theology in regards to the unity of the trinity.
Finally, he has also been regarded as a spiritual master for such works as ''An Exhortation to Martyrdom'' and ''On Prayer''.
The third is an epistle to Sextus Julius Africanus, extant in Greek, replying to a letter from Africanus (also extant), and defending the authenticity of the Greek additions to the book of Daniel.
The doctrine of the resurrection of the body he upholds by the explanation that the Logos maintains the unity of man's existence by ever changing his body into new forms, thus preserving the unity and identity of personality in harmony with the tenet of an endless cosmic process.
He was one of the most influential figures in early Christian asceticism.
His nickname or cognomen ''Adamantios'' () derives from Greek ''adámas'' (), which means "adamant", "unalterable", "unbreakable", "unconquerable", "diamond".
As a result of this condemnation, the writings of Origen supporting his teachings in these areas were destroyed.
Nautin has argued that they were all preached in a three-year liturgical cycle some time between 238 and 244, preceding the ''Commentary on the Song of Songs'', where Origen refers to homilies on Judges, Exodus, Numbers, and a work on Leviticus.
Fragments of some other commentaries survive.
The ideal Church alone was the Church of Christ, scattered over all the earth; the other provided also a shelter for sinners.
*scholia, or brief summaries of the meaning of difficult passages
It is extant only in the free translation of Rufinus of 397, except for fragments (books 3.1 and 4.1-3) preserved in ''Origen's Philocalia'', and smaller citations in Justinian's letter to Mennas.
One of his chief methods was the translation of proper names, which enabled him, like Philo, to find a deep meaning even in every event of history (see hermeneutics), but at the same time he insisted on an exact grammatical interpretation of the text as the basis of all exegesis.
Little is known of the last twenty years of Origen's life.
Unfortunately, only meagre fragments of the commentaries have survived.
Edward Gibbon, in his ''History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'', also accepts this story as true.
Many modern scholars, however, doubt that Clement's school had been an official ecclesiastical institution as Origen's was and thus deny continuity between the two.
It is doubtful whether Origen possessed an obligatory creed; at any rate, such a confession of faith was not a norm like the inspired word of scripture.
At Caesarea, Origen was joyfully received and was the guest of Firmilian, bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.
His position on the literal resurrection of physical bodies is difficult, but in both the ''Contra Celsum'' and ''On First Principles'', Origen affirms some form of bodily resurrection, but eschews the notion that earthly bodies will be raised, on account of their gross materiality.
The soul is divided into the rational and the irrational, the latter being material and transitory, while the former, incorporeal and immaterial, possesses freedom of the will and the power to reascend to purer life.
Man's accidental being is rooted in transitory matter, but his higher nature is formed in the image of the Creator.
In 202, Origen's father was martyred in the outbreak of the persecution during the reign of Septimius Severus.
He evidently, however, developed an extraordinary literary productivity, broken by occasional journeys; one of which, to Athens during some unknown year, was of sufficient length to allow him time for research.
A story reported by Eusebius has it that Origen wished to follow him in martyrdom, but was prevented only by his mother hiding his clothes.
In fact, Popes Vigilius (537–555), Pelagius I (556–61), Pelagius II (579–90), and Gregory the Great (590–604) were only aware that the Fifth Council specifically dealt with the Three Chapters and make no mention of Origenism or Universalism, nor spoke as if they knew of its condemnation - even though Gregory the Great opposed the belief of universalism.
He is aided by guardian angels, but more especially by the Logos who operates through saints and prophets in proportion to the constitution of these and man's capacity.
Origen accordingly fled from Alexandria in 231–2, and made his permanent home in Caesarea in Palestine, where his friend Theoctistus was bishop.
The material world, which at first had no place in this eternal spiritual progression, was due to the fall of the spirits from God, the first being the serpent, who was imprisoned in matter and body.
Some portions were discovered in Milan indicating that at least some individual parts existed much longer than was previously thought.
He taught dialectics, physics, ethics, and metaphysics.
For instance, he was the greatest textual critic of the early Church, directing the production of the massive ''Hexapla'' ("Sixfold"), an Old Testament in six columns: Hebrew, Hebrew in Greek characters, the Septuagint, and the Greek versions of Theodotion, Aquila of Sinope, and Symmachus.
His concept of the soul of Jesus is likewise uncertain and wavering.
An ordained priest in Palestine, he has left posterity numerous homilies on various books of the Bible.
At first devoted to the contemplation and love of their creator, almost all of these intelligences eventually grew bored of contemplating God, and their love for him cooled off.
Citations in Origen's Philocalia include fragments of the third book of the commentary on Genesis.
This was an immense and complex word-for-word comparison of the Greek Septuagint with the original Hebrew Scriptures and with those other Greek translations.
The ''Stromateis'' were of a similar character, and the margin of ''Codex Athous Laura'', 184, contains citations from this work on Rom.
Approximately three years after his arrival in Caesarea in Palestine, Origen's life as a scholar was again interrupted by the persecution of Maximinus Thrax (235-8).
He therefore regards as the purely ideal centre of this spiritual and eternal world, God, the pure reason, whose creative powers call into being the world with matter as the necessary substratum.
Origen's Greek name ''Ōrigénēs'' () probably means "child of Horus" (from , "Horus", and , "born").
The homilies preserved are on Genesis (16), Exodus (13), Leviticus (16), Numbers (28), Joshua (26), Judges (9), I Sam.
He interpreted scripture both literally and allegorically.
22), in order to afford creative mediation between God and the world, such mediation being necessary, because God, as changeless unity, could not be the source of a multitudinous creation.
In the following year, a popular uprising at Alexandria caused Caracalla to let his soldiers plunder the city, shut the schools, and expel all foreigners.
Thus what seems unfair, some being born poor and others wealthy, some sick and others healthy, and so forth, is, Origen insists, actually a by-product of the free-will of souls.
A series of attacks on him seems to have emanated from Alexandria, whether for his self-castration (a capital crime in Roman law) or for alleged heterodoxy is unknown; but at all events these fulminations were heeded only at Rome, while Palestine, Phoenicia, Arabia, and Achaia paid no attention to them.
''Against Celsus'' (Greek: Κατὰ Κέλσου; Latin: ''Contra Celsum''), preserved entire in Greek, was Origen's last treatise, written about 248.
The latter measure caused Ambrose to take refuge in Caesarea, where he seems to have made his permanent home; and Origen left Egypt, apparently going with Ambrose to Caesarea, where he spent some time.
He was educated by his father, Leonides of Alexandria, who gave him a standard Hellenistic education, but also had him study the Christian scriptures.
It is not improbable that Origen gave no attention to supervising the publication of his homilies, for only by such a hypothesis can the numerous evidences of carelessness in diction be explained.
Many heteroclite views became associated with Origen, and the 15 anathemas attributed to the council condemn a form of apocatastasis along with the pre-existence of the soul, animism (a heterodox Christology), and a denial of real and lasting resurrection of the body.
Origen, however, was taken under the protection of a woman of wealth and standing; but as her household already included a heretic named Paul, the strictly orthodox Origen seems to have remained with her only a short time.
The homilies were preached in the church at Caesarea, with the exception of the two on 1 Samuel which were delivered in Jerusalem.
But Demetrius, taking this well-meant act as an infringement of his rights, was furious, for not only was Origen under his jurisdiction as bishop of Alexandria, but, if Eastern sources may be believed, Demetrius had been the first to introduce episcopal ordination in Egypt.
A list was given by Eusebius in his lost ''Life of Pamphilus'', which was apparently known to Jerome.
He is an image, a reflex of God, in which God communicates his divinity, as light radiating from the sun.
Eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.
This story was accepted during the Middle Ages and was cited by Peter Abelard in his letters to Heloise.
Some authorities believe these anathemas belong to an earlier local synod.
The attribution to Origen has been confirmed by experts like Prof. Lorenzo Perrone of the Bologna University.
*"books", or commentaries in the strict sense of the term.
He preached regularly on Wednesdays and Fridays, and later daily.
They were either destroyed outright, or translated with the appropriate adjustments to eliminate conflict with orthodox Christian doctrine.
After his conversion of Beryllus, however, his aid was frequently invoked against heresies.
He founded a school where Gregory Thaumaturgus, later bishop of Pontus, was one of the pupils.
He was a prolific writer in multiple branches of theology, including textual criticism, biblical exegesis and hermeneutics, philosophical theology, preaching, and spirituality written in Greek.
The ''Tetrapla'' was an abbreviation of the ''Hexapla'' in which Origen placed only the translations (Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, and the Septuagint) in parallels.
On June 11, 2012, the Bavarian National Library announced the discovery by philologist Marina Molin Pradel of unknown original texts of homilies by Origenes in a twelfth-century Greek manuscript.
In fact, Origen would have possibly included in his list of "inspired writings" other texts which were kept out by the likes of Eusebius, including the Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 Clement.
One commentary on a book of the Old Testament, the ''Commentary on the Song of Songs'', has also been preserved in part, in a Latin translation of Rufinus.
His own interests became more and more centered in exegesis, and he accordingly studied Hebrew, though there is no certain knowledge concerning his instructor in that language.
''On Martyrdom'', or the ''Exhortation to Martyrdom'', also preserved entire in Greek, was written some time after the beginning of the persecution of Maximinus in the first half of 235.
The second is a short letter to Gregory Thaumaturgus, preserved in the ''Philocalia''.
While Patriarch Mennas of Constantinople condemned Origen and a form of apocatastasis at the Synod of Constantinople (543); experts are divided whether the Second Council of Constantinople (the Fifth Ecumenical Council) in 553 ratified the condemnation authentically as "It is only certain that the council opened on 5 May, 553, in spite of the protestations of Pope Vigilius, who though at Constantinople refused to attend it, and that in the eight conciliary sessions (from 5 May to 2 June), the Acts of which we possess, only the question of the Three Chapters is treated."
Except for a few fragments, only three letters have been preserved.
The papyri discovered at Tura in 1941 contained the Greek text of two previously unknown works of Origen.
His idealising tendency to consider the spiritual alone as real, fundamental to his entire system, led him to combat the "rude" or "crude" Chiliasm (see Christian eschatology) of a sensual beyond.
A strict adherent of the Church, Origen yet distinguished sharply between the ideal and the empirical Church, representing "a double church of men and angels", or, in Platonic phraseology, the lower church and its celestial ideal.
Jerome states that there were scholia on Leviticus, Psalms i.-xv., Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, and part of John.
The metropolitan accordingly convened a synod of bishops and presbyters which banished Origen from Alexandria, while a second synod declared his ordination invalid.
During this time at Caesarea in Palestine (232–5), he resumed work on the ''Commentary on John'', composing at least books 6-10, wrote the treatise ''On Prayer'', and, some time in the first half of the year 235, composed his ''Exhortation to Martyrdom''.
As he conceived matter as merely the universal limit of created spirits, so would it be impossible to state in what form the two were combined.
The latter was rendered the more easy for him by Ambrose, who provided him with more than seven stenographers to take dictation in relays, as many scribes to prepare long-hand copies, and a number of girls to multiply the copies.
On this, Origen's accord with the teachings of the Church was merely superficial.
His thought on the Old Testament was an important link in the development of the medieval system of typology.
During the reign of emperor Caracalla, about 211–212, Origen paid a brief visit to Rome, but the relative laxity during the pontificate of Zephyrinus seems to have disillusioned him, and on his return to Alexandria he resumed his teaching with zeal increased by the contrast.
In Origen the Christian Church had its first theologian.
To the multitude to whom his instruction was beyond grasp, he left mediating images and symbols, as well as the final goal of attainment.
The diverse conditions in which human beings are born is actually dependent upon what their souls did in this pre-existent state.
The eight books preserved of the ''Commentary on Matthew'' (Books 10-17) cover Matthew 13.36-22.33.
Neither work can be dated precisely, though both were probably written after the persecution of Maximinus in 235.
Origen regarded the death of Jesus as a sacrifice, paralleling it with other cases of self-sacrifice for the general good.
Since the divine Logos spoke in the scriptures, they were an organic whole and on every occasion he combatted the Gnostic tenet of the inferiority of the Old Testament.
The exegesis of the homilies was simpler than that of the scientific commentaries, but nevertheless demanded no mean degree of intelligence from the auditor.
Since sin was ultimately only negative as a lack of pure knowledge, the activity of Jesus was essentially example and instruction, and his human life was only incidental as contrasted with the immanent cosmic activity of the Logos.
He was likewise keenly conscious of the textual difficulties in the manuscripts of the New Testament, although he never wrote definitely on this subject.
The full text of the ''Hexapla'' is no longer extant.
