Welles conceived the project with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, who was writing radio plays for ''The Campbell Playhouse''.
Also in 1975, the American Film Institute presented Welles with its third Lifetime Achievement Award (the first two going to director John Ford and actor James Cagney).
Although the Welles family was no longer devout, it was fourth-generation Protestant Episcopalian and, before that, Quaker and Puritan.
In 1971, Welles directed a short adaptation of ''Moby-Dick'', a one-man performance on a bare stage, reminiscent of his 1955 stage production ''Moby Dick—Rehearsed''.
In 1970, Welles narrated (but did not write) a satirical political record on the administration of President Richard Nixon titled ''The Begatting of the President''.
In 1946, Welles began two new radio series—''The Mercury Summer Theatre on the Air'' for CBS, and ''Orson Welles Commentaries'' for ABC.
Welles also contributed to the script, his writing credit was attributed to the pseudonym 'O.
''The Magnificent Ambersons'' was in production October 28, 1941 – January 22, 1942.
Del Río returned to México in 1943, shortly before Welles married Rita Hayworth.
"Then always back to
Welles made his stage debut at the Gate Theatre on October 13, 1931, appearing in Ashley Dukes's adaptation of ''Jew Suss'' as Duke Karl Alexander of Württemberg.
"Both Welles and Leaming talked of Welles's life and the segment was a nostalgic interlude," wrote biographer Frank Brady.
On November 14, 1934, Welles married Chicago socialite and actress Virginia Nicolson (often misspelled "Nicholson") in a civil ceremony in New York.
The show entertained more than 1,000 service members each night, and proceeds went to the War Assistance League, a charity for military service personnel.
Towers hired Welles again, to play Professor Moriarty in the radio series, ''The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes'', starring John Gielgud and Ralph Richardson.
In July 1937, the Mutual Network gave Welles a seven-week series to adapt ''Les Misérables''.
"By making himself the center of the storytelling process, Welles fostered the impression of self-adulation that was to haunt his career to his dying day," wrote critic Andrew Sarris.
Welles served as host and interviewer, his commentary including documentary facts and his own personal observations (a technique he would continue to explore in later works).
A public memorial tribute took place November 2, 1985, at the Directors Guild of America Theater in Los Angeles.
While filming ''The Trial'' Welles met Oja Kodar, who later became his mistress and collaborator for the last 20 years of his life.
Also in 1979, Welles appeared in the biopic ''The Secret of Nikola Tesla'', and a cameo in ''The Muppet Movie'' as Lew Lord.
Similar to the ''Around the World with Orson Welles'' series, they presented travelogues of Spain and included Welles's wife, Paola, and their daughter, Beatrice.
While expressing displeasure at the cuts, Welles was appalled particularly with the musical score.
He wrote of the Holocaust footage in his syndicated ''New York Post'' column May 7, 1945.
Another project he worked on was ''Filming The Trial'', the second in a proposed series of documentaries examining his feature films.
The restoration went on to a successful theatrical run in America.
Host Peter Bogdanovich introduced speakers including Charles Champlin, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Greg Garrison, Charlton Heston, Roger Hill, Henry Jaglom, Arthur Knight, Oja Kodar, Barbara Leaming, Janet Leigh, Norman Lloyd, Dan O'Herlihy, Patrick Terrail and Robert Wise.
In the mid-1980s, Henry Jaglom taped lunch conversations with Welles at Los Angeles's Ma Maison as well as in New York.
''The Mercury Theatre on the Air'' made its last broadcast on December 4, 1938, and ''The Campbell Playhouse'' began five days later.
Welles directed a number of high-profile stage productions for the Federal Theatre Project in his early twenties, including an innovative adaptation of ''Macbeth'' with an entirely African American cast, and the political musical ''The Cradle Will Rock''.
He wanted no memorial services …" Cotten declined to attend the memorial program; instead he sent a short message, ending with the last two lines of a Shakespeare sonnet that Welles had sent him on his most recent birthday:
As a result, Orson felt guilty because he believed his father had drunk himself to death because of him.
Armstrong was cast to play himself in the brief dramatization of the history of jazz performance, from its roots to its place in American culture in the 1940s.
The meticulous Cortez worked slowly and the film lagged behind schedule and over budget.
The Mercury Theatre opened November 11, 1937, with ''Caesar'', Welles's modern-dress adaptation of Shakespeare's tragedy ''Julius Caesar'' — streamlined into an anti-fascist tour de force that Joseph Cotten later described as "so vigorous, so contemporary that it set Broadway on its ear."
In a telegram December 20, 1941, Whitney wrote Welles, "Personally believe you would make great contribution to hemisphere solidarity with this project."
While he was directing the ''Voodoo Macbeth'' Welles was dashing between Harlem and midtown Manhattan three times a day to meet his radio commitments.
The article falsely states that he was descended from "Gideon Welles, who was a member of President Lincoln's cabinet".
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,All losses are restored and sorrows end.
Welles's next turn as director was the film ''Mr.
The actors' union stated that the production belonged to the Federal Theater Project and could not be performed outside that context without permission.
Hill provided Welles with an ''ad hoc'' educational environment that proved invaluable to his creative experience, allowing Welles to concentrate on subjects that interested him.
''Variety'' reported that block voting by screen extras deprived ''Citizen Kane'' of Oscars for Best Picture and Best Actor (Welles), and similar prejudices were likely to have been responsible for the film receiving no technical awards.
With filming of "My Friend Bonito" about two-thirds complete, Welles decided he could shift the geography of ''It's All True'' and incorporate Flaherty's story into an omnibus film about Latin America—supporting the Roosevelt administration's Good Neighbor policy, which Welles strongly advocated.
The film was ''The Fountain of Youth'', based on a story by John Collier.
In Hong Kong he co-starred with Curt Jürgens in Lewis Gilbert's film ''Ferry to Hong Kong''.
In 2002, Welles was voted the greatest film director of all time in two British Film Institute polls among directors and critics, and a wide survey of critical consensus, best-of lists, and historical retrospectives calls him the most acclaimed director of all time.
Well known for his baritone voice, Welles was a well-regarded actor in radio and film, a celebrated Shakespearean stage actor, and an accomplished magician noted for presenting troop variety shows in the war years.
Welles invested his earnings into his failing stage play.
On the recommendation of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau asked Welles to lead the Fifth War Loan Drive, which opened June 12 with a one-hour radio show on all four networks, broadcast from Texarkana, Texas.
At the time it did not seem that Welles's other film projects would be disrupted, but as film historian Catherine L. Benamou wrote, "the ambassadorial appointment would be the first in a series of turning points leading—in 'zigs' and 'zags,' rather than in a straight line—to Welles's loss of complete directorial control over both ''The Magnificent Ambersons'' and ''It's All True'', the cancellation of his contract at RKO Radio Studio, the expulsion of his company Mercury Productions from the RKO lot, and, ultimately, the total suspension of ''It's All True''.
One of its concessions was that he would defer to the studio in any creative dispute.
Its purpose was employment, so he was able to hire any number of artists, craftsmen and technicians, and he filled the stage with performers.
"I felt guilty about the war," Welles told biographer Barbara Leaming.
The weekly hour-long show presented radio plays based on classic literary works, with original music composed and conducted by Bernard Herrmann.
In 1961, Welles directed ''In the Land of Don Quixote'', a series of eight half-hour episodes for the Italian television network RAI.
While offers to act, narrate and host continued, Welles also found himself in great demand on television talk shows.
Simultaneously with his work in the theatre, Welles worked extensively in radio as an actor, writer, director and producer, often without credit.
A half-hour variety show broadcast January 26 – July 19, 1944, on the Columbia Pacific Network, ''The Orson Welles Almanac'' presented sketch comedy, magic, mindreading, music and readings from classic works.
Welles presented another special broadcast on the death of Roosevelt the following evening: "We must move on beyond mere death to that free world which was the hope and labor of his life."
Welles's reliance on self-production meant that many of his later projects were filmed piecemeal or were not completed.
All of them were eventually released by the Filmmuseum München.
Eventually five different versions of the film would be released, two in Spanish and three in English.
''The Stranger'' was Welles's first job as a film director in four years.
The year 1974 also saw Welles lending his voice for that year's remake of Agatha Christie's classic thriller ''Ten Little Indians'' produced by his former associate, Harry Alan Towers and starring an international cast that included Oliver Reed, Elke Sommer and Herbert Lom.
At the ceremony, Welles screened two scenes from the nearly finished ''The Other Side of the Wind''.
One of these ideas was the joke in what came to be called the Fala speech, Roosevelt's nationally broadcast September 23 address to the International Teamsters Union which opened the 1944 presidential campaign.
Welles's shows were regarded as significant contributions to the war effort.
Welles wrote a 58-page memo outlining suggestions and objections, stating that the film was no longer his version—it was the studio's, but as such, he was still prepared to help with it.
The name was inspired by the title of the iconoclastic magazine, ''The American Mercury''.
They were followed by ''Heartbreak House'' (April 29, 1938) and ''Danton's Death'' (November 5, 1938).
Despite an urban legend promoted by Welles himself, he was not related to Abraham Lincoln's wartime Secretary of the Navy, Gideon Welles.
In that year, legal complications over the ownership of the film forced the negative into a Paris vault.
In his 2011 autobiography Lindsay-Hogg reported that his questions were resolved by his mother's close friend Gloria Vanderbilt, who wrote that Fitzgerald had told her that Welles was his father.
While much was shot for these projects, none of them was completed.
Direction was credited to Norman Foster.
Based loosely on several episodes of the Harry Lime radio show, it stars Welles as a billionaire who hires a man to delve into the secrets of his past.
At Todd School Welles came under the influence of Roger Hill, a teacher who was later Todd's headmaster.
"Orson never joked or teased about the religious beliefs of others," wrote biographer Barton Whaley.
In late November 1941, Welles was appointed as a goodwill ambassador to Latin America by Nelson Rockefeller, U.S.
"Many such programs were being translated into Spanish and Portuguese and broadcast to Latin America, to counteract many years of successful Axis propaganda to that area.
After 20 shows, Campbell began to exercise more creative control and had complete control over story selection.
The film stars Robert Arden, who had worked on the Harry Lime series; Welles's third wife, Paola Mori, whose voice was dubbed by actress Billie Whitelaw; and guest stars Akim Tamiroff, Michael Redgrave, Katina Paxinou and Mischa Auer.
"And they made a great publicity point of the fact that I had gone to South America without a script and thrown all this money away.
In Italy in 1959, Welles directed his own scenes as King Saul in Richard Pottier's film ''David and Goliath''.
Filming stopped with the death of Francisco Reiguera, the actor playing Quixote, in 1969.
Welles began commuting from Hollywood to New York for the two Sunday broadcasts of ''The Campbell Playhouse'' after signing a film contract with RKO Pictures in August 1939.
Herbert Wilcox cast Welles as the antagonist in ''Trouble in the Glen'' opposite Margaret Lockwood, Forrest Tucker and Victor McLaglen.
Welles produced additional war loan drive broadcasts on June 14 from the Hollywood Bowl, and June 16 from Soldier Field, Chicago.
Welles married Rita Hayworth on September 7, 1943.
Because of severe federal cutbacks in the Works Progress projects, the show's premiere at the Maxine Elliott Theatre was canceled.
In 1972, Welles acted as on-screen narrator for the film documentary version of Alvin Toffler's 1970 book ''Future Shock''.
At the time of his death, the film remained largely a collection of footage in various states of editing.
As presented by Charles Higham in a genealogical chart that introduces his 1985 biography of Welles, Orson Welles's father was Richard Head Welles (born Wells), son of Richard Jones Wells, son of Henry Hill Wells (who had an uncle named Gideon ''Wells''), son of William Hill Wells, son of Richard Wells (1734–1801).
In postwar France, however, the film's reputation grew after it was seen for the first time in 1946.
Welles worked for more than half a year with no compensation.
At the old firehouse in Woodstock he also shot his first film, an eight-minute short titled ''The Hearts of Age''.
"So I was fired from RKO," Welles later recalled.
Welles held the film in high regard: "It's my favorite picture, yes.
It was originally scheduled to open June 16, 1937, in its first public preview.
By 1935 Welles was supplementing his earnings in the theater as a radio actor in Manhattan, working with many actors who would later form the core of his Mercury Theatre on programs including ''America's Hour'', ''Cavalcade of America'', ''Columbia Workshop'' and ''The March of Time''.
In 1975, Welles narrated the documentary ''Bugs Bunny: Superstar'', focusing on Warner Bros. cartoons from the 1940s.
In 1984, Welles narrated the short-lived television series ''Scene of the Crime''.
Originally only hired as an actor, Welles was promoted to director by Universal Studios at the insistence of Charlton Heston.
Released in 1968, it stars Jeanne Moreau, Roger Coggio and Norman Eshley.
I used what I wanted of Mank's and, rightly or wrongly, kept what I liked of my own."
While there have been several reports of all the legal disputes concerning ownership of the film being settled, enough disputes still exist to prevent its release.
In 1937, Welles rehearsed Marc Blitzstein's political operetta, ''The Cradle Will Rock''.
Frank D. Gilroy was signed to write the television script and direct the TV movie on the assurance that Welles would star, but by April 1977 Welles had bowed out.
The agreement was bitterly resented by the Hollywood studios and persistently mocked in the trade press.
He campaigned heavily for Roosevelt in the 1944 election.
After bearing with Welles's romances in New York, Virginia had learned that Welles had fallen in love with Mexican actress Dolores del Río.
That September, Mutual chose Welles to play Lamont Cranston, also known as ''The Shadow''.
Welles' name and political activities are reported on pages 155–157 of Red Channels, the anti-Communist publication that, in part, fueled the already flourishing Hollywood Blacklist.
Though Welles was fluent in Italian, the network was not interested in him providing Italian narration because of his accent, and the series sat unreleased until 1964, by which time the network had added Italian narration of its own.
Ultimately, versions of the episodes were released with the original musical score Welles had approved, but without the narration.
Welles had once wanted to make a series of Nero Wolfe movies, but Rex Stout—who was leery of Hollywood adaptations during his lifetime after two disappointing 1930s films—turned him down.
The myth dates back to the first newspaper feature ever written about Welles—"Cartoonist, Actor, Poet and only 10"—in the February 19, 1926, issue of ''The Capital Times''.
Working again for a British producer, Welles played Long John Silver in director John Hough's ''Treasure Island'' (1972), an adaptation of the Robert Louis Stevenson novel, which had been the second story broadcast by ''The Mercury Theatre on the Air'' in 1938.
Financed by Iranian backers, ownership of the film fell into a legal quagmire after the Shah of Iran was deposed.
Throughout the 1960s, filming continued on ''Quixote'' on-and-off until the decade, as Welles evolved the concept, tone and ending several times.
Journal'', ''Mail Call'', ''Nazi Eyes on Canada'', ''Stage Door Canteen'' and ''Treasury Star Parade''.
Welles's next feature film role was in ''Man in the Shadow'' for Universal Pictures in 1957, starring Jeff Chandler.
Welles spoke at 10:10 p.m Eastern War Time, from Hollywood, and stressed the importance of continuing FDR's work: "He has no need for homage and we who loved him have no time for tears … Our fighting sons and brothers cannot pause tonight to mark the death of him whose name will be given to the age we live in."
The film had a successful run in French theaters.
Despite his family's affluence, Welles encountered hardship in childhood.
''Admiral of the Ocean Sea'', also known as ''Columbus Day'', begins with the words, "Hello Americans"—the title Welles would choose for his own series five weeks later.
Unable to find network interest, the pilot was never broadcast.
In early 1943, the two concurrent radio series (''Ceiling Unlimited'', ''Hello Americans'') that Orson Welles created for CBS to support the war effort had ended.
An excerpt of Welles's 1930s ''War of the Worlds'' broadcast was recreated for this film; however, none of the dialogue heard in the film actually matches what was originally broadcast.
It was filmed in France, Germany, Spain and Italy on a very limited budget.
Welles returned and cut 20 minutes from the film at Republic's request and recorded narration to cover some gaps.
In 1956, Welles completed ''Portrait of Gina''.
After his mother's death Welles ceased pursuing music.
Originally deemed not viable as a pilot, the film was not aired until 1958—and won the Peabody Award for excellence.
Many of the shows originated on U.S. military camps, where Welles and his repertory company and guests entertained the troops with a reduced version of ''The Mercury Wonder Show''.
Welles was executive producer, and the original company included such actors as Joseph Cotten, George Coulouris, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Arlene Francis, Martin Gabel, John Hoyt, Norman Lloyd, Vincent Price, Stefan Schnabel and Hiram Sherman.
In 1955, Welles married actress Paola Mori (née Countess Paola di Girifalco), an Italian aristocrat who starred as Raina Arkadin in his 1955 film, ''Mr.
Harry Alan Towers offered Welles another series, ''The Black Museum'', which ran for 52 weeks with Welles as host and narrator.
He was told that if the film was successful he could sign a four-picture deal with International Pictures, making films of his own choosing.
Welles briefly returned to America to make his first appearance on television, starring in the ''Omnibus'' presentation of ''King Lear'', broadcast live on CBS October 18, 1953.
Welles thought the location possessed a "Jules Verne modernism" and a melancholy sense of "waiting", both suitable for Kafka.
Although he had a complete version of the film shot and edited at least once, he would continue toying with the editing well into the 1980s, he never completed a version film he was fully satisfied with, and would junk existing footage and shoot new footage.
The film garnered nine Academy Award nominations but won only for Best Original Screenplay, shared by Mankiewicz and Welles.
''The Stranger'' was the first commercial film to use documentary footage from the Nazi concentration camps.
The combination of the news bulletin form of the performance with the between-breaks dial spinning habits of listeners was later reported to have created widespread confusion among listeners who failed to hear the introduction, although the extent of this confusion has come into question.
After signing a summary agreement with RKO on July 22, Welles signed a full-length 63-page contract August 21, 1939.
At intermission September 7, 1943, KMPC radio interviewed audience and cast members of ''The Mercury Wonder Show''—including Welles and Rita Hayworth, who were married earlier that day.
I never recovered from that attack."
''Romeo and Juliet'', ''The Barretts of Wimpole Street'' and ''Candida'' toured in repertory for 36 weeks beginning in November 1933, with the first of more than 200 performances taking place in Buffalo, New York.
The film cans would remain in a lost-and-found locker at the hotel for several decades, where they were discovered after Welles's death.
Frustrated by his slow progress in the editing room, producer Dolivet removed Welles from the project and finished the film without him.
Made for West German television, it was also released in theaters.
Such was the success of the Mercury Theatre that Welles appeared on the cover of ''Time'' magazine, in full makeup as Captain Shotover in ''Heartbreak House'', in the issue dated May 9, 1938—three days after his 23rd birthday.
In 1987 the cremated remains of Welles and Mori (killed in a 1986 car crash) were taken to Ronda, Spain, and buried in an old well covered by flowers on the rural estate of a longtime friend, bullfighter Antonio Ordóñez.
Mankiewicz based the original outline on the life of William Randolph Hearst, whom he knew socially and came to hate after being exiled from Hearst's circle.
producers ambiguously concluded that story arc by having one character accuse another of having hired an actor to portray Robin Masters.
Unable to obtain a work permit, he returned to the U.S.
His father's will left it to Orson to name his guardian.
Welles left for Europe, while co-producer and lifelong supporter Richard Wilson reworked the soundtrack.
Welles traveled to North Africa while working on thousands of illustrations for the ''Everybody's Shakespeare'' series of educational books, a series that remained in print for decades.
"Among the outstanding programs which attracted wide attention was a special tribute delivered by Orson Welles", reported ''Broadcasting'' magazine.
The funeral of Welles's father Richard H. Welles was Episcopalian.
''Citizen Kane'' is now hailed as one of the greatest films ever made.
Lindsay-Hogg knew Welles, worked with him in the theatre and met him at intervals throughout Welles's life.
After it ran its course theatrically, ''Citizen Kane'' was retired to the vault in 1942.
Welles campaigned ardently for Roosevelt in 1944.
Some footage is included in the documentaries ''Working with Orson Welles'' (1993) and ''Orson Welles: One Man Band'' (1995).
Outside the scope of the Federal Theatre Project, American composer Aaron Copland chose Welles to direct ''The Second Hurricane'' (1937), an operetta with a libretto by Edwin Denby.
While waiting for ''Citizen Kane'' to be released, Welles directed the original Broadway production of ''Native Son'', a drama written by Paul Green and Richard Wright based on Wright's novel.
After heavy editing by the studio, approximately one hour of Welles's first cut was removed, including much of a climactic confrontation scene in an amusement park funhouse.
Filming also had wrapped on the 1943 film adaptation of ''Jane Eyre'' and that fee, in addition to the income from his regular guest-star roles in radio, made it possible for Welles to fulfill a lifelong dream.
He was also an early and outspoken critic of American racism and the practice of segregation.
Later in 1942 when RKO Pictures began promoting its new corporate motto, "Showmanship In Place of Genius: A New Deal at RKO", Welles understood it as a reference to himself.
No stranger to shooting on found locations, Welles soon filmed the interiors in the Gare d'Orsay, at that time an abandoned railway station in Paris.
Mercury Productions purchased the stories for two other segments—"My Friend Bonito" and "The Captain's Chair"—from documentary filmmaker Robert J. Flaherty.
The restoration included reconstructing Angelo Francesco Lavagnino's original musical score, which was originally inaudible, and adding ambient stereo sound effects, which were not in the original film.
Welles was thoroughly briefed in Washington, D.C., immediately before his departure for Brazil, and film scholar Catherine L. Benamou, a specialist in Latin American affairs, finds it "not unlikely" that he was among the goodwill ambassadors who were asked to gather intelligence for the U.S. government in addition to their cultural duties.
In March 1932 Welles performed in W. Somerset Maugham's ''The Circle'' at Dublin's Abbey Theatre and travelled to London to find additional work in the theatre.
In addition to his radio addresses he filled in for Roosevelt, opposite Republican presidential nominee Thomas E. Dewey, at ''The New York Herald Tribune Forum'' broadcast October 18 on the Blue Network.
Some voodoo trappings of the famous Welles/Houseman Negro Theatre stage adaptation are visible, especially in the film's characterization of the Weird Sisters, who create an effigy of Macbeth as a charm to enchant him.
"For the most part, however, Welles was singularly generous to the other members of his cast and inspired loyalty from them above and beyond the call of professionalism."
On October 12, 1942, ''Cavalcade of America'' presented Welles's radio play, ''Admiral of the Ocean Sea'', an entertaining and factual look at the legend of Christopher Columbus.
Drawn by the numerous offers he received to work in television and films, and upset by a tabloid scandal reporting his affair with Kodar, Welles abandoned the editing of ''Don Quixote'' and moved back to America in 1970.
"''It's All True'' was not going to make any cinematic history, nor was it intended to," he later said.
In 1969, Welles authorized the use of his name for a cinema in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
If I try to think of a home, it's that."
The couple had embarked on a passionate affair, and they were married at her parents' insistence.
Orson Welles and Chicago-born actress and socialite Virginia Nicolson (1916–1996) were married on November 14, 1934.
On September 15, 1926, he entered the Todd Seminary for Boys, an expensive independent school in Woodstock, Illinois, that his older brother, Richard Ives Welles, had attended ten years before but was expelled for misbehavior.
Welles found his fame ephemeral and turned to a writing project at Todd School that would become the immensely successful, first entitled ''Everybody's Shakespeare'' and subsequently, ''The Mercury Shakespeare''.
Welles left for Brazil on February 4 and began filming in Rio February 8, 1942.
On March 22, 1935,  Welles made his debut on the CBS Radio series ''The March of Time'', performing a scene from ''Panic'' for a news report on the stage production
In 1968 Welles began filming a TV special for CBS under the title ''Orson's Bag'', combining travelogue, comedy skits and a condensation of Shakespeare's play ''The Merchant of Venice'' with Welles as Shylock.
Shortly before this, Welles had announced to his father that he would stop seeing him, believing it would prompt his father to refrain from drinking.
''Journey into Fear'' was in production January 6–March 12, 1942.
As of 2009, legal complications over the Welles estate had kept the film from being finished or released.
"In some ways, he was never really a young boy, you know," said Roger Hill, who became Welles's teacher and lifelong friend.
He studied for a few weeks at the Art Institute of Chicago with Boris Anisfeld, who encouraged him to pursue painting.
Near the end of his life Welles was dining at Ma Maison, his favorite restaurant in Los Angeles, when proprietor Patrick Terrail conveyed an invitation from the head of the Greek Orthodox Church, who asked Welles to be his guest of honor at divine liturgy at Saint Sophia Cathedral.
