* 10 former fire-fighters,
On February 27, 2012 three Kansai cities, Kyoto, Osaka and Kobe, jointly asked Kansai Electric Power Company to break its dependence on nuclear power.
To some degree, Osaka residents are still stigmatized by Tokyo observers in the same way today, especially in terms of gluttony, evidenced in the phrase, .
* the establishment of new nuclear safety standards
Osaka was long considered Japan's primary economic center, with a large percentage of the population belonging to the merchant class (see Four divisions of society).
MasterCard Worldwide reported that Osaka ranks 19th among the world's leading cities and plays an important role in the global economy.
As of February 2009, the city is fully covered by terrestrial digital TV broadcasts
The commonly spoken dialect of this area is ''Osaka-ben'', a typical sub-dialect of ''Kansai-ben''.
Jippenisha Ikku in 1802 depicted Osakans as stingy almost beyond belief.
* Morinomiya University of Medical Sciences
The mayor is supported by two Vice Mayors, currently Akira Morishita and Takashi Kashiwagi, who are appointed by him in accordance with the city bylaw.
The large numbers of increasingly larger tomb mounds found in the plains of Osaka are seen as evidence of political-power concentration, leading to the formation of a state.
The city occupies a larger area (about 13%) than any other city or village within Osaka Prefecture.
Naniwa was declared the capital again in 744 by order of Emperor Shōmu, and remained so until 745, when the Imperial Court moved back to Heijō-kyō (now Nara).
By the end of the Nara period, Naniwa's seaport roles had been gradually taken over by neighboring areas, but it remained a lively center of river, channel, and land transportation between Heian-kyō (Kyoto today) and other destinations.
By 1780 Osaka had cultivated a vibrant arts culture, as typified by its famous Kabuki and Bunraku theaters.
Spring in Osaka starts off mild, but ends up being hot and humid.
* 13 ex-officials of the: Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism
Osaka Science Museum is in a five storied building next to the National Museum of Art, with a planetarium and an OMNIMAX theatre.
Osaka's sprawling cityscape has been described as "only surpassed by Tokyo as a showcase of the Japanese urban phenomenon."
According to global consulting firm Mercer, Osaka was the second most expensive city for expatriate employees in the world in 2009.
The annual Osaka Asian Film Festival takes place in Osaka every March.
In 1927, General Motors operated a factory called Osaka Assembly until 1941, manufacturing Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, and Buick vehicles, operated and staffed by Japanese workers and managers.
The merger with JASDAQ will help the Osaka Securities Exchange become the largest exchange in Japan for start-up companies.
Colleges and universities include:
* Osaka University of Education
Situated at the mouth of the Yodo River on Osaka Bay, Osaka is the second largest city in Japan by daytime population after Tokyo's 23 wards and the third largest city by nighttime population after Tokyo's 23 wards and Yokohama, serving as a major economic hub for the country.
The Osaka GP is the only IAAF games annually held in Japan.
This minimized the cost of welfare programs.
In July 2012 the first Japan Bandy Festival was organised.
Another yearly event held at Nagai Stadium is the Osaka Gran Prix Athletics games operated by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) in May.
Shōtengai are seen across Japan, and Osaka has the longest one in the country.
There are two J.League clubs, Gamba Osaka, plays its home games at Suita City Football Stadium.
In 645, Emperor Kōtoku built his Naniwa Nagara-Toyosaki Palace in what is now Osaka, making it the capital of Japan.
Many major companies have since moved their main offices to Tokyo.
The Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake of 1995 caused a decline in demand for international schools, as there were about 2,500 U.S. nationals resident in Osaka after the earthquake while the pre-earthquake number was about 5,000.
Osaka hosts four professional sport teams: one of them is the Orix Buffaloes, a Nippon Professional Baseball team, playing its home games at Kyocera Dome Osaka.
* Osaka District Court
In 2004, commerce, services, and manufacturing have been the three major industries, accounting for 30%, 26%, and 11% of the total, respectively.
However, it was not ranked in the top ten places of the list in 2013.
* Osaka Family Court
In 1809 the derogatory term "Kamigata zeeroku" was used by Edo residents to characterize inhabitants of the Osaka region in terms of calculation, shrewdness, lack of civic spirit, and the vulgarity of Osaka dialect.
* Kinki Regional Transportation Bureau
The name is now written  in kanji, but it was written  until 1870, when the partisans for the Meiji Restoration changed it, apparently to avoid the second kanji being misinterpreted as , meaning "samurai rebellion".
The per capita income in the city was about ¥3.3 million, 10% higher than that of the Osaka Prefecture.
Osaka was opened to foreign trade by the government of the Bakufu at the same time as Hyōgo (modern Kobe) on 1 January 1868, just before the advent of the Boshin War and the Meiji Restoration.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi constructed Osaka Castle in its place in 1583.
Historically, Osaka was the center of commerce in Japan, especially in the middle and pre-modern ages.
Toru Hashimoto, former governor of Osaka Prefecture is the 19th mayor of Osaka since 2011.
Author Michael Booth and food critic François Simon of ''Le Figaro'' have suggested that Osaka is the food capital of the world.
* Osaka City University
* that Kansai Electric would be split into two companies, separating power generation from power transmission
The Mayor of the city is directly elected by the citizens every four years as well, in accordance with the Local Autonomy Law.
(; ) is a designated city in the Kansai region of Japan.
* Osaka Public Prosecutors Office
* Kinki Regional Finance Bureau
The three cities were stockholders of the plant: Osaka owned 9% of the shares, while Kobe had 3% and Kyoto 0.45%.
* Japan Coast Guard, Fifth Regional Headquarters
Public elementary and junior high schools in Osaka are operated by the city of Osaka.
Osaka is home to many publishing companies including: Examina, Izumi Shoin, Kaihou Shuppansha, Keihanshin Elmagazine, Seibundo Shuppan, Sougensha, and Toho Shuppan.
Later, the city went through three major expansions to reach its current size of .
The population peaked at 3,252,340 in 1940, and had a post-war peak of 3,156,222 in 1965, but continued to decrease since, as the residents moved out to the suburbs.
It jumped up nine places from 11th place in 2008 and was the eighth most expensive city in 2007.
However major film productions are uncommon in the city.
Osaka has a large number of wholesalers and retail shops: 25,228 and 34,707 respectively in 2004, according to the city statistics.
If implemented, Osaka City, neighbouring Sakai City and possibly other surrounding municipalities would dissolve and be reorganized as special wards of Osaka prefecture – similar to former Tokyo City's successor wards within Tokyo prefecture.
Historically foreign expatriates in the Kansai region preferred to live in Kobe rather than Osaka.
* Osaka University of Comprehensive Children education
Osaka is the home of the 2011 created Japan Bandy Federation and the introduction of bandy, in the form of rink bandy, was made in the city.
Other newspaper related companies located in Osaka include, the regional headquarters of FujiSankei Business i.;Houchi Shimbunsha; Nikkan Sports; Sports Nippon, and offices of Kyodo News Jiji Press; Reuters; Bloomberg L.P..
Although the capital was moved to Asuka (in Nara Prefecture today) in 655, Naniwa remained a vital connection, by land and sea, between Yamato (modern day Nara Prefecture), Korea, and China.
Below is a list of Governmental Offices housed in Osaka.
After winning promotion in 2008-09, they will again remain in the competition for the 2009-10 season.
Over the course of the Edo period (1603–1867), Osaka grew into one of Japan's major cities and returned to its ancient role as a lively and important port.
Such people included the following:
There were 1,280,325 households with approximately 2.1 persons per household.
* Osaka Summary Court
Nomura Securities, the first brokerage firm in Japan, was founded in the city in 1925, and Osaka still houses a leading futures exchange.
In 2001 the city of Osaka and YMCA established the Osaka YMCA International School.
* Kinki Regional Development Bureau
At a meeting held on April 10, 2012 by the "energy strategy council", formed by the city of Osaka and the governments of the prefectures, it became clear that at the end of the fiscal year 2011 some 69 employees of Kansai Electric Power Company were former public servants.
* 430 donations to various organizations and foundations: a total of 553 million yen
Osaka is known for its fine sake, which is made with fresh water from the prefecture's mountains.
According to the census in 2005, there were 2,628,811 residents in Osaka, an increase of 30,037 or 1.2% from 2000.
The GDP in the greater Osaka area (Osaka and Kobe) is $341 billion.
As a result, until 1991 the Osaka area has no schools catering to expatriate children.
* Kinki Communications Bureau
* Osaka Institute of Technology
The phrase "808 bridges of Naniwa" was an expression in old Japan used to indicate impressiveness and the "uncountable".
Osaka Museum of Natural History houses a collection related to natural history and life.
Edo writers by contrast saw "zeeroku" as obsequious apprentices, stingy, greedy, gluttonous, and lewd.
NHK has also its regional station based in the city.
* the disposing of spent fuel.
Osakans' love for the culinary is made apparent in the old saying "Kyotoites are financially ruined by overspending on clothing, Osakans are ruined by spending on food."
In Japan it was here that municipal government first introduced a comprehensive system of poverty relief, copied in part from British models.
Osaka International School of Kwansei Gakuin, founded in 1991, is located in nearby Minoh, and it was the first international school in the Osaka area.
The city now known as Osaka was at this time referred to as Naniwa, and this name and derivations of it are still in use for districts in central Osaka such as Naniwa () and Namba ().
AM Radio services are provided by NHK as well as the ABC Radio (Asahi Broadcasting Corporation), MBS Radio (Mainichi Broadcasting System, Inc.) and Radio Osaka (Osaka Broadcasting Corporation) and headquartered in the city.
The Great Kantō earthquake caused a mass migration to Osaka between 1920 and 1930, and the city became Japan's largest city in 1930 with 2,453,573 people, outnumbering even Tokyo, which had a population of 2,070,913.
* Osaka Regional Aerospace Bureau
Another major annual sporting event that takes place is Osaka is Osaka International Ladies Marathon.
In recent years, Osaka has started to garner more attention from foreigners with the increased popularity of cooking and dining in popular culture.
Kintetsu Liners, a rugby union team, play in the Top League.
* Tokiwakai Gakuen University
Summers are very hot and humid.
Its popular culture was closely related to ''ukiyo-e'' depictions of life in Edo.
The population density was 11,836 persons per km².
Literacy was high and the educational system expanded rapidly, producing a middle class with a taste for literature and a willingness to support the arts.
Historically a merchant city, Osaka has also been known as the  and served as a center for the rice trade during the Edo period.
Another club Cerezo Osaka, plays its home games at Nagai Stadium.
* Kinki Regional Economy, Trade and Industry Bureau
Ikuno, with its Tsuruhashi district, is the home to one of the largest population of Korean residents in Japan, with 27,466 registered zainichi Koreans.
FM services are available from NHK, FM OSAKA, FM802 and FM Cocolo, the last providing programs in multiple languages including English.
* a nuclear safety agreement
Evessa has won the first three championships of the league since its establishment.
* Osaka University of Arts, Minamikawachi District, Osaka
It is believed that what is today the Uehonmachi area consisted of a peninsular land with an inland sea in the east.
It also tends to be Osaka's wettest season, with the —the rainy season—occurring between late May to early July.
Likewise, public high schools are operated by the Osaka Prefectural Board of Education.
* Osaka Jogakuin College
Osaka residents were stereotyped in Edo literature from at least the 18th century.
The city's west side is open to Osaka Bay, and is otherwise completely surrounded by more than ten satellite cities, all of them in Osaka Prefecture, with one exception: the city of Amagasaki, belonging to Hyōgo Prefecture, in the northwest.
* Namba – main shopping, sightseeing, and restaurant area
Osaka city once had a large number of universities and high schools, but because of growing campuses and the need for larger area, many chose to move to the suburbs, including Osaka University.
All five nationwide newspaper majors also house their regional headquarters, and most local newspapers nationwide have branches in Osaka.
Other shopping areas include Den Den Town, the electronic and manga/anime district, which is comparable to Akihabara; the Umeda district, which has the Hankyu Sanbangai shopping mall and Yodobashi Camera, a huge electrical appliance store that offers a vast range of fashion stores, restaurants, and a Shonen Jump store.
The older kanji is still in very limited use, usually in historical contexts, but in Japanese the kanji —pronounced '''' when standing alone—now refers exclusively to Osaka City or Osaka Prefecture.
The figure accounts for about 55% of the total output in the Osaka Prefecture and 26.5% in the Kinki region.
In July 2012, a joint multi-party bill was submitted to the Diet that would allow for implementation of the Osaka Metropolis plan as pursued by the mayor of Osaka city, the governor of Osaka and their party.
* Umeda – theaters, boutiques, and department stores near the train station
* 2 ex-officials of the Ministry of the Environment,
Due to its geographical position, Osaka's international ferry connections are far greater than that of Tokyo, with international service to Shanghai, Tianjin, Korea along with domestic routes to Kitakyushu, Kagoshima, Miyazaki and Okinawa.
Osaka, along with Paris and London, has one of the most productive hinterlands in the world.
It became known as the "Manchester of the Orient."
The U.S. bombed the city again twice in June 1945 and again on August 14, a day before Japan's surrender.
* Dōtonbori – part of Namba district and considered heart of the city
* selling all unnecessary assets including the stock holdings of KEPCO.
* the implementation of absolutely secure measurements to ensuring the safety of the nuclear facilities.
Special wards are municipal-level administrative units that leave some otherwise municipal administrative responsibilities and revenues to the prefectural administration.
* 70 donations were paid to local governments: to a total of 699 million yen
* 100 donations to public-service organizations: 443 million yen,
In a letter to KEPCO they also requested to disclose information on the demand and supply of electricity, and for lower and stable prices.
* a reduction of the number of the utility's executives and employees.
American Chamber of Commerce in Japan (ACCJ) Kansai chapter president Norman Solberg stated that since 2002 the numbers of expatriates in Kansai were recovering "but the fact is there is still a persistent exodus to Tokyo."
The Ad Council Japan is based in Osaka.
The city rarely sees snowfall during the winter.
Besides this, it became known that Kansai Electric had done about 600 external financial donations, to a total sum of about 1.695 billion yen:
* Kinki Regional Police Bureau
The rapid industrialization attracted many Korean immigrants, who set up a life apart for themselves.
The Osaka City Council is the city's local government formed under the Local Autonomy Law.
The Osaka Securities Exchange, specializing in derivatives such as Nikkei 225 futures, is based in Osaka.
Approximately one-quarter of the city was razed before shogunal officials put down the rebellion, after which Ōshio killed himself.
Osaka's culinary prevalence is the result of a location that has provided access to high quality ingredients, a high population of merchants, and proximity to the ocean and waterway trade.
Types of shops vary from malls to conventional shōtengai shopping arcades, built both above- and underground.
The Council has eighty-nine seats, allocated to the twenty-four wards proportional to their population and re-elected by the citizens every four years.
Fall in Osaka sees a cooling trend, with the early part of the season resembling summer while the latter part of fall resembles winter.
* Osaka Labour Bureau
The five TV networks are represented by Asahi Broadcasting Corporation (ANN), Kansai Telecasting Corporation (FNN), Mainichi Broadcasting System, Inc. (JNN), Television Osaka, Inc. (TXN) and Yomiuri Telecasting Corporation (NNN), headquartered in Osaka.
Another baseball team, the Hanshin Tigers, although based in Nishinomiya, Hyōgo, plays a part of its home games in Kyocera Dome Osaka as well, when their homeground Koshien Stadium is occupied with the annual National High School Baseball Championship games during summer season.
every nationwide TV network (with the exception of TXN network) registers its secondary-key station in Osaka.
On March 13, 1945, a total of 329 Boeing B-29 Superfortress heavy bombers took part in the raid against Osaka.
Osaka Municipal Museum of Art is inside Tennōji park, housing over 8,000 pieces of Japanese and Chinese paintings and sculptures.
The Osaka Museum of History, opened in 2001, is located in a 13-story modern building providing a view of Osaka Castle.
The Tenjinbashi-suji arcade stretches from the road approaching the Tenmangū shrine and continues for  going north to south.
* stress tests and evaluations based on these new safety rules
The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) ranked Osaka as the second most expensive city in the world in its 2013 Cost of Living study.
The Council elects its President and Vice President.
"Amakudari" was the Japanese name for this practice of rewarding by hiring officials that formerly controlled and supervised the firm.
Its supervisory organization on educational matters is Osaka City Board of Education.
In 1496, Jōdo Shinshū Buddhists established their headquarters in the heavily fortified Ishiyama Hongan-ji, located directly on the site of the old Naniwa Imperial Palace.
Osaka is known for its food, in Japan and abroad.
Their base is the Hanazono Rugby Stadium.
On March 18, 2012 the city of Osaka decided as largest shareholder of Kansai Electric Power Co, that at the next shareholders-meeting in June 2012 it would demand a series of changes:
In the months of July and August, the average daily high temperature approaches , while average nighttime temperatures typically hover around .
The political system was  pluralistic, with a strong emphasis on promoting industrialization and modernization.
* 16 former policemen,
Its exhibits cover the history of Osaka from pre-history to the present day.
* Osaka Regional Taxation Bureau
* Osaka Meteorological Observatory
Osaka policymakers stressed the importance of family formation and mutual assistance as the best way to combat poverty.
According to an American prisoner of war who was held in the city, the air raid took almost the entire night and destroyed  of the city.
* 3 ex-officials of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry,
Osaka contains numerous urban canals and bridges, many of which serve as the namesake for their surrounding neighbourhoods.
One of the most famous festivals held in Osaka, the Tenjin Matsuri, is held on July 24 and 25 (Ikukunitama Shrine).
By the Kofun period, Osaka developed into a hub port connecting the region to the western part of Japan.
Toru Hashimoto, the  mayor of Osaka, announced a proposal to minimize the dependence on nuclear power for the shareholders meeting in June 2012.
All the five nationwide newspaper majors of Japan, the ''Asahi Shimbun'', ''Mainichi Shimbun'', ''Nihon Keizai Shimbun'', ''Sankei Shimbun'' and ''Yomiuri Shimbun'', have their regional headquarters in Osaka and issue their regional editions.
* the consent of the local people and government within 100 kilometer from the plant
The gross city product of Osaka in fiscal year 2004 was ¥21.3 trillion, an increase of 1.2% over the previous year.
The Museum of Oriental Ceramics holds more than 2,000 pieces of ceramics, from China, Korea, Japan and Vietnam, featuring displays of some of their Korean celadon under natural light.
In this action Osaka had secured the support of two other cities and shareholders: Kyoto and Kobe, but with their combined voting-rights of 12.5 percent they were not certain of the ultimate outcome, because for this two-thirds of the shareholders would be needed to agree to revise the corporate charter.
However, several major companies, such as Panasonic, Sharp, and Sanyo, are still headquartered in Osaka.
* Osaka Seikei University
Toshifumi Tagaya (LDP) is the current and 104th President since May 2008.
The city is home to Osaka Evessa, a basketball team that plays in the bj league.
* Osaka Regional Law Bureau
Osaka's highest point is  Tokyo Peil in Tsurumi-ku, and the lowest point is in Nishiyodogawa-ku at  Tokyo Peil.
Some of the earliest signs of human habitation in the Osaka area at the  comprise shell mounds, sea oysters and buried human skeletons from the 5th–6th centuries BC.
Regional cuisine includes , , , as well as the traditional , particularly .
* the installation of new kind of thermal power generation to secure non-nuclear supply of energy.
