The attacks resulted in the deaths of 2,996 people, including 2,192 civilians, 343 firefighters, and 71 law enforcement officers who were in the World Trade Center and in the surrounding area; 70 civilians and 55 military personnel who were in the Pentagon; and 245 civilians, a law enforcement officer, and 19 hijackers on board the four airliners.
Notes of a meeting of bin Laden and others on August 20, 1988 indicate that al-Qaeda was a formal group by that time: "Basically an organized Islamic faction, its goal is to lift the word of God, to make his religion victorious."
The letter has been deemed authentic by military and counterterrorism officials, according to ''The Washington Post''.
The decapitalization of ''bin'' is based on the convention of leaving short prepositions, articles, and patronymics uncapitalized in surnames; the nasab ''bin'' means "son of".
On May 2, 2011, bin Laden was shot and killed inside a private residential compound in Abbottabad, where he lived with a local family from Waziristan, during a covert operation conducted by members of the United States Naval Special Warfare Development Group and Central Intelligence Agency SAD/SOG operators on the orders of U.S. President Barack Obama.
In August 1996, bin Laden declared war against the United States.
On August 20, 1998, 66 cruise missiles launched by United States Navy ships in the Arabian Sea struck bin Laden's training camps near Khost in Afghanistan, narrowly missing him by a few hours.
Their advice was heeded.
President Obama rejected the Bush administration's policy on bin Laden that "conflated all terror threats from al-Qaeda to Hamas to Hezbollah," replacing it with "a covert, laserlike focus on al-Qaeda and its spawn."
After the raid, reports at the time stated that U.S. forces had taken bin Laden's body to Afghanistan for identification, then buried it at sea within 24 hours of his death.
Bin Laden was raised as a devout Sunni Muslim.
It was previously believed that bin Laden was hiding near the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas, but he was found  away in a three-story mansion in Abbottabad at .
In the 18-minute tape, played on Al-Jazeera, four days before the American presidential election, bin Laden accused U.S. President George W. Bush of negligence in the hijacking of the planes on September 11.
Bin Laden's personal security detail consisted of "bodyguards...personally selected by him."
The FBI described bin Laden as an adult as tall and thin, between  and  in height and weighing about , although the author Lawrence Wright, in his Pulitzer Prize-winning book on Al-Qaeda, ''The Looming Tower'', writes that a number of bin Laden's close friends confirmed that reports of his height were greatly exaggerated, and that bin Laden was actually "just over  tall".
On March 16, 1998, Libya issued the first official Interpol arrest warrant against bin Laden and three other people.
The Bosnian daily ''Oslobođenje'' published in 2001 that three men, believed to be linked to bin Laden, were arrested in Sarajevo in July 2001.
The U.S. 82nd Airborne Division landed in north-eastern Saudi city of Dhahran and was deployed in the desert barely 400 miles from Medina.
The Arabic linguistic convention would be to refer to him as "Osama" or "Osama bin Laden", not "bin Laden" alone, as "bin Laden" is a patronymic, not a surname in the Western manner.
The UK Government reached a similar conclusion regarding al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden's culpability for the September 11 attacks, although the government report noted that the evidence presented is not necessarily sufficient to prosecute the case.
On May 2, 2011, the White House announced that U.S. Navy SEALs had successfully carried out the operation, killing him in his Abbottabad compound in Pakistan.
The paper said that two of the suspects were holding Bosnian passports.
On June 9, The Australian News's online edition repeated the claim.
In 1999, U.S. President Bill Clinton convinced the United Nations to impose sanctions against Afghanistan in an attempt to force the Taliban to extradite him.
A list of requirements for membership itemized the following: listening ability, good manners, obedience, and making a pledge (''bayat'') to follow one's superiors.
The evidence against bin Laden included courtroom testimony by former al-Qaeda members and satellite phone records, from a phone purchased for him by al-Qaeda procurement agent Ziyad Khaleel in the United States.
During his trial at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević presented FBI documents that verified bin Laden's al-Qaeda had a presence in the Balkans and aided the Kosovo Liberation Army.
On June 15, 2011, federal prosecutors of the United States of America officially dropped all criminal charges against Osama bin Laden following his death in May.
At the most important places where it is held to prove the guilt of bin Laden, it is not identical with the Arabic."
Bin Laden had an olive complexion and was left-handed, usually walking with a cane.
The attacks involved the hijacking of four commercial passenger aircraft – United Airlines Flight 93, United Airlines Flight 175, American Airlines Flight 11, and American Airlines Flight 77 – and flying two into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, and the third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, destroying the former, and severely damaging the latter, while the fourth, either intended to target the United States Capitol or the White House in Washington, D.C., crashed in a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, with no survivors.
In 1974, at the age of 17, bin Laden married Najwa Ghanem at Latakia, Syria; they were separated before September 11, 2001.
He wore a plain white turban and he had stopped wearing the traditional Saudi male headdress.
At university, bin Laden's main interest was religion, where he was involved in both "interpreting the Quran and jihad" and charitable work.
The plan was foiled by the arrest of the Jordanian terrorist cell, the sinking of the explosive-filled skiff intended to target the destroyer, and the arrest of Ahmed Ressam.
Less common renderings include "Ussamah bin Ladin" and, in the French-language media, "Oussama ben Laden".
The spellings with ''o'' and ''e'' come from a Persian-influenced pronunciation also used in Afghanistan, where bin Laden spent many years.
Among them was Karim Said Atmani, who was identified by authorities as the document forger for a group of Algerians accused of plotting the bombings in the United States.
In secret meetings with Saudi officials, Sudan offered to expel Bin Laden to Saudi Arabia and asked the Saudis to pardon him.
The Saudis, however, did not want Bin Laden, giving as their reason their revocation of his citizenship.
In late 1995, when Bin Laden was still in Sudan, the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) learned that Sudanese officials were discussing with the Saudi government the possibility of expelling Bin Laden.
Bin Laden wrote that the tatarrus doctrine "needs to be revisited based on the modern-day context and clear boundaries established."
Bin Laden effectively took over Ariana Afghan Airlines, which ferried Islamic militants, arms, cash and opium through the United Arab Emirates and Pakistan, as well as provided false identifications to members of bin Laden's terrorist network.
On March 29, 2012 Pakistani newspaper ''Dawn'' acquired a report produced by Pakistani security officials, based on interrogation of his three surviving wives, that detailed his movements while living underground in Pakistan.
Pakistan's United States envoy, ambassador Husain Haqqani, promised a "full inquiry" into how Pakistani intelligence services was said to have failed to find bin Laden in a fortified compound, just a few hours drive from Islamabad, and stated that "obviously bin Laden did have a support system; the issue is, was that support system within the government and the state of Pakistan or within the society of Pakistan?".
According to Middle East intelligence reports, bin Laden financed small convoys of recruits from the Arab world through his businesses in Sudan.
Other interests included writing poetry; reading, with the works of Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and Charles de Gaulle said to be among his favorites; black stallions; and association football, in which he enjoyed playing at centre forward and followed the English club Arsenal F.C.
Bin Laden was opposed to music on religious grounds, and his attitude towards technology was mixed.
I was responsible for entrusting the nineteen brothers ... with the raids" (May 23, 2006).
A Bosnian government search of passport and residency records, conducted at the urging of the United States, revealed other former Mujahideen who were linked to the same Algerian group or to other groups of suspected terrorists, and had lived in the area  north of Sarajevo, the capital, in the past few years.
By 1984, bin Laden and Azzam established Maktab al-Khidamat, which funneled money, arms and fighters from around the Arab world into Afghanistan.
Years later, on October 10, 2001, bin Laden appeared as well on the initial list of the top 22 FBI Most Wanted Terrorists, which was released to the public by the President of the United States George W. Bush, in direct response to the September 11 attacks, but which was again based on the indictment for the 1998 embassy attack.
This offer was rejected by President Bush stating that this was no longer negotiable, with Bush responding "there's no need to discuss innocence or guilt.
He was angered by the internecine tribal fighting among the Afghans.
Bin Laden helped cement his alliance with the Taliban by sending several hundred Afghan Arab fighters along to help the Taliban kill between five and six thousand Hazaras overrunning the city.
It has been claimed that bin Laden funded the Luxor massacre of November 17, 1997, which killed 62 civilians, and outraged the Egyptian public.
Milošević had argued that the United States aided the terrorists, which culminated in its backing of the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War.
The U.S. State Department accused Sudan of being a "sponsor of international terrorism" and bin Laden of operating "terrorist training camps in the Sudanese desert".
He was generous to the poor and popular with the people.
None were ever definitively proven.
Their "arsenal included SAM-7 and Stinger missiles, AK-47s, RPGs, and PK machine guns (similar to an M60)."
Some sources also list a sixth wife, name unknown, whose marriage to bin Laden was annulled soon after the ceremony.
The 9/11 Commission Report states:
Bin Laden became the 456th person listed on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list, when he was added on June 7, 1999, following his indictment along with others for capital crimes in the 1998 embassy attacks.
Bin Laden initially denied involvement in the attacks.
He asked a subordinate to draw up a jihadist code of conduct that would constrain military operations in order to avoid civilian casualties.
His viewpoints and methods of achieving them had led to him being designated as a terrorist by scholars, journalists from ''The New York Times'', the BBC, and Qatari news station Al Jazeera, analysts such as Peter Bergen, Michael Scheuer, Marc Sageman, and Bruce Hoffman.
Of the groups affiliated with al-Qaida, Bin Laden condemned Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan for an attack on members of a hostile tribe, declaring that "the operation is not justified, as there were casualties of noncombatants."
In the 1990s, bin Laden's al-Qaeda assisted jihadis financially and sometimes militarily in Algeria, Egypt and Afghanistan.
According to Wright, the group's real name was not used in public pronouncements because "its existence was still a closely held secret".
Osama bin Laden had also assumed the ''kunyah'' "Abū 'Abdāllāh" ("father of Abdallah").
The arms smuggler Viktor Bout helped to run the airline, maintaining planes and loading cargo.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has stated that classified evidence linking al-Qaeda and bin Laden to the September 11 attacks is clear and irrefutable.
While referring to Osama bin Laden in a CNN film clip on September 17, 2001, then President George W. Bush stated, "I want justice.
According to ''The Washington Post'', the U.S. government concluded that Osama bin Laden was present during the Battle of Tora Bora, Afghanistan in late 2001, and according to civilian and military officials with first-hand knowledge, failure by the United States to commit enough U.S. ground troops to hunt him led to his escape and was the gravest failure by the United States in the war against al-Qaeda.
Michael Scheuer, head of the CIA's bin Laden unit, concluded that Ariana was being used as a "terrorist taxi service".
Osama bin Laden's full name, Osama bin Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden, means "Osama, son of Mohammed, son of Awad, son of Laden".
Through two other tapes aired by Al Jazeera in 2006, Osama bin Laden announced, "I am the one in charge of the nineteen brothers.
It was during this time that he became idolised by many Arabs.
Bush to King Fahd in 1990, that all U.S. forces based in Saudi Arabia would be withdrawn once the Iraqi threat had been dealt with, by 1996 the Americans were still there.
Shia Muslims have been listed along with "heretics, ... America, and Israel" as the four principal "enemies of Islam" at ideology classes of bin Laden's al-Qaeda organization.
Upon being elected, then President-elect Obama expressed his plans to "renew U.S. commitment to finding al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, according to his national security advisers" in an effort to ratchet up the hunt for the terrorist.
He was convicted of colluding with Osama bin Laden by a French court.
* On December 9, 2009, BBC News reported that U.S. Army General Stanley A. McChrystal, who served as Commander of the U.S. forces in Afghanistan from June 15, 2009 until June 23, 2010, emphasized the continued importance of the capture or killing of bin Laden, thus indicating that the U.S. high command believed that bin Laden was still alive.
It was not until eight days after the bombing of Afghanistan began in October 2001 that the Taliban finally did offer to turn over Osama bin Laden to a third-party country for trial in return for the United States ending the bombing.
From 2001 to 2011, bin Laden was a major target of the War on Terror, as the FBI placed a $25 million bounty on him in their search for him.
The operation, code-named '''Operation Neptune Spear''', was ordered by United States President Barack Obama and carried out in a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operation by a team of United States Navy SEALs from the United States Naval Special Warfare Development Group (also known as DEVGRU or informally by its former name, SEAL Team Six) of the Joint Special Operations Command, with support from CIA operatives on the ground.
His research suggests that al-Qaeda was formed at an August 11, 1988, meeting between "several senior leaders" of Egyptian Islamic Jihad, Abdullah Azzam, and bin Laden, where it was agreed to join bin Laden's money with the expertise of the Islamic Jihad organization and take up the jihadist cause elsewhere after the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan.
Bin Laden continued to speak publicly against the Saudi government, for which the Saudis banished him.
Bin Laden's criticism of the Saudi monarchy led them to try to silence him.
Intelligence officials assembled what they believed to be decisive evidence, from contemporary and subsequent interrogations and intercepted communications, that bin Laden began the Battle of Tora Bora inside the cave complex along Afghanistan's mountainous eastern border.
The word ''usāmah'' (أسامة) means "lion", earning him the nicknames "Lion" and "Lion Sheik".
He chose to return to Jalalabad, Afghanistan aboard a chartered flight on May 18, 1996; there he forged a close relationship with Mullah Mohammed Omar.
The attacks were linked to local members of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, brought Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri to the attention of the United States public for the first time, and resulted in the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation placing bin Laden on its Ten Most Wanted list.
Along with his Arab legion, he was thought to have "brought down the mighty superpower" of the Soviet Union.
They will leave you nothing, either in this world or the next."
Various sources report that bin Laden lost between $20 million and $300 million in Sudan; the government seized his construction equipment, and bin Laden was forced to liquidate his businesses, land, and even his horses.
In a December 1998 interview with Pakistani journalist Rahimullah Yusufzai, bin Laden stated that Operation Desert Fox was proof that Israeli Jews controlled the governments of the United States and United Kingdom, directing them to kill as many Muslims as they could.
Arabist Dr. Abdel El M. Husseini stated: "This translation is very problematic.
In February 1998, Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri co-signed a ''fatwa'' in the name of the World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders, which declared the killing of North Americans and their allies an "individual duty for every Muslim" to "liberate the al-Aqsa Mosque (in Jerusalem) and the holy mosque (in Mecca) from their grip".
In a 2004 tape broadcast by al-Jazeera, bin Laden spoke of "bleeding America to the point of bankruptcy".
Pakistan's Prime Minister Gillani rejected claims that Osama bin Laden was hiding in Pakistan.
Bin Laden's father Mohammed died in 1967 in an airplane crash in Saudi Arabia when his American pilot Jim Harrington misjudged a landing.
This information was denied by the Bosnian government following the September 11 attacks, but it was later found that Aodouni was arrested in Turkey and that at that time he possessed the Bosnian passport.
He was indicted on terrorism charges by law enforcement agencies in Madrid, New York City, and Tripoli.
Al-Attas married Hamida in the late 1950s or early 1960s, and they are still together.
In a May 1998 interview with ABC's John Miller, bin Laden stated that the Israeli state's ultimate goal was to annex the Arabian Peninsula and the Middle East into its territory and enslave its peoples, as part of what he called a "Greater Israel".
Subsequently, bin Laden retreated further from public contact to avoid capture.
He opposed such alternatives such as secular government, as well as "pan-Arabism, socialism, communism, democracy."
At the public announcement of the fatwa bin Laden announced that North Americans are "very easy targets".
He later told a journalist: "I felt outraged that an injustice had been committed against the people of Afghanistan."
Google Earth maps show that the compound was not present in 2001, but it was present on images taken in 2005.
Nonetheless, bin Laden criticized the U.S. for its secular form of governance, calling upon Americans to convert to Islam and "reject the immoral acts of fornication, homosexuality, intoxicants, gambling, and usury", in a letter published in late 2002.
He claimed that the U.S. State Department and U.S. Department of Defense were controlled by Jews, for the sole purpose of serving the Israeli state's goals.
Bin Laden was described as soft-spoken and mild-mannered in demeanor.
"I don't think that we can finally defeat al-Qaeda until he's captured or killed," McChrystal said of bin Laden.
It was not until 2000 that the State Department authorized U.S. intelligence officials to visit Sudan.
They discovered copious evidence of terrorist plots, including plans to blow up New York City skyscrapers.
One source described him as "hard working"; another said he left university during his third year without completing a college degree.
Bin Laden remains the only fugitive ever to be listed on both FBI fugitive lists.
In the tapes he was seen with Ramzi bin al-Shibh, as well as two of the 9/11 hijackers, Hamza al-Ghamdi and Wail al-Shehri, as they made preparations for the attacks (videotape broadcast September 7, 2006).
The bin Laden family made $5 billion in the construction industry, of which Osama later inherited around $25–30 million.
Due to the increasing pressure on Sudan from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United States, bin Laden was permitted to leave for a country of his choice.
In response to the attacks, the United States launched the War on Terror to depose the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and capture al-Qaeda operatives, and several countries strengthened their anti-terrorism legislation to preclude future attacks.
He instructed his followers around the world to focus on education and persuasion rather than "entering into confrontations" with Islamic political parties.
This marked the earliest discovery of al-Qaeda terrorist plans outside of Muslim countries.
Many of his labourers were the same fighters who had been his comrades in the war against the Soviet Union.
In a 2010 letter, bin Laden chastised followers who had reinterpreted ''al-tatarrus''—an Islamic doctrine meant to excuse the unintended killing of non-combatants in unusual circumstances—to justify routine massacres of Muslim civilians, which had turned Muslims against the extremist movement.
It was entitled "Declaration of War against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy Places."
Bin Laden publicly denounced Saudi dependence on the U.S. military, arguing the two holiest shrines of Islam, Mecca and Medina, the cities in which the Prophet Mohamed received and recited Allah's message, should only be defended by Muslims.
In 1988, he formed al-Qaeda.
On October 7, 2008, in the second presidential debate, on foreign policy, then-presidential candidate Barack Obama pledged, "We will kill bin Laden.
Bin Laden's offer was rebuffed, and the Saudi monarchy invited the deployment of U.S. forces in Saudi territory.
Shortly after the September 11 attacks it was revealed that President Clinton had signed a directive authorizing the CIA (and specifically their elite Special Activities Division) to apprehend bin Laden and bring him to the United States to stand trial after the 1998 United States embassy bombings in Africa; if taking bin Laden alive was deemed impossible, then deadly force was authorized.
From 1968 to 1976, he attended the élite secular Al-Thager Model School.
They had already revoked his citizenship, however, and would not tolerate his presence in their country.
By 1998 four members of Egyptian Islamic Jihad (EIJ) were arrested in Albania and extradited to Egypt.
He studied economics and business administration at King Abdulaziz University.
After his initial denial, Osama bin Laden in 2004 finally claimed responsibility for the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States.
The attempt failed, and Sudan expelled the EIJ.
Bin Laden believed that Afghanistan, under the rule of Mullah Omar's Taliban, was "the only Islamic country" in the Muslim world.
Bin Laden was killed in what some suggest was his residence for five years.
Bin Laden and Al-Zawahiri organized an al-Qaeda congress on June 24, 1998.
In it he said he had personally directed the nineteen hijackers.
Bin Laden was on the American Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) lists of Ten Most Wanted Fugitives and Most Wanted Terrorists for his involvement in the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings.
U.S. officials became aware of these secret discussions, certainly by March.
Following the Soviet Union's withdrawal from Afghanistan in February 1989, Osama bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia in 1990 as a hero of jihad.
* In March 2009, the ''New York Daily News'' reported that the hunt for bin Laden had centered in the Chitral District of Pakistan, including the Kalam Valley.
He is a former roommate of Ahmed Ressam, the man arrested at the Canadian-U.S. border in mid-December 1999 with a car full of nitroglycerin and bomb-making materials.
In 1999 the press reported that bin Laden and his Tunisian assistant Mehrez Aodouni were granted citizenship and Bosnian passports in 1993 by the government in Sarajevo.
After establishing a new base in Afghanistan, he declared a war against the United States, initiating a series of bombings and related attacks.
By 1988, bin Laden had split from Maktab al-Khidamat.
According to bin Laden's son Omar bin Laden, the family's hereditary surname is "al-Qahtani" (, ''āl-Qaḥṭānī''), but bin Laden's father Mohammed bin Laden never officially registered the name.
* Al-Qaeda continued to release time-sensitive and professionally verified videos demonstrating bin Laden's continued survival as recently as August 2007.
Nasser al-Bahri, who was bin Laden's personal bodyguard from 1997–2001, details bin Laden's personal life in his memoir.
Khalil al-Deek was arrested in Jordan in late December 1999 on suspicion of involvement in a plot to blow up tourist sites.
Bin Laden's overall strategy for achieving his goals against much larger enemies such as the Soviet Union and United States was to lure them into a long war of attrition in Muslim countries, attracting large numbers of jihadists who would never surrender.
In mid-1997, the Northern Alliance threatened to overrun Jalalabad, causing bin Laden to abandon his Najim Jihad compound and move his operations to Tarnak Farms in the south.
According to former CIA analyst Michael Scheuer, who led the CIA's hunt for Osama bin Laden, the al-Qaeda leader was motivated by a belief that U.S. foreign policy has oppressed, killed, or otherwise harmed Muslims in the Middle East, condensed in the phrase, "They hate us for what we do, not who we are."
Bin Laden believed that the Islamic world was in crisis and that the complete restoration of Sharia law would be the only way to "set things right" in the Muslim world.
On September 16, 2001, bin Laden read a statement later broadcast by Qatar's Al Jazeera satellite channel denying responsibility for the attack.
He helped to fund the Mujahideen by funneling arms, money and fighters from the Arab world into Afghanistan, and gained popularity among many Arabs.
The agenda included discussion of a possible Saudi role in Karzai's plan to reintegrate Taliban militants.
His vocal criticism of Western government and society, and his claims that they were dominated by Jews, earned him respect from various sectors of the far right in Europe and North America.
* On February 2, 2010, Afghan president Hamid Karzai arrived in Saudi Arabia for an official visit.
Ambassador Carney had instructions only to push the Sudanese to expel Bin Laden.
In 1997, ''Rzeczpospolita'', one of the largest Polish daily newspapers, had reported that intelligence services of the Nordic-Polish SFOR Brigade suspected that a center for training terrorists from Islamic countries was located in the Bocina Donja village near Maglaj in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
After leaving college in 1979, bin Laden went to Pakistan, joined Abdullah Azzam and used money and machinery from his own construction company to help the Mujahideen resistance in the Soviet war in Afghanistan.
In 1992 he went to live in exile in Sudan, in a deal brokered by Ali Mohamed.
However, others argue the fact Bin Laden lived in a compound with a local family and never used the internet or a cell would have made him much harder to trace.
In a letter released in late 2002, he stated that Jews controlled the civilian media outlets, politics, and economic institutions of the United States.
Pakistan also argued given its limited resources its priority was its war against the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan and other insurgents who posed an active threat to it.
Many of bin Laden's children fled to Iran following the September 11 attacks and , Iranian authorities reportedly continue to control their movements.
A major component of bin Laden's ideology was the concept that civilians from enemy countries, including women and children, were legitimate targets for jihadists to kill.
Bin Laden was still wanted by the Libyan government at the time of his death.
Carlotta Gall, writing in ''The New York Times'' magazine, claimed that the United States had direct evidence that the ISI chief, Lt. Gen. Ahmad Shuja Pasha, knew of Bin Laden's presence in Abbottabad, Pakistan.
Nosair was eventually convicted in connection to the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, and later admitted guilt for the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane in New York City on November 5, 1990.
For example, Mosharraf Zia, a leading Pakistani columnist, stated, "It seems deeply improbable that bin Laden could have been where he was killed without the knowledge of some parts of the Pakistani state.
It was an extensive compound located less than a mile from Pakistan Military Academy, probably built for him and less than 100 kilometers' drive from the capital.
According to the 9/11 Commission, the expulsion from Sudan significantly weakened bin Laden and his organization.
''The Washington Post'' also reported that the CIA unit composed of special operations paramilitary forces dedicated to capturing bin Laden was shut down in late 2005.
Numerous speculative press reports were issued about his whereabouts or even death; some placed bin Laden in different locations during overlapping time periods.
The 9/11 Commission Report further states:
Pakistan's president Asif Ali Zardari denied that his country's security forces sheltered bin Laden, and called any supposed support for bin Laden by the Pakistani government "baseless speculation".
Identified motivations of the September 11 attacks include the support of Israel by the United States, presence of the U.S. military in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the U.S. enforcement of sanctions against Iraq.
On July 13, 2007, the Senate voted to double the reward to $50 million though the amount was never changed.
The three, one of whom was identified as Imad El Misri, were Egyptian nationals.
Ambassador Carney had no legal basis to ask for more from the Sudanese since, at the time, there was no indictment outstanding against bin Laden in any country.
According to a fatwa issued by Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, the killing of someone standing near the enemy is justified because any innocent bystander will find a proper reward in death, going to ''Jannah'' (Paradise) if they were good Muslims and to ''Jahannam'' (hell) if they were bad or non-believers.
During his time in Sudan, he heavily invested in the infrastructure, in agriculture and businesses.
Bin Laden established camps inside Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan and trained volunteers from across the Muslim world to fight against the Soviet-backed regime, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan; he would also participate in some combat activity, such as the Battle of Jaji.
With Iraqi forces on the Saudi border, Saddam's appeal to pan-Arabism was potentially inciting internal dissent.
He issued a fatwā against the United States, which was first published in ''Al Quds Al Arabi'', a London-based newspaper.
The tape was broadcast on various news networks on December 13, 2001.
He often delivered warnings against alleged Jewish conspiracies: "These Jews are masters of usury and leaders in treachery.
In December 1998, the Director of Central Intelligence Counterterrorist Center reported to President Bill Clinton that al-Qaeda was preparing for attacks in the United States of America, including the training of personnel to hijack aircraft.
* In the first week of December 2009, a Taliban detainee in Pakistan said he had information that bin Laden was in Afghanistan in 2009.
After killing dozens of al-Qaeda and Taliban members, they did not find either Osama bin Laden or Ayman al-Zawahiri.
He stated that Jews and Muslims could never get along and that war was "inevitable" between them, and further accused the U.S. of stirring up anti-Islamic sentiment.
It was after this bombing that al-Qaeda was reported to have developed its justification for the killing of innocent people.
