Rehearsals of the play, starring Sarah Bernhardt, began but the play was refused a licence by the Lord Chamberlain, since it depicted biblical characters.
Wilde was concerned about the effect of moralising on art, he believed in art's redemptive, developmental powers: "Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force.
In November he collapsed during chapel from illness and hunger.
Originally planned to last four months, it continued for almost a year due to the commercial success.
The 1891 census records the Wildes' residence at 16 Tite Street, where he lived with his wife Constance and two sons.
Ransome concludes that Wilde succeeds precisely because the literary criticism is unveiled with such a deft touch.
Robbie Ross found Wilde at the Cadogan Hotel, Knightsbridge, with Reginald Turner; both men advised Wilde to go at once to Dover and try to get a boat to France; his mother advised him to stay and fight.
The trial in April 1913 was in a way a re-run of the trial(s) of Oscar Wilde.
Soon his public and private lives had become sharply divided; in ''De Profundis'' he wrote to Douglas that "It was like feasting with panthers; the danger was half the excitement...
He also stated his intention to "return to England, probably for good."
Wilde was initially buried in the Cimetière de Bagneux outside Paris; in 1909 his remains were disinterred and transferred to Père Lachaise Cemetery, inside the city.
Turner was one of the very few of the old circle who remained with Wilde right to the end, and was at his bedside when he died.
Wilde was freed from Holloway and, shunning attention, went into hiding at the house of Ernest and Ada Leverson, two of his firm friends.
She became engaged to Bram Stoker and they married in 1878.
Wilde's response "And I?
His right ear drum was ruptured in the fall, an injury that later contributed to his death.
Wilde's parents were successful Anglo-Irish Dublin intellectuals.
Douglas lost; ''De Profundis'' which was read in part at the trial disproved his claims (Ross had shown Ransome the full text of it).
The trial ended with the jury unable to reach a verdict.
He suggested that it be published in ''Reynold's Magazine'', "because it circulates widely among the criminal classes&nbsp;– to which I now belong&nbsp;– for once I will be read by my peers&nbsp;– a new experience for me".
Wilde's charm also had a lasting effect on Parisian literati, who produced several original biographies and monographs on him.
...I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden of the world... And so, indeed, I went out, and so I lived.
As Gray's portrait allows him to escape the corporeal ravages of his hedonism, Wilde sought to juxtapose the beauty he saw in art with daily life.
Soon Wilde was sufficiently confined to his hotel to joke, on one of his final trips outside, "My wallpaper and I are fighting a duel to the death.
No attempt is made to assess the justice of the laws which convicted them, but rather the poem highlights the brutalisation of the punishment that all convicts share.
Lockwood answered that he would like to do so, but feared that the case had become too politicised to be dropped.
Wilde did not meet Walter Pater until his third year, but had been enthralled by his ''Studies in the History of the Renaissance'', published during Wilde's final year in Trinity.
16, Tite Street was duly renovated in seven months at considerable expense.
After Wilde left the court, a warrant for his arrest was applied for on charges of sodomy and gross indecency.
On 12 October 1900 he sent a telegram to Ross: "Terribly weak.
He adopted the proletarian ballad form, and the author was credited as "C33", Wilde's cell number in Reading Gaol.
When Gray, who has a "face like ivory and rose leaves", sees his finished portrait, he breaks down.
Lord Alfred's father, the Marquess of Queensberry, was known for his outspoken atheism, brutish manner and creation of the modern rules of boxing.
It was an immediate roaring commercial success, going through seven editions in less than two years, only after which "Oscar Wilde" was added to the title page, though many in literary circles had known Wilde to be the author.
In 1954 Vyvyan Holland published his memoir ''Son of Oscar Wilde'', which recounts the difficulties Wilde's wife and children faced after his imprisonment.
Higginson, a cleric and abolitionist, wrote in "Unmanly Manhood" of his general concern that Wilde, "whose only distinction is that he has written a thin volume of very mediocre verse", would improperly influence the behaviour of men and women.
When Wilde eagerly attended Ruskin's lecture series ''The Aesthetic and Mathematic Schools of Art in Florence'', he learned about aesthetics as simply the non-mathematical elements of painting.
Though Wilde's health had suffered greatly from the harshness and diet of prison, he had a feeling of spiritual renewal.
The only evidence for this is two supposed puns within the sonnets themselves.
''Lady Windermere's Fan'' was first performed on 20 February 1892 at St James's Theatre, packed with the cream of society.
His tomb there was designed by Sir Jacob Epstein, It was commissioned by Robert Ross, who asked for a small compartment to be made for his own ashes, which were duly transferred in 1950.
The trial resulted from Douglas's rivalry with Robbie Ross for Wilde (and his need of money).
After writing in different forms throughout the 1880s, he became one of London's most popular playwrights in the early 1890s.
In any case, it became unique: ''The Chameleon'' was not published again.
Between January and March 1897 Wilde wrote a 50,000-word letter to Douglas.
The result was a new play, ''Salomé'', written rapidly and in French.
"The Portrait of Mr. W. H.", which Wilde had begun in 1887, was first published in ''Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'' in July 1889.
George Orwell summarised, "In effect, the world will be populated by artists, each striving after perfection in the way that seems best to him."
In 2012, Wilde was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people.
In 1891 he published two more collections, ''Lord Arthur Savile's Crime and Other Stories'', and in September ''A House of Pomegranates'' was dedicated "To Constance Mary Wilde".
His flair, having previously only been put into socialising, suited journalism and did not go unnoticed.
If Wilde's period at the helm of the magazine was a mixed success from an organizational point of view, one can also argue that it played a pivotal role in his development as a writer and facilitated his ascent to fame.
By his third year Wilde had truly begun to create himself and his myth, and saw his learning developing in much larger ways than merely the prescribed texts.
And outcasts always mourn.
Douglas soon dragged Wilde into the Victorian underground of gay prostitution and Wilde was introduced to a series of young working-class male prostitutes from 1892 onwards by Alfred Taylor.
Carson pressed him on the answer, repeatedly asking why the boy's ugliness was relevant.
Wilde's counsel, Sir Edward Clarke, was finally able to get a magistrate to allow Wilde and his friends to post bail.
Under the Act, Queensberry could avoid conviction for libel only by demonstrating that his accusation was in fact true, and furthermore that there was some "public benefit" to having made the accusation openly.
This point of view did not align him with the Fabians, intellectual socialists who advocated using state apparatus to change social conditions, nor did it endear him to the monied classes whom he had previously entertained.
Lady Wilde's interest in the neo-classical revival showed in the paintings and busts of ancient Greece and Rome in her home.
At the turn of the 1890s, he refined his ideas about the supremacy of art in a series of dialogues and essays, and incorporated themes of decadence, duplicity, and beauty into his only novel, ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'' (1890).
When Wilde returned to London just before Christmas the ''Paris Echo'' referred to him as ''"le great event"'' of the season.
Increasingly sending instructions to the magazine by letter, he began a new period of creative work and his own column appeared less regularly.
Unsure of his next step, he wrote to various acquaintances enquiring about Classics positions at Oxford or Cambridge. ''
By Richard Ellmann's account, he was a precocious seventeen-year-old "so young and yet so knowing, was determined to seduce Wilde".
He is remembered for his epigrams, his novel ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'', his plays, as well as the circumstances of his imprisonment and early death.
Neither his father, who threatened to cut off his funds, nor Mahaffy thought much of the plan; but mostly Wilde, the supreme individualist, balked at the last minute from pledging himself to any formal creed.
Of Wilde's other close friends, Robert Sherard, Robert Ross, his literary executor; and Charles Ricketts variously published biographies, reminiscences or correspondence.
Douglas lost his case.
The first more or less objective biography of Wilde came about when Hesketh Pearson wrote ''Oscar Wilde: His Life and Wit'' (1946).
Under cross examination Wilde was at first hesitant, then spoke eloquently:
And if I catch you and my son again in any public restaurant I will thrash you" to which Wilde responded: "I don't know what the Queensberry rules are, but the Oscar Wilde rule is to shoot on sight".
The story thus is an early masterpiece of Wilde's combing many elements that interested him, conversation, literature and the idea that to shed oneself of an idea one must first convince another of its truth.
Two of Wilde's four writings on aesthetics are dialogues: though Wilde had evolved professionally from lecturer to writer, he retained an oral tradition of sorts.
Wilde, having tired of journalism, had been busy setting out his aesthetic ideas more fully in a series of longer prose pieces which were published in the major literary-intellectual journals of the day.
While Wilde won the most laughs from the court, Carson scored the most legal points.
He corrected and published ''An Ideal Husband'' and ''The Importance of Being Earnest'', the proofs of which, according to Ellmann, show a man "very much in command of himself and of the play", but he refused to write anything else: "I can write, but have lost the joy of writing".
It was revised and updated by Merlin Holland in 1989.
Queensberry's lawyers thus hired private detectives to find evidence of Wilde's homosexual liaisons to prove the fact of the accusation.
Mostly set in drawing rooms and almost completely lacking in action or violence, ''Earnest'' lacks the self-conscious decadence found in ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'' and ''Salome''.
In November 1878, he graduated with a double first in his B.A.
Unperturbed, Wilde produced four society comedies in the early 1890s, which made him one of the most successful playwrights of late Victorian London.
Robert Ross had read Wilde's poems before they met, and was unrestrained by the Victorian prohibition against homosexuality, even to the extent of estranging himself from his family.
Wilde, who was earning up to £100 a week from his plays (his salary at ''The Woman's World'' had been £6), indulged Douglas's every whim: material, artistic or sexual.
In 2011 the tomb was cleaned of the many lipstick marks left there by admirers, and a glass barrier was installed to prevent further marks or damage.
'', his essay-story on Shakespeare's sonnets, in a new anthology in 1891, but eventually decided to limit it to purely aesthetic subjects.
In addition to his children with his wife, Sir William Wilde was the father of three children born out of wedlock before his marriage: Henry Wilson, born in 1838, and Emily and Mary Wilde, born in 1847 and 1849, respectively, of different maternity to Henry.
Wilde, who had first set out to irritate Victorian society with his dress and talking points, then outrage it with ''Dorian Gray'', his novel of vice hidden beneath art, finally found a way to critique society on its own terms.
He promptly renamed it ''The Woman's World'' and raised its tone, adding serious articles on parenting, culture, and politics, keeping discussions of fashion and arts.
1891 turned out to be Wilde's ''annus mirabilis'', apart from his three collections he also produced his only novel.
Some elements disdained the aesthetes, but their languishing attitudes and showy costumes became a recognised pose.
At Wilde's instruction, Ross and Wilde's butler forced their way into the bedroom and library of 16 Tite Street, packing some personal effects, manuscripts, and letters.
The play, now considered Wilde's masterpiece, was rapidly written in Wilde's artistic maturity in late 1894.
On his father's side Wilde was descended from a Dutchman, Colonel de Wilde, who went to Ireland with King William of Orange's invading army in 1690.
The libel trial became a ''cause célèbre'' as salacious details of Wilde's private life with Taylor and Douglas began to appear in the press.
Neil McKenna's 2003 biography, ''The Secret Life of Oscar Wilde,'' offers an exploration of Wilde's sexuality.
Then Carson asked Wilde directly whether he had ever kissed a certain servant boy, Wilde responded, "Oh, dear no.
While their characters often rise to serious themes in moments of crisis, ''Earnest'' lacks the by-now stock Wildean characters: there is no "woman with a past", the principals are neither villainous nor cunning, simply idle cultivés, and the idealistic young women are not that innocent.
Constance Wilde was already refusing to meet Wilde or allow him to see their sons, though she sent him money – a meagre three pounds a week.
Fox described it in this way:
The earliest were memoirs by those who knew him: often they are personal or impressionistic accounts which can be good character sketches, but are sometimes factually unreliable.
Wilde's life was still waiting for independent, true scholarship when Richard Ellmann began researching his 1987 biography ''Oscar Wilde'', for which he posthumously won a National (USA) Book Critics Circle Award in 1988 and a Pulitzer Prize in 1989.
Wilde won the 1878 Newdigate Prize for his poem "Ravenna", which reflected on his visit there the year before, and he duly read it at Encaenia.
He was deeply considering converting to Catholicism, discussing the possibility with clergy several times.
The Marquess was the father of Wilde's lover, Lord Alfred Douglas.
With his youth nearly over, and a family to support, in mid-1887 Wilde became the editor of ''The Lady's World'' magazine, his name prominently appearing on the cover.
was a sincere, though flamboyant, attempt to explain the dichotomies he saw in himself:
Queensberry was found not guilty, as the court declared that his accusation that Wilde was "posing as a Somdomite"  was justified, "true in substance and in fact."
Richard D'Oyly Carte, an English impresario, invited Wilde to make a lecture tour of North America, simultaneously priming the pump for the US tour of ''Patience'' and selling this most charming aesthete to the American public.
At the height of his fame and success, while his masterpiece, ''The Importance of Being Earnest'' (1895), was still on stage in London, Wilde had the Marquess of Queensberry prosecuted for libel.
He realised that his ordeal had filled his soul with the fruit of experience, however bitter it tasted at the time.
"I do not say that you are it, but you look it, and pose at it, which is just as bad.
Wilde was released from prison on 18 May 1897 and sailed immediately for France.
Wilde envisions a society where mechanisation has freed human effort from the burden of necessity, effort which can instead be expended on artistic creation.
It was first performed on 14 February 1895, at St James's Theatre in London, Wilde's second collaboration with George Alexander, the actor-manager.
''Punch'' was less enthusiastic, "The poet is Wilde, but his poetry's tame" was their verdict.
Wilde vigorously responded, writing to the editor of the ''Scots Observer'', in which he clarified his stance on ethics and aesthetics in art – "If a work of art is rich and vital and complete, those who have artistic instincts will see its beauty and those to whom ethics appeal more strongly will see its moral lesson."
He spent two months in the infirmary.
The Rise of Historical Criticism'' was his submission for the Chancellor's Essay prize of 1879, which, though no longer a student, he was still eligible to enter.
Wilde was commissioned to write two more plays and ''An Ideal Husband'', written in 1894, followed in January 1895.
The audience, like Lady Windermere, are forced to soften harsh social codes in favour of a more nuanced view.
As a spokesman for aestheticism, he tried his hand at various literary activities: he published a book of poems, lectured in the United States and Canada on the new "English Renaissance in Art", and then returned to London where he worked prolifically as a journalist.
The trial unearthed evidence that caused Wilde to drop his charges and led to his own arrest and trial for gross indecency with men.
Wilde spent the next six years in London and Paris, and in the United States where he travelled to deliver lectures.
''Earnest's'' immediate reception as Wilde's best work to date finally crystallised his fame into a solid artistic reputation.
Speak gently, she can hear
Frank Harris, his friend and editor, wrote a biography, ''Oscar Wilde: His Life and Confessions'' (1916); though prone to exaggeration and sometimes factually inaccurate, it offers a good literary portrait of Wilde.
About five months after Wilde arrived at Reading Gaol, Charles Thomas Wooldridge, a trooper in the Royal Horse Guards, was brought to Reading to await his trial for murdering his wife on 29 March 1896; on 17 June Wooldridge was sentenced to death and returned to Reading for his execution, which took place on Tuesday, 7 July 1896 – the first hanging at Reading in 18 years.
Crosland, vindictively reacted to Douglas's discovery that ''De Profundis'' was addressed to him and defensively tried to distance him from Wilde's scandalous reputation.
Known to his family and friends as "Bosie", he was a handsome and spoilt young man.
Carson then moved to the factual evidence and questioned Wilde about his acquaintances with younger, lower-class men.
It was from these heights that his life with Douglas began, and Wilde examines that particularly closely, repudiating him for what Wilde finally sees as his arrogance and vanity: he had not forgotten Douglas's remark, when he was ill, "When you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting."
Wilde and aestheticism were both mercilessly caricatured and criticised in the press; the ''Springfield Republican'', for instance, commented on Wilde's behaviour during his visit to Boston to lecture on aestheticism, suggesting that Wilde's conduct was more a bid for notoriety rather than devotion to beauty and the aesthetic.
After graduation from Oxford, Wilde returned to Dublin, where he met again Florence Balcombe, a childhood sweetheart.
He had been publishing lyrics and poems in magazines since his entering Trinity College, especially in ''Kottabos'' and the ''Dublin University Magazine''.
Wilde's mother, under the pseudonym ''"Speranza"'' (the Italian word for 'Hope'), wrote poetry for the revolutionary Young Irelanders in 1848 and was a lifelong Irish nationalist.
The final trial was presided over by Mr Justice Wills.
On his release, he gave the manuscript to Ross, who may or may not have carried out Wilde's instructions to send a copy to Douglas (who later denied having received it).
It brought him a little money.
He was encouraged to compete for a demyship to Magdalen College, Oxford&nbsp;– which he won easily, having already studied Greek for over nine years.
Both authors later regretted their work.
In his opening speech for the defence, Carson announced that he had located several male prostitutes who were to testify that they had had sex with Wilde.
In 1877, Wilde was left speechless after an audience with Pope Pius&nbsp;IX in Rome.
Wilde worked hard to solicit good contributions from his wide artistic acquaintance, including those of Lady Wilde and his wife Constance, while his own "Literary and Other Notes" were themselves popular and amusing.
During rehearsal Alexander requested that Wilde shorten the play from four acts to three, which the author did.
The anonymous narrator is at first sceptical, then believing, finally flirtatious with the reader: he concludes that "there is really a great deal to be said of the Willie Hughes theory of Shakespeare's sonnets."
The Reverend Stewart Headlam put up most of the £5,000 surety required by the court, having disagreed with Wilde's treatment by the press and the courts.
When roused, he gave signs of being inwardly conscious...
Distraught that his beauty will fade while the portrait stays beautiful, he inadvertently makes a Faustian bargain in which only the painted image grows old while he stays beautiful and young.
Queensberry was arrested on a charge of criminal libel, a charge carrying a possible sentence of up to two years in prison ( Libel Act of 1843).
The line quickly became famous, accepted as a slogan by aesthetes but used against them by critics who sensed in it a terrible vacuousness.
Ruskin admired beauty, but believed it must be allied with, and applied to, moral good.
Though trying to remain calm, Wilde saw that he was becoming ensnared in a brutal family quarrel.
One evening, after discussing depictions of Salome throughout history, he returned to his hotel and noticed a blank copybook lying on the desk, and it occurred to him to write in it what he had been saying.
The Wildes' new home was larger and, with both his parents' sociality and success, it soon became a "unique medical and cultural milieu".
May I say nothing, my Lord?"
Douglas and some Oxford friends founded a journal, ''The Chameleon'', to which Wilde "sent a page of paradoxes originally destined for the ''Saturday Review''".
Its subject, "Historical Criticism among the Ancients" seemed ready-made for Wilde&nbsp;– with both his skill in composition and ancient learning&nbsp;– but he struggled to find his voice with the long, flat, scholarly style.
He wandered the boulevards alone, and spent what little money he had on alcohol.
Wilde was once physically attacked by a group of four fellow students, and dealt with them single-handedly, surprising critics.
Wilde's final play again returns to the theme of switched identities: the play's two protagonists engage in "bunburying" (the maintenance of alternative personas in the town and country) which allows them to escape Victorian social mores.
Wilde's poem "Requiescat" is written to her memory.
Wilde was disappointed but stoic: he wrote to her, remembering "the two sweet years&nbsp;– the sweetest years of all my youth" they had spent together.
The first version of ''The Picture of Dorian Gray'' was published as the lead story in the July 1890 edition of ''Lippincott's Monthly Magazine'', along with five others.
Wilde became the sole literary signatory of George Bernard Shaw's petition for a pardon of the anarchists arrested (and later executed) after the Haymarket massacre in Chicago in 1886.
''The Importance of Being Earnest'' remains his most popular play.
It is a short story, which reports a conversation, in which the theory that Shakespeare's sonnets were written out of the poet's love of the boy actor "Willie Hughes", is advanced, retracted, and then propounded again.
In 1897, in prison, he wrote ''De Profundis'', which was published in 1905, a long letter which discusses his spiritual journey through his trials, forming a dark counterpoint to his earlier philosophy of pleasure.
Under the Libel Act 1843, Queensberry's acquittal rendered Wilde legally liable for the considerable expenses Queensberry had incurred in his defence, which left Wilde bankrupt.
There he wrote his last work, ''The Ballad of Reading Gaol'' (1898), a long poem commemorating the harsh rhythms of prison life.
According to Daniel Mendelsohn, Wilde, who had long alluded to Greek love, was "initiated into homosexual sex" by Ross, while his "marriage had begun to unravel after his wife's second pregnancy, which left him physically repelled".
I did not know that when they were to strike at me it was to be at another's piping and at another's pay."
The Oxford Union condemned the book for alleged plagiarism in a tight vote.
Wilde was arrested for "gross indecency" under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, a term meaning homosexual acts not amounting to buggery (an offence under a separate statute).
The first half concludes with Wilde forgiving Douglas, for his own sake as much as Douglas's.
1 Merrion Square, where Wilde's sister, Isola, was born in 1857.
Instead of writing a short but serious essay on the question, Wilde tossed the theory amongst the three characters of the story, allowing it to unfold as background to the plot.
One of us has got to go."
"This poverty really breaks one's heart: it is so ''sale'' filthy, so utterly depressing, so hopeless.
Wilde though, not content with being better known than ever in London, returned to Paris in October 1891, this time as a respected writer.
There lies its immense value.
Carson repeatedly pointed out the unusual nature of these relationships and insinuated that the men were prostitutes.
''Oscar Wilde and Myself'' (1914), largely ghost-written by T.W.H.
To drift with every passion till my soulIs a stringed lute on which all winds can play
The opportunity to construct aesthetic details precisely, and combine them with larger social themes, drew Wilde to write drama.
He proposed to her, and they married on 29 May 1884 at the Anglican St James's Church, Paddington in London.
Wilde's final address was at the dingy Hôtel d'Alsace (now known as L'Hôtel), on rue des Beaux-Arts in Saint-Germain-des-Prés, Paris.
Wilde was then imprisoned on remand at Holloway where he received daily visits from Douglas.
According to Fox's own testimony written by him years later in ''Donahoe's Magazine'' in 1905, Jane Wilde would visit his chapel in Glencree, Co Wicklow for Mass and would take her sons with her.
Wilde left Portora with a royal scholarship to read classics at Trinity College, Dublin, from 1871 to 1874, sharing rooms with his older brother Willie Wilde.
He learned tracts of the book by heart, and carried it with him on travels in later years.
Richard Ellmann argues that Wilde's poem "Hélas!"
There the young Wilde and his brother Willie played with George Moore.
He spent the remainder of his sentence there, addressed and identified only by "C33" – the occupant of the third cell on the third floor of C ward.
In 2000, Leon Johnson, a multimedia artist, installed a silver prosthesis to replace them.
His moods fluctuated; Max Beerbohm relates how their mutual friend Reginald 'Reggie' Turner had found Wilde very depressed after a nightmare.
He could organise and share his views on art, literature and life, yet in a format less tedious than lecturing.
The charge carried a penalty of up to two years in prison.
The librarian, who had requested the book for the library, returned the presentation copy to Wilde with a note of apology.
He had continued his interest in the theatre and now, after finding his voice in prose, his thoughts turned again to the dramatic form as the biblical iconography of Salome filled his mind.
