Oslo is one of the most expensive cities in the world.
The City Council has five standing committees, each having its own areas of responsibility.
Oslo was bidding to host the 2022 Winter Olympics, but later withdrew on 2 October 2014.
The original name of Oslo was restored in 1925.
He is seated on a throne with lion decorations, which at the time was also commonly used by the Norwegian Kings.
The 1999 IIHF World Championship in ice hockey were held in Oslo, as have three Bandy World Championships, in 1961, 1977 and 1985.
The Vigeland Museum located in the large Frogner Park, is free to access and contains over 212 sculptures by Gustav Vigeland including an obelisk and the Wheel of Life.
The Drammen Line runs under the city centre in the Oslo Tunnel.
Backer also designed the restaurant at Ekeberg, which opened in 1929.
The Norwegian Wood Rock Festival is held every year in June in Oslo.
City Hall was constructed in the former slum area of Vika, from 1931–1950.
File:Oslo Sentralstasjon.JPG|Jernbanetorget
The outdoor pool Frognerbadet also has the 50-metre range.
The Black Death came to Norway in 1349 and, like other cities in Europe, the city suffered greatly.
Det Norske Veritas, headquartered at Høvik outside Oslo, is one of the three major maritime classification societies in the world, with 16.5% of the world fleet to class in its register.
It is an important centre for maritime industries and maritime trade in Europe.
The post was created with the implementation of parliamentarism in Oslo and is similar to the role of the prime minister at the national level.
, it is ranked tenth according to the Worldwide Cost of Living Survey provided by Mercer Human Resource Consulting and first according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.
Jordal Amfi, the home of the ice hockey team Vålerenga Ishockey, and Manglerudhallen is the home of Manglerud Star, both of whom play in GET-ligaen.
File:Astrup Fearnley 009.JPG| The art gallery of Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art in Oslo
In 2013, 40% of Oslo's primary school pupils were registered as having a first language other than the Norwegian or Sami.
He also started the construction of the Akershus Castle.
Nationaltheatret (station)
It was established as a municipality (''formannskapsdistrikt'') on 1 January 1838.
The Oslo City Museum holds a permanent exhibition about the people in Oslo and the history of the city.
The municipality operates eight public swimming pools.
Oslo is also served by two secondary airports, which serve some low-cost carriers, such as Ryanair: Rygge Airport and Torp Airport, the latter being  from the city.
* Tøyen Park stretches out behind the Munch Museum, and is a vast, grassy expanse.
Meanwhile, prices on goods and services remain some of the highest of any city.
The Kon-Tiki Museum houses Thor Heyerdahl's Kontiki and Ra2.
This growth stems for the most part from international immigration and related high birth rates, but also from intra-national migration.
The building cost 500 million euro to build and took five years to build and is known for being the first Opera House in the world to let people walk on the roof of the building.
The ''municipality'' developed new areas such as Ullevål garden city (1918–1926) and Torshov (1917–1925).
Oslo was formerly twinned with Madison, Wisconsin, Tel Aviv and Vilnius, but has since abolished the concept of twin cities.
This compares with NOK165.915&nbsp;billion (&nbsp;billion) in 1995.
The government has recently invested large amounts of money in cultural installations, facilities, buildings and festivals in the City of Oslo.
In the borough Groruddalen in 2008 for instance, the ethnic Norwegian population decreased by 1,500, while the immigrant population increased by 1,600.
There are three beltways, the innermost which are streets and the outermost, Ring 3 which is an expressway.
Less than one in a hundred cases get solved.
A number of magazines are produced in Oslo.
Personal unions with Denmark from 1397 to 1523 and again from 1536 to 1814 and with Sweden from 1814 to 1905 reduced its influence.
The city's port is the largest general cargo port in the country and its leading passenger gateway.
The government of this new state needed buildings for its expanding administration and institutions.
According to the most recent census 432,000 Oslo residents (70.4% of the population) were ethnically Norwegian, an increase of 6% since 2002 (409,000).
The Ibsen Quotes project completed in 2008 is a work of art consisting of 69 Ibsen quotations in stainless steel lettering which have been set into the granite sidewalks of the city's central streets.
File:GMB BFM 71104 1.jpg|Flytoget (Airport Express Train); a High-speed rail connecting the city with its main airport, Oslo-Gardermoen Airport.
The museum will be named Munch/Stenersen.
July 2014 was the warmest summer month ever recorded, with a monthly mean temperature at , monthly mean maximum temperature , monthly mean low was .
This includes the six-line Oslo Metro, the world's most extensive metro per resident, the six-line Oslo Tramway and the eight-line Oslo Commuter Rail.
Oslo is the home of several football clubs in the Norwegian league system.
The two dominant companies are Aller Media and Hjemmet Mortensen AB.
The city is home to many companies within the maritime sector, some of which are among the world's largest shipping companies, shipbrokers and maritime insurance brokers.
Modern linguists generally interpret the original ''Óslo'' or ''Áslo'' as either "Meadow at the Foot of a Hill" or "Meadow Consecrated to the Gods", with both considered equally likely.
Oslo Police District has five police stations located around the city at Grønland, Sentrum, Stovner, Majorstuen and Manglerud.
File:Haakon Magnussens segl-013.jpg|The seal of Haakon V Magnusson, the King who made Oslo the capital of Norway
This called for the celebration of Oslo's millennium in 2000.
The strong economy transformed Christiania into a trading port.
It draws about 60,000 people to the Medieval Park east in Oslo and lasts for four days.
There is also a variety of specialty publications and smaller media companies.
It has been regarded as the capital city since the reign of King Haakon V (1299–1319), the first king to reside permanently in the city.
Oslo hosts the annual Oslo Freedom Forum, a conference described by ''The Economist'' as "on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum."
Twenty days in July 2014 had highs above .
Although Oslo does have the most expensive housing market in Norway, it is comparably cheaper than other cities on the list in that regard.
The supreme authority of the city is the City Council (''Bystyret''), which currently has 59 seats.
Rikard Nordraak, composer of the Norwegian national anthem, was born in Oslo in 1842.
FIS Nordic World Ski Championships have been hosted in 1930, 1966, 1982 and 2011, as well as the 1952 Winter Olympics.
The metropolitan area had an estimated population of 1.71 million.
Other large immigrant groups are people from Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Turkey, Morocco, Iraq and Iran.
File:Nationaltheatret station Oslo.jpg|Metro train leaving.
Based mostly on support from the Red Party, the coalition maintains a workable majority in the City Council.
PST is a security agency which was established in 1936 and is one of the non-secret agencies in Norway.
Christian Heinrich Grosch, one of the first architects educated completely within Norway, designed the original building for the Oslo Stock Exchange (1826–1828), the local branch of the Bank of Norway (1828), Christiania Theatre (1836–1837), and the first campus for the University of Oslo (1841–1856).
Outside the city, near Vaterland and Grønland near Old Town, Oslo, a new, unmanaged part of the city grew up filled with citizens of low class status.
In 2008, 63% of the population were members of the Church of Norway, lower than the national average of 82%.
The stadium has previously hosted the finals of the UEFA Women's Championship in 1987 and 1997, and the 2002 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship.
The Governing Mayor of Oslo is the head of the City government.
File:Frognerkilen - 2011-09-07 at 21-36-46.jpg|Fort Oslo Marina
In the end of the 12th century, Hanseatic traders from Rostock moved into the city and gained major influence in the city.
This used to be the most powerful political position in Oslo, but following the implementation of parliamentarism, the Mayor has had more of a ceremonial role, similar to that of the President of the Storting at the national level.
Some of the city islands and the neighbouring municipality of Nesodden are connected by ferry.
Over the years, fire destroyed major parts of the city many times, as many of the city's buildings were built entirely of wood.
The playwright Henrik Ibsen is probably the most famous Norwegian author.
Oslo has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest twice.
In the 2011 Norway terror attacks, Oslo was hit by a bomb blast that ripped through the Government quarter, damaging several buildings including the building that houses the Office of the Prime Minister.
File:Oslo Opera House seen from Langkaia.JPG|Oslo Opera House
It has hosted Biathlon World Championships in 1986, 1990, 2000, 2002 and 2016.
Kunstnernes Hus art gallery by Gudolf Blakstad and Herman Munthe-Kaas (1930) still shows the influence of the preceding classicist trend of the 1920s.
Oslo's biggest rock festival is Øyafestivalen or simply "Øya".
The Oslo World Music Festival showcases people who are stars in their own country but strangers in Norway.
Oslo has warm summers with two out of three days in July that have high temperatures above 20&nbsp;°C and on average one out of four days reach a maximum above 25&nbsp;°C.
A new National Museum in Oslo will be built in the next 10 years and the building will be located at Vestbanen behind the Nobel Peace Center.
A whole group of oil and gas companies is situated in Oslo.
Founded in the year 1040, and established as a "kaupstad" or trading place in 1048 by King Harald III, the city was elevated to a bishopric in 1070 and a capital under Haakon V around 1300.
In 2008, the total workforce in the greater Oslo region (5 counties) numbered 1,020,000 people.
Recent archaeological research however has uncovered Christian burials which can be dated to prior to AD 1000, evidence of a preceding urban settlement.
The Oslo Chamber Music Festival is held in August every year and world-class chambers and soloists gather in Oslo to perform at this festival.
He did minor works for wealthy patrons in and around Oslo, but his major achievement was the renovation of the Oslo Katedralskole, completed in 1800.
All suburbs in Oslo were above the national average of 14.1 percent.
File:CyclePickandDrop.jpg|A rental bicycle station in the city center.
Although Eastern Norway has a number of rivers, none of these flow into the ocean at Oslo.
Many landmarks were built in the 19th century, including the Royal Palace (1825–1848), Stortinget (the Parliament) (1861–1866), the University, Nationaltheatret and the Stock Exchange.
According to a report compiled by Swiss bank UBS in the month of August 2006, Oslo and London were the world's most expensive cities.
Early 20th-century literature from Oslo include poets Rudolf Nilsen and André Bjerke.
The National Museums exhibition avenues are the National Gallery, the Museum of Contemporary Art, the National Museum, the Museum of Decorative Arts and the National Museum of Architecture.
''See also Transportation ''
In 2013 Oslo tied with the Australian city of Melbourne as the fourth most expensive city in the world, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU)'s Worldwide Cost of Living study.
In 2012, there were about 48,000 registered Muslims in Oslo, making up about 8% of the population, and about 33,000 registered Roman Catholics.
Even though Sami land is far away from the capital, the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History marks the Sami National Day with a series of activities and entertainment.
Oslo constitutes both a county and a municipality.
In 1814 Christiania once more became a real capital when the union with Denmark was dissolved.
In 2015, according to Statistics Norway annual report, there were 647,676 permanent residents in the Oslo municipality, of which 628,719 resided in the city proper.
Ibsen wrote plays such as ''Hedda Gabler'', ''Peer Gynt'', ''A Doll's House'' and ''The Lady from the Sea''.
This statue is very well known as an icon in the city.
Representatives are popularly elected every four years.
According to the Oslo Police, they receive more than 15,000 reports of petty thefts annually.
Gardermoen is a hub for Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Widerøe.
Røa IL is Oslo's only team in the women's league, Toppserien.
Oslo is also known for giving out the Nobel Peace Prize every year.
Oslo has Norway's most extensive public transport system, managed by Ruter.
In the north, there is a viewing point known as Ola Narr.
The name ''Lo'' is now believed to be a back-formation arrived at by Friis in support of his idea about etymology for ''Oslo''.
In the 2015 update of the EIU’s Worldwide Cost of Living survey, Oslo now ranks as the third most expensive city in the world.
The first major undertaking was the Royal Palace, designed by Hans Linstow and built between 1824 and 1848.
The origin of the name ''Oslo'' has been the subject of much debate.
File:14-09-02-oslo-RalfR-393.jpg|Oslo Harbour
The building houses a permanent exhibition, expanding every year when a new Nobel Peace Prize winner is announced, containing information of every winner in history.
After the last fire in 1624, which lasted for three days, King Christian IV decided that the old city should not be rebuilt again.
The fjord, which is nearly bisected by the Nesodden peninsula opposite Oslo, lies to the south; in all other directions Oslo is surrounded by green hills and mountains.
Oslo is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the European Commission intercultural cities programme.
Eight people were killed in the bomb attack.
In January, three out of four days are below freezing (0&nbsp;°C), on average one out of four days is colder than −10&nbsp;°C.
Oslo has a large and varied number of cultural attractions, which include several buildings containing artwork from Edvard Munch and various other international artists but also several Norwegian artists.
It hosts annual world cup tournaments, including the Holmenkollen Ski Festival.
Oslo is an important centre of maritime knowledge in Europe and is home to approximately 1980 companies and 8,500 employees within the maritime sector.
This theatre represents the actors and play-writers of the country but the songwriters, singers and dancers are represented in the form of a newly opened Oslo Opera House, situated in Bjørvika.
He added a classical portico to the front of an older structure, and a semicircular auditorium that was sequestered by Parliament in 1814 as a temporary place to assemble, now preserved at Norsk Folkemuseum as a national monument.
Although the city's population is small compared to most European capitals, it occupies an unusually large land area, of which two-thirds are protected areas of forests, hills and lakes.
File:Bydel Bjerke, Linderud %26 Veitvet fra Kalbakken.jpg| Bjerke, a highly populated urban area with a population density of 3,100 inhabitants per square km
The main airport serving the city is Gardermoen Airport, located in Ullensaker,  from the city centre of Oslo.
Since the local elections of 2015, the city government has been a coalition of the Labour Party, the Green Party and the Socialist Left.
The city centre is situated at the end of the Oslofjord, from which point the city sprawls out in three distinct "corridors"—inland north-eastwards, and southwards along both sides of the fjord—which gives the urbanized area a shape reminiscent of an upside-down reclining "Y" (on maps, satellite pictures, or from high above the city).
Other examples of annual events in Oslo are Desucon, a convention focusing on Japanese culture and Færderseilasen, the world's largest overnight regatta with more than 1100 boats taking part every year.
The coldest temperature recorded is  on 3 and 19 January 1942.
The Museum shows permanent exhibitions of works from its own collections but also temporary exhibitions that incorporate work loaned from elsewhere.
+ '''Number of minorities (1st and 2nd generation) in Oslo by country of origin in 2015'''
The reason for this discrepancy is that the EIU omits certain factors from its final index calculation, most notably housing.
The redevelopment of Oslo Airport (by the Aviaplan consortium) at Gardermoen, which opened in 1998, was Norway's largest construction project to date.
* St. Hanshaugen Park is an old public park on a high hill in central Oslo.
German architectural influence persisted in Norway, and many wooden buildings followed the principles of Neoclassicism.
Since 1947, Oslo has sent a , 50 to 100-year-old spruce, as an expression of gratitude toward Britain for its support of Norway during World War II.
File:Postgirobygget fra Gunerius.jpg|Postgirobygget at Oslo central station.
An ambitious building program was initiated, but realised very slowly because of economic constraints.
The part of the city built starting in 1624 is now often called ''Kvadraturen'' because of its orthogonal layout.
Each year, the international youth football tournament Norway Cup is held on Ekebergsletta and other places in the city.
In comparison, total tax revenues from the oil and gas industry on the Norwegian Continental Shelf amounted to about 16%.
Several important buildings were erected – The Bank of Norway (1828), the Royal Palace (1848), and the Storting (1866).Large areas were incorporated in 1839, 1859 an 1878.
50 different museums are located around the city.
Another popular sculpture is Sinnataggen, a baby boy stamping his foot in fury.
The seal of Oslo shows the city's patron saint, St. Hallvard, with his attributes, the millstone and arrows, with a naked woman at his feet.
Oslo (with neighbouring Sandvika-Asker) is built in a horseshoe shape on the shores of the Oslofjord and limited in most directions by hills and forests.
The last plague outbreak in Oslo occurred in 1654.
When Christiania was made capital of Norway in 1814, there were practically no buildings suitable for the many new government institutions.
Pakistanis make up the single largest ethnic minority, followed by Swedes, Somalis, and Poles.
However, not only has no evidence been found of a river "Lo" predating the work where Peder Claussøn Friis first proposed this etymology, but the very name is ungrammatical in Norwegian: the correct form would have been ''Loaros'' (cf.
File:Medieval Oslo map.jpg|Medieval Oslo
Only the university buildings were realised according to this plan.
As of January 1, 2016, the municipality of Oslo has a population of 658,390.
Long before this, Christiania had started to establish its stature as a centre of commerce and culture in Norway.
The newspapers ''Aftenposten'', ''Dagbladet'', ''Verdens Gang'', ''Dagens Næringsliv'', ''Finansavisen'', ''Dagsavisen'', ''Morgenbladet'', ''Vårt Land, Nationen'' and ''Klassekampen'' are published in Oslo.
There were also 942,084 in the city's urban area and an estimated 1.71 million in the Greater Oslo Region, within  of the city centre.
The highest point is Kirkeberget, at .
The immigrant population in the city is growing somewhat faster than the Norwegian population, and in the city proper this is now more than 25% of the total.
The transformation of the city went slowly for the first hundred years.
Among the world-famous artists who lived here during this period were Henrik Ibsen and Knut Hamsun (the latter was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature).
The urban municipality (''bykommune'') of Oslo and county of Oslo (''fylke'') are two parts of the same entity, making Oslo the only city in Norway where two administrative levels are integrated.
Linstow also planned Karl Johans gate, the avenue connecting the Palace and the city, with a monumental square halfway to be surrounded by buildings for University, the Parliament (Storting) and other institutions.
The eastern part of Oslo is more mixed, with some schools up to 97% immigrant share.
Several world-famous writers have either lived or been born in Oslo.
The greater Oslo region has several higher educational institutions and is home to more than 73,000 students.
This is also a main source of drinking water for large parts of Oslo.
In 1877 the city was renamed ''Kristiania''.
Christiania expanded its industry from 1840, most importantly around Akerselva.
File:Tallship Christiania Oslo Norway photo D Ramey Logan.jpg|Tallship Christiania in Oslo Norway
A century later, Norway was the weaker part in a personal union with Denmark, and Oslo's role was reduced to that of provincial administrative centre, with the monarchs residing in Copenhagen.
Close to 6,000 ships dock at the Port of Oslo annually with a total of 6 million tonnes of cargo and over five million passengers.
Following a spelling reform, it was known as '''Kristiania''' from 1877 to 1925, at which time its original Norwegian name was restored.
The population increased from approximately 10 000 in 1814 to 230 000 in 1900.
It was separated from the county of Akershus to become a county of its own in 1842.
A number of landmark buildings, particularly in Oslo, were built in the Functionalist style (better known in the US and Britain as Modernist), the first being Skansen restaurant (1925–1927) by Lars Backer, demolished in 1970.
There is also a newer landscaped sculpture park, Ekebergparken Sculpture Park, with works by Norwegian and international artists such as Salvador Dalí.
Nordstrand HE and Oppsal IF plays in the women's GRUNDIGligaen in handball, while Bækkelaget HE plays in the men's league.
Examples are Knut Hamsun and Henrik Ibsen.
Bjerke Travbane is the main venue for harness racing in the country.
Tøyenbadet is the largest indoor swimming facility in Oslo and one of the few pools in Norway offering a 50-metre main pool.
Hanshaugen' is also the name of the surrounding neighborhood as well as the larger administrative district (borough) that includes major parts of central Oslo.
The foyer and the roof are also used for concerts as well as the three stages.
Oslo has numerous religious communities.
Holmenkollen National Arena and Holmenkollbakken is the country's main biathlon and Nordic skiing venue.
Oslo occupies an arc of land at the northernmost end of the Oslofjord.
The World Cup Biathlon in Holmenkollen is held every year and here male and female competitors compete against each other in Sprint, Pursuit and Mass Start disciplines.
