He is arrested and dies after being tortured.
The ballet ''Othello'' was choreographed by John Neumeier to music by Arvo Pärt, Alfred Schnittke, Naná Vasconcelos et al.
Leavis describes Othello as "egotistical".
His Othello was captured on record in 1964 with Jay Robinson as Iago and on video in 1981 with Ron Moody as Iago.
The work premiered at the Connecticut College American Dance Festival in the same year.
Iago goads Cassio on to talk about his affair with Bianca, a local courtesan, but whispers her name so quietly that Othello believes the two men are talking about Desdemona.
Many critics have noted references to demonic possession throughout the play, especially in relation to Othello's seizure, a phenomenon often associated with possession in the popular consciousness of the day.
Famous nineteenth century Othellos included Edmund Kean, Edwin Forrest, Ira Aldridge, and Tommaso Salvini, and outstanding Iagos were Edwin Booth and Henry Irving.
This play was published by Narrative Eye and documents a fictional take on Othello’s young life before his character known in William Shakespeare’s play.
Brabantio has no option but to accompany Othello to the Duke's residence, where he accuses Othello of seducing Desdemona by witchcraft.
The work is attributed to "Shaxberd."
The film stars Welles as Othello and Suzanne Cloutier as Desdemona.
He did so on a tour at the start of 2009 produced by Northern Broadsides in collaboration with West Yorkshire Playhouse.
The plot of the Portuguese language novel ''Dom Casmurro'' by the Brazilian author Machado de Assis, a translator of ''Othello'' into Portuguese, is based upon the play.
Every time I moved my hair went wild."
Iago then accuses Bianca of the failed conspiracy to kill Cassio.
Othello confronts Desdemona, and then strangles her to death in their bed.
The senate is satisfied, once Desdemona confirms that she loves Othello, but Brabantio leaves saying that Desdemona will betray Othello: "Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:/She has deceived her father, and may thee."
The casting of the role comes with a political subtext.
It was published in 1996 by NEV Editions.
It is generally considered one of the great novels of Brazilian literature.
The first major screen production casting a black actor as Othello would not come until 1995 with Laurence Fishburne opposite Kenneth Branagh's Iago - not that there have been many major screen productions of ''Othello'': most film versions to date have been filmed stage productions.
He said, "Do what I used to do."
He achieves this by getting close to all characters and playing on their weaknesses while they refer to him as "honest" Iago, thus furthering his control over the characters.
Printed by N. O. Nicholas Okes for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Eagle and Child, in Brittans Bursse, 1622."
On 25 February 1999, ''Bandanna'', an English language opera in a prologue and two acts with a libretto by Irish poet Paul Muldoon and music by Daron Hagen was performed by the opera theatre at The University of Texas in Austin.
However, it did not win the award.
Other critics, most notably in the later twentieth century (after F. R. Leavis), have focused on Othello.
In the darkness, Iago manages to hide his identity, and when Lodovico and Gratiano hear Cassio's cries for help, Iago joins them.
and was premiered by the Hamburg Ballet in Hamburg on 27 January 1985, with Gamal Gouda as Othello, Gigi Hyatt as Desdemona, and Max Midinet as Iago.
Patrick Stewart played the role alongside an otherwise all-black cast in the Shakespeare Theatre Company's 1997 staging of the play and Thomas Thieme, also white, played Othello in a 2007 Munich Kammerspiele staging at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford.
Roderigo attacks Cassio in the street after Cassio leaves Bianca's lodgings.
As critics have established, the term 'Moor' referred to darker-skinned people in general, used interchangeably with similarly ambiguous terms such as 'African', 'Somali', 'Ethiopian', 'Negro', 'Arab', 'Berber', and even 'Indian' to designate a figure from Africa (or beyond)."
The former governor Montano arrives, with Gratiano and Iago.
The film noir colouring of the picture minimised any commentary on Othello's blackness, to the point that the critic F. R. Leavis wrote that the film made no reference to Othello's colour.
These two versions also differ from each other in their readings of numerous words.
Lack of funds (and costumes) forced Roderigo's death scene to be shot in a Turkish bath with performers wearing only large, ragged towels.
Honigmann discusses the view that Abd el-Ouahed ben Messaoud ben Mohammed Anoun, Moorish ambassador of the Arab King of Barbary to Queen Elizabeth I in 1600, was one inspiration for Othello.
The first certainly known performance occurred on 1 November 1604, at Whitehall Palace in London, being mentioned in a Revels account on "Hallamas Day, being the first of Nouembar", 1604, when "the Kings Maiesties plaiers" performed "A Play in the Banketinge house at Whit Hall Called The Moor of Venis."
Verdi and his librettist dispensed with the first act of the play.
Lodovico appoints Gratiano Othello's successor and exhorts Cassio to punish Iago justly.
One contemporary critic found the coloration too much, commenting that Olivier was "blacker than black, almost blue" .
url= http://art.thewalters.org/detail/9022
The opera is set in 1968 on the United States–Mexican border and borrows elements from Cinthio's tale, Shakespeare's play, and Verdi's opera.
I copied him exactly.
Olivier sent me a telegram on the first night.
Gambon had been in Olivier's earlier production.
Meanwhile, Iago sneaks away to find Othello and warns him that Brabantio is coming for him.
Iago convinces Roderigo to wake Brabantio and tell him about his daughter's elopement.
The American actor William Marshall performed the title role in at least six productions.
Olivier was among the last white actors to be greatly acclaimed as Othello, although the role continued to be played by such performers as Donald Sinden at the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1979-1980, Paul Scofield at the Royal National Theatre in 1980, Anthony Hopkins in the ''BBC Television Shakespeare'' production (1981), and Michael Gambon in a stage production at Scarborough directed by Alan Ayckbourn in 1990.
Quartos were also published in 1630, 1655, 1681, 1695, 1699 and 1705.
Franco Zeffirelli's 1986 film version of Verdi's opera starring Plácido Domingo as Othello was nominated for the BAFTA for foreign language film.
The "Ensign" then seeks revenge by disclosing to the "Squadron Leader" the "Moor's" involvement in Desdemona's death.
Soon after, on 8 December 1660, Thomas Killigrew's new King's Company acted the play at their Vere Street theatre, with Margaret Hughes as Desdemona – probably the first time a professional actress appeared on a public stage in England.
The 1982 Broadway staging starred James Earl Jones as Othello and Christopher Plummer as Iago, who became the only actor to receive a Tony Award nomination for a performance in the play.
The troubled production was filmed over the course of three years as Welles' time and money permitted, in Mogador, Morocco and Venice.
American Ballet Theatre was the first dance company outside Limon's to include the work in its repertory.
''Otello'', a four-act opera with an Italian libretto by Francesco Maria Berio di Salsi and music by Gioachino Rossini was first performed at the Teatro del Fondo, Naples, on 4 December 1816.
In Elizabethan discourse, the word "black" could suggest various concepts that extended beyond the physical colour of skin, including a wide range of negative connotations.
He reflects the archetypal villain, and has the biggest share of the dialogue.
File:დეზდემონა – პეტრე ოცხელი, უილიამ შექსპირის ოტელო, 1933 წ.JPG|Petre Otskheli design for Othello, staged by Kote Marjanishvili, 1933
Iago refuses to explain his motives, vowing to remain silent from that moment on.
Meanwhile, Roderigo complains that he has received no results from Iago in return for his money and efforts to win Desdemona, but Iago convinces him to kill Cassio.
Rather than focusing on racial disparity, the film plays on a difference between Desdemona and Othello in age, size and personal attractiveness.
Companies have also chosen to share the role between several actors during a performance.
Based on its style, the play is usually dated 1603 or 1604, but arguments have been made for dates as early as 1601 or 1602.
On the other hand, F .R.
You couldn't do it today, you'd get shot.
As the Protestant Reformation of England proclaimed the importance of pious, controlled behaviour in society, it was the tendency of the contemporary Englishman to displace society's "undesirable" qualities of barbarism, treachery, jealousy and libidinousness onto those who are considered "other".
He used to paint the big negro lips on.
Roderigo calls Othello 'the thicklips', which seems to refer to Sub-Saharan African physiognomy, but Honigmann counters that, as these comments are all intended as insults by the characters, they need not be taken literally.
The "Ensign", however, continues to escape detection in Desdemona's death, but engages in other crimes while in Venice.
While Shakespeare closely followed Cinthio's tale in composing ''Othello'', he departed from it in some details.
title= Othello}} The Walters Art Museum.
When Othello mentions the handkerchief as proof, Emilia realizes what her husband Iago has done, and she exposes him, whereupon he kills her.
When Desdemona drops a handkerchief (the first gift given to her by Othello), Emilia finds it, and gives it to her husband Iago, at his request, unaware of what he plans to do with it.
''Othello'' opened at the Donmar Warehouse in London on 4 December 2007, directed by Michael Grandage, with Chiwetel Ejiofor as Othello, Ewan McGregor as Iago, Tom Hiddleston as Cassio, Kelly Reilly as Desdemona and Michelle Fairley as Emillia.
It is a standard in dance companies around the world and notable interpreters of the Moor include Rudolf Nureyev.
Iago now persuades Othello to be suspicious of Cassio and Desdemona.
Between 1948 and 1952 Orson Welles directed ''The Tragedy of Othello: The Moor of Venice'' (1952), produced as a black-and-white film noir.
Another scholar suggests that the epileptic fit relates to the mind-body problem and the existence of the soul.
The film won the Palme d'Or at the 1952 Cannes Film Festival.
I stuck a pony tail on with a bell on the end of it.
Kerrigan suggests that the 1623 Folio version of Othello and a number of other plays may have been cleaned-up relative to the Quarto to conform with the 1606 Act to Restrain Abuses, which made it an offence 'in any Stage-play, Interlude, Shew, Maygame, or Pageant, iestingly, and prophanely to speake, or vse the holy Name of God, or of Christ Iesus, or of the holy Ghost, or of the Trinitie'.
News has arrived in Venice that the Turks are going to attack Cyprus; therefore Othello is summoned to advise the senators.
From his first entry, slender and magnificently tall, framed in a high Byzantine arch, clad in white samite, mystic, wonderful, a figure of Arabian romance and grace, to his last plunging of the knife into his stomach, Mr Marshall rode without faltering the play's enormous rhetoric, and at the end the house rose to him."
Shakespeare's most striking departure from Cinthio is the manner of his heroine's death.
Lodovico apprehends both Iago and Othello for the murders of Roderigo and Emilia, but Othello commits suicide.
The Folio also lacks a scattering of about a dozen lines or part-lines that are to be found in the Quarto.
The popular opera attracts world class singers and is found in the repertoire of prominent opera houses.
When Laurence Olivier gave his acclaimed performance of Othello at the Royal National Theatre in 1964, he had developed a case of stage fright that was so profound that when he was alone onstage, Frank Finlay (who was playing Iago) would have to stand offstage where Olivier could see him to settle his nerves.
Some of these cluster together in quite extensive passages.
There have been many differing views on the character of Othello over the years.
In March 2016, Onyeka, historian and writer of Blackamoores: ''Africans in Tudor England their Presence, Status and Origins'', produced a play entitled ''Young Othello''.
Nicholas Burt played the lead, with Charles Hart as Cassio; Walter Clun won fame for his Iago.
It is based on the story ''Un Capitano Moro'' ("A Moorish Captain") by Cinthio, a disciple of Boccaccio, first published in 1604.
Given its varied and enduring themes of racism, love, jealousy, betrayal, revenge and repentance, ''Othello'' is still often performed in professional and community theatre alike, and has been the source for numerous operatic, film, and literary adaptations.
In Cinthio, the two murderers escape detection.
Othello sees this, and Iago convinces him that Cassio received the handkerchief from Desdemona.
Other ballets include ''Prologue'' choreographed by Jacques d'Amboise for the New York City Ballet in 1967 as a prequel to Shakespeare's play, ''Othello'' choreographed by John Butler to the music of Dvořák for Carla Fracci and the La Scala Theatre Ballet in 1976, and a version choreographed by Jean-Pierre Bonnefoux for the Louisville Ballet in the 1980s.
This is not incompatible with the suggestion that the Quarto is based on an early version of the play, whilst the Folio represents Shakespeare's revised version.
Various uses of the word 'black' (for example, "Haply for I am black") are insufficient evidence for any accurate racial classification, Honigmann argues, since 'black' could simply mean 'swarthy' to Elizabethans.
On 22 November 1629, and on 6 May 1635, it played at the Blackfriars Theatre.
Cinthio drew a moral (which he placed in the mouth of Desdemona) that it is unwise for European women to marry the temperamental men of other nations.
The opera is rarely performed.
Othello blames Cassio for the disturbance and strips him of his rank.
'''''Othello''''' ('''''The Tragedy of Othello, the Moor of Venice''')'' is a tragedy by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written in 1603.
(Indeed, according to the Kennedy Center's biographical note on Domingo, Laurence Olivier saw Domingo in ''Otello'' and, in a mock-furious voice, told Franco Zeffirelli: "You realise that Domingo plays Othello as well as I do, and he has that voice!")
He stayed with his retinue in London for several months and occasioned much discussion.
There is no consensus over Othello's ethnic origin.
The Revels account was first printed by Peter Cunningham in 1842, and, while its authenticity was once challenged, is now regarded as genuine (as authenticated by A.E.
The ballet was broadcast on PBS's ''Great Performances: Dance in America'' and the program was nominated for an Emmy Award.
Brabantio, Roderigo, and several minor characters are not found in Cinthio, for example, and Shakespeare's Emilia takes part in the handkerchief mischief while her counterpart in Cinthio does not.
Unlike Welles's film, Stuart Burge's ''Othello'' (1965), based on John Dexter's National Theatre Company's production, starring Laurence Olivier, brings issues of race to the fore, with Olivier putting on an 'African accent' and entering in a large 'ethnic' necklace and a dressing gown.
Iago plants the handkerchief in Cassio's lodgings, then tells Othello to watch Cassio's reactions while Iago questions him.
I was at the back like that, standing for an hour.
''Omkara'' is a version in Hindi set in Uttar Pradesh, starring Ajay Devgan as Omkara (Othello), Saif Ali Khan as Langda Tyagi (Iago), Kareena Kapoor as Dolly (Desdemona), Vivek Oberoi as Kesu (Cassio), Bipasha Basu as Billo (Bianca) and Konkona Sen Sharma as Indu (Emilia).
As it hath beene diuerse times acted at the Globe, and at the Black-Friers, by his Maiesties Seruants.
Olivier used to lower his voice for Othello so I did mine.
Ejiofor, Hiddleston and Fairley all received nominations for Laurence Olivier Awards, with Ejiofor winning.
The play was entered into the Register of the Stationers Company on 6 October 1621, by Thomas Walkley, and was first published in quarto format by him in 1622:
''Othello'' possesses an unusually detailed performance record.
Iago tells Brabantio that "an old black ram / is tupping your white ewe" (1.1.88).
During the scuffle, Iago comes from behind Cassio and badly cuts his leg.
", with the story set in an American high school and revolving around sports rather than warfare.
At the start of the Restoration era, on 11 October 1660, Samuel Pepys saw the play at the Cockpit Theatre.
Malayalam film ''Kaliyattam'' is an adapted version of ''Othello'' against the backdrop of the Hindu Theyyam performance.
The story revolves around four central characters: Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army; his beloved wife, Desdemona; his loyal lieutenant, Cassio; and his trusted but ultimately unfaithful ensign, Iago.
It was Verdi's second to last opera (followed by another Shakespeare adaptation, ''Falstaff'') and is considered by many his greatest.
Unlike in ''Othello'', in Cinthio, the "Ensign" (the play's Iago) lusts after Desdemona and is spurred to revenge when she rejects him.
Except I had a pony tail.
Othello explains that Desdemona became enamoured of him for the sad and compelling stories he told of his life before Venice, not because of any witchcraft.
Ground-breaking black American actor Paul Robeson played the role in three different productions between 1930 and 1959.
Othello is referred to as a "Barbary horse" (1.1.113) and a "lascivious Moor" (1.1.127).
Mexican choreographer José Limón created a 20-minute, four character ballet called ''The Moor's Pavane'' to the music of Henry Purcell in 1949.
Iago hates Othello for promoting a younger man named Cassio above him, whom Iago considers less capable a soldier than himself, and tells Roderigo that he plans to use Othello for his own advantage.
Shakespeare's opening scenes are unique to his tragedy as is the tender scene between Emilia and Desdemona as the lady prepares for bed.
The play is there attributed to "Shaxberd".
Subsequent performances took place on Monday, 30 April 1610 at the Globe Theatre, and at Oxford in September 1610.
Giuseppe Verdi and librettist Arrigo Boito adapted Shakespeare's play to ''Otello'', an Italian grand opera in four acts that was first performed at the Teatro alla Scala, Milan on 5 February 1887.
His Othello was called by Harold Hobson of the London Sunday Times "the best Othello of our time," continuing: "...nobler than Tearle, more martial than Gielgud, more poetic than Valk.
:''"Tragœdy of Othello, The Moore of Venice''.
It may be one index of the play's power that ''Othello'' was one of the very few Shakespearean plays that was never adapted and changed during the Restoration and the eighteenth century.
Marshall also played Othello in a jazz musical version, ''Catch My Soul'', with Jerry Lee Lewis as Iago, in Los Angeles in 1968.
The interpretation of the role is broadening, with theatre companies casting Othello as a woman or inverting the gender of the whole cast to explore gender questions in Shakespeare's text.
In the past, Othello would often have been portrayed by a white actor in blackface or in a black mask: more recent actors who chose to 'black up' include Ralph Richardson (1937); John Gielgud (1961); Laurence Olivier (1964); Anthony Hopkins (1981) and Orson Welles.
This performance was recorded complete on LP, and filmed by popular demand in 1965 (according to a biography of Olivier, tickets for the stage production were notoriously hard to get).
Stand up comedian Lenny Henry was the latest big name to play Othello.
As Shakespeare regained popularity among nineteenth-century French Romantics, poet, playwright, and novelist Alfred de Vigny created a French translation of ''Othello'', titled ''Le More de Venise'', which premiered at the Comédie-Française on 24 October 1829.
Othello, belatedly realising Desdemona's innocence, stabs Iago but not fatally, saying that he would rather have Iago live the rest of his life in pain.
Emilia calls for help.
Cinthio's "Moor" is the model for Shakespeare's Othello, but some researchers believe the poet also took inspiration from the several Moorish delegations from Morocco to Elizabethan England ''circa'' 1600.
of Shakespeare's collected plays.
It may also be that the Quarto was cut in the printing house to meet a fixed number of pages.
It also resembles an incident described in the earlier tale of "The Three Apples", one of the stories narrated in the ''One Thousand and One Nights'' (''Arabian Nights'').
Cinthio's "Ensign's Wife" (the play's Emilia), survives her husband's death to tell her story.
There are those who also take a less critical approach to the character of Othello such as William Hazlitt, who said: "the nature of the Moor is noble ... but his blood is of the most inflammable kind".
I played him as an Arab.
James O'Neill also alternated the roles of Othello and Iago with Booth.
While Shakespeare's play was written only a few years afterwards, Honigmann questions the view that ben Messaoud himself was a significant influence on it.
In Shakespeare, Othello suffocates Desdemona, but in Cinthio, the "Moor" commissions the "Ensign" to bludgeon his wife to death with a sand-filled stocking.
Cinthio describes each gruesome blow, and, when the lady is dead, the "Ensign" and the "Moor" place her lifeless body upon her bed, smash her skull, and cause the cracked ceiling above the bed to collapse upon her, giving the impression its falling rafters caused her death.
I didn't have any lines at all.
Othello was frequently performed as an Arab Moor during the 19th century.
Othello proceeds to make Desdemona's life miserable, hitting her in front of visiting Venetian nobles.
When Emilia arrives, Othello accuses Desdemona of adultery.
In his absence, Iago gets Cassio drunk, then persuades Roderigo to draw Cassio into a fight.
Cassio wounds Roderigo.
When Cassio identifies Roderigo as one of his attackers, Iago secretly stabs Roderigo to stop him revealing the plot.
No English translation of Cinthio was available in Shakespeare's lifetime, and verbal echoes in ''Othello'' are closer to the Italian original than to Gabriel Chappuy's 1584 French translation.
Enraged and hurt, Othello resolves to kill his wife and asks Iago to kill Cassio.
The work remains in the repertoire of the Hamburg Ballet, seeing its 100th performance in 2008.
He refuses to admit his guilt and is condemned to exile.
He commented, however, that he did "not dare to play the Moor as a full-blooded negro".
For knowledge of this, Shakespeare may have used Gasparo Contarini's ''The Commonwealth and Government of Venice'', in Lewes Lewkenor's 1599 translation.
It is one of the few mainstream Indian movies to contain uncensored profanity.
A modernised, loose retelling, ''O'', completed in 1999 and released in 2001, featured African-American actor Mekhi Phifer in the lead role, which was renamed from "Othello" to "Odin James" or "O.
"Renaissance representations of the Moor were vague, varied, inconsistent, and contradictory.
The ballet is recorded on Kultur video.
Cinthio's tale has been described as a "partly racist warning" about the dangers of miscegenation.
Although its title suggests that the tragedy belongs primarily to Othello, Iago plays an important role in the plot.
And then I went and played Othello myself at Birmingham Rep I was 27.
The work has been staged by the San Francisco Ballet with Desmond Richardson, Yuan Yuan Tan, and Parrish Maynard in the principal roles.
In ''Othello'', it is Iago who manipulates all other characters at will, controlling their movements and trapping them in an intricate net of lies.
In III.III he denounces Desdemona's supposed sin as being "black as mine own face."
The assumed characteristics of black men, or "the other", were both instigated and popularised by Renaissance dramas of the time; for example, the treachery of black men inherent to George Peele's ''The Battle of Alcazar'' (1588).
In an interview Gambon commented "I wasn't even the second gentleman in that.
Desdemona's relatives eventually find and kill him.
He demotes him, and refuses to have him in his company.
In June 2016, baritone and actor David Serero plays the title role in a Moroccan adaptation featuring Judeo-Arabic songs and Verdi's opera version in New York
In 1997, Patrick Stewart took the role of Othello with the Shakespeare Theatre Company (Washington, D.C.) in a race-bending performance, in a "photo negative" production of a white ''Othello'' with an otherwise all-black cast.
The film was directed by Vishal Bhardwaj who earlier adapted Shakespeare's Macbeth as ''Maqbool''.
In 1998, Suresh Gopi received the National Film Award for Best Actor, and Jayaraj the award for Best Director for their work on the film.
Michael Neill, editor of ''The Oxford Shakespeare'', notes that the earliest critical references to Othello's colour (Thomas Rymer's 1693 critique of the play, and the 1709 engraving in Nicholas Rowe's edition of Shakespeare) assume him to be Sub-Saharan, while the earliest known North African interpretation was not until Edmund Kean's production of 1814.
He was first played by a black man on the London stage in 1833, by Ira Aldridge.
In 2002, modern dance choreographer Lar Lubovitch created a full-length ballet in three acts based on the Shakespeare play and Cinthio's tale with a score by Elliot Goldenthal.
Written by William Shakespeare.
Iago twice uses the word 'Barbary' or 'Barbarian' to refer to Othello, seemingly referring to the Barbary coast inhabited by Berbers.
A.C. Bradley calls Othello the "most romantic of all of Shakespeare's heroes" (by "hero" Bradley means protagonist) and "the greatest poet of them all".
