The City of Ottawa reported that the city had an estimated population of 960,754 as of December 2015.
There are about 2130 hours of average sunshine annually (46% of possible).
Since 1969, Ottawa has been the home of the National Arts Centre, a major performing arts venue that houses four stages and is home to the National Arts Centre Orchestra, the Ottawa Symphony Orchestra and Opera Lyra Ottawa.
On 29 June 2007, the Rideau Canal, which stretches  to Kingston, Fort Henry and four Martello towers in the Kingston area was recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Hence they began naming the falls and river 'rideau' which is the French equivalent of the English word for curtain.
By 1854 it also had a modern all season Bytown and Prescott Railway that carried passengers, lumber and supplies the 82-kilometre distance to Prescott on the Saint Lawrence River and beyond.
Most of the city has traditionally supported the Liberal Party.
The Kanata suburban area includes the former village of Stittsville to the southwest.
Annual precipitation averages around .
Bytown, Ottawa's original name, was founded as a community in 1826 when hundreds of land speculators were attracted to the south side of the river when news spread that British authorities were immediately constructing the northerly end of the Rideau Canal military project at that location.
Three years later, Samuel de Champlain wrote about the waterfalls of the area and about his encounters with the Algonquins, who had been using the Ottawa River for centuries.
The Ottawa and Gatineau rivers were historically important in the logging and lumber industries and the Rideau as part of the Rideau Canal system for military, commercial and, subsequently, recreational purposes.
In 2011, the populations of the City of Ottawa and the Ottawa-Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) were 883,391 and 1,236,324 respectively.
In 1958 the National Capital Commission was established as a Crown Corporation from the passing of the National Capital Act in order to implement the Greber Plan recommendations which it successfully accomplished during the 1960s and 1970s.
By the 1980s, Bell Northern Research (later Nortel) employed thousands, and large federally assisted research facilities such as the National Research Council contributed to an eventual technology boom.
This was followed by large growth in the high-tech industry during the 1990s and 2000s.
The military purpose of the canal was to provide a secure route between Montreal and Kingston on Lake Ontario, bypassing the stretch of the St. Lawrence River bordering the state of New York that had left the British forces easily exposed to American enemy fire during the War of 1812.
Federal buildings in the National Capital Region are managed by Public Works Canada, while most of the federal land in the region is managed by the National Capital Commission; its control of much undeveloped land gives the NCC a great deal of influence over the city's development.
Smaller groups include Latin Americans, Southeast Asians, Filipinos, and West Asians.
The Canadian War Museum houses over 3.75 million artifacts and was moved to an expanded facility in 2005.
It is also a member of the U15, a group of highly respected research-intensive universities in Canada.
The Ottawa area includes CFS Leitrim, CFB Uplands, and the former CFB Rockcliffe.
Algonquin College has also won numerous national championships.
The overall growth of jobs in Ottawa-Gatineau was 1.3% compared to the previous year, down to sixth place among Canada's largest cities.
The City of Ottawa is the second largest employer with over 15,000 employees.
Over 20 percent of the city's population is foreign-born, with the most common non-Canadian countries of origin being the United Kingdom (8.8% of those foreign-born), China (8.0%), and Lebanon (4.8%).
Some of these communities are Burritts Rapids; Ashton; Fallowfield; Kars; Fitzroy Harbour; Munster; Carp; North Gower; Metcalfe; Constance Bay  and Osgoode  and Richmond.
Today, several buildings are slightly taller than the Peace Tower, with the tallest located on Albert Street being the 29-storey Place de Ville (Tower C) at .
Ottawa is situated on the south bank of the Ottawa River and contains the mouths of the Rideau River and Rideau Canal.
The two French-language boards are the French-Catholic ''Conseil des écoles catholiques du Centre-Est'' with 49 schools, and the French ''Conseil des écoles publiques de l'Est de l'Ontario'' with 37 schools.
In the province, however, this rate increased over the same period from 6.4 to 9.1%.
The city has a main urban area but there are many other urban, suburban and rural areas within the modern city's limits.
Established in 1975, the Great Canadian Theatre Company specializes in the production of Canadian plays at a local level.
Ottawa's median age of 39.2 is both below the provincial and national averages .
On 1 June 1912 the Grand Trunk Railway opened both the Château Laurier hotel and its neighbouring downtown Union Station.
Secondly, Ottawa was located approximately midway between Toronto and Kingston (in Canada West) and Montreal and Quebec City (in Canada East).
Examples include a magnitude 5.2 earthquake on 1 January 2000, a magnitude 4.5 earthquake on 24 February 2006, a magnitude 5.0 earthquake on 23 June 2010, and a magnitude 5.2 earthquake on 17 May 2013.
From the 1960s until the 1980s, the National Capital Region experienced a building boom.
Many of the telecommunications and new technology are located in the western part of the city (formerly Kanata).
Many other properties of cultural value have been designated as having  "heritage elements" by the City of Ottawa under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act.
The Library of Parliament and Parliament Hill landscaping would not be completed until 1876.
Ottawa's domestic architecture is dominated by single family homes.
The following year, the town would soon be named after British military engineer Colonel John By who was responsible for the entire Rideau Waterway construction project.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Ottawa was  on 4 July 1913, 1 August 1917 and 11 August 1944.
This new downtown location was very close to Ottawa's first (1849-1877) and second (1877-1931) City Halls.
In recent years, Carleton has become ranked highly among comprehensive universities in Canada.
Similar to its Upper Canada and Lower Canada namesakes, historically 'Upper Town' was predominantly English speaking and Protestant whereas 'Lower Town' was predominantly French, Irish and Catholic.
Snow and ice are dominant during the winter season.
Queen Victoria made her 'Queen's choice' very quickly just before welcoming in the New Year.
*The University of Ottawa (originally named the "College of Bytown") was the first post-secondary institution established in the city in 1848.
The English-language Ottawa-Carleton District School Board (OCDSB) is the largest board with 147 schools, followed by the English-Catholic Ottawa Catholic School Board with 85 schools.
The fire also spread across the Ottawa River and destroyed about one fifth of Ottawa from the Lebreton Flats south to Booth Street and down to Dow's Lake.
The Ottawa Redblacks are a professional Canadian Football team playing in the Canadian Football League.
It is the second-largest city in Ontario, fourth-largest city in the country, and the fourth-largest CMA in the country.
The first maps of the area used the word Ottawa to name the river.
Wright pioneered the Ottawa Valley timber trade (soon to be the area's most significant economic activity) by transporting timber by river from the Ottawa Valley to Quebec City.
The Ottawa river valley has  archaeological sites with arrow heads, pottery, and stone tools.
Casual recreational activities, such as skating, cycling, hiking, sailing, golfing, skiing and fishing/ice fishing are also popular.
Rural parts of the former township of Cumberland, with a large number of Francophones, traditionally support the Liberal Party, though their support has recently weakened.
The university's campus sits between Old Ottawa South and Dow's Lake.
Most of these companies specialize in telecommunications, software development and environmental technology.
Between 1987 and 2002, 131,816 individuals relocated to the city, which represents 75% of the population growth for that period.
Ottawa had the fourth highest GDP growth rate among major Canadian cities in 2007 at 2.7%, which exceeded the Canadian average of 2.4%.
A further 49 countries accredit their embassies and missions in the United States to Canada.
The original Parliament buildings which included the Centre, East and West Blocks were constructed between 1859 and 1866 in the Gothic Revival style.
Also included in this new city hall complex was an adjacent 19th century restored heritage building formerly known as the Ottawa Normal School.
There are four main public school boards in Ottawa: English, English-Catholic, French, and French-Catholic.
It was redeveloped as a ceremonial centre in 1938 as part of the City Beautiful Movement and became the site of the National War Memorial in 1939 and designated a National Historic Site in 1984.
An integrated hub-and-spoke system of services is available consisting of: regular buses travelling on fixed routes in mixed traffic, typical of most urban transit systems; a bus rapid transit (BRT) system which is a high-frequency bus service operating on the transitway (a network of mostly grade-separated dedicated bus lanes within their own right of way) and having full stations with Park & Ride facilities, further supported by on-road reserved bus lanes and priority traffic signal controls; a light rail transit (LRT) system known as the ''O-Train'' operating on one north-south route (the Trillium Line); and a door-to-door bus service for the disabled known as ParaTranspo.
Professional soccer club Ottawa Fury FC play in the North American Soccer League, the second division in North American pro soccer after Major League Soccer.
Both Ottawa Fury FC and the Ottawa Redblacks play their home games at TD Place Stadium.
Some of Ottawa's suburbs are swing areas, notably central Nepean and, despite its francophone population, Orléans.
The public transit system is operated by OC Transpo, a department of the city.
Those that identify their mother tongue as English constitute 62.4 percent, while those with French as their mother tongue make up 14.2 percent of the population.
The university would eventually expand to become the largest English-French bilingual university in the world.
Another major employer is the health sector, which employs over 18,000 people.
Across the canal to the west lies ''Centretown'' and ''Downtown Ottawa'', which is the city's financial and commercial hub and home to the Parliament of Canada and numerous federal government department headquarters, notably the Privy Council Office.
This line, known today as the Trillium Line, was dubbed the O-Train and connected downtown Ottawa to the southern suburbs via Carleton University.
It stands on the south bank of the Ottawa River in the eastern portion of southern Ontario.
The City of Ottawa is a single-tier municipality, meaning it is in itself a census division and has no county or regional municipality government above it.
The economic downturn resulted in an increase in the unemployment rate between April 2008 and April 2009 from 4.7 to 6.3%.
The area was used for wild edible harvesting, hunting, fishing, trade, travel, and camps for over 6500 years by local populations.
He also laid out the streets of the town and created two distinct neighbourhoods named "Upper Town" west of the canal and "Lower Town" east of the canal.
A wide range of Canadian television broadcast networks and systems, and an extensive number of radio stations, are broadcast in both English and French.
In 2001, Ottawa City Hall moved back downtown to a relatively new building (1990) on 110 Laurier Avenue West that had been the home of the now defunct Regional Municipality of Ottawa-Carleton.
The Algonquins called the Ottawa River ''Kichi Sibi'' or ''Kichissippi'' meaning "Great River" or "Grand River".
The city is the most educated in Canada, and it is home to a number of post-secondary, research, and cultural institutions, including the National Arts Centre and the National Gallery.
Both OC Transpo and the Quebec-based ''Société de transport de l'Outaouais (STO)'' operate bus services between Ottawa and Gatineau.
The city name "Ottawa" was chosen in reference to the Ottawa River nearby, which is a word derived from the Algonquin word ''Odawa'', meaning  "to trade".
The Rideau Canal is the oldest continuously operated canal system in North America, and in 2007, it was registered as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
On New Year's Eve 1857, Queen Victoria, as a symbolic and political gesture, was presented with the responsibility of selecting a location for the permanent capital of the Province of Canada.
In addition, there are 24 other National Historic Sites of Canada in Ottawa, including: the Central Chambers, the Central Experimental Farm, the Château Laurier, Confederation Square, the former Ottawa Teachers' College, Langevin Block, Laurier House and the Parliament Buildings.
Philemon Wright, a New Englander, created the first settlement in the area on 7 March 1800 on the north side of the river, across from Ottawa in Hull.
After O'Brien's election transit plans were changed to establish a series of light rail stations from the east side of the city into downtown, and for using a tunnel through the downtown core.
Public transportation began in 1870 with a horsecar system, overtaken in the 1890s by a vast electric streetcar system that lasted until 1959.
However, not all rural areas support the Conservative Party.
The city was designated as a "Gold" Bicycle Friendly Community in 2013 by Share the Road Cycling Coalition, the first city in Ontario to receive this designation.
During part of the winter season the Ottawa section of the canal forms the world's largest skating rink thereby providing both a recreational venue and a  transportation path to downtown for ice skaters (from Carleton University and Dow's Lake to the Rideau Centre and National Arts Centre).
In reality, Prime Minister John A. Macdonald had assigned this selection process to the Executive Branch of the Government, as previous attempts to arrive at a consensus had ended in deadlock.
Ottawa's city limits had been increasing over the years, but it acquired the most territory on 1 January 2001, when it amalgamated all the municipalities of the Regional Municipality of Ottawa-Carleton into one single city.
Several weekly and monthly community papers are also published, including the Kitchissippi Times.
On 15 October 2001, a diesel-powered light rail transit (LRT) line was introduced on an experimental basis.
The city's growth led to strains on the public transit system and to bridges.
In 2006, the National Capital Commission completed aesthetic enhancements to Confederation Boulevard, a ceremonial route of existing roads linking key attractions on both sides of the Ottawa River.
The area has three major rivers that meet, making it an important trade and travel area for thousands of years.
The government already owned the land that would eventually become Parliament Hill which they thought would be an ideal location for building the Parliament Buildings.
Large technology companies such as Nortel, Corel, Mitel, Cognos, Halogen Software, Shopify and JDS Uniphase were founded in the city.
The small size of the town it was thought would make it less prone to rampaging politically motivated mobs, as had happened in the previous Canadian capitals.
This is especially true in the former Townships of West Carleton, Goulbourn, Rideau and Osgoode, which are more in line with the conservative areas in the surrounding counties.
In 2012, the city was ranked for the third consecutive year as the best community in Canada to live in by MoneySense.
As a single tier municipality, Ottawa has responsibility for all municipal services, including fire, emergency medical services, police, parks, roads, sidewalks, public transit, drinking water, storm water, sanitary sewage and solid waste.
The lane is separated from car traffic by a low concrete barrier with many gaps to allow for loading and unloading of people and goods.
In 2011, Ottawa was selected as the first city to receive Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge during their tour of Canada.
In 1958 a new City Hall opened on Green Island near Rideau falls where urban renewal had recently transformed this former industrial location into green space.
The decision to extend the O-Train, and to replace it with an electric light rail system was a major issue in the 2006 municipal elections where Chiarelli was defeated by businessman Larry O'Brien.
There are also a number of specialized hospital facilities, such as the University of Ottawa Heart Institute and the Royal Ottawa Mental Health Centre.
The Carleton Ravens are nationally ranked in basketball, and the Ottawa Gee-Gees are nationally ranked in football and basketball.
Founded in 1826 as Bytown, and incorporated as "Ottawa" in 1855, the city has evolved into a political and technological centre of Canada.
The annual cost of living rate in 2007 grew 1.9%.
Ottawa became one of Canada's largest high tech cities and was nicknamed Silicon Valley North.
At present, Ottawa is host to 130 embassies.
Jim Watson, who had been the last mayor of Ottawa prior to amalgamation, was re-elected in the 2010 election.
The unemployment rate in Ottawa-Gatineau was 5.2% (only in Ottawa: 5.1%), which was below the national average of 6.0%.
The city had a population density of 316.6 persons per km2 in 2006, while the CMA had a population density of 196.6 persons per km2.
Ottawa borders Gatineau, Quebec; the two form the core of the Ottawa–Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) and the National Capital Region (NCR).
In December 2012, City Council voted unanimously to move forward with the Confederation Line, a 12.5&nbsp;km light rail transit line, to be fully operational by 2018.
On average Ottawa receives  of snowfall annually but maintains an average  of snowpack throughout the three winter months.
The average gross income in the region amounted to $40,078, an increase of 4.9% compared to the previous year.
The farther one goes outside the city centre like to Kanata and Barrhaven and rural areas, the voters tend to be increasingly conservative, both fiscally and socially.
The Ottawa Little Theatre, originally called the Ottawa Drama League at its inception in 1913, is the longest-running community theatre company in Ottawa.
Winds in Ottawa are generally Westerlies averaging 13&nbsp;km/h but tend to be slightly more dominant during the winter.
Bytown's population grew to 1,000 as the Rideau Canal was being completed in 1832.
Ottawa is also an important technology centre; in 2015, its 1800 companies employ approximately 63,400 people.
Ottawa also has two main public colleges – Algonquin College and La Cité collégiale.
Most domestic buildings are clad in brick, with small numbers covered in wood or stone.
It was able to bypass the unnavigable sections of the Cataraqui and Rideau Rivers and various small lakes along the waterway due to flooding techniques and the construction of 47 water transport locks.The Rideau River got its name from early French explorers who thought that the water falls located at the point where the Rideau River empties into the Ottawa River resembled a 'curtain'.
Average relative humidity averages 54% in the afternoon and 84% by morning.
It connects the Saint Lawrence River on Lake Ontario at Kingston to the Ottawa River near Parliament Hill.
About 6.1% of residents are not Canadian citizens.
On average 11 days of the three summer months have temperatures exceeding , or 37 days if the humidex is considered.
The Federal government is the city's largest employer, employing over 110,000 individuals from the National Capital region.
Nordion, i-Stat as well as the National Research Council of Canada and OHRI are part of the growing life science sector.
An average 16 days of the three winter months experience temperatures below , or 41 days if the wind chill is considered.
As of December 31 2015, there are 900 km of cycling facilities located in Ottawa, including 435 km of multi use pathways, 8 km of cycle tracks, 200 km of on-road bicycle lanes and 257 km of paved shoulders.
*Carleton University was founded in 1942 to meet the needs of returning World War II veterans and later became Ontario's first private, non-denominational college.
Sport in Ottawa has a history dating back to the 19th century.
Regional Chair Bob Chiarelli was elected as the new city's first mayor in the 2000 municipal election, defeating Gloucester mayor Claudette Cain.
Ottawa is governed by the 24-member Ottawa City Council consisting of 23 councillors each representing one ward and the mayor, currently Jim Watson, elected in a citywide vote.
The region of Ottawa-Gatineau has the third highest income of all major Canadian cities.
Ottawa sits at the confluence of three major rivers: the Ottawa River, the Gatineau River and the Rideau River.
In October 2012, City Council approved the final Lansdowne Park plan, an agreement with the Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group that will see a new stadium, increased green space, and housing and retail added to the site.
While the number of employees in the federal government stagnated, the high-technology industry grew by 2.4%.
The Senators play their home games at the Canadian Tire Centre.
Approximately ten percent of Ottawa's GDP is derived from finance, insurance and real estate whereas employment is in goods-producing industries is only half the national average.
Until then, City Hall had temporarily been located for 27 years (1931-1958) at the Transportation Building adjacent to Union Station and now part of the Rideau Centre.
The coldest temperature ever recorded was  on 29 December 1933.
Non-Christian religions are also very well established in Ottawa, the largest being Islam (6.7%), Hinduism (1.4%), Buddhism (1.3%), and Judaism (1.2%).
Construction is underway on the Confederation Line, a  light-rail transit line (LRT), which includes a  tunnel through the downtown area featuring three underground stations.
These include Arabic (3.2%), Chinese (3.0%), Spanish (1.2%), Italian (1.1%), and many others.
The city has a high standard of living and low unemployment.
There are three main daily local newspapers printed in Ottawa: two English newspapers, the ''Ottawa Citizen'' established as ''the Bytown Packet'' in 1845 and the ''Ottawa Sun'', with 900,197 and 274,628 weekly circulation respectively, and one French newspaper, ''Le Droit''.
Central Ottawa is usually more left-leaning, and the New Democratic Party have won ridings there.
The 'Queen's choice' turned out to be the small frontier town of Ottawa for two main reasons: Firstly, Ottawa's isolated location in a back country surrounded by dense forest far from the Canada–US border and situated on a cliff face would make it more defensible from attack.
Mercer ranks Ottawa with the third highest quality of living of any large city in the Americas, and 16th highest in the world.
Colonel By set up military barracks on the site of today's Parliament Hill.
Ottawa's former industrial appearance was vastly altered by the 1950 Greber Plan.
There are also the communities of Manotick and Riverside South  on the other side of the Rideau River, and Greely, southeast of Riverside South.
Across the Ottawa River, which forms the border between Ontario and Quebec, lies the city of Gatineau, itself the result of amalgamation of the former Quebec cities of Hull and Aylmer together with Gatineau.
Ottawa is currently home to four professional sports teams.
The  project broke ground in 2013, with operation scheduled to start in 2018.
The Rideau Canal (Rideau Waterway) first opened in 1832 and is 202 kilometres in length.
The city is home to an assortment of amateur organized team sports such as soccer, basketball, baseball, curling, rowing, hurling and horse racing.
Nepean is another major suburb which also includes Barrhaven.
An additional 20.4 percent of the population list languages other than English and French as their mother tongue.
Across the Ottawa river in Gatineau is the most visited museum in Canada, the Canadian Museum of History.
Bytown encountered some impassioned and violent times in her early pioneer period that included Irish labour unrest that attributed to the Shiners' War from 1835 to 1845 and political dissension that was evident from the 1849 Stony Monday Riot.
Over time, Carleton would make the transition to the public university that it is today.
In 1855 Bytown was renamed ''Ottawa'' and incorporated as a city.
The city is also home to the Canada Agriculture Museum, the Canada Aviation and Space Museum, the Canada Science and Technology Museum, Billings Estate Museum, Bytown Museum, Canadian Museum of Contemporary Photography, Canadian Ski Museum, Currency Museum, and the Portrait Gallery of Canada.
The library system had 2.3 million items .
The southern and western parts of the old city of Ottawa are generally moderate and swing to the Conservative Party.
Designed by Canadian Aboriginal architect Douglas Cardinal, the curving-shaped complex, built at a cost of 340 million USD, also houses the Canadian Children's Museum, the Canadian Postal Museum and a 3D IMAX theatre.
Its original boundaries were expanded through numerous minor annexations and were ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and major amalgamation in 2001 which significantly increased its land area.
He, with five other families and twenty-five labourers,  set about to create an agricultural community called Wrightsville.
It ranked second out of 150 worldwide in the Numbeo quality of life index 2014-2015, and it contains a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Because most streets either have wide curb lanes or bicycle lanes, cycling is a popular mode of transportation in the region throughout the year.
Business, finance, administration, and sales and service occupations rank high among types of occupations.
On 10 July 2011 Ottawa saw its first dedicated, segregated bike lanes in the downtown core.
The city is also home to the head office of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, although it is not the primary production location of most CBC radio or television programming.
In May 2011, The NCC introduced the Bixi Bike rental program.
Another free commuter daily paper, Metro Ottawa was added in the 2000s.
These pathways are used for transportation, tourism, and recreation.
On 3 February 1916 the Centre Block of the Parliament buildings was destroyed by a fire.
The House of Commons and Senate was temporarily relocated to the then recently constructed Victoria Memorial Museum, now the Canadian Museum of Nature until the completion of the new Centre Block in 1922, the centrepiece of which is a dominant Gothic revival styled structure known as the Peace Tower.
The Ottawa Public Library was created in 1906 as part of the famed Carnegie library system.
French architect-planner Jacques Greber was hired by then Prime Minister Mackenzie King to design an urban plan for managing development in the National Capital Region to make it more aesthetically pleasing and thus more befitting a location that was the political centre of Canada.
Amongst the city's national museums and galleries is the National Gallery of Canada; designed by famous architect Moshe Safdie, it is a permanent home to the Maman sculpture.
There are also smaller numbers of semi-detached, rowhouses, and apartment buildings.
The skyline has been controlled by building height restrictions originally implemented to keep Parliament Hill and the Peace Tower at  visible from most parts of the city.
Members of visible minority groups (non-white/European) constitute 23.7%, while those of Aboriginal origin make up 2.1% of the total population.
