In 1754 the artillery school was reopened on a semi-secret basis.
Intercultural marriages also played their part in creating the characteristic Ottoman elite culture.
By the late 18th century, a number of defeats in several wars with Russia led some people in the Ottoman Empire to conclude that the reforms of Peter the Great had given the Russians an edge, and the Ottomans would have to keep up with Western technology in order to avoid further defeats.
An estimate of 7,230,660 for the first census held in 1831 is considered a serious undercount, as this census was meant only to register possible conscripts.
The ''Ottoman Navy Foundation'' was established in 1910 to buy new ships through public donations.
By 1881, the Ottoman Empire agreed to have its debt controlled by an institution known as the Ottoman Public Debt Administration, a council of European men with presidency alternating between France and Britain.
Following the Young Turk Revolution in 1908, the Committee of Union and Progress sought to develop a strong Ottoman naval force.
The Treaty also revealed that the Ottoman Empire was on the defensive and unlikely to present any further aggression in Europe.
These court categories were not, however, wholly exclusive: for instance, the Islamic courts—which were the Empire's primary courts—could also be used to settle a trade conflict or disputes between litigants of differing religions, and Jews and Christians often went to them to obtain a more forceful ruling on an issue.
By the mid-19th century, the Ottoman Empire was called the "sick man" by Europeans.
Jealous of their privileges and firmly opposed to change, the Janissary created a revolt.
The sultan no longer had executive powers.
This diversity was, in part, due to the Tanzimat writers' wish to disseminate as much of the new literature as possible, in the hopes that it would contribute to a revitalization of Ottoman social structures.
The earliest belonged to Orhan Gazi.
Referred to as Nizamiye, this system was extended to the local magistrate level with the final promulgation of the Mecelle, a civil code that regulated marriage, divorce, alimony, will, and other matters of personal status.
This treaty, as designed in the conference of London, allowed the Sultan to retain his position and title.
In 1785 around one sixth of the Egyptian population died from plague and Aleppo saw its population reduced by twenty percent in the 18th century.
In 1821, the Greeks declared war on the Sultan.
Ottoman government deliberately pursued a policy for the development of Bursa, Edirne, and Istanbul, successive Ottoman capitals, into major commercial and industrial centres, considering that merchants and artisans were indispensable in creating a new metropolis.
This action provoked the Ottoman Empire into the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774.
The Ottoman bashi-bazouks brutally suppressed the Bulgarian uprising of 1876, massacring up to 100,000 people in the process.
Some of these were later absorbed into the Ottoman Empire, while others were granted various types of autonomy during the course of centuries.
In return for British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's advocacy for restoring the Ottoman territories on the Balkan Peninsula during the Congress of Berlin, Britain assumed the administration of Cyprus in 1878, and later sent troops to Egypt in 1882, with the pretext of helping the Ottoman government to put down the Urabi Revolt, effectively gaining control in both territories.
However, the Ottoman court system lacked an appellate structure, leading to jurisdictional case strategies where plaintiffs could take their disputes from one court system to another until they achieved a ruling that was in their favor.
Analogue genres did exist, though, in both Turkish folk literature and in Divan poetry.
The empire had managed to control nearly all former Byzantine lands surrounding the city, but in 1402 the Byzantines were temporarily relieved when the Turco-Mongol leader Timur, founder of the Timurid Empire, invaded Anatolia from the east.
The main sports Ottomans were engaged in were Turkish Wrestling, hunting, Turkish archery, horseback riding, Equestrian javelin throw, arm wrestling, and swimming.
The Ottomans practiced a system in which the state (as in the Byzantine Empire) had control over the clergy.
During his brief majority reign, Murad IV (1623–1640) reasserted central authority and recaptured Iraq (1639) from the Safavids.
The financial burden of the war led the Ottoman state to issue foreign loans amounting to 5 million pounds sterling on 4 August 1854.
During the 19th century the Empire came under pressure from Western European countries to outlaw the practice.
At the beginning of the 17th century the empire contained 32 provinces and numerous vassal states.
Muslim sects regarded as heretical, such as the Druze, Ismailis, Alevis, and Alawites, ranked below Jews and Christians.
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu was the author of the first surgical atlas and the last major medical encyclopedia from the Islamic world.
"Between 1701 and 1750, 37 larger and smaller plague epidemics were recorded in Istanbul, and 31 between 1751 and 1801."
The millet system has been called an example of pre-modern religious pluralism.
Female slaves were still sold in the Empire as late as 1908.
The leading clubs, according to timeline, were Beşiktaş Gymnastics Club (1903), Galatasaray Sports Club (1905) and Fenerbahçe Sports Club (1907) in Istanbul.
Both religious and non-religious books could be illuminated.
It initiated the conquest of North Africa, with the addition of Algeria and Egypt to the Ottoman Empire in 1517.
This 1603–1618 war eventually resulted in the Treaty of Nasuh Pasha, which ceded the entire Caucasus, except westernmost Georgia, back into Iranian Safavid possession.
In a similar vein, the novelist Ahmed Midhat Efendi wrote important novels in each of the major movements: Romanticism (Hasan Mellâh yâhud Sırr İçinde Esrâr, 1873; "Hasan the Sailor, or The Mystery Within the Mystery"), Realism (Henüz On Yedi Yaşında, 1881; "Just Seventeen Years Old"), and Naturalism (Müşâhedât, 1891; "Observations").
After this Ottoman expansion, a competition started between the Portuguese Empire and the Ottoman Empire to become the dominant power in the region.
Before the reforms of the 19th and 20th centuries, the state organisation of the Ottoman Empire was a simple system that had two main dimensions, which were the military administration and the civil administration.
Starting with the loss of Greece in 1821 and Algeria in 1830, Ottoman naval power and control over the Empire's distant overseas territories began to decline.
The art of Ottoman decoration developed with a multitude of influences due to the wide ethnic range of the Ottoman Empire.
With the extension of Turkish dominion into the Balkans, the strategic conquest of Constantinople became a crucial objective.
The Christian population of the empire, owing to their higher educational levels, started to pull ahead of the Muslim majority, leading to much resentment on the part of the latter.
The Empire's defeat and the occupation of part of its territory by the Allied Powers in the aftermath of World War I resulted in its partitioning, which was largely interrupted by the successful Turkish War of Independence against the occupying Allies and the subsequent emergence of the Republic of Turkey in the Anatolian heartland.
By the end of Suleiman's reign, the Empire's population totaled about 15 million people, extending over three continents.
Serbia and Montenegro finally gained complete independence, but with smaller territories.
Beginning with the late 16th century, sultans withdrew from politics and the Grand Vizier became the ''de facto'' head of state.
Economies were also impacted with the loss of artisans, merchants, manufacturers and agriculturists.
Population densities were higher in the European provinces, double those in Anatolia, which in turn were triple the population densities of Iraq and Syria and five times the population density of Arabia.
Following the attack, Russia and its allies, France and Britain, declared war on the Ottomans.
The '''Ottoman Empire''' (; , ''''; Modern Turkish: '''' or ''''), also known as the '''Turkish Empire''', '''Ottoman Turkey''', or simply '''Turkey''', was an empire founded at the end of the thirteenth century in northwestern Anatolia by the Turkish tribal leader Osman, according to the Ottoman tradition said to have been descended from the Kayı tribe.
In the Ottoman Empire, in accordance with the Muslim ''dhimmi'' system, Christians were guaranteed limited freedoms (such as the right to worship), but were treated as second-class citizens.
In 1867, Britain and France forced the Ottoman military to retreat from northern Serbia, securing its ''de facto'' independence (formalized after the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 and the Congress of Berlin in 1878.)
The Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca of 1774 ended the war and provided freedom to worship for the Christian citizens of the Ottoman-controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia.
Certain pre-Islamic Turkish traditions that had survived the adoption of administrative and legal practices from Islamic Iran remained important in Ottoman administrative circles.
The shipyard at Barrow, England, built its first submarine in 1886 for the Ottoman Empire.
While the Empire was able to largely hold its own during the conflict, it was struggling with internal dissent, especially with the Arab Revolt in its Arabian holdings.
The Imperial Harem was one of the most important powers of the Ottoman court.
Many Christians and Jews voluntarily converted to secure full status in the society.
In the late 19th century, the non-Muslim population of the empire began to fall considerably, not only due to secession, but also because of migratory movements.
In the century after the death of Osman I, Ottoman rule began to extend over the Eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans.
Presiding over Islamic courts would be a ''Qadi'', or judge.
Divan poetry was composed through the constant juxtaposition of many such images within a strict metrical framework, thus allowing numerous potential meanings to emerge.
The effective military and bureaucratic structures of the previous century came under strain during a protracted period of misrule by weak Sultans.
On 10 November 1444, Murad II defeated the Hungarian, Polish, and Wallachian armies under Władysław III of Poland (also King of Hungary) and John Hunyadi at the Battle of Varna, the final battle of the Crusade of Varna, although Albanians under Skanderbeg continued to resist.
Urbanization increased from 1700 to 1922, with towns and cities growing.
According to Ottoman legendary tradition, Ertuğrul, the father of Osman I (founder of the Ottoman Empire), arrived in Anatolia from Merv (Turkmenistan) with 400 horsemen to aid the Seljuks of Rum against the Byzantines.
In Topkapi Palace, these manuscripts were created by the artists working in ''Nakkashane'', the atelier of the miniature and illumination artists.
The Serbian revolution (1804–1815) marked the beginning of an era of national awakening in the Balkans during the Eastern Question.
Its origins are obscure, deriving perhaps from an older Egyptian tradition, or possibly from an Asian source.
The Ottoman sultan, ''pâdişâh'' or "lord of kings", served as the Empire's sole regent and was considered to be the embodiment of its government, though he did not always exercise complete control.
After this treaty the Ottoman Empire was able to enjoy a generation of peace, as Austria and Russia were forced to deal with the rise of Prussia.
The First Constitutional Era lasted for only two years until 1878.
Later still, beginning in 1320, a Grand Vizier was appointed to assume certain of the sultan's responsibilities.
When Vasco da Gama bypassed Ottoman controlled routes and established direct trade links with India in 1498, and Christopher Columbus first journeyed to the Bahamas in 1492, the Ottoman Empire was at its zenith.
In many places in Europe, Jews were suffering persecution at the hands of their Christian counterparts, such as in Spain after the conclusion of Reconquista.
A month before the siege of Nice, France supported the Ottomans with an artillery unit during the 1543 Ottoman conquest of Esztergom in northern Hungary.
In Ottoman Turkish, the empire was referred to as ''Devlet-i ʿAlīye-yi ʿOsmānīye'' (), (literally "The Supreme Ottoman State") or alternatively ''ʿOsmānlı Devleti'' ().
The Ottoman cavalry depended on high speed and mobility rather than heavy armour, using bows and short swords on fast Turkoman and Arabian horses (progenitors of the Thoroughbred racing horse), and often applied tactics similar to those of the Mongol Empire, such as pretending to retreat while surrounding the enemy forces inside a crescent-shaped formation and then making the real attack.
The alliance of the Holy League pressed home the advantage of the defeat at Vienna, culminating in the Treaty of Karlowitz (26 January 1699), which ended the Great Turkish War.
It was performed by a single puppet master, who voiced all of the characters, and accompanied by tambourine (''def'').
It was ruled by the Valide Sultan.
Within the social and political system they were living in Ottoman administrators could not have comprehended or seen the desirability of the dynamics and principles of the capitalist and mercantile economies developing in Western Europe.
With Constantinople as its capital and control of lands around the Mediterranean basin, the Ottoman Empire was at the centre of interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds for six centuries.
In the provinces, several different kinds of folk music were created.
In 1911, of the 654 wholesale companies in Istanbul, 528 were owned by ethnic Greeks.
The main corps of the Ottoman Army included Janissary, Sipahi, Akıncı and Mehterân.
The Divan, in the years when the Ottoman state was still a ''Beylik'', was composed of the elders of the tribe.
In Europe, only the House of Habsburg had a similarly unbroken line of sovereigns (kings/emperors) from the same family who ruled for so long, and during the same period, between the late 13th and early 20th centuries.
The politics of the state had a number of advisors and ministers gathered around a council known as Divan.
Consequently, the Young Turks movement began when these relatively young and newly trained men returned with their education.
It was a startling, if mostly symbolic, blow to the image of Ottoman invincibility, an image which the victory of the Knights of Malta against the Ottoman invaders in the 1565 Siege of Malta had recently set about eroding.
Many of the writers in the Tanzimat period wrote in several different genres simultaneously: for instance, the poet Namık Kemal also wrote the important 1876 novel İntibâh ("Awakening"), while the journalist İbrahim Şinasi is noted for writing, in 1860, the first modern Turkish play, the one-act comedy "Şair Evlenmesi" ("The Poet's Marriage").
Throughout Ottoman history, there were many instances in which local governors acted independently, and even in opposition to the ruler.
The Sultan was the highest position in the system.
The next year, the invasion was repeated but repelled at the Battle of Molodi.
For a time, the women of the Harem effectively controlled the state in what was termed the "Sultanate of Women".
In Modern Turkish, it is known as ''Osmanlı İmparatorluğu'' ("The Ottoman Empire") or ''Osmanlı Devleti'' ("The Ottoman State").
Because of bad relations between the states of western Europe and the later Byzantine Empire, the majority of the Orthodox population accepted Ottoman rule as preferable to Venetian rule.
The important city of Thessaloniki was captured from the Venetians in 1387.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, at the height of its power under the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent, the Ottoman Empire was a multinational, multilingual empire controlling much of Southeast Europe, Western Asia, the Caucasus, North Africa, and the Horn of Africa.
He named them as the Nizam-ı Cedid (New Order).
The empire's First Constitutional era was short-lived.
Another example is Ali Qushji -an astronomer, mathematician and physicist originally from Samarkand- who became a professor in two madrasas, and influenced Ottoman circles as a result of his writings and the activities of his students, even though he only spent two or three years before his death in Istanbul.
Ottoman illumination covers non-figurative painted or drawn decorative art in books or on sheets in ''muraqqa'' or albums, as opposed to the figurative images of the Ottoman miniature.
This Ottoman conquest meant the loss of Byzantine control over northwestern Anatolia.
The Grand Vizier had considerable independence from the sultan with almost unlimited powers of appointment, dismissal and supervision.
The Ottoman navy recovered quickly, persuading Venice to sign a peace treaty in 1573, allowing the Ottomans to expand and consolidate their position in North Africa.
Ottoman architecture was influenced by Persian, Byzantine Greek and Islamic architectures.
The economic structure of the Empire was defined by its geopolitical structure.
In the Ottoman Empire, illuminated and illustrated manuscripts were commissioned by the Sultan or the administrators of the court.
The instruments used are a mixture of Anatolian and Central Asian instruments (the saz, the bağlama, the kemence), other Middle Eastern instruments (the ud, the tanbur, the kanun, the ney), and—later in the tradition—Western instruments (the violin and the piano).
Censuses of Ottoman territories only began in the early 19th century.
In the 19th century, Ishak Efendi is credited with introducing the then current Western scientific ideas and developments to the Ottoman and wider Muslim world, as well as the invention of a suitable Turkish and Arabic scientific terminology, through his translations of Western works.
Following this successful test, work on the first Turkish telegraph line (Istanbul-Edirne-Şumnu) began on 9 August 1847.
The Battle of Nicopolis in 1396, widely regarded as the last large-scale crusade of the Middle Ages, failed to stop the advance of the victorious Ottoman Turks.
Both systems were taught at the Empire's law schools, which were in Istanbul and Bursa.
Slavery was a part of Ottoman society.
From the Persian poetry that largely inspired it, it inherited a wealth of symbols whose meanings and interrelationships—both of similitude (مراعات نظير mura'ât-i nazîr / تناسب tenâsüb) and opposition (تضاد tezâd) were more or less prescribed.
Published in 1851, the novel was entitled The Story of Akabi (Turkish: Akabi Hikyayesi) and was written in Turkish but with Armenian script.
It also flourished economically due to its control of the major overland trade routes between Europe and Asia.
File:The ruined gateway of Prince Eugene, Belgrade.jpg|Belgrade, c. 1865.
The vast majority of Divan poetry was lyric in nature: either gazels (which make up the greatest part of the repertoire of the tradition), or kasîdes.
The Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 initiated a series of Ottoman-Portuguese naval wars in the Indian Ocean throughout the 16th century.
Until the 19th century, Ottoman prose did not contain any examples of fiction: there were no counterparts to, for instance, the European romance, short story, or novel.
The Russo-Turkish War (1877–78) ended with a decisive victory for Russia.
Among them “Committee of Union and Progress,” and “Freedom and Accord Party” were major parties.
The Somali Muslim Ajuran Empire, allied with the Ottomans, defied the Portuguese economic monopoly in the Indian Ocean by employing a new coinage which followed the Ottoman pattern, thus proclaiming an attitude of economic independence in regard to the Portuguese.
As the Ottoman state attempted to modernize its infrastructure and army in response to threats from the outside, it also opened itself up to a different kind of threat: that of creditors.
This organization developed a scribal bureaucracy (known as "men of the pen") as a distinct group, partly highly trained ulama, which developed into a professional body.
Policies developed by various Sultans throughout the 19th century attempted to curtail the slave trade but, since slavery did have centuries of religious backing and sanction, they never directly abolished the institution outright.
The constitution offered hope by freeing the empire’s citizens to modernize the state’s institutions, rejuvenate its strength, and enable it to hold its own against outside powers.
The founding of the Aviation School quickened advancement in the military aviation program, increased the number of enlisted persons within it, and gave the new pilots an active role in the Ottoman Army and Navy.
However, the observatory's primary purpose was almost certainly astrological rather than astronomical, leading to its destruction in 1580 due to the rise of a clerical faction which opposed its use for that purpose.
File:Turkish troops storming Fort Shefketil (cropped).jpg|Turkish troops storming Fort Shefketil during the Crimean War of 1853–1856
Also sheets for albums ''levha'' consisted of illuminated calligraphy (''hat'') of ''tughra'', religious texts, verses from poems or proverbs, and purely decorative drawings.
They were forbidden to carry weapons or ride on horseback, their houses could not overlook those of Muslims, in addition to various other legal limitations.
The highest position in Islam, ''caliphate'', was claimed by the sultans starting since Murad I, which was established as Ottoman Caliphate.
From 1894 to 1896, between 100,000 and 300,000 Armenians living throughout the empire were killed in what became known as the Hamidian massacres.
Plague remained a major event in Ottoman society until the second quarter of the 19th century.
The caliphate was abolished on 3 March 1924.
The Ottoman Empire was always organized around a system of local jurisprudence.
Concepts of Ottoman architecture mainly circle the mosque.
The young Republic abolished of the Ottoman monarchy and caliphate, and elsewhere followed the founding of modern Balkan and Middle Eastern states.
Though his work was largely based on Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi's ''Al-Tasrif'', Sabuncuoğlu introduced many innovations of his own.
This diverse cuisine was honed in the Imperial Palace's kitchens by chefs brought from certain parts of the Empire to create and experiment with different ingredients.
Many common dishes in the region, descendants of the once-common Ottoman cuisine, include yogurt, döner kebab/gyro/shawarma, cacık/tzatziki, ayran, pita bread, feta cheese, baklava, lahmacun, moussaka, yuvarlak, köfte/keftés/kofta, börek/boureki, rakı/rakia/tsipouro/tsikoudia, meze, dolma, sarma, rice pilaf, Turkish coffee, sujuk, kashk, keşkek, manti, lavash, kanafeh, and more.
The art of carpet weaving was particularly significant in the Ottoman Empire, carpets having an immense importance both as decorative furnishings, rich in religious and other symbolism, and as a practical consideration, as it was customary to remove one's shoes in living quarters.
Abbasid influence in Central Asia was ensured through a process that was greatly facilitated by the Muslim conquest of Transoxiana.
The most prominent women of this period were Kösem Sultan and her daughter-in-law Turhan Hatice, whose political rivalry culminated in Kösem's murder in 1651.
In the late 19th century, the Ottoman legal system saw substantial reform.
The civil system was based on local administrative units based on the region's characteristics.
Besides the mosque, it is also possible to find good examples of Ottoman architecture in soup kitchens, theological schools, hospitals, Turkish baths and tombs.
Many of the various Turkic tribes—including the Oghuz Turks, who were the ancestors of both the Seljuks and the Ottomans—gradually converted to Islam, and brought the religion with them to Anatolia beginning in the 11th century.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, the Ottoman Empire entered a period of expansion.
After the demise of the Turkish Seljuk Sultanate of Rum in the 14th century, Anatolia was divided into a patchwork of independent, mostly Turkish states, the so-called Ghazi emirates.
Modern Ottoman studies indicate that the change in relations between the Ottoman Turks and central Europe was caused by the opening of the new sea routes.
He calculated the eccentricity of the Sun's orbit and the annual motion of the apogee.
By contrast, the Habsburg frontier had settled somewhat, a stalemate caused by a stiffening of the Habsburg defences.
In contrast, the term "Turk" (''Türk'') was used to refer to the Anatolian peasant and tribal population, and was seen as a disparaging term when applied to urban, educated individuals.
For unclear reasons, the population in the 18th century was lower than that in the 16th century.
A great part of this desire for local and foreign manuscripts arose in the 15th Century.
The Orthodox millet, for instance, was still officially legally subject to Justinian's Code, which had been in effect in the Byzantine Empire for 900 years.
With these conquests, Selim further solidified the Ottoman claim for being an Islamic caliphate, although Ottoman sultans had been claiming the title of caliph since the 14th century starting with Murad I (reigned 1362 to 1389).
The traditional shadow play called Karagöz and Hacivat was widespread throughout the Ottoman Empire and featured characters representing all of the major ethnic and social groups in that culture.
Since the closing of the ''ijtihad'', or ''Gate of Interpretation, Qadis ''throughout the Ottoman Empire focused less on legal precedent, and more with local customs and traditions in the areas that they administered.
Though the sultan was the supreme monarch, the sultan's political and executive authority was delegated.
Selim I established Ottoman rule in Egypt, and created a naval presence on the Red Sea.
The two primary streams of Ottoman written literature are poetry and prose.
Ottoman power revolved crucially around the administration of the rights to land, which gave a space for the local authority to develop the needs of the local millet.
The Vilayets were introduced with the promulgation of the "Vilayet Law" () in 1864, as part of the tanzimat reforms.
In addition, the Empire became a dominant naval force, controlling much of the Mediterranean Sea.
This dichotomy was officially ended in 1920–23, when the newly established Ankara-based Turkish government chose Turkey as the sole official name.
The 18th century saw some success against Venice in 1714 and Austria in 1739, but by the end of the century the European-style Russian armies forced the Ottomans to concede land.
There were several important Ottoman victories in the early years of the war, such as the Battle of Gallipoli and the Siege of Kut.
For example, the 1831 census only counted men and did not cover the whole empire.
Its guarantee of liberties promised to dissolve inter-communal tensions and transform the empire into a more harmonious place.
The Ottoman aviation squadrons fought on many fronts during World War I, from Galicia in the west to the Caucasus in the east and Yemen in the south.
Suleiman the Magnificent (1520–1566) captured Belgrade in 1521, conquered the southern and central parts of the Kingdom of Hungary as part of the Ottoman–Hungarian Wars, and, after his historical victory in the Battle of Mohács in 1526, he established Turkish rule in the territory of present-day Hungary (except the western part) and other Central European territories.
Epidemic diseases and famine caused major disruption and demographic changes.
The Anglo-Ottoman Treaty, also known as the Treaty of Balta Liman that opened the Ottoman markets directly to English and French competitors, would be seen as one of the staging posts along this development.
Ottoman classical music arose largely from a confluence of Byzantine music, Armenian music, Arabic music, and Persian music.
The representatives formed the Imperial Government of the Ottoman Empire.
The Arab Revolt which began in 1916 turned the tide against the Ottomans on the Middle Eastern front, where they initially seemed to have the upper hand during the first two years of the war.
The first novel published in the Ottoman Empire was by an Armenian named Vartan Pasha.
A parliament was formed, with representatives chosen from the provinces.
The ensuing civil war lasted from 1402 to 1413 as Bayezid's sons fought over succession.
The Crimean Khanate continued to invade Eastern Europe in a series of slave raids, and remained a significant power in Eastern Europe until the end of the 17th century.
Charles XII persuaded the Ottoman Sultan Ahmed III to declare war on Russia, which resulted in an Ottoman victory in the Pruth River Campaign of 1710–1711, in Moldavia.
The financial burden of the Medrese was supported by vakifs, allowing children of poor families to move to higher social levels and income.
The Turkish word for "Ottoman" (''Osmanlı'') originally referred to the tribal followers of Osman in the fourteenth century, and subsequently came to be used to refer to the empire's military-administrative elite.
The French conquests of Nice (1543) and Corsica (1553) occurred as a joint venture between the forces of the French king Francis I and Suleiman, and were commanded by the Ottoman admirals Barbarossa Hayreddin Pasha and Turgut Reis.
Instead, this period became the story of the twilight struggle of the Empire.
In the West, the two names "Ottoman Empire" and "Turkey" were often used interchangeably, with "Turkey" being increasingly favored both in formal and informal situations.
Large-scale massacres were also committed against the Empire's Greek and Assyrian minorities as part of the same campaign of ethnic cleansing.
