Prussia's population had greatly expanded in the 1860s and was now one-third Catholic.
Their final split occurred after Bismarck tried to implement far-reaching anti-socialist laws in early 1890.
He can be seen as a marginal contributor to Italian unification.
Steinberg comments: The anti-Catholic hysteria in many European countries belongs in its European setting.
Bismarck therefore joined in the Scramble for Africa.
In 1847 Bismarck, aged thirty-two, was chosen as a representative to the newly created Prussian legislature, the ''Vereinigter Landtag''.
The National Liberals took this program to be an expression of State Socialism, against which they were dead set.
Bismarck's diplomatic moves relied on a victorious Prussian military, and these two men gave Bismarck the victories he needed to convince the smaller German states to join Prussia.
Although Bismarck hoped to become a diplomat, he started his practical training as a lawyer in Aachen and Potsdam, and soon resigned, having first placed his career in jeopardy by taking unauthorized leave to pursue two English girls; first Laura Russell, niece of the Duke of Cleveland, and then Isabella Loraine-Smith, daughter of a wealthy clergyman.
In the 1870s he allied himself with the Liberals (who were low-tariff and anti-Catholic) and fought the Catholic Church in what was called the ''Kulturkampf'' ("culture struggle").
Following unification, Germany became one of the most powerful nations in Europe.
The individual local health bureaus were administered by a committee elected by the members of each bureau, and this move had the unintended effect of establishing a majority representation for the workers on account of their large financial contribution.
German unification had been a major objective of the revolutions of 1848, when representatives of the German states met in Frankfurt and drafted a constitution, creating a federal union with a national parliament to be elected by universal male suffrage.
Over the centuries various rulers had tried to unify the German states without success until Bismarck.
He was dubious about laws protecting workers at the workplace, such as safe working conditions, limitation of work hours, and the regulation of women's and child labor.
In 1871 he formed the German Empire with himself as Chancellor, while retaining control of Prussia.
When Denmark refused, Austria and Prussia invaded, sparking the Second Schleswig War.
It marked the high point of his career.
In 1888 Kaiser Wilhelm I died, leaving the throne to his son, Friedrich III.
In 1872, a protracted quarrel began to fester between Bismarck and Count Harry von Arnim, the imperial ambassador to France.
Without these two events, Italian unification would have been a more prolonged process.
For example, Hamburg's memorial, unveiled in 1906, is considered one of the greatest expressions of imperial Germany's Bismarck cult and an important development in the history of German memorial art.
By July 1898 he was permanently wheelchair-bound, had trouble breathing, and was almost constantly feverish and in pain.
Accordingly, opposition politician Adolphe Thiers claimed that it was France, not Austria, who had really been defeated at Königgrätz.
France mobilized and declared war on 19 July.
This was an important refusal as Prussia and Russia were close military allies, whose heads of state often communicated through military contacts rather than diplomatic channels.
In the elections of 1866 the liberals suffered a major defeat, losing their majority in the House of Deputies.
That marked a rapid decline in the support of the National Liberals, and by 1879 their close ties with Bismarck had all but ended.
The young men went to German industrial cities, so that Bismarck's insurance system partly offset low wage rates in Germany and further reduced the emigration rate.
Bismarck was born in Schönhausen, a wealthy family estate situated west of Berlin in the Prussian province of Saxony.
Bismarck, therefore, engaged in a policy of diplomatically isolating France while maintaining cordial relations with other nations in Europe.
1849) and Wilhelm (b.
During most of his nearly thirty-year-long tenure, Bismarck held undisputed control over the government's policies.
"The German Bishops, who were politically powerless in Germany and theologically in opposition to the Pope in Rome, have now become powerful political leaders in Germany and enthusiastic defenders of the now infallible Faith of Rome, united, disciplined, and thirsting for martyrdom, thanks to Bismarck's uncalled for antiliberal declaration of War on the freedom they had hitherto peacefully enjoyed."
The Queen and the Royal Family hated him and the King, emotional and unreliable, would soon have his 70th birthday.
The myth made him out to be a dogmatic ideologue and ardent nationalist when, in fact, he was ideologically flexible.
His king Wilhelm I rarely challenged the Chancellor's decisions; on several occasions, Bismarck obtained his monarch's approval by threatening to resign.
If two of them were allied, then the third would ally with Germany only if Germany conceded excessive demands.
To those who presided over its construction, the monument was also a means of asserting Hamburg's cultural aspirations and of shrugging off a reputation as a city hostile to the arts.
Gerwarth argues that the constructed memory of Bismarck played a central role as an antidemocratic myth in the highly ideological battle over the past, which raged between 1918 and 1933.
He had achieved the impossible, and his genius and the cult of genius had no limits.
Still, however, Bismarck believed that if the German states perceived France as the aggressor, they would unite behind the King of Prussia.
France was also required to pay an indemnity; the indemnity figure was calculated, on the basis of population, as the precise equivalent of the indemnity that Napoleon I had imposed on Prussia in 1807.
Bismarck had originally proposed that the federal government pay a portion of the accident insurance contribution.
Bismarck took steps to silence or restrain political opposition, as evidenced by laws restricting the freedom of the press, and the anti-socialist laws.
His extraordinary double ability to see how groups would react and the willingness to use violence to make them obey, the capacity to read group behavior and the force to make them move to his will, gave him the chance to exercise what Steinberg has called his "sovereign self"
Langer, however, argues that this episode played a minor role in causing the war.
Bismarck then issued an edict restricting the freedom of the press, an edict that even gained the public opposition of the Crown Prince.
First, he feared that Austria, hungry for revenge, would ally with the French.
He also served in the army for a year and became an officer in the Landwehr (reserve), before returning to run the family estates at Schönhausen on his mother's death in his mid-twenties.
Having crushed his parliamentary opponents, flattened and abused his ministers, and refused to allow himself to be bound by any loyalty.
In 1871, he was further created '''' ("Prince of Bismarck") and accorded the style of '''' ("Serene Highness"); this princely title descended only to his eldest male heirs.
The editorial indicated that highly influential Germans were alarmed by France's rapid recovery from defeat in 1875 and its announcement of an increase in the size of its army, as well as talks of launching a preventive war against France.
In the end, France had to cede Alsace and part of Lorraine, as Moltke and his generals wanted it as a buffer.
— "A loyal German servant of Emperor Wilhelm I."
Bismarck married Marie's cousin, the noblewoman Johanna von Puttkamer (1824–94) at Alt-Kolziglow (modern Kołczygłowy) on 28 July 1847.
Still, a turn of events eventually led to his breaking with Wilhelm.
At Göttingen, Bismarck befriended the American student John Lothrop Motley.
On 23 September 1862, Wilhelm appointed Bismarck Minister President and Foreign Minister.
Immediately after he left office, citizens started to praise him and established funds to build monuments like the Bismarck Memorial or towers dedicated to him.
Bismarck's campaign was not unique in itself, but his violent temper, intolerance of opposition, and paranoia that secret forces  had conspired to undermine his life's work, made it more relentless.
Despite (or perhaps because of) his attempts to silence critics, Bismarck remained a largely unpopular politician.
Bismarck denied knowing about the article ahead of time, but he certainly knew about the talk of preventive war.
Reaction to Danish and French nationalism provided foci for expressions of German unity.
He died just after midnight on July 30, 1898, at the age of eighty-three in Friedrichsruh, where he is entombed in the Bismarck Mausoleum.
"He never had a Pole among his peasants" working the Bismarckian estates; it was the educated Polish bourgeoisie and revolutionaries he denounced from personal experience, and "because of ''them'' he disliked intellectuals in politics."
Together they would control Eastern Europe, making sure that restive ethnic groups such as the Poles were kept under control.
Police officers could stop, search and arrest socialist party members and their leaders, a number of whom were then tried by police courts.
In it he described Bismarck as a reckless and dashing eccentric, but also as an extremely gifted and charming young man.
In 1866, Austria reneged on the agreement and demanded that the Diet determine the Schleswig–Holstein issue.
Bismarck wanted to demonstrate the willingness of the German government to reduce the hardship experienced by the German workers so as to wean them away from supporting the various left-wing parties, most importantly the Social Democrats.
He was aware that public opinion had started to demand colonies for reasons of German prestige.
The editorial produced a war scare, with Britain and Russia warning that they would not tolerate a preventive war against France.
No longer under the influence of his ultraconservative Prussian friends, Bismarck became less reactionary and more pragmatic.
Other European nations, led by Britain and France, were acquiring colonies in a rapid fashion (see New Imperialism).
A secondary concern was trumping the Socialists, who had no welfare proposals of their own and opposed Bismarck's.
Arnim saw himself as a rival and competitor for the chancellorship, but the rivalry escalated out of hand, and Arnim took sensitive records from embassy files at Paris to back up his case.
The negotiations succeeded; patriotic sentiment overwhelmed what opposition remained.
Well aware that Europe was skeptical of his powerful new Reich, Bismarck turned his attention to preserving peace in Europe based on a balance of power that would allow Germany's economy to flourish.
Italy's entry into the war forced the Austrians to divide their forces.
He abandoned it in 1878 to preserve his remaining political capital since he now needed the Centre Party votes in his new battle against socialism.
Although a constitution was granted, its provisions fell far short of the demands of the revolutionaries.
The German states saw France as the aggressor, and&mdash;swept up by nationalism and patriotic zeal&mdash;they rallied to Prussia's side and provided troops.
His had been a great career, beginning with three wars in eight years and ending with a period of 20 years during which he worked for the peace of Europe, despite countless opportunities to embark on further enterprises with more than even chance of success.... No other statesman of his standing had ever before shown the same great moderation and sound political sense of the possible and desirable.... Bismarck at least deserves full credit for having steered European politics through this dangerous transitional period without serious conflict between the great powers."
Wilhelm countered that he was not willing to open his reign with a bloody campaign against his own subjects.
The monarch, though initially inclined to use armed forces to suppress the rebellion, ultimately declined to leave Berlin for the safety of military headquarters at Potsdam.
As minister president of Prussia and as imperial chancellor, Bismarck "sorted people into their linguistic and religious ‘tribes’", however, he pursued a policy of hostility in particular toward the Poles, which was an expedient rooted in Prussian history.
France pressured Leopold into withdrawing his candidacy.
Bismarck was influenced by Hamburg merchants and traders, his neighbors at Friedrichsruh.
Bismarck proposed that Prussia should exploit Austria's weakness to move her frontiers "as far south as Lake Constance" on the Swiss border; instead, Prussia mobilised troops in the Rhineland to deter further French advances into Venetia.
Worried by the growth of the socialist movement, the Social Democratic Party in particular, Bismarck instituted the Anti-Socialist Laws in 1878.
Bismarck believed that the pope and bishops held too much power over the German Catholics and was further concerned about the emergence of the Catholic Centre Party, organised in 1870.
Upon hearing about Windthorst's visit, Wilhelm was furious.
Over the next twelve years, Bismarck, Moltke and Roon transformed Prussia; Bismarck would later refer to this period as "the most significant of my life".
His diplomacy of ''realpolitik'' and powerful rule at home gained him the nickname the "Iron Chancellor."
Bismarck had opposed colonial acquisitions, arguing that the burden of obtaining, maintaining, and defending such possessions would outweigh any potential benefit.
In dramatic contrast stands the ambition of Wilhelm II's ''Weltpolitik'' to secure the Reich's future through expansion, leading to World War I.
Austria had a seemingly powerful army that was allied with most of the north German and all of the south German states.
He was also appointed as the first Imperial Chancellor (''Reichskanzler'') of the German Empire, but retained his Prussian offices, including those of Minister-President and Foreign Minister.
The minimum payments for medical treatment and sick pay for up to 13 weeks were legally fixed.
Bismarck was intent on maintaining royal supremacy by ending the budget deadlock in the King's favour, even if he had to use extralegal means to do so.
Prussia had only a plurality (17 out of 43 seats) in the Bundesrat despite being larger than the other 21 states combined, but Bismarck could easily control the proceedings through alliances with the smaller states.
Politics surrounding the 1866 Austro-Prussian War allowed Italy to annex Venetia, which had been a ''kronland'' ("crown land") of the Austrian Empire since the 1815 Congress of Vienna.
Bismarck was alarmed by Prussia's isolation during the Crimean War of the mid-1850s, in which Austria sided with Britain and France against Russia; Prussia was almost not invited to the peace talks in Paris.
Disraeli, who would become Prime Minister in the 1870s, later claimed to have said of Bismarck, "Be careful of that man&mdash;he means every word he says".
Austria, too, was weakened by the creation of a German Empire, though to a much lesser extent than France.
The Bundesrat was, in practice, the stronger chamber.
Thanks to Roon's reorganization, the Prussian army was nearly equal in numbers to the Austrian army.
Evans says he was "intimidating and unscrupulous, playing to others' frailties, not their strengths."
The memorial was greeted with widespread disapproval among the working classes and did not prevent their increasing support for the Social Democrats.
Its emperor, Napoleon III, had tried to gain territory for France (in Belgium and on the left bank of the Rhine) as a compensation for not joining the war against Prussia and was disappointed by the surprisingly quick outcome of the war.
It was in September 1862, when the ''Abgeordnetenhaus'' (House of Deputies) overwhelmingly rejected the proposed budget, that Wilhelm was persuaded to recall Bismarck to Prussia on the advice of Roon.
Attempts to reconcile Germany and Russia did not have lasting effect: the Three Emperors' League was re-established in 1881 but quickly fell apart, ending Russian-Austrian-Prussian solidarity, which had existed in various forms since 1813.
They conclude that factors in addition to the strength of Bismarck's ''Realpolitik'' led a collection of early modern polities to reorganize political, economic, military, and diplomatic relationships in the 19th century.
Young men considering emigration looked at not only the gap between higher hourly "direct wages" in the United States and Germany but also the differential in "indirect wages", social benefits, which favored staying in Germany.
Bismarck, at the same time, did not avoid war with France, though he feared the French for a number of reasons.
Military success brought Bismarck tremendous political support in Prussia.
Later that year, the public Bismarck modified his belligerence and wrote to Prussia’s foreign minister: "Every success of the Polish national movement is a defeat for Prussia, we cannot carry on the fight against this element according to the rules of civil justice, but only in accordance with the rules of war."
After his dismissal he was promoted to the rank of "Colonel-General with the Dignity of Field Marshal", so-called because the German Army did not appoint full Field Marshals in peacetime.
The King's brother, Prince Wilhelm, had fled to England, and Bismarck intrigued with Wilhelm's wife Augusta to place their teenage son Frederick William on the Prussian throne in Frederick William IV's place.
He accepted his appointment as one of Prussia's representatives at the Erfurt Parliament, an assembly of German states that met to discuss plans for union, but he only did so to oppose that body's proposals more effectively.
Gerwarth (2007) shows that the Bismarck myth, built up predominantly during his years of retirement and even more stridently after his death, proved a powerful rhetorical and ideological tool.
As a result, Russo-German relations further deteriorated, with the Russian chancellor Gorchakov denouncing Bismarck for compromising his nation's victory.
In May 1872 Bismarck thus attempted to reach an understanding with other European governments to manipulate future papal elections; governments should agree beforehand on unsuitable candidates, and then instruct their national cardinals to vote appropriately.
Bismarck's successors as Chancellor were much less influential, as power was concentrated in the Emperor's hands.
This program was expanded, in 1886, to include agricultural workers.
He travelled to Berlin in disguise to offer his services, but was instead told to make himself useful by arranging food supplies for the Army from his estates in case they were needed.
The first monument built in his honour was the one at Bad Kissingen erected in 1877.
He remained well-informed due to Roon, with whom Bismarck formed a lasting friendship and political alliance.
However, in Germany, the Chancellor depended on the confidence of the Emperor alone, and Wilhelm believed that the Emperor had the right to be informed before his minister's meeting.
Napoleon III was taken prisoner at Sedan and kept in Germany for a time in case Bismarck had need of him to head the French regime; he later died in exile in England in 1873.
But Bismarck was sidelined from events in Germany and could only watch impotently as France drove Austria out of Lombardy during the Italian War of 1859.
Conflicts between Wilhelm and his chancellor soon poisoned their relationship.
Bismarck had also made a secret alliance with Italy, who desired Austrian-controlled Venetia.
Bismarck's eight years in Frankfurt were marked by changes in his political opinions, detailed in the numerous lengthy memoranda, which he sent to his ministerial superiors in Berlin.
By establishing a Germany without Austria, the political and administrative unification in 1871 at least temporarily solved the problem of dualism.
Unlike the accident and sickness insurance programs, this program covered all categories of workers (industrial, agrarian, artisans and servants) from the start.
Bismarck believed that as long as Britain, Russia and Italy were assured of the peaceful nature of the German Empire, French belligerency could be contained; his diplomatic feats were undone, however, by Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose policies unified other European powers against Germany in time for World War I.
After Russia's victory over the Ottoman Empire in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78, Bismarck helped negotiate a settlement at the Congress of Berlin.
The solution was to ally with two of the three.
This experience echoed the memory of mutual accomplishment in the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in the War of Liberation of 1813–14.
Bismarck, Roon and Moltke took charge at a time when relations among the Great Powers (Great Britain, France, Austria and Russia) had been shattered by the Crimean War and the Italian War.
From 1832 to 1833 he studied law at the University of Göttingen, where he was a member of the Corps Hannovera, and then enrolled at the University of Berlin (1833–35).
As president of the confederation, Wilhelm appointed Bismarck as chancellor of the confederation.
A downturn hit the German economy for the first time since industrial development began to surge in the 1850s.
In Frankfurt he engaged in a battle of wills with the Austrian representative Count Friedrich von Thun und Hohenstein, insisting on being treated as an equal by petty tactics such as imitating Thun when Thun claimed the privileges of smoking and removing his jacket in meetings.
It was Bismarck's ambition to be assimilated into the mediatized houses of Germany.
He disliked colonialism but reluctantly built an overseas empire when it was demanded by both elite and mass opinion.
The result was the Kulturkampf, which, with its largely Prussian measures, complemented by similar actions in several other German states, sought to curb the clerical danger by legislation restricting the Catholic church's political power."
Bismarck faced a diplomatic crisis when Frederick VII of Denmark died in November 1863.
British historians, including Steinberg, Evans, Taylor, Palmer and Crankshaw, see Bismarck as an ambivalent figure, undoubtedly a man of great skill but who left no lasting system in place to guide successors less skilled than himself.
Historians stress that Bismarck's peace-oriented, "saturated continental diplomacy" was increasingly unpopular, because it consciously reined in any expansionist drives.
It was a product of the desire of Hamburg's patrician classes to defend their political privileges in the face of dramatic social change and attendant demands for political reform.
Also, unlike the other two programs, the principle that the national government should contribute a portion of the underwriting cost, with the other two portions prorated accordingly, was accepted without question.
Bismarck, feeling pressured and unappreciated by the Emperor and undermined by ambitious advisers, refused to sign a proclamation regarding the protection of workers along with Wilhelm, as was required by the German constitution.
Provoked, Austria called for the aid of other German states, who quickly became involved in the Austro-Prussian War.
Similarly, he feared that the Russian army would assist France to maintain a balance of power.
As a result of the Peace of Prague (1866), the German Confederation was dissolved.
He was soon elected to the ''Reichstag'' as a National Liberal in Bennigsen's old and supposedly safe Hamburg seat, but he was so humiliated by being taken to a second ballot by a Social Democrat opponent that he never actually took up his seat.
In the 1860s he engineered a series of wars that unified the German states, significantly and deliberately excluding Austria, into a powerful German Empire under Prussian leadership.
Bismarck continued his feud with Wilhelm II by attacking him in his memoirs and by publishing the text of the Reinsurance Treaty with Russia, a major breach of national security for which any individual of lesser status would have been heavily prosecuted.
In addition, French mobilization for the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871 made it necessary for Napoleon III to withdraw his troops from Rome and The Papal States.
Prussia annexed Schleswig, Holstein, Frankfurt, Hanover, Hesse-Kassel, and Nassau.
The most senior diplomats in the foreign service ... were sworn enemies and he knew it.
The King's ministers could not convince legislators to pass the budget, and the King was unwilling to make concessions.
As Henry Kissinger has noted, "The man of 'blood and iron' wrote prose of extraordinary directness and lucidity, comparable in distinctiveness to Churchill's use of the English language."
At first this seemed like a victory for Augustenburg, but Bismarck soon removed him from power by making a series of unworkable demands, namely that Prussia should have control over the army and navy of the duchies.
Bismarck maintained good relations with Italy, although he had a personal dislike for Italians and their country.
Both powers promised to remain neutral towards one another unless Russia attacked Austria-Hungary.
Based on Bismarck's message, the Reichstag filed three bills to deal with the concepts of accident and sickness insurance.
Bismarck had no ally left when he needed it.
Bismarck considered the program, established to provide sickness insurance for German industrial laborers, the least important and the least politically troublesome.
Bismarck regarded it as a mockery of his ambition, and he considered nothing more cruel than this action of the emperor.
The subjects of retirement pensions and disability insurance were placed on the back-burner for the time being.
In September 1850, after a dispute over Hesse, (the Hesse Crisis of 1850) Prussia was humiliated and forced to back down by Austria (supported by Russia) in the so-called Punctation of Olmütz; a plan for the unification of Germany under Prussian leadership, proposed by Prussia's Minister President Radowitz, was also abandoned.
Denmark was ultimately forced to renounce its claim on both duchies.
Opponents, friends, and subordinates all remarked on Bismarck as "demonic," a kind of uncanny, diabolic personal power over men and affairs.
A suitable pretext for war arose in 1870, when the German Prince Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen was offered the Spanish throne, vacant since a revolution in 1868.
He was also given a new title, Duke of Lauenburg, which he joked would be useful when traveling incognito.
After his wife's death on 27 November 1894, his health worsened and one year later he was finally confined to a wheelchair.
Bismarck sharply disagreed with Wilhelm's policies and worked to circumvent them.
In these years of his greatest power, he believed that he could anything.
A master of complex politics at home, Bismarck created the first welfare state in the modern world, with the goal of gaining working class support that might otherwise go to his Socialist enemies.
To solidify Prussian hegemony, Prussia forced the 21 states north of the River Main to join it in forming the North German Confederation in 1867.
With the strategic genius of Moltke, the Prussian army fought battles it was able to win.
The bully, the dictator, and the "demonic" combined in him with the self-pity and the hypochondria to create a constant crisis of authority, which he exploited for his own ends.
The remainder of the war featured a siege of Paris, the city was "ineffectually bombarded"; the new French republican regime then tried, without success, to relieve Paris with various hastily assembled armies and increasingly bitter partisan warfare.
Bismarck also worked to maintain the friendship of Russia and a working relationship with Napoleon III's France, the latter being anathema to his conservative friends, the Gerlachs, but necessary both to threaten Austria and to prevent France allying itself to Russia.
I have all the sympathy in the world for their situation, but if we want to exist we have no choice but to wipe them out: wolves are only what God made them, but we shoot them all the same when we can get at them."
Having unified his nation, Bismarck now devoted himself to promoting peace in Europe with his skills in statesmanship.
The Centre Party was afraid of the expansion of federal power at the expense of states' rights.
Under the Constitution, the budget could be passed only after the king and legislature agreed on its terms.
In 1851, Frederick William IV appointed Bismarck as Prussia's envoy to the Diet of the German Confederation in Frankfurt.
The Balkans posed a more serious issue, and Bismarck's solution was to give Austria predominance in the western areas, and Russia in the eastern areas.
Around age thirty, Bismarck formed an intense friendship with Marie von Thadden, newly married to one of his friends.
He also believed that the middle-class liberals wanted a unified Germany more than they wanted to break the grip of the traditional forces over society.
This time, the state or province supervised the programs directly.
However, they never forgot his culture war and preached solidarity to present organized resistance should it ever be resumed.
Prussia's victory over Austria increased tensions with France.
The bullying, however, almost got out of hand in mid-1875, when an editorial entitled "''Krieg-in-Sicht''" ("War in Sight") was published in a Berlin newspaper close to the government, the ''Post''.
