Thousands of northern gannets nest here, and by special arrangement some of their young, known as ''gugas'' are harvested annually by the men of Ness.
In the 2001 census, each island overall was over 50% Gaelic speaking – South Uist (71%), Harris (69%), Barra (68%), North Uist (67%), Lewis (56%) and Benbecula (56%).
However, the Education (Scotland) Act 1872 led to generations of Gaels being forbidden to speak their native language in the classroom, and is now recognised as having dealt a major blow to the language.
This may have brought peace to the islands, but in the following century it came at a terrible price.
By 2001 the population of North Uist was only 1,271.
Cladh Hallan on South Uist, the only site in the UK where prehistoric mummies have been found and the impressive ruins of Dun Carloway broch on Lewis both date from the Iron Age.
Others have played a part in Scottish history.
The Lewis Pipe Band was founded in 1904 and the Lewis and Harris Piping Society in 1977.
The Outer Hebrides became a unitary council area in 1975, although in most of the rest of Scotland similar unitary councils were not established until 1996.
North and South Uist and Benbecula, (sometimes collectively referred to as The Uists) have sandy beaches and wide cultivated areas of machair to the west and virtually uninhabited mountainous areas to the east.
Although it was in use until the 1930s, its existence was largely forgotten until 2005 and it is now being restored to Morris's original design.
This 6th century stele shows a flower, V-rod and lunar crescent to which has been added a later and somewhat crude cross.
Both the 1901 and 1921 census reported that all parishes were over 75% Gaelic speaking, including areas of high population density such as Stornoway.
Barra is  in extent and has a rugged interior, surrounded by machair and extensive beaches.
The creation of the Highlands and Islands Development Board and the discovery of  substantial deposits of North Sea oil in 1965, the establishment of a unitary local authority for the islands in 1975 and more recently the renewables sector have all contributed to a degree of economic stability in recent decades.
The main islands form an archipelago of which the major islands include Lewis and Harris, North Uist, Benbecula, South Uist, and Barra.
Modern navigation systems now minimise the dangers but in the past the stormy seas have claimed many ships.
More than 35 such islands have been identified in the Outer Hebrides alone.
Nationally important populations of breeding waders are present in the Outer Hebrides including common redshank, dunlin, lapwing and ringed plover.
Loch Langavat on Lewis is  long, and has several large islands in its midst, including Eilean Mòr.
Nonetheless, by 1971 most areas were still more than 75% Gaelic speaking – with the exception of Stornoway, Benbecula and South Uist at 50-74%.
The "Mingulay Boat Song", although evocative of island life, was written after the abandonment of the island in 1938 and Taransay hosted the BBC television series ''Castaway 2000''.
The granite here is anorthosite, and is similar in composition to rocks found in the mountains of the Moon.
Religion, music and sport are important aspects of local culture, and there are numerous designated conservation areas to protect the natural environment.
Much of the western coastline of the islands is machair, a fertile low-lying dune pastureland.
Hanson (2003) writes: "For many years it has been almost axiomatic in studies of the period that the Roman conquest must have had some major medium or long-term impact on Scotland.
The British government's strategy was to estrange the clan chiefs from their kinsmen and turn their descendants into English-speaking landlords whose main concern was the revenues their estates brought rather than the welfare of those who lived on them.
Millennia of continuous occupation notwithstanding, many of the remoter islands were abandoned - Mingulay in 1912, Hirta in 1930, and Ceann Iar in 1942 among them.
There are gales one day in six at the Butt of Lewis and small fish are blown onto the grass on top of 190&nbsp;metre (620&nbsp;ft) high cliffs at Barra Head during winter storms.
Dumna is cognate with the Early Celtic ''dumnos'' and means the "deep-sea isle".
There followed a period of peace, but all too soon the clans were at loggerheads again.
The colonists tried again in 1605 with the same result but a third attempt in 1607 was more successful, and in due course Stornoway became a Burgh of Barony.
Much of the land is now under local control and commercial activity is based on tourism, crofting, fishing, and weaving.
''I Know Where I'm Going!''
mhòr, mòire, mhòire, mòra, mhòra, mòir, mhòir
Pliny probably took his information from Pytheas of Massilia who visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC.
The island does not have a common name in either English or Gaelic and is referred to as "Lewis and Harris", "Lewis with Harris", "Harris with Lewis" etc.
It is possible that Ptolemy did as well, as Agricola's information about the west coast of Scotland was of poor quality.
''Magh Domhna'' means "the plain of Domhna (or Domon)", but the precise meaning of the text is not clear.
Nonetheless emigration and military service became the choice of many and the archipelago's populations continued to dwindle throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries.
The earliest written references that have survived relating to the islands were made by Pliny the Elder in his ''Natural History'', where he states that there are 30 "Hebudes", and makes a separate reference to "Dumna", which Watson (1926) concludes is unequivocally the Outer Hebrides.
This process  involved a transition from these places being perceived as relatively self-sufficient agricultural economies to a view becoming held by both island residents and outsiders alike that they lacked the essential services of a modern industrial economy.
A similar distance to the north of Lewis are North Rona and Sula Sgeir, two small and remote islands.
The Western Isles, including Stornoway, are defined by Highlands and Islands Enterprise as an economically "Fragile Area" and they have an estimated trade deficit of some £163.4 million.
A considerable number of islandmen "came out" in support of the Jacobite  Earl of Mar in the "15" although the response to the 1745 rising was muted.
The other independent run Councils are Shetland and Orkney.
From Barra Head to the  Butt of Lewis is roughly .
The Outer Hebrides have a cool temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude, due to the influence of the North Atlantic Current.
With 59.3% of Gaelic speakers or a total of 15,723 speakers, this made the Outer Hebrides the most strongly coherent Gaelic speaking area in Scotland.
The Hebridean Challenge is an adventure race run in five daily stages, which takes place along the length of the islands and includes hill and road running, road and mountain biking, short sea swims and demanding sea kayaking sections.
In 1598 King James VI authorised some "Gentleman Adventurers" from Fife to civilise the "most barbarous Isle of Lewis".
For example, Colonel Gordon of Cluny, owner of Barra, South Uist and Benbecula evicted thousands of islanders using trickery and cruelty and even offered to sell Barra to the government as a penal colony.
ghlas, glais, ghlais, glaise, ghlaise, glasa, ghlasa
The Hebrides were originally settled in the Mesolithic era and have a diversity of important prehistoric sites.
Modern commercial activities centre on tourism, crofting, fishing, and weaving including the manufacture of Harris tweed.
In modern Gaelic the islands are sometimes referred to collectively as ''An t-Eilean Fada'' (the Long Island) or ''Na h-Eileanan a-Muigh'' (the Outer Isles).
Bus services are operated by Bus na Comhairle, based in Stornoway, and by numerous other operators, which run the bulk of services.
The 15 inhabited islands have a total population of 27,400 and there are more than 50 substantial uninhabited islands.
This situation lasted until the partitioning of the Western Isles in 1156, at which time the Outer Hebrides remained under Norwegian control while the Inner Hebrides broke out under Somerled, the Norse-Celtic kinsman of the Manx royal house.
The Scottish independence referendum has led some islanders to call for a debate on the constitutional position of the Western Isles, linked with similar initiatives in Orkney and Shetland.
Although their contribution to the islands can still be found in personal and placenames, the archaeological record of the Norse period is very limited.
Calvay in the Sound of Barra provided the inspiration for Compton MacKenzie's  novel ''Whisky Galore'' after the  ran aground there with a cargo of single malt in 1941.
There is some optimism about the possibility of future developments in, for example, renewable energy generation, tourism, and education, and after declines in the 20th century the population has stabilised since 2003, although it is ageing.
This made the Western Isles the Scottish council area with the smallest percentage of atheists in the population.
11% stated that they had no religion.
dhubh, duibh, dhuibh, duibhe, dhuibhe, dubha, dhubha
They form part of the Hebrides, separated from the Scottish mainland and from the Inner Hebrides by the waters of the Minch, the Little Minch and the Sea of the Hebrides.
Thompson (1968) provides a more literal translation: "Fire played in the fig-trees of Liodhus; it mounted up to heaven.
A two-week festival,  it has inspired 43 other ''feisean'' throughout Scotland.
These are amongst the oldest rocks in Europe, having been formed in the Precambrian period up to three billion years ago.
North and South Uist and Lewis in particular have landscapes with a high percentage of freshwater and a maze and complexity of loch shapes.
Writing about 80 years later, in 140-150 AD, Ptolemy, drawing on the earlier naval expeditions of Agricola, also distinguished between the ''Ebudes'', of which he writes there were only five (and thus possibly meaning the Inner Hebrides) and Dumna.
South Uist is home to the Askernish Golf Course.
However the economic position of the islands remains relatively precarious.
Nonetheless the aftermath of the decisive Battle of Culloden, which effectively ended Jacobite hopes of a Stuart restoration, was widely felt.
At the time of the 2001 Census, 42% of the population identified themselves as being affiliated with the Church of Scotland, with 13% Roman Catholic and 28% with other Christian churches.
Lewis is comparatively flat, and largely consists of treeless moors of blanket peat.
The name for the British Parliament constituency covering this area is Na h-Eileanan an Iar, the seat being held by Angus MacNeil MP since 2005, while the Scottish Parliament constituency for the area is Na h-Eileanan an Iar, the incumbent being Alasdair Allan MSP.
Breeze also suggests that Dumna might be Lewis and Harris, the largest island of the Outer Hebrides although he conflates this single island with the name "Long Island".
The Highland Clearances of the 19th century had a devastating effect on many communities and it is only in recent years that population levels have ceased to decline.
Initially successful, the colonists were driven out by local forces commanded by Murdoch and Neil MacLeod, who based their forces on Bearasaigh in Loch Ròg.
Smaller isles and skerries and other island groups pepper the North Atlantic surrounding the main islands.
The highest eminence is Mealisval at  in the south west.
By this time Lewis was held by the Mackenzies of Kintail, (later the Earls of Seaforth), who pursued a more enlightened approach, investing in fishing in particular.
is a 1945 British drama/romance film set mostly in the Outer Hebrides, depicting local lifestyles and speech.
The impact appears to have been very limited.
While Rona  used to support a small population who grew grain and raised cattle, Sula Sgeir is an inhospitable rock.
The islands also provide a habitat for other important species such as corncrake, hen harrier, golden eagle and otter.
Watson (1926)  states that the meaning of Ptolemy's "Eboudai" is unknown and that the root may be pre-Celtic.
The Outer Hebrides have historically been a very strong Scottish Gaelic (''Gàidhlig'') speaking area.
Most of Harris is mountainous, with large areas of exposed rock and Clisham, the archipelago's only Corbett, reaches  in height.
The island became completely uninhabited by 1980 with the automation of the lighthouse.
Eilean Dòmhnuill in Loch Olabhat on North Uist was constructed circa  3200–2800 BC and may be Scotland's earliest crannog (a type of artificial island).
In 2003 Scottish Natural Heritage undertook culls of hedgehogs in the area although they were halted in 2007, with trapped animals now being relocated to the mainland.
Norse control of the Hebrides was formalised in 1098 when Edgar of Scotland formally signed the islands over to Magnus III of Norway.
The islands are geographically coextensive with Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, one of the 32 unitary council areas of Scotland.
In July 1906 grazing land on Vatersay was raided by landless men from Barra and its isles.
Since then, the islands have formed one of the 32 unitary council areas that now cover the whole country, with the council officially known by its Gaelic name, ''Comhairle nan Eilean Siar'' under the terms of the Local Government (Gaelic Names) (Scotland) Act 1997.
This idea is often repeated but no firm evidence of this derivation has emerged.
The fire gushed out of the houses".
South Uist is considered the best place in the UK for the aquatic plant Slender Naiad, which is a European Protected Species.
Some are not geologically part of the Outer Hebrides, but are administratively and in most cases culturally, part of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar.
Scottish Gaelic is the predominant spoken language, although in a few areas English speakers form a majority.
Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from Lewisian gneiss.
The historian W. C. MacKenzie was moved to write:
Some of the larger islands have development trusts that support the local economy and, in striking contrast to the 19th and 20th century domination by absentee landlords, more than two thirds of the Western Isles population now lives on community-owned estates.
There are relatively small outcrops of Triassic sandstone at Broad Bay near Stornoway.
Most of the islands have a bedrock formed from ancient metamorphic rocks and the climate is mild and oceanic.
Although Loch Suaineabhal has only 25% of the Langavat's surface area it has a mean depth of  and is the most voluminous on the island.
Many of this last group belong to the Free Church of Scotland, known for its strict observance of the Sabbath.
The position was exacerbated by the failure of the islands' kelp industry, which thrived from the 18th century until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and large scale emigration became endemic.
The growing threat that Clan Donald posed to the Scottish crown led to the forcible dissolution of the Lordship of the Isles by James IV in 1493, but although the king had the power to subdue the organised military might of the Hebrides, he and his immediate successors lacked the will or ability to provide an alternative form of governance.
The Hebrides were now part of Kingdom of the Isles, whose rulers were themselves vassals of the Kings of Norway.
The animals are not native to the islands, having been introduced in the 1970s to reduce garden pests and their spread posed a threat to the eggs of ground nesting wading birds.
During the summer season in the 1860s and 1870s five thousand inhabitants of Lewis could be found in Wick on the mainland of Scotland, employed on the fishing boats and at the quaysides.
The council has its base in Stornoway on Lewis and is often known locally simply as "the Comhairle" or ''a' Chomhairle''.
At high water the runways are under the sea so flight times vary with the tide.
In addition to the Outer Hebrides, they form basement deposits on the Scottish mainland west of the Moine Thrust and on the islands of Coll and Tiree.
It incorporates Lewis in the north and Harris in the south, both of which are frequently referred to as individual islands, although they are joined by a land border.
On Barra Head, for example, Historic Scotland have identified eighty-three archaeological sites on the island, the majority being of a pre-medieval date.
The Comhairle is one of only three Councils in Scotland with a majority of elected members who are independents.
The Western Isles is a member of the International Island Games Association.
The gneiss's delicate pink colours are exposed throughout the islands and it is sometimes referred to by geologists as "The Old Boy".
Within ten minutes the ship began to founder and break up casting 450 people into the raging sea.
The Callanish Stones dating from about 2900 BC are the finest example of a stone circle in Scotland, the 13 primary monoliths of between one and five metres high creating a circumference about  in diameter.
Lady Gordon Cathcart took legal action against the "raiders" but the visiting judge took the view that she had neglected her duties as a landowner and that "long indifference to the necessities of the cottars had gone far to drive them to exasperation".
The later Iron Age inhabitants of the northern and western Hebrides were probably Pictish, although the historical record is sparse.
''Annie Jane'', a three-masted immigrant ship out of Liverpool bound for Montreal, Canada, struck rocks off the West Beach of Vatersay during a storm on Tuesday 28 September, 1853.
The areas with the lowest density of speakers are Stornoway (44%), Braigh (41%), Melbost (41%), and Balivanich (37%).
Harris has fewer large bodies of water but innumerable small lochans.
The Uists and their immediate outliers have a combined area of .
In 1540 James V himself conducted a royal tour, forcing the clan chiefs to accompany him.
There are four main sports centres: ''Ionad Spors Leodhais'' in Stornoway, which has a 25 m swimming pool; Harris Sports Centre; Lionacleit Sports Centre on Benbecula; and Castlebay Sports Centre on Barra.
Sea transport is crucial and a variety of ferry services operate between the islands and to mainland Scotland.
On present evidence that cannot be substantiated either in terms of environment, economy, or, indeed, society.
The tiny Beasts of Holm off the east coast of Lewis were the site of the sinking of  during the first few hours of 1919, one of the worst maritime disasters in United Kingdom waters during the 20th century.
Lewis and Harris has an area of  and is the largest island in Scotland and the third largest in the British Isles, after Great Britain and Ireland.
There are scheduled flights from Stornoway, Benbecula and Barra airports both inter-island and to the mainland.
With the implementation of the Treaty of Union in 1707 the Hebrides became part of the new Kingdom of Great Britain, but the clan's loyalties to a distant monarch were not strong.
In common with the other main island chains of Scotland, many of the more remote islands were abandoned during the 19th and 20th centuries, in some cases after continuous habitation since the prehistoric period.
In 1506 the Earl of Huntly besieged and captured Stornoway Castle using cannon.
Loch Bì is South Uist's largest loch and at  long it all but cuts the island in two.
Most areas were between 60-74% Gaelic speaking and the areas with the highest density of over 80% are Scalpay near Harris, Newtonferry and Kildonan, whilst Daliburgh, Linshader, Eriskay, Brue, Boisdale, West Harris, Ardveenish, Soval, Ness, and Bragar all have more than 75%.
Fèis Bharraigh began in 1981 with the aim of  developing the practice and study of the Gaelic language, literature, music, drama and culture on the islands of Barra and Vatersay.
Indech, son of the goddess Domnu, who ruled over the deep seas).
The work of the Napier Commission and the Congested Districts Board, and the passing of  the Crofting Act of 1886 helped, but social unrest continued.
There are more than fifty uninhabited islands greater in size than  in the Outer Hebrides, including the Barra Isles, Flannan Isles, Monach Islands, the Shiant Isles and the islands of Loch Ròg.
The Scottish acceptance of Magnus III as King of the Isles came after the Norwegian king had conquered Orkney, the Hebrides and the Isle of Man in a swift campaign earlier the same year, directed against the local Norwegian leaders of the various islands petty kingdoms.
Moray is run by a Conservative/Independent coalition.
There are also more than 7,500 freshwater lochs in the Outer Hebrides, about 24% of the total for the whole of Scotland.
The Western Isles became part of the Norse kingdom of the ''Suðreyjar'', which lasted for over 400 years until sovereignty was transferred to Scotland by the Treaty of Perth in 1266.
A new era of Hebridean involvement in the affairs of the wider world was about to commence.
The island of Pabbay is the site of the Pabbay Stone, the only extant Pictish symbol stone in the Outer Hebrides.
The best known find from this time is the Lewis chessmen, which date from the mid 12th century.
The St Kilda wren is a subspecies of wren whose range is confined to the islands whose name it bears.
There are also several islands called ''Orasaigh'' from the Norse ''Örfirirsey'' meaning "tidal" or "ebb island".
The oldest links in the Outer Hebrides, it was designed by Old Tom Morris.
The average annual rainfall in Lewis is  and sunshine hours range from 1,100 to 1,200 per year.
By capturing the islands Magnus imposed a more direct royal control, although at a price.
Control of the islands was then held by clan chiefs, principal of whom were the MacLeods, MacDonalds, Mackenzies and MacNeils.
People still living can recall being beaten for speaking Gaelic in school.
For example, hundreds left North Uist for Cape Breton, Nova Scotia.
Hunter (2000) states that in relation to King Bridei I of the Picts in the sixth century AD: "As for Shetland, Orkney, Skye and the Western Isles, their inhabitants, most of whom appear to have been Pictish in culture and speech at this time, are likely to have regarded Bridei as a fairly distant presence."
''hebridensis'' is endemic to the Hebrides and there are local variants of the dark green fritillary and green-veined white butterflies.
The highest peak here is Beinn Mhòr at .
Murray (1966) claims that Ptolemy's "Ebudae" was originally derived from the Old Norse ''Havbredey'', meaning "isles on the edge of the sea".
For those who remained new economic opportunities emerged through the export of cattle, commercial fishing and tourism.
These rocks are largely igneous in origin, mixed with metamorphosed marble, quartzite and mica schist and intruded by later basaltic dykes and granite magma.
This includes the Uists themselves and the islands that link to them by causeways and bridges.
generally from the Norse ''øy'' meaning "island"
In Scotland, the Celtic Iron Age way of life, often troubled but never extinguished by Rome, re-asserted itself when the legions abandoned any permanent occupation in 211 AD.
The individual island and place names in the Outer Hebrides have mixed Gaelic and Norse origins.
There are also small Episcopalian congregations in Lewis and Harris and the Outer Hebrides are part of the Diocese of Argyll and The Isles in both the Episcopalian and Catholic traditions.
''Innse Gall'' (islands of the foreigners or strangers) is also heard occasionally, a name that was originally used by mainland Highlanders when the islands were ruled by the Norse.
The general picture remains one of broad continuity, not of disruption&nbsp;...
These princelings nominally owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown, although in practice the latter's control was fairly limited.
The Kingdom had two parts: the ''Suðr-eyjar'' or South Isles  encompassing the Hebrides and the Isle of Man; and the ''Norðr-eyjar'' or North Isles of Orkney and Shetland.
Far and wide the people were driven to flight.
The remains of 350 men, women and children were buried in the dunes behind the beach and a small cairn and monument marks the site.
On 4 May 1746, the "Young Pretender" Charles Edward Stuart hid on Eilean Liubhaird with some of his men for four days whilst Royal Navy vessels patrolled the Minch.
The sandstone at Broad Bay was once thought to be Torridonian or Old Red Sandstone.
Of Loch Sgadabhagh on North Uist it has been said that "there is probably no other loch in Britain which approaches Loch Scadavay in irregularity and complexity of outline."
Granite intrusions are found in the parish of Barvas in west Lewis, and another forms the summit plateau of the mountain Roineabhal in Harris.
Outdoor activities including rugby, football, golf, shinty, fishing, riding, canoeing, athletics, and multi-sports are popular in the Western Isles.
They were pirates, extracting tribute from the coasts of Ireland and one of their kings was Indech mac Dé Domnand (i.e.
In the 18th century the population was over fifty, but the last native islanders had left by 1931.
The Shiant Isles and St Kilda are formed from much later tertiary basalt and basalt and gabbros respectively.
Loch Druidibeg on South Uist is a national nature reserve owned and managed by Scottish Natural Heritage.
However, by 2011 the overall percentage of Gaelic speakers in the Outer Hebrides had fallen to 52%.
The average temperature for the year is 6&nbsp;°C (44&nbsp;°F) in January and 14&nbsp;°C (57&nbsp;°F) in summer.
In Irish mythology the islands were the home of the Fomorians, described as "huge and ugly" and "ship men of the sea".
There are various important prehistoric structures, many of which pre-date the first written references to the islands by Roman and Greek authors.
skerry; often refers to a rock or rocks that lie submerged at high tide.
The status of Rockall, which is  to the west of North Uist and which the Island of Rockall Act 1972 decreed to be a part of the Western Isles, remains a matter of international dispute.
Following the ill-fated 1263 expedition of Haakon IV of Norway, the Outer Hebrides along with the Isle of Man, were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth.
The Highland Clearances of the 19th century destroyed communities throughout the Highlands and Islands as the human populations were evicted and replaced with sheep farms.
The '''Outer Hebrides''', also known as the '''Western Isles''' (Scottish Gaelic: ''''  or '''' ), ''Innse Gall'' ("islands of the strangers") or the '''Long Isle''' or '''Long Island''' (Gaelic: ''An t-Eilean Fada''), is an island chain off the west coast of mainland Scotland.
Gaelic music is popular in the islands and the Lewis and Harris Traditional Music Society plays an active role in promoting the genre.
The Romans' direct impact on the Highlands and Islands was scant and there is no evidence that they ever actually landed in the Outer Hebrides.
The House of Stuart's attempts to control the Outer Hebrides were then at first desultory and little more than punitive expeditions.
