However, the tail can extend outward to more than 100–200 Earth radii.
In 1976, eight equatorial states (Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Congo, Zaire, Uganda, Kenya, and Indonesia) met in Bogotá, Colombia.
Once a satellite descends to , it will start to burn up in the atmosphere.
In 1640, he demonstrated that an established force resisted the formation of a vacuum.
The atoms account for only 4.6% of the total energy density, or a density of one proton per four cubic meters.
The region outside Earth's atmosphere and extending out to just beyond the Moon’s orbit, including the Lagrangian points, is sometimes referred to as ''cis-lunar space''.
The Italian scientist Galileo Galilei knew that air had mass and so was subject to gravity.
The outer boundary of geospace is the magnetopause, which forms an interface between the planet's magnetosphere and the solar wind.
For Earth, this sphere has a radius of about .
Moving an infrared telescope out past the dust will increase the effectiveness of the instrument.
The inner boundary is the ionosphere.
The French mathematician Blaise Pascal reasoned that if the column of mercury was supported by air then the column ought to be shorter at higher altitude where the air pressure is lower.
The sparse density of matter in outer space means that electromagnetic radiation can travel great distances without being scattered: the mean free path of a photon in intergalactic space is about 1023&nbsp;km, or 10 billion light years.
They remain a fundamental tool for the exploration of outer space, as well as observation of the Earth.
Blood and other body fluids boil when the pressure drops below 6.3&nbsp;kPa, and this condition is called ebullism.
Large regions of higher density matter known as molecular clouds allow chemical reactions to occur, including the formation of organic polyatomic species.
He concluded that there must be a vacuum between the Earth and the Moon.
Using the estimated radiation of the background stars, he concluded that space must be heated to a temperature of 5–6&nbsp;K. British physicist Arthur Eddington made a similar calculation to derive a temperature of 3.18&nbsp;K in 1926.
In 1961, Venera 1 became the first planetary probe.
This established that the Andromeda galaxy, and by extension all galaxies, lay well outside the Milky Way.
In the 2nd century, astronomer Zhang Heng became convinced that space must be infinite, extending well beyond the mechanism that supported the Sun and the stars.
The tally of molecules discovered through radio astronomy is steadily increasing at the rate of about four new species per year.
This concept of an aether originated with ancient Greek philosophers, including Aristotle, who conceived of it as the medium through which the heavenly bodies moved.
center of the planet.
Planets without magnetic fields, such as Mars, have their atmospheres gradually eroded by the solar wind.
These claims are not internationally accepted.
The first spacecraft to reach escape velocity was the Soviet Luna 1, which performed a fly-by of the Moon in 1959.
Ebullism is slowed by the pressure containment of blood vessels, so some blood remains liquid.
Interstellar space is the physical space within a galaxy beyond the influence of each star on the plasma.
The contents of interstellar space are called the interstellar medium.
When stars are moving at sufficiently high peculiar velocities, their astrospheres can generate bow shocks as they collide with the interstellar medium.
The treaty was passed by the United Nations General Assembly in 1963 and signed in 1967 by the USSR, the United States of America and the United Kingdom.
The expression ''outer space'' was used as an astronomical term by Alexander von Humboldt in 1845.
Due to the high cost of getting into space, manned spaceflight has been limited to low Earth orbit and the Moon.
In 1648, his brother-in-law, Florin Périer, repeated the experiment on the Puy de Dôme mountain in central France and found that the column was shorter by three inches.
Geospace extends from Earth's atmosphere to the outer reaches of Earth's magnetic field, whereupon it gives way to the solar wind of interplanetary space.
Lesser symptoms include loss of body mass, nasal congestion, sleep disturbance, and puffiness of the face.
It was later popularized in the writings of H. G. Wells in 1901.
These plasmas form a medium from which storm-like disturbances powered by the solar wind can drive electrical currents into the Earth’s upper atmosphere.
It covers the legal use of outer space by nation states, and includes in its definition of ''outer space'' the Moon and other celestial bodies.
Space is a partial vacuum: its different regions are defined by the various atmospheres and "winds" that dominate within them, and extend to the point at which those winds give way to those beyond.
The concept of a Universe filled with a luminiferous aether remained in vogue among some scientists until the early 20th century.
It revealed the presence of the solar wind and performed the first fly-by of the planet Venus, although contact was lost before reaching Venus.
English philosopher William Gilbert arrived at a similar conclusion, arguing that the stars are visible to us only because they are surrounded by a thin aether or a void.
The Outer Space Treaty provides the basic framework for international space law.
Based on this idea that a vacuum could not exist, in the West it was widely held for many centuries that space could not be empty.
Exposure to radiation sources such as high-energy, ionizing cosmic rays can result in fatigue, nausea, vomiting, as well as damage to the immune system and changes to the white blood cell count.
Outside a protective atmosphere and magnetic field, there are few obstacles to the passage through space of energetic subatomic particles known as cosmic rays.
Hence, at this altitude the human body requires a pressure suit, or a pressurized capsule, to survive.
'''Outer space''', '''deep space''', or just '''space''', is the void that exists between celestial bodies, including the Earth.
a plasma consisting of equal numbers of electrons and protons.
This decrease in pressure was further demonstrated by carrying a half-full balloon up a mountain and watching it gradually expand, then contract upon descent.
This concept built upon a 5th-century BCE ontological argument by the Greek philosopher Parmenides, who denied the possible existence of a void in space.
Humans evolved for life in Earth gravity, and exposure to weightlessness has been shown to have deleterious effects on the health of the human body.
A conjecture is that just such a scenario occurred early in the history of the Solar System, with potentially microorganism-bearing rocks being exchanged between Venus, Earth, and Mars.
The absence of air makes outer space an ideal location for astronomy at all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The Moon passes through the geospace tail during roughly four days each month, during which time the surface is shielded from the solar wind.
Computer simulations and observations indicate that up to half of the atomic matter in the Universe might exist in this warm–hot, rarefied state.
The thermosphere in this range has large gradients of pressure, temperature and composition, and varies greatly due to space weather.
As late as the 17th century, the French philosopher René Descartes argued that the entirety of space must be filled.
This region contains material left over from previous manned and unmanned launches that are a potential hazard to spacecraft.
The treaty states that outer space is free for all nation states to explore and is not subject to claims of national sovereignty.
The steam may bloat the body to twice its normal size and slow circulation, but tissues are elastic and porous enough to prevent rupture.
Interplanetary space contains the magnetic field generated by the Sun.
The framework for international space law was established by the Outer Space Treaty, which was passed by the United Nations in 1967.
He believed that the Universe, while not infinite, could not be held as finite as it lacked any bounds within which it could be contained.
Prior to the advent of reliable rocket technology, the closest that humans had come to reaching outer space was through the use of balloon flights.
Further research will be needed to assess the radiation hazards and determine suitable countermeasures.
Beginning in 1958, outer space has been the subject of multiple resolutions by the United Nations General Assembly.
This wind has a particle density of 5–10 protons/cm3 and is moving at a velocity of .
It was replaced by Albert Einstein's theory of special relativity, which holds that the speed of light in a vacuum is a fixed constant, independent of the observer's motion or frame of reference.
Unmanned spacecraft in Earth orbit have become an essential technology of modern civilization.
However, the radiation that fills the vacuum has a different temperature than the kinetic temperature of the gas, meaning that the gas and radiation are not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
The present day shape of the Universe has been determined from measurements of the cosmic microwave background using satellites like the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe.
This was followed by the first human spaceflight in 1961, when Yuri Gagarin was sent into orbit on Vostok 1.
When this happened, matter and energy became decoupled, allowing photons to travel freely through space.
However, not every location in space is ideal for a telescope.
In 350 BCE, Greek philosopher Aristotle suggested that ''nature abhors a vacuum'', a principle that became known as the ''horror vacui''.
Of these, more than 50 have been concerning the international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space and preventing an arms race in space.
In 1650, German scientist Otto von Guericke constructed the first vacuum pump: a device that would further refute the principle of ''horror vacui''.
This volume nearly coincides with a region of space known as the Local Bubble, which is characterized by a lack of dense, cold clouds.
These are shaped by the influence of the solar wind into the approximation of a teardrop shape, with the long tail extending outward behind the planet.
Humans began the physical exploration of space during the 20th century with the advent of high-altitude balloon flights, followed by manned rocket launches.
In 1887, the Michelson–Morley experiment tried to detect the Earth's motion through this medium by looking for changes in the speed of light depending on the direction of the planet's motion.
When gas falls from the filamentary structures of the WHIM into the galaxy clusters at the intersections of the cosmic filaments, it can heat up even more, reaching temperatures of 108&nbsp;K and above in the so-called intracluster medium.
Microgravity also has a negative effect on human physiology that causes both muscle atrophy and bone loss.
There is no firm boundary where outer space begins.
This is evidenced by the spectacular pictures sent back by the Hubble Space Telescope, allowing light from more than 13&nbsp;billion years ago—almost to the time of the Big Bang—to be observed.
The discovery since 1995 of extrasolar planets means that other stars must possess their own interplanetary media.
Swelling and ebullism can be reduced by containment in a flight suit.
The 1979 Moon Treaty turned the jurisdiction of all heavenly bodies (including the orbits around such bodies) over to the international community.
Space suits are needed at  to provide enough oxygen for breathing and to prevent water loss, while above  they are essential to prevent ebullism.
(The actual distance to the border of this cavity varies from 60 to 250&nbsp;pc or more.)
In 1935, the U.S. ''Explorer II'' manned balloon flight had reached an altitude of .
However the Kármán line, at an altitude of  above sea level, is conventionally used as the start of outer space in space treaties and for aerospace records keeping.
In spite of this, extinction, which is the absorption and scattering of photons by dust and gas, is an important factor in galactic and intergalactic astronomy.
The temperature of the vacuum is measured in terms of the kinetic activity of the gas, as it is on Earth.
Spacecraft with a perigee below about  are subject to drag from the Earth's atmosphere, which will cause the orbital altitude to decrease.
Proposed concepts for addressing this issue include non-rocket spacelaunch, momentum exchange tethers, and space elevators.
The duration of space sickness varies, but it typically lasts for 1–3 days, after which the body adjusts to the new environment.
The idea of the luminiferous aether was then abandoned.
Interplanetary space is defined by the solar wind, a continuous stream of charged particles emanating from the Sun that creates a very tenuous atmosphere (the heliosphere) for billions of kilometers into space.
Other effects include fluid redistribution, slowing of the cardiovascular system, decreased production of red blood cells, balance disorders, and a weakening of the immune system.
In ancient China, there were various schools of thought concerning the nature of the heavens, some of which bear a resemblance to the modern understanding.
(Although the plasma is very hot by terrestrial standards, 105 K is often called "warm" in astrophysics.)
This experiment resulted in the first mercury barometer and created a scientific sensation in Europe.
Earth orbit was first achieved by Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union in 1961 and unmanned spacecraft have since reached all of the known planets in the Solar System.
The matter that remained following the initial expansion has since undergone gravitational collapse to create stars, galaxies and other astronomical objects, leaving behind a deep vacuum that forms what is now called outer space.
Unlike the matter and dark matter, the dark energy seems not to be concentrated in galaxies: although dark energy may account for a majority of the mass-energy in the Universe, dark energy's influence is 5 orders of magnitude smaller than the influence of gravity from matter and dark matter within the Milky Way.
These storms increase fluxes of energetic electrons that can permanently damage satellite electronics, disrupting telecommunications and GPS technologies, and can also be a hazard to astronauts, even in low Earth orbit.
To achieve an orbit, a spacecraft must travel faster than a sub-orbital spaceflight.
They made the "Declaration of the First Meeting of Equatorial Countries," also known as "the Bogotá Declaration", where they made a claim to control the segment of the geosynchronous orbital path corresponding to each country.
The peak flux of cosmic rays occurs at energies of about 109&nbsp;eV, with approximately 87% protons, 12% helium nuclei and 1% heavier nuclei.
Longer term exposure to weightlessness results in muscle atrophy and deterioration of the skeleton, or spaceflight osteopenia.
Atmospheres have no clearly delineated boundary: the density of atmospheric gas gradually decreases with distance from the object until it becomes indistinguishable from the surrounding environment.
However, it would remain for his pupil Evangelista Torricelli to create an apparatus that would produce a vacuum in 1643.
Still, there remains no legal prohibition against deploying conventional weapons in space, and anti-satellite weapons have been successfully tested by the US, USSR and China.
It has effectively no friction, allowing stars, planets and moons to move freely along their ideal orbits.
This is enriched with trace amounts of heavier atoms formed through stellar nucleosynthesis.
A bow shock is the third boundary of an astrosphere after the termination shock and the astropause (called the heliopause in the Solar System).
The baseline temperature, as set by the background radiation from the Big Bang, is 2.7&nbsp;kelvins (K) (−270.45&nbsp;°C; −454.81&nbsp;°F).
Instead, these authors argue that a subsonic bow wave defines the transition from the solar wind flow to the interstellar medium.
They also create aurorae seen near the magnetic poles.
These ideas led to speculations as to the infinite dimension of space by the Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno in the 16th century.
This volume contains about 104–105 stars and the local interstellar gas counterbalances the astrospheres that surround these stars, with the volume of each sphere varying depending on the local density of the interstellar medium.
The first humans to escape Earth orbit were Frank Borman, Jim Lovell and William Anders in 1968 on board the U.S. Apollo 8, which achieved lunar orbit and reached a maximum distance of  from the Earth.
It also prohibits the deployment of nuclear weapons in outer space.
Fortunately, most such particles are significantly attenuated by the shielding provided by the aluminium walls of a spacecraft, and can be further diminished by water containers and other barriers.
Most space suits use around 30–39&nbsp;kPa of pure oxygen, about the same as on the Earth's surface.
A number of molecules exist in interstellar space, as can tiny 0.1&nbsp;μm dust particles.
But the scale of the Universe remained unknown until the first successful measurement of the distance to a nearby star in 1838 by the German astronomer Friedrich Bessel.
At or above the Armstrong line, fluids in the throat and lungs will boil away.
Approximately 70% of the mass of the interstellar medium consists of lone hydrogen atoms; most of the remainder consists of helium atoms.
The density of the Universe, however, is clearly not uniform; it ranges from relatively high density in galaxies—including very high density in structures within galaxies, such as planets, stars, and black holes—to conditions in vast voids that have much lower density, at least in terms of visible matter.
However, this treaty has not been ratified by any nation that currently practices manned spaceflight.
The background energy released during the initial expansion has steadily decreased in density, leading to a 1948 prediction by American physicts Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman of a temperature of 5&nbsp;K for the temperature of space.
The escape velocity required to pull free of Earth's gravitational field altogether and move into interplanetary space is about .
This treaty precludes any claims of national sovereignty and permits all states to freely explore outer space.
They allow direct monitoring of weather conditions, relay long-range communications including telephone calls and television signals, provide a means of precise navigation, and allow remote sensing of the Earth.
Intergalactic space takes up most of the volume of the Universe, but even galaxies and star systems consist almost entirely of empty space.
It consists mostly of ionized hydrogen; i.e.
Interplanetary space, the space around the Sun and planets of the Solar System, is the region dominated by the interplanetary medium, which extends out to the heliopause where the influence of the galactic environment starts to dominate over the magnetic field and particle flux from the Sun.
Even if the victim's airway is fully open, the flow of air through the windpipe may be too slow to prevent the rupture.
The surviving books of the Hsüan Yeh school said that the heavens were boundless, "empty and void of substance".
Once the deoxygenated blood arrives at the brain, humans and animals will lose consciousness after a few seconds and die of hypoxia within minutes.
In August 2012, Voyager 1 became the first man-made object to leave the Solar System and enter interstellar space.
This leaves open the question as to whether the Universe is finite or infinite.
According to astronauts, like Don Pettit, space has a burned/metallic odor that clings to their suits and equipment, similar to the scent of an arc welding torch.
However, this space is not completely empty, and is sparsely filled with cosmic rays, which include ionized atomic nuclei and various subatomic particles.
The altitude where the atmospheric pressure matches the vapor pressure of water at the temperature of the human body is called the Armstrong line, named after American physician Harry G. Armstrong.
As a consequence of rapid decompression, any oxygen dissolved in the blood will empty into the lungs to try to equalize the partial pressure gradient.
Cosmic rays can damage electronic components and pose a health threat to space travelers.
Stars, planets and moons retain their atmospheres by gravitational attraction.
This corresponds to a distance of over 10 light years.
Below about , decay becomes more rapid with lifetimes measured in days.
It is not completely empty, but consists of a hard vacuum containing a low density of particles, predominantly a plasma of hydrogen and helium as well as electromagnetic radiation, magnetic fields, neutrinos, dust and cosmic rays.
The Earth's atmospheric pressure drops to about Pa at  of altitude, compared to 100,000 Pa for the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) definition of standard pressure.
However, like asteroid mining, space manufacturing requires a significant investment with little prospect of an immediate return.
An important factor in the total expense is the high cost of placing mass into Earth orbit: $&ndash; per kg in inflation-adjusted dollars, according to a 2006 estimate.
The gas temperatures in outer space are always at least the temperature of the CMB but can be much higher.
At these temperatures, it is called the warm–hot intergalactic medium (WHIM).
The density of matter in the interstellar medium can vary considerably: the average is around 106 particles per m3, but cold molecular clouds can hold 108–1012 per m3.
The first spacecraft to perform a fly-by of Mars was Mariner 4, which reached the planet in 1964.
The density of the IGM is 5–200 times the average density of the Universe.
This material is called the intergalactic medium (IGM).
The energy required to reach Earth orbital velocity at an altitude of  is about 36&nbsp;MJ/kg, which is six times the energy needed merely to climb to the corresponding altitude.
However, the null result indicated something was wrong with the concept.
Outer space represents a challenging environment for human exploration because of the dual hazards of vacuum and radiation.
All of the observable universe is filled with photons that were created during the Big Bang, which is known as the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB).
The volume of interplanetary space is a nearly total vacuum, with a mean free path of about one astronomical unit at the orbital distance of the Earth.
In the high energy range, the flux of electrons is only about 1% of that of protons.
The Crew Altitude Protection Suit (CAPS), a fitted elastic garment designed in the 1960s for Shuttle astronauts, prevents ebullism at pressures as low as 2 kPa.
In addition to these health and environmental issues, the economic cost of putting objects, including humans, into space is high.
The lithopanspermia hypothesis suggests that rocks ejected into outer space from life-harboring planets may successfully transport life forms to another habitable world.
The rate of orbital decay depends on the satellite's cross-sectional area and mass, as well as variations in the air density of the upper atmosphere.
However, the impact of the cosmic rays upon the shielding produces additional radiation that can affect the crew.
There is also gas, plasma and dust, small meteors, and several dozen types of organic molecules discovered to date by microwave spectroscopy.
This pressure is high enough to prevent ebullism, but evaporation of nitrogen dissolved in the blood could still cause decompression sickness and gas embolisms if not managed.
These magnetic fields can trap particles from the solar wind and other sources, creating belts of magnetic particles such as the Van Allen radiation belt.
Interplanetary space extends to the heliopause, whereupon the solar wind gives way to the winds of the interstellar medium.
He extended the Copernican heliocentric cosmology to the concept of an infinite Universe filled with a substance he called aether, which did not cause resistance to the motions of heavenly bodies.
This can cause nausea and vomiting, vertigo, headaches, lethargy, and overall malaise.
For long duration space travel, radiation can pose an acute health hazard.
The shorter term ''space'' is actually older, first used to mean the region beyond Earth's sky in John Milton's ''Paradise Lost'' in 1667.
Intergalactic space is the physical space between galaxies.
Energetic cosmic rays penetrate the cold, dense clouds and ionize hydrogen and helium, resulting, for example, in the trihydrogen cation.
Geospace is the region of outer space near Earth.
These effects can be minimized through a regimen of exercise.
The Local Bubble contains dozens of warm interstellar clouds with temperatures of up to 7,000&nbsp;K and radii of 0.5–5&nbsp;pc.
The deep vacuum of space could make it an attractive environment for certain industrial processes, such as those that require ultraclean surfaces.
Initially, more than 50% of astronauts experience space motion sickness.
However, even the deep vacuum of intergalactic space is not devoid of matter, as it contains a few hydrogen atoms per cubic meter.
Interstellar space then continues to the edges of the galaxy, where it fades into the intergalactic void.
Studies of the large scale distribution of galaxies show that the Universe has a bubble-like structure, with clusters and groups of galaxies lying along filaments that occupy about a tenth of the total space.
As the physical properties and behavior of near Earth space is affected by the behavior of the Sun and space weather, the field of geospace is interlinked with heliophysics; the study of the Sun and its impact on the Solar System planets.
As light has a finite velocity, this theory also constrains the size of the directly observable universe.
It forms a cavity in the Orion Arm of the Milky Way galaxy, with dense molecular clouds lying along the borders, such as those in the constellations of Ophiuchus and Taurus.
Species of lichen carried on the ESA BIOPAN facility survived exposure for ten days in 2007.
In 1957, the unmanned satellite ''Sputnik 1'' was launched by a Russian R-7 rocket, achieving Earth orbit at an altitude of .
These atoms are ejected into the interstellar medium by stellar winds or when evolved stars begin to shed their outer envelopes such as during the formation of a planetary nebula.
