Being far from Rome, he had no access to libraries, and thus might have been forced to abandon the ''Fasti'' poem about the Roman calendar, of which only the first six books exist – January through June.
2.549–52 that his work was interrupted after six books.
The poet asks Livia to look for consolation in Tiberius.
Likewise, Arthur Golding moralized his own translation of the full 15 books, and published it in 1567.
Book 1 contains 11 poems; the first piece is an address by Ovid to his book about how it should act when it arrives in Rome.
Ovid may identify this work in his exile poetry as the ''carmen'', or song, which was one cause of his banishment.
The greatest loss is Ovid's only tragedy, ''Medea'', from which only a few lines are preserved.
His poetry was much imitated during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, and greatly influenced Western art and literature.
The chronology of these early works is not secure; tentative dates, however, have been established by scholars.
Poem 14 discusses Corinna's disastrous experiment in dyeing her hair and 15 stresses the immortality of Ovid and love poets.
The Emperor's grandchildren, Julia the Younger and Agrippa Postumus (the latter adopted by him), were also banished around the same time.
The first book opens with an invocation to Venus, in which Ovid establishes himself as a ''praeceptor amoris'' (1.17)—a teacher of love.
Book 2 invokes Apollo and begins with a telling of the story of Icarus.
Ovid's use of Alexandrian epic, or elegiac couplets, shows his fusion of erotic and psychological style with traditional forms of epic.
2.18.19–26 that seems to describe the collection as an early published work.
Ovid himself attributes his exile to ''carmen et error'', "a poem and a mistake", but his discretion in discussing the causes has resulted in much speculation among scholars.
Some scholars have even interpreted Corinna as a metapoetic symbol for the elegiac genre itself.
Some scholars, such as Kenney and Clausen, have compared Ovid with Virgil.
The ''Consolatio'' is a long elegiac poem of consolation to Augustus' wife Livia on the death of her son Nero Claudius Drusus.
This shows that the exile of Ovid had some influence in 19th century Romanticism since it makes connections with its key concepts such as wildness and the misunderstood genius.
Ovid uses mythical exempla to condemn his enemy in the afterlife, cites evil prodigies that attended his birth, and then in the next 300 lines wishes that the torments of mythological characters befall his enemy.
Poems 8 and 9 deal with Corinna selling her love for gifts, while 11 and 12 describe the poet's failed attempt to arrange a meeting.
Ovid emphasizes care of the body for the lover.
Orthodox scholars, however, oppose these hypotheses.
Ovid gives women detailed instructions on appearance telling them to avoid too many adornments.
The project seems unprecedented in Roman literature.
This attitude, coupled with the lack of testimony that identifies Ovid's Corinna with a real person has led scholars to conclude that Corinna was never a real person—and that Ovid's relationship with her is an invention for his elegiac project.
Ovid also varies his tone and material from different literary genres; G. B. Conte has called the poem "a sort of gallery of these various literary genres."
The final letters (16–21) are paired compositions comprising a letter to a lover and a reply.
Paris and Helen, Hero and Leander, and Acontius and Cydippe are the addressees of the paired letters.
That was a significant year in Roman politics.
Book 3 has 15 poems.
Ovid has been seen as taking on a persona in his poetry that is far more emotionally detached from his mistress and less involved in crafting a unique emotional realism within the text than the other elegists.
The final book of the ''Tristia'' with 14 poems focuses on his wife and friends.
This poem, traditionally placed at ''Amores'' 3.5, is considered spurious.
The fourth book focuses on three pairs of lovers: Pyramus and Thisbe, Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, and Perseus and Andromeda.
The five books of the elegiac ''Tristia'', a series of poems expressing the poet's despair in exile and advocating his return to Rome, are dated to AD 9–12.
The poem is considered spurious because it incorporates allusions to Ovid's works in an uncharacteristic way, although the piece is thought to be contemporary with Ovid.
Poem 1 expresses his love of poetry and the solace it brings; while 2 describes a triumph of Tiberius.
Ovid changes the leader of his elegies from the poet, to Amor (love).
The end of the poem praises Augustus and expresses Ovid's belief that his poem has earned him immortality.
The ''Ibis'' is an elegiac poem in 644 lines, in which Ovid uses a dazzling array of mythic stories to curse and attack an enemy who is harming him in exile.
While this poem has always been invaluable to students of Roman religion and culture for the wealth of antiquarian material it preserves, it recently has been seen as one of Ovid's finest literary works and a unique contribution to Roman elegiac poetry.
He also seems to emphasize unsavory, popular traditions of the festivals, imbuing the poem with a popular, plebeian flavor, which some have interpreted as subversive to the Augustan moral legislation.
The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London ordered that a contemporary translation of Ovid's love poems be publicly burned in 1599.
In 1923, scholar J. J. Hartman proposed a theory that is little considered among scholars of Latin civilization today: that Ovid was never exiled from Rome and that all of his exile works are the result of his fertile imagination.
The fifth poem, describing a noon tryst, introduces Corinna by name.
In the Middle Ages the voluminous ''Ovide moralisé'', a French work that moralizes 15 books of the ''Metamorphoses'' was composed.
Six books in elegiacs survive of this second ambitious poem that Ovid was working on when he was exiled.
This event shaped all his following poetry.
He may have been banished for these works, which appeared subversive to the emperor's moral legislation.
Romantics might have preferred his poetry of exile.
In exile, Ovid wrote two poetry collections, ''Tristia'' and ''Epistulae ex Ponto'', that illustrated his sadness and desolation.
The first book address men and teaches them how to seduce women, the second, also to men, teaches how to keep a lover.
Ovid died at Tomis in AD 17 or 18.
The poem was probably dedicated to Augustus initially, but perhaps the death of the emperor prompted Ovid to change the dedication to honor Germanicus.
Book 3 has nine poems in which Ovid addresses his wife (1) and various friends.
In the ''Epistulae'' he claims friendship with the natives of Tomis (in the ''Tristia'' they are frightening barbarians) and to have written a poem in their language (''Ex P''.
The Romantic movement of the 19th century, in contrast, considered Ovid and his poems "stuffy, dull, over-formalized and lacking in genuine passion."
Letter 15, from the historical Sappho to Phaon, seems spurious (although referred to in ''Am.''
Book 2 contains impassioned requests to Germanicus (1 and 5) and various friends to speak on his behalf at Rome while he describes his despair and life in exile.
The seventh book focuses on Medea, as well as Cephalus and Procris.
His erotic elegy covers a wide spectrum of themes and viewpoints; the ''Amores'' focus on Ovid's relationship with Corinna, the love of mythical characters is the subject of the ''Heroides'', and the ''Ars Amatoria'' and the other didactic love poems provide a handbook for relationships and seduction from a (mock-)"scientific" viewpoint.
The ''Ars Amatoria'' was followed by the ''Remedia Amoris'' in the same year.
Poems 2 and 3 are entreaties to a guardian to let the poet see Corinna, poem 6 is a lament for Corinna's dead parrot; poems 7 and 8 deal with Ovid's affair with Corinna's servant and her discovery of it, and 11 and 12 try to prevent Corinna from going on vacation.
He cites Callimachus' ''Ibis'' as his inspiration and calls all the gods to make his curse effective.
Richard Heinze in his famous ''Ovids elegische Erzählung'' (1919) delineated the distinction between Ovid's styles by comparing the ''Fasti'' and ''Metamorphoses'' versions of the same legends, such as the treatment of the Ceres–Proserpina story in both poems.
In the final poem Ovid apologizes for the quality and tone of his book, a sentiment echoed throughout the collection.
This elegiac poem proposes a cure for the love Ovid teaches in the ''Ars Amatoria'', and is primarily addressed to men.
The ''Heroides'' ("Heroines") or ''Epistulae Heroidum'' are a collection of 21 poems in elegiac couplets.
The poem opens by advising Livia not to try to hide her sad emotions and contrasts Drusus' military virtue with his death.
He advises women to read elegiac poetry, learn to play games, sleep with people of different ages, flirt, and dissemble.
It is probably in this period, if they are indeed by Ovid, that the double letters (16–21) in the ''Heroides'' were composed.
Otis states that the ''Heroides'' are more serious and, though some of them are "quite different from anything Ovid had done before ... he is here also treading a very well-worn path" to relate that the motif of females abandoned by or separated from their men was a "stock motif of Hellenistic and neoteric poetry (the classic example for us is, of course, Catullus 66)."
While the Jesuits saw his poems as elegant compositions worthy of being presented to students for educational purposes, they also felt his works as a whole might corrupt students.
Ovid also mentions some occasional poetry (''Epithalamium'', dirge, even a rendering in Getic,) which does not survive.
The sixth book is a collection of stories about the rivalry between gods and mortals, beginning with Arachne and ending with Philomela.
The ''Epistulae ex Ponto'' is a collection in four books of further poetry from exile.
The book ends with Ovid asking his "students" to spread his fame.
The tenth book focuses on stories of doomed love, such as Orpheus, who sings about Hyacinthus, as well as Pygmalion, Myrrha, and Adonis.
The poem is known to have circulated independently and its lack of engagement with Tibullan or Propertian elegy argue in favor of its spuriousness; however, the poem does seem to be datable to the early empire.
Some are also to the Emperor Augustus, yet others are to himself, to friends in Rome, and sometimes to the poems themselves, expressing loneliness and hope of recall from banishment or exile.
In his treatment of elegy, scholars have traced the influence of rhetorical education in his enumeration, in his effects of surprise, and in his transitional devices.
The final poem is again an apology for his work.
Ovid has been considered a highly inventive love elegist who plays with traditional elegiac conventions and elaborates the themes of the genre; Quintilian even calls him a "sportive" elegist.
By AD 8, he had completed his most ambitious work, the ''Metamorphoses'', a hexameter epic poem in 15 books.
These are considered a later addition to the corpus because they are never mentioned by Ovid and may or may not be spurious.
In a monologue asking boys not pelt it with stones to get its fruit, the tree contrasts the formerly fruitful golden age with the present barren time, in which its fruit is violently ripped off and its branches broken.
Cervantes also used the ''Metamorphoses'' as a platform of inspiration for his prodigious novel ''Don Quixote.''
This short poem in 91 elegiac couplets is related to Aesop's fable of "The Walnut Tree" that was the subject of human ingratitude.
Between the publications of the two editions of the ''Amores'' can be dated the premiere of his tragedy ''Medea'', which was admired in antiquity but is no longer extant.
The second book opens with Phaethon and continues describing the love of Jupiter with Callisto and Europa.
His last wife was connected in some way to the influential ''gens Fabia'' and would help him during his exile in Tomis.
The first 25 years of Ovid's literary career were spent primarily writing poetry in elegiac meter with erotic themes.
Even though it is unlikely, if the last six books of the ''Fasti'' ever existed, they constitute a great loss.
Ovid uses direct inquiry of gods and scholarly research to talk about the calendar and regularly calls himself a ''vates'', a priest.
He was part of the circle centered on the patron Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus, and seems to have been a friend of poets in the circle of Maecenas.
The first book describes the formation of the world, the ages of man, the flood, the story of Daphne's rape by Apollo and Io's by Jupiter.
In the ''Remedia Amoris'', Ovid reports criticism from people who considered his books insolent.
The Imperial scholar Quintilian considered him the last of the Latin love elegists.
The poem goes through the Roman calendar, explaining the origins and customs of important Roman festivals, digressing on mythical stories, and giving astronomical and agricultural information appropriate to the season.
They also play with generic conventions; most of the letters seem to refer to works in which these characters were significant, such as the ''Aeneid'' in the case of Dido and Catullus 64 for Ariadne, and transfer characters from the genres of epic and tragedy to the elegiac genre of the ''Heroides''.
Grief is expressed for his lost military honors, his wife, and his mother.
Otis wrote that in the Ovidian poems of love, he "was burlesquing an old theme rather than inventing a new one."
Also lost is the final portion of the ''Medicamina''.
The work encyclopedically catalogues transformations in Greek and Roman mythology, from the emergence of the cosmos to the deification of Julius Caesar.
The second book has 19 pieces; the opening poem tells of Ovid's abandonment of a Gigantomachy in favor of elegy.
He was allegedly buried a few kilometers away in a nearby town.
Poems 3–5 are to friends, 7 a request for correspondence, and 10 an autobiography.
Other sources include Seneca the Elder and Quintilian.
Although this poem was connected to the ''Elegiae in Maecenatem'', it is now thought that they are unconnected.
The ability of dogs and land creatures to protect themselves is described.
Elegy originates with Propertius and Tibullus; however, Ovid is an innovator in the genre.
1.6, while other poems seem to have no elegiac precedents and appear to be Ovid's own generic innovations, such as the poem on Corinna's ruined hair (''Am.''
Poem 4 is didactic and describes principles that Ovid would develop in the ''Ars Amatoria''.
2.18.19–26 as safe from objection.
The thirteenth book discusses the contest over Achilles' arms, and Polyphemus.
The stories follow each other in the telling of human beings transformed to new bodies: trees, rocks, animals, flowers, constellations etc.
The books describe the many aspects of love and focus on the poet's relationship with a mistress called Corinna.
The third addresses women and teaches seduction techniques.
His earliest extant work is thought to be the ''Heroides'', letters of mythological heroines to their absent lovers, which may have been published in 19 BC, although the date is uncertain as it depends on a notice in ''Am.''
It is known that since his own lifetime, he was already famous and criticized.
Like the other canonical elegiac poets Ovid takes on a persona in his works that emphasizes subjectivity and personal emotion over traditional militaristic and public goals, a convention that some scholars link to the relative stability provided by the Augustan settlement.
The fourteenth moves to Italy, describing the journey of Aeneas, Pomona and Vertumnus, and Romulus.
This theory was supported and rejected in the 1930s, especially by Dutch authors.H.
Book 1 contains 15 poems.
In analyzing the ''Metamorphoses'', scholars have focused on Ovid's organization of his vast body of material.
The first tells of Ovid's intention to write epic poetry, which is thwarted when Cupid steals a metrical foot from him, changing his work into love elegy.
Poem 12 is addressed to a Tuticanus, whose name, Ovid complains, does not fit into meter.
Although Pliny the Elder mentions a ''Halieutica'' by Ovid, which was composed at Tomis near the end of Ovid's life, modern scholars believe Pliny was mistaken in his attribution and that the poem is not genuine.
Within an extent of nearly 12,000 verses, almost 250 different myths are mentioned.
Book 3 opens with a vindication of women's abilities and Ovid's resolution to arm women against his teaching in the first two books.
Image:Scythians at the Tomb of Ovid c. 1640.jpg|''Scythians at the Tomb of Ovid'' (c.1640), by Johann Heinrich Schönfeld.
At the beginning of the poem, Ovid claims that his poetry up to that point had been harmless, but now he is going to use his abilities to hurt his enemy.
Like the ''Metamorphoses'', the ''Fasti'' was to be a long poem and emulated aetiological poetry by writers like Callimachus and, more recently, Propertius and his fourth book.
His father wanted him to study rhetoric toward the practice of law.
About a hundred elegiac lines survive from this poem on beauty treatments for women's faces, which seems to parody serious didactic poetry.
The poem ends with a prayer that the gods make his curse effective.
The poems mainly deal with requests for friends to speak on his behalf to members of the imperial family, discussions of writing with friends, and descriptions of life in exile.
The book ends with his wish that women will follow his advice and spread his fame saying ''Naso magister erat,'' "Ovid was our teacher".
The ways that stories are linked by geography, themes, or contrasts creates interesting effects and constantly forces the reader to evaluate the connections.
Some have interpreted this poem as the close of Ovid's didactic cycle of love poetry and the end of his erotic elegiac project.
In the 16th century, some Jesuit schools of Portugal cut several passages from Ovid's ''Metamorphoses''.
It seems that Ovid planned to cover the whole year, but was unable to finish because of his exile, although he did revise sections of the work at Tomis, and he claims at ''Trist.''
He held minor public posts, as one of the ''tresviri capitales'', as a member of the Centumviral court and as one of the ''decemviri litibus iudicandis'', but resigned to pursue poetry probably around 29–25 BC, a decision his father apparently disapproved of.
Ovid's next poem, the ''Medicamina Faciei'', a fragmentary work on women's beauty treatments, preceded the ''Ars Amatoria'', the ''Art of Love'', a parody of didactic poetry and a three-book manual about seduction and intrigue, which has been dated to AD 2 (Books 1–2 would go back to 1 BC).
Ovid is traditionally considered the final significant love elegist in the evolution of the genre and one of the most versatile in his handling of the genre's conventions.
Some commentators have also noted the influence of Ovid's interest in love elegy in his other works, such as the ''Fasti,'' and have distinguished his "elegiac" style from his "epic" style.
The obscure causes of Ovid's exile have given rise to endless explanations from scholars.
One of the main arguments of these scholars is that Ovid would not let his ''Fasti'' remain unfinished, mainly because this poem meant his consecration as an imperial poet.
4.10.41–54, Ovid mentions friendships with Macer, Propertius, Horace, Ponticus and Bassus (he only barely met Virgil and Tibullus, a fellow member of Messalla's circle whose elegies he admired greatly).
He enjoyed enormous popularity, but, in one of the mysteries of literary history, he was sent by Augustus into exile in a remote province on the Black Sea, where he remained until his death.
'''Publius Ovidius Naso''' (; 20 March 43 BC – AD 17/18), known as '''Ovid''' () in the English-speaking world, was a Roman poet who lived during the reign of Augustus.
Drusus' funeral and the tributes of the imperial family are described as are his final moments and Livia's lament over the body, which is compared to birds.
The ''Heroides'' take the form of letters addressed by famous mythological characters to their partners expressing their emotions at being separated from them, pleas for their return, and allusions to their future actions within their own mythology.
This corpus of elegiac, erotic poetry earned Ovid a place among the chief Roman elegists Gallus, Tibullus, and Propertius, of whom he saw himself as the fourth member.
The eleventh book compares the marriage of Peleus and Thetis with the love of Ceyx and Alcyone.
According to them, Virgil was ambiguous and ambivalent while Ovid was defined and, while Ovid wrote only what he could express, Virgil wrote for the use of language.
many poems, in fact, are forming in my mind.
The fifth book focuses on the song of the Muses, which describes the rape of Proserpina.
Ovid was born in Sulmo (modern Sulmona), in an Apennine valley east of Rome, to an important equestrian family, on March 20, 43 BC.
In Spain, Ovid is both praised and criticized by Cervantes in his ''Don Quixote'' where he warns against satires that can exile poets, as happened to Ovid.
Ovid advises men to avoid giving too many gifts, keep up their appearance, hide affairs, compliment their lovers, and ingratiate themselves with slaves to stay on their lover's good side.
In the 16th century, Ovid's works were criticized in England.
The opening piece depicts personified Tragedy and Elegy fighting over Ovid.
Ovid's first recitation has been dated to around 25 BC, when he was eighteen.
Baudelaire took the opportunity to write a long essay about the life of an exiled poet like Ovid.
This Ovidian innovation can be summarized as the use of love as a metaphor for poetry.
The Puritans of the following century viewed Ovid as pagan, thus as an immoral influence.
Ovid describes the places one can go to find a lover, like the theater, a triumph, which he thoroughly describes, or arena—and ways to get the girl to take notice, including seducing her covertly at a banquet.
Ovid was very popular at the time of his early works, but was later exiled by Augustus in AD 8.
Old letters should be burned and the lover's family avoided.
The picture ''Ovid among the Scythians'', painted by Delacroix, portrays the last years of the poet in exile in Scythia, and was seen by Baudelaire, Gautier and Edgar Degas.
He was educated in rhetoric in Rome under the teachers Arellius Fuscus and Porcius Latro with his brother who excelled at oratory.
Otis also states that Phaedra and Medea, Dido and Hermione (also present in the poem) "are clever re-touchings of Euripides and Vergil."
This switch in focus from the triumphs of the poet, to the triumphs of love over people is the first of its kind for this genre of poetry.
He married three times and divorced twice by the time he was thirty years old.
it will be more so, if only my feet travel the road they’ve started.
Hofmann, "The unreality of Ovid's Tomitan exile once again", ''Liverpool Classical Monthly'' 12.2 (1987), p. 23.
The six books cover the first semester of the year, with each book dedicated to a different month of the Roman calendar (January to June).
Yet he pined for Rome—and for his third wife, addressing many poems to her.
John Dryden composed a famous translation of the ''Metamorphoses'' into stopped rhyming couplets during the 17th century, when Ovid was "refashioned ... in its own image, one kind of Augustanism making over another."
The final book opens with a philosophical lecture by Pythagoras and the deification of Caesar.
The date of the piece is unknown, but a date in the reign of Tiberius has been suggested because of that emperor's prominence in the poem.
Book 3 in 14 poems focuses on Ovid's life in Tomis.
In AD 8, Ovid was banished to Tomis, on the Black Sea, by the exclusive intervention of the Emperor Augustus, without any participation of the Senate or of any Roman judge.
Poems 4, 5, 11, and 14 are addressed to his wife, 2 and 3 are prayers to Augustus and Bacchus, 4 and 6 are to friends, 8 to an enemy.
Throughout the book, Ovid playfully interjects, criticizing himself for undoing all his didactic work to men and mythologically digresses on the story of Procris and Cephalus.
According to Serafim Leite (1949), the ''ratio studiorum'' was in effect in Colonial Brazil during the early 17th century, and in this period Brazilian students read works like the ''Epistulae ex Ponto'' to learn Latin grammar.
Ovid responded to this criticism with the following:
The ''Halieutica'' is a fragmentary didactic poem in 134 poorly preserved hexameter lines and is considered spurious.
The Jesuits took much of their knowledge of Ovid to the Portuguese colonies.
Montaigne, for example, alluded to Ovid several times in his ''Essais'', specifically in his comments on ''Education of Children'' when he says:
Information about his biography is drawn primarily from his poetry, especially ''Tristia'' 4.10, which gives a long autobiographical account of his life.
The ''Heroides'' markedly reveal the influence of rhetorical declamation and may derive from Ovid's interest in rhetorical ''suasoriae'', persuasive speeches, and ''ethopoeia'', the practice of speaking in another character.
The old woman spurs the girl to leave her lover and find someone else.
A line from a work entitled ''Epigrammata'' is cited by Priscian.
The Julian Marriage Laws of 18 BC, which promoted monogamous marriage to increase the population's birth rate, were fresh in the Roman mind.
The interpreter interprets the dream as a love allegory; the bull represents the poet, the heifer a girl, and the crow an old woman.
This version was the same version used as a supplement to the original Latin in the Tudor-era grammar schools that influenced such major Renaissance authors as Christopher Marlowe and William Shakespeare.
