Both liquid and solid  are clear substances with a light sky-blue color caused by absorption in the red (in contrast with the blue color of the sky, which is due to Rayleigh scattering of blue light).
This amounts to more than 6 billion tonnes of oxygen inhaled by humanity per year.
English chemist John Mayow (1641–1679) refined this work by showing that fire requires only a part of air that he called ''spiritus nitroaereus''.
That is, they impart magnetic character to oxygen when it is in the presence of a magnetic field, because of the spin magnetic moments of the unpaired electrons in the molecule, and the negative exchange energy between neighboring  molecules.
Liquid oxygen may also be condensed from air using liquid nitrogen as a coolant.
Oxygen levels in the atmosphere are trending slightly downward globally, possibly because of fossil-fuel burning.
Chemical catalysts can be used as well, such as in chemical oxygen generators or oxygen candles that are used as part of the life-support equipment on submarines, and are still part of standard equipment on commercial airliners in case of depressurization emergencies.
An electron configuration with two unpaired electrons, as is found in dioxygen (see the filled * orbitals in the diagram) orbitals that are of equal energy—i.e., degenerate—is a configuration termed a spin triplet state.
It is a member of the chalcogen group on the periodic table and is a highly reactive nonmetal and oxidizing agent that readily forms oxides with most elements as well as other compounds.
Hence, the ground state of the  molecule is referred to as triplet oxygen.
Acetone () and phenol () are used as feeder materials in the synthesis of many different substances.
(although this figure also is subject to wide variation, depending on type of mask).
He had produced oxygen gas by heating mercuric oxide and various nitrates by about 1772.
Scheele called the gas "fire air" because it was the only known supporter of combustion, and wrote an account of this discovery in a manuscript he titled ''Treatise on Air and Fire'', which he sent to his publisher in 1775.
Oxygen also acts as a ligand for transition metals, forming transition metal dioxygen complexes, which feature metal–.
Free oxygen also occurs in solution in the world's water bodies.
Free oxygen first appeared in significant quantities during the Paleoproterozoic eon (between 3.0 and 2.3 billion years ago).
It is also the major component of the world's oceans (88.8% by mass).
Since the beginning of the Cambrian period 540 million years ago, atmospheric  levels have fluctuated between 15% and 30% by volume.
Highly concentrated sources of oxygen promote rapid combustion.
The reaction for aerobic respiration is essentially the reverse of photosynthesis and is simplified as:
Oxygen is present in the atmosphere in trace quantities in the form of carbon dioxide ().
Water-soluble silicates in the form of , , and  are used as detergents and adhesives.
The other primary method of producing  is passing a stream of clean, dry air through one bed of a pair of identical zeolite molecular sieves, which absorbs the nitrogen and delivers a gas stream that is 90%&nbsp;to&nbsp;93% .
Scientists assess this aspect of water quality by measuring the water's biochemical oxygen demand, or the amount of  needed to restore it to a normal concentration.
Fire and explosion hazards exist when concentrated oxidants and fuels are brought into close proximity; an ignition event, such as heat or a spark, is needed to trigger combustion.
O2 has a bond length of 121&nbsp;pm and a bond energy of 498&nbsp;kJ·mol−1, which is smaller than the energy of other double bonds or pairs of single bonds in the biosphere and responsible for the exothermic reaction of O2 with any organic molecule.
This cluster has the potential to be a much more powerful oxidizer than either  or  and may therefore be used in rocket fuel.
There are many important organic solvents that contain oxygen, including: acetone, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, furan, THF, diethyl ether, dioxane, ethyl acetate, DMF, DMSO, acetic acid, and formic acid.
DC electricity must be used: if AC is used, the gases in each limb consist of hydrogen and oxygen in the explosive ratio 2:1.
John Dalton's original atomic hypothesis presumed that all elements were monatomic and that the atoms in compounds would normally have the simplest atomic ratios with respect to one another.
Some remote sensing scientists have proposed using the measurement of the radiance coming from vegetation canopies in those bands to characterize plant health status from a satellite platform.
Pure or nearly pure  use in diving at higher-than-sea-level pressures is usually limited to rebreather, decompression, or emergency treatment use at relatively shallow depths (~6 meters depth, or less).
Scuba divers and submariners also rely on artificially delivered , but most often use normal pressure, and/or mixtures of oxygen and air.
An exotic and unusual reaction occurs with , which oxidizes oxygen to give O2+PtF6−.
'''Oxygen''' is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''O''' and atomic number&nbsp;8.
Epoxides are ethers in which the oxygen atom is part of a ring of three atoms.
This combination of cancellations and σ and  overlaps results in dioxygen's double bond character and reactivity, and a triplet electronic ground state.
All fats, fatty acids, amino acids, and proteins contain oxygen (due to the presence of carbonyl groups in these acids and their ester residues).
Cellular respiration of  occurs in all eukaryotes, including all complex multicellular organisms such as plants and animals.
The spectroscopy of molecular oxygen is associated with the atmospheric processes of aurora, airglow and nightglow.
Due to its electronegativity, oxygen forms chemical bonds with almost all other elements to give corresponding oxides.
Accounts of these and other experiments and ideas were published in 1668 in his work ''Tractatus duo'' in the tract "De respiratione".
The solubility of oxygen in water is temperature-dependent, and about twice as much (14.6&nbsp;mg·L−1) dissolves at 0&nbsp;°C than at 20&nbsp;°C (7.6&nbsp;mg·L−1).
In 1805, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Alexander von Humboldt showed that water is formed of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of oxygen; and by 1811 Amedeo Avogadro had arrived at the correct interpretation of water's composition, based on what is now called Avogadro's law and the diatomic elemental molecules in those gases.
Most 18O is produced when 14N (made abundant from CNO burning) captures a 4He nucleus, making 18O common in the helium-rich zones of evolved, massive stars.
Later, in 1901, oxyacetylene welding was demonstrated for the first time by burning a mixture of acetylene and compressed .
Other estimates of the oceanic contribution to atmospheric oxygen are higher, while some estimates are lower, suggesting oceans produce ~45% of Earth's atmospheric oxygen each year.
Oxygen is used in mitochondria to generate ATP during oxidative phosphorylation.
In nature, singlet oxygen is commonly formed from water during photosynthesis, using the energy of sunlight.
The free oxygen partial pressure in the body of a living vertebrate organism is highest in the respiratory system, and decreases along any arterial system, peripheral tissues, and venous system, respectively.
Oxygen gas is the second most common component of the Earth's atmosphere, taking up 20.8% of its volume and 23.1% of its mass (some 1015 tonnes).
Many centuries later Leonardo da Vinci built on Philo's work by observing that a portion of air is consumed during combustion and respiration.
Oxygen was first discovered by Swedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele.
Ozone is produced in the upper atmosphere when  combines with atomic oxygen made by the splitting of  by ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
Oxygen is the most abundant chemical element by mass in the Earth's biosphere, air, sea and land.
The name ''oxygen'' was coined in 1777 by Antoine Lavoisier, whose experiments with oxygen helped to discredit the then-popular phlogiston theory of combustion and corrosion.
After a set cycle time the operation of the two beds is interchanged, thereby allowing for a continuous supply of gaseous oxygen to be pumped through a pipeline.
In 1923, the American scientist Robert H. Goddard became the first person to develop a rocket engine that burned liquid fuel; the engine used gasoline for fuel and liquid oxygen as the oxidizer.
For reasons of economy, oxygen is often transported in bulk as a liquid in specially insulated tankers, since one liter of liquefied oxygen is equivalent to 840&nbsp;liters of gaseous oxygen at atmospheric pressure and .
Water () is an oxide of hydrogen and the most familiar oxygen compound.
Marine organisms then incorporate more oxygen-18 into their skeletons and shells than they would in a warmer climate.
Other aspects of  are covered in the remainder of this article.
An application of  as a low-pressure breathing gas is in modern space suits, which surround their occupant's body with pressurized air.
Oxygen reacts spontaneously with many organic compounds at or below room temperature in a process called autoxidation.
Singlet oxygen is a name given to several higher-energy species of molecular  in which all the electron spins are paired.
Due to its energy content, O2 is used by complex forms of life, such as animals, in cellular respiration (see Biological role).
During periods of lower global temperatures, snow and rain from that evaporated water tends to be higher in oxygen-16, and the seawater left behind tends to be higher in oxygen-18.
Seawater molecules that contain the lighter isotope, oxygen-16, evaporate at a slightly faster rate than water molecules containing the 12% heavier oxygen-18, and this disparity increases at lower temperatures.
The unusually high concentration of oxygen gas on Earth is the result of the oxygen cycle.
He also noted that the tin had increased in weight and that increase was the same as the weight of the air that rushed back in.
Until the discovery of anaerobic metazoa, oxygen was thought to be a requirement for all complex life.
Scheele also posted a letter to Lavoisier on September 30, 1774 that described his discovery of the previously unknown substance, but Lavoisier never acknowledged receiving it (a copy of the letter was found in Scheele's belongings after his death).
Carotenoids in photosynthetic organisms (and possibly animals) play a major role in absorbing energy from singlet oxygen and converting it to the unexcited ground state before it can cause harm to tissues.
Oxygen toxicity usually begins to occur at partial pressures more than 50 kilopascals&nbsp;(kPa), equal to about 50% oxygen composition at standard pressure or 2.5 times the normal sea-level  partial pressure of about 21&nbsp;kPa.
Hydrogen atoms are covalently bonded to oxygen in a water molecule but also have an additional attraction (about 23.3&nbsp;kJ·mol−1 per hydrogen atom) to an adjacent oxygen atom in a separate molecule.
In that work, he proved that air is a mixture of two gases; 'vital air', which is essential to combustion and respiration, and ''azote'' (Gk. ''''
Compounds containing oxygen in other oxidation states are very uncommon: −1/2 (superoxides), −1/3 (ozonides), 0 (elemental, hypofluorous acid), +1/2 (dioxygenyl), +1 (dioxygen difluoride), and +2 (oxygen difluoride).
The highest energy, partially filled orbitals are antibonding, and so their filling weakens the bond order from three to two.
Planetary geologists have measured the relative quantities of oxygen isotopes in samples from the Earth, the Moon, Mars, and meteorites, but were long unable to obtain reference values for the isotope ratios in the Sun, believed to be the same as those of the primordial solar nebula.
High-purity liquid  is usually obtained by the fractional distillation of liquefied air.
Simultaneously, nitrogen gas is released from the other nitrogen-saturated zeolite bed, by reducing the chamber operating pressure and diverting part of the oxygen gas from the producer bed through it, in the reverse direction of flow.
Professional athletes, especially in American football, sometimes go off-field between plays to don oxygen masks to boost performance.
Photosynthesis releases oxygen into the atmosphere, while respiration, decay, and combustion remove it from the atmosphere.
Conversely, oxygen is continuously replenished by photosynthesis, which uses the energy of sunlight to produce oxygen from water and carbon dioxide.
When such oxygen sinks became saturated, free oxygen began to outgas from the oceans 3–2.7&nbsp;billion years ago, reaching 10% of its present level around 1.7&nbsp;billion years ago.
After breathing the gas himself, he wrote: "The feeling of it to my lungs was not sensibly different from that of common air, but I fancied that my breast felt peculiarly light and easy for some time afterwards."
For the first billion years, any free oxygen produced by these organisms combined with dissolved iron in the oceans to form banded iron formations.
Among the most important classes of organic compounds that contain oxygen are (where "R" is an organic group): alcohols (R-OH); ethers (R-O-R); ketones (R-CO-R); aldehydes (R-CO-H); carboxylic acids (R-COOH); esters (R-COO-R); acid anhydrides (R-CO-O-CO-R); and amides ().
Oxygen therapy is used to treat emphysema, pneumonia, some heart disorders (congestive heart failure), some disorders that cause increased pulmonary artery pressure, and any disease that impairs the body's ability to take up and use gaseous oxygen.
The presence of large amounts of dissolved and free oxygen in the oceans and atmosphere may have driven most of the extant anaerobic organisms to extinction during the Great Oxygenation Event (''oxygen catastrophe'') about 2.4 billion years ago.
A simplified overall formula for photosynthesis is:
Analysis of a silicon wafer exposed to the solar wind in space and returned by the crashed Genesis spacecraft has shown that the Sun has a higher proportion of oxygen-16 than does the Earth.
This is an important part of the atmosphere and diatomic oxygen gas constitutes 20.8% of the Earth's atmosphere.
In 1891 Scottish chemist James Dewar was able to produce enough liquid oxygen for study.
Other important organic compounds that contain oxygen are: glycerol, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, citric acid, acetic anhydride, and acetamide.
As ''dioxygen'', two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other.
Both men lowered the temperature of air until it liquefied and then distilled the component gases by boiling them off one at a time and capturing them.
Most of the remaining 20% of commercially produced oxygen is used in medical applications, metal cutting and welding, as an oxidizer in rocket fuel, and in water treatment.
A steady stream of oxygen gas is then produced by the exothermic reaction.
The absorption in the Herzberg continuum and Schumann–Runge bands in the ultraviolet produces atomic oxygen that is important in the chemistry of the middle atmosphere.
The measurement is technically difficult owing to the low signal-to-noise ratio and the physical structure of vegetation; but it has been proposed as a possible method of monitoring the carbon cycle from satellites on a global scale.
In vertebrates,  diffuses through membranes in the lungs and into red blood cells.
The element is found in almost all biomolecules that are important to (or generated by) life.
The French chemist Antoine Laurent Lavoisier later claimed to have discovered the new substance independently.
Combustion hazards also apply to compounds of oxygen with a high oxidative potential, such as peroxides, chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, and dichromates because they can donate oxygen to a fire.
In one experiment, he found that placing either a mouse or a lit candle in a closed container over water caused the water to rise and replace one-fourteenth of the air's volume before extinguishing the subjects.
People who climb mountains or fly in non-pressurized fixed-wing aircraft sometimes have supplemental  supplies.
An adult human at rest inhales 1.8 to 2.4&nbsp;grams of oxygen per minute.
Most of the mass of living organisms is oxygen as a component of water, the major constituent of lifeforms.
He also thought that the lungs separate nitroaereus from air and pass it into the blood and that animal heat and muscle movement result from the reaction of nitroaereus with certain substances in the body.
Using a cascade method, Swiss chemist and physicist Raoul Pierre Pictet evaporated liquid sulfur dioxide in order to liquefy carbon dioxide, which in turn was evaporated to cool oxygen gas enough to liquefy it.
Available studies support a performance boost from enriched  mixtures only if it is breathed ''during'' aerobic exercise.
::  + 6  → 6  + 6  + 2880 kJ·mol−1
The  surrounding those planets is produced solely by ultraviolet radiation on oxygen-containing molecules such as carbon dioxide.
In the case of spacesuits, the  partial pressure in the breathing gas is, in general, about 30&nbsp;kPa (1.4 times normal), and the resulting  partial pressure in the astronaut's arterial blood is only marginally more than normal sea-level  partial pressure (for more information on this, see space suit and arterial blood gas).
In one experiment, Lavoisier observed that there was no overall increase in weight when tin and air were heated in a closed container.
In his work ''Pneumatica'', Philo observed that inverting a vessel over a burning candle and surrounding the vessel's neck with water resulted in some water rising into the neck.
Because of its unpaired electrons, triplet oxygen reacts only slowly with most organic molecules, which have paired electron spins; this prevents spontaneous combustion.
Oxygen, as a supposed mild euphoric, has a history of recreational use in oxygen bars and in sports.
Variations of oxygen shaped the climates of the past.
For example, the mineral FeO (wüstite) is written as , where ''x'' is usually around 0.05.
:: 6  + 6  + photons →  + 6
Decompression sickness occurs in divers who decompress too quickly after a dive, resulting in bubbles of inert gas, mostly nitrogen and helium, forming in the blood.
Free oxygen gas was almost nonexistent in Earth's atmosphere before photosynthetic archaea and bacteria evolved, probably about 3.5 billion years ago.
Another air separation method is forcing air to dissolve through ceramic membranes based on zirconium dioxide by either high pressure or an electric current, to produce nearly pure  gas.
Liquid oxygen is so magnetic that, in laboratory demonstrations, a bridge of liquid oxygen may be supported against its own weight between the poles of a powerful magnet.
Such tankers are used to refill bulk liquid oxygen storage containers, which stand outside hospitals and other institutions that need large volumes of pure oxygen gas.
The measurement implies that an unknown process depleted oxygen-16 from the Sun's disk of protoplanetary material prior to the coalescence of dust grains that formed the Earth.
''Azote'' later became ''nitrogen'' in English, although it has kept the name in French and several other European languages.
Oxygen is also used medically for patients who require mechanical ventilation, often at concentrations above the 21% found in ambient air.
Towards the end of the Carboniferous period (about 300&nbsp;million years ago) atmospheric  levels reached a maximum of 35% by volume, which may have contributed to the large size of insects and amphibians at this time.
Because he published his findings first, Priestley is usually given priority in the discovery.
Many oxides of the transition metals are non-stoichiometric compounds, with slightly less metal than the chemical formula would show.
This is known as pressure swing adsorption.
The fact that a substance like wood gains overall weight in burning was hidden by the buoyancy of the gaseous combustion products.
Chemists (such as Sir Humphry Davy in 1812) eventually determined that Lavoisier was wrong in this regard (hydrogen forms the basis for acid chemistry), but by then the name was too well established.
Contrary to popular belief, the 2:1 ratio observed in the DC electrolysis of acidified water does not prove that the empirical formula of water is H2O unless certain assumptions are made about the molecular formulae of hydrogen and oxygen themselves.
This biogeochemical cycle describes the movement of oxygen within and between its three main reservoirs on Earth: the atmosphere, the biosphere, and the lithosphere.
Oxygen is necessary to sustain most terrestrial life.
Trioxygen () is usually known as ozone and is a very reactive allotrope of oxygen that is damaging to lung tissue.
Deeper diving requires significant dilution of  with other gases, such as nitrogen or helium, to prevent oxygen toxicity.
The  remaining (after production of the water molecule) is released into the atmosphere.
These devices use nearly pure oxygen at about one third normal pressure, resulting in a normal blood partial pressure of .
The fire that killed the Apollo 1 crew in a launch pad test spread so rapidly because the capsule was pressurized with pure  but at slightly more than atmospheric pressure, instead of the  normal pressure that would be used in a mission.
At 25&nbsp;°C and  of air, freshwater contains about 6.04&nbsp;milliliters&nbsp;(mL) of oxygen per liter, and seawater contains about 4.95&nbsp;mL per liter.
Air did not play a role in phlogiston theory, nor were any initial quantitative experiments conducted to test the idea; instead, it was based on observations of what happens when something burns, that most common objects appear to become lighter and seem to lose something in the process.
Since the primary cost of production is the energy cost of liquefying the air, the production cost will change as energy cost varies.
Excited state singlet molecular oxygen is responsible for red chemiluminescence in solution.
That document was published in 1777.
As with other cryogenic liquids, on contact with the human body it can cause frostbites to the skin and the eyes.
Other animals use hemocyanin (molluscs and some arthropods) or hemerythrin (spiders and lobsters).
Oxygen is a highly reactive substance and must be segregated from combustible materials.
Only a few drops of the liquid were produced in each case and no meaningful analysis could be conducted.
Oxygen also occurs in phosphate () groups in the biologically important energy-carrying molecules ATP and ADP, in the backbone and the purines (except adenine) and pyrimidines of RNA and DNA, and in bones as calcium phosphate and hydroxylapatite.
The oxidation state −1 is found in a few compounds such as peroxides.
Liquid oxygen is passed through heat exchangers, which convert the cryogenic liquid into gas before it enters the building.
When oxygen declined, atmospheric density dropped and this in turn increased surface evaporation, and led to precipitation increases and warmer temperatures.
Oxygen was discovered independently by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, in Uppsala, in 1773 or earlier, and Joseph Priestley in Wiltshire, in 1774, but Priestley is often given priority because his work was published first.
Breathing pure  in space applications, such as in some modern space suits, or in early spacecraft such as Apollo, causes no damage due to the low total pressures used.
The first commercially viable process for producing liquid oxygen was independently developed in 1895 by German engineer Carl von Linde and British engineer William Hampson.
Fourteen radioisotopes have been characterized.
In this process, metal up to  thick is first heated with a small oxy-acetylene flame and then quickly cut by a large stream of .
A similar method is the electrocatalytic  evolution from oxides and oxoacids.
Reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide ion () and hydrogen peroxide (), are dangerous by-products of oxygen use in organisms.
Most 16O is synthesized at the end of the helium fusion process in massive stars but some is made in the neon burning process.
Its name derives from the Greek roots ὀξύς ''oxys'', "acid", literally "sharp", referring to the sour taste of acids and -γενής ''-genes'', "producer", literally "begetter", because at the time of naming, it was mistakenly thought that all acids required oxygen in their composition.
Oxygen bars are establishments found in Japan, California, and Las Vegas, Nevada since the late 1990s that offer higher than normal  exposure for a fee.
At standard temperature and pressure, two atoms of the element bind to form dioxygen, a colorless and odorless diatomic gas with the formula .
This trade-off of higher oxygen concentration for lower pressure is needed to maintain suit flexibility.
Oxygen is also stored and shipped in smaller cylinders containing the compressed gas; a form that is useful in certain portable medical applications and oxy-fuel welding and cutting.
In the meantime, on August 1, 1774, an experiment conducted by the British clergyman Joseph Priestley focused sunlight on mercuric oxide (HgO) inside a glass tube, which liberated a gas he named "dephlogisticated air".
The most common decay mode of the isotopes lighter than 16O is β+ decay to yield nitrogen, and the most common mode for the isotopes heavier than 18O is beta decay to yield fluorine.
Treatment not only increases oxygen levels in the patient's blood, but has the secondary effect of decreasing resistance to blood flow in many types of diseased lungs, easing work load on the heart.
Earth is unusual among the planets of the Solar System in having such a high concentration of oxygen gas in its atmosphere: Mars (with 0.1%  by volume) and Venus have much less.
Indeed, one of the first clues that the phlogiston theory was incorrect was that metals gain weight in rusting (when they were supposedly losing phlogiston).
Pulling on the masks "to start the flow of oxygen" as cabin safety instructions dictate, forces iron filings into the sodium chlorate inside the canister.
Oxygen presents two spectrophotometric absorption bands peaking at the wavelengths 687 and 760&nbsp;nm.
The rest of the Earth's crust is also made of oxygen compounds, in particular various complex silicates (in silicate minerals).
Liquid oxygen spills, if allowed to soak into organic matter, such as wood, petrochemicals, and asphalt can cause these materials to detonate unpredictably on subsequent mechanical impact.
Most of the organic compounds that contain oxygen are not made by direct action of .
The bond can be variously described based on level of theory, but is reasonably and simply described as a covalent double bond that results from the filling of molecular orbitals formed from the atomic orbitals of the individual oxygen atoms, the filling of which results in a bond order of two.
Parts of the immune system of higher organisms create peroxide, superoxide, and singlet oxygen to destroy invading microbes.
Other recreational uses that do not involve breathing include pyrotechnic applications, such as George Goble's five-second ignition of barbecue grills.
Carbon monoxide poisoning, gas gangrene, and decompression sickness (the 'bends') are sometimes addressed with this therapy.
Many steps are involved, but the result is the formation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane, which is used to synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via photophosphorylation.
A liter of blood can dissolve 200&nbsp;cm3 of .
Oxygen is used in oxyacetylene welding burning acetylene with  to produce a very hot flame.
About 0.9% of the Sun's mass is oxygen.
He noted that air rushed in when he opened the container, which indicated that part of the trapped air had been consumed.
Oxygen gas is increasingly obtained by these non-cryogenic technologies (see also the related vacuum swing adsorption).
Oxygen was liquified in a stable state for the first time on March 29, 1883 by Polish scientists from Jagiellonian University, Zygmunt Wróblewski and Karol Olszewski.
Oxygen dissolves more readily in water than nitrogen, and in freshwater more readily than seawater.
Steel pipes and storage vessels used to store and transmit both gaseous and liquid oxygen will act as a fuel; and therefore the design and manufacture of  systems requires special training to ensure that ignition sources are minimized.
These hydrogen bonds between water molecules hold them approximately 15% closer than what would be expected in a simple liquid with just van der Waals forces.
Hyperbaric (high-pressure) medicine uses special oxygen chambers to increase the partial pressure of  around the patient and, when needed, the medical staff.
This method of welding and cutting metal later became common.
17O is primarily made by the burning of hydrogen into helium during the CNO cycle, making it a common isotope in the hydrogen burning zones of stars.
Lavoisier renamed 'vital air' to ''oxygène'' in 1777 from the Greek roots '' (oxys)'' (acid, literally "sharp", from the taste of acids) and ''-γενής (-genēs)'' (producer, literally begetter), because he mistakenly believed that oxygen was a constituent of all acids.
Oxygen condenses at 90.20&nbsp;K (−182.95&nbsp;°C, −297.31&nbsp;°F), and freezes at 54.36&nbsp;K (−218.79&nbsp;°C, −361.82&nbsp;°F).
