Two methods are commonly used, release and bagging.
In recent years, pathogens such as ''Vibrio parahaemolyticus'' have caused outbreaks in several harvesting areas of the eastern United States during the summer months, lending further credence to this belief.
If the oyster has a particularly soft shell, the knife can be inserted instead in the 'sidedoor', about halfway along one side where the oyster lips widen with a slight indentation.
What is not used for animal growth is then expelled as solid waste pellets, which eventually decompose into the atmosphere as nitrogen.
*"Dermo" is caused by a protozoan parasite (''Perkinsus marinus'').
Oyster-shucking competitions are staged around the world.
Oysters feed most actively at temperatures above .
Oysters are low in food energy; one dozen raw oysters contains .
In New Jersey, however, the Department of Environmental Protection refused to allow oysters as a filtering system in Sandy Hook Bay and the Raritan Bay, citing worries that commercial shellfish growers would be at risk and that members of the public might disregard warnings and consume tainted oysters.
Fresh oysters must be alive just before consumption or cooking.
This triggers spawning in the rest, clouding the water with millions of eggs and sperm.
In the early 19th century, oysters were cheap and mainly eaten by the working class.
The eggs become fertilized in the water and develop into larvae, which eventually find suitable sites, such as another oyster's shell, on which to settle.
They are rich in protein (approximately 9g in 100g of pacific oysters).
As they grow over the next two or three years and develop greater energy reserves, they spawn as females by releasing eggs.
This scarcity increased prices, converting them from their original role as working-class food to their current status as an expensive delicacy.
For example, the eastern oyster (''Crassostrea virginica'') was introduced to California waters in 1875, while the Pacific oyster was introduced there in 1929.
Spat are oysters less than  long.
In both cases, oysters are cultivated onshore to the size of spat, when they can attach themselves to a substrate.
These make a distinctive noise when tapped, and are known as 'clackers'.
The Pacific oyster prospered in Pendrell Sound, where the surface water is typically warm enough for spawning in the summer.
Oysters can contain harmful bacteria.
First attested in English during the 14th century, the word "oyster" comes from Old French ''oistre'', in turn from Latin ''ostrea'', the feminine form of ''ostreum'', which is the latinisation of the Greek ὄστρεον (''ostreon''), "oyster".
They have been cultivated in Japan from at least 2000 BC.
A team of American and Italian researchers analyzed bivalves and found they were rich in amino acids that trigger increased levels of sex hormones.
The Pacific or Japanese oyster, ''Crassostrea gigas'', has been grown in the outflow of mariculture ponds.
Attached oyster larvae are called '''spat'''.
However, their taste becomes less pleasant as they age.
In the United Kingdom, the native variety (''Ostrea edulis'') requires five years to mature and is protected by an Act of Parliament during the May to August spawning season.
In either case, they are then placed in the water to mature.
These regulations prompted the development of specialized sailboats (the bugeye and later the skipjack) for dredging.
True oysters are members of the family Ostreidae.
Oysters from the Gulf Coast of the United States, for example, contain high bacterial loads of human pathogens in the warm months, most notably ''Vibrio vulnificus'' and ''Vibrio parahaemolyticus''.
Eventually, rising demand exhausted many of the beds.
In 2005, China accounted for 80% of the global oyster harvest.
In Maryland, the Chesapeake Bay Program plans to use oysters to reduce the amount of nitrogen compounds entering the Chesapeake Bay by  per year by 2010.
Some kinds of oysters are commonly consumed by humans, cooked or raw, the latter being a delicacy.
The holding temperatures and salinity vary according to species.
At the same time, two kidneys, located on the underside of the muscle, remove waste products from the blood.
If the shell is open, the oyster is dead, and cannot be eaten safely.
Oysters are an excellent source of zinc, iron, calcium, and selenium, as well as vitamin A and vitamin B12.
Examples include the Belon oyster, eastern oyster, Olympia oyster, Pacific oyster, and the Sydney rock oyster.
Oyster feeding and nutrient cycling activities could "rebalance" shallow, coastal ecosystems if restoration of historic populations could be achieved.
Bivalves, including oysters, are effective filter feeders and can have large effects on the water columns in which they occur.
He was so famous for this, the Romans used to say he could breed oysters on the roof of his house.
Depuration of oysters can remove moderate levels of contamination of most bacterial indicators and pathogens.
To increase production, they introduced foreign species, which brought disease; effluent and increasing sedimentation from erosion destroyed most of the beds by the early 20th century.
In addition to their gills, oysters can also exchange gases across their mantles, which are lined with many small, thin-walled blood vessels.
In fact, in a harvest of two and a half tons of oysters, only three to four oysters produce what commercial buyers consider to be absolute perfect pearls.
In somewhat deeper water, long-handled rakes or oyster tongs are used to reach the beds.
An increase in water temperature prompts a few oysters to spawn.
Many of these animals are prey to larger animals, including fish, such as striped bass, black drum and croakers.
Oysters can be eaten on the half shell, raw, smoked, boiled, baked, fried, roasted, stewed, canned, pickled, steamed, or broiled, or used in a variety of drinks.
The gonads surround the digestive organs, and are made up of sex cells, branching tubules, and connective tissue.
Compare ὀστέον (''osteon''), "bone".
The shells of live oysters are usually tightly closed or snap shut given a slight tap.
The resulting triploid oyster cannot propagate, which prevents introduced oysters from spreading into unwanted habitats.
Oysters usually reach maturity in one year.
Some tropical oysters, such as the mangrove oyster in the family Ostreidae, grow best on mangrove roots.
The United Kingdom hosts several other annual oyster festivals, for example Woburn Oyster Festival is held in September.
Oysters must be eaten alive, or cooked alive.
Multiple studies have shown individual oysters are capable of filtering up to 50 gallons of water per day, and thus oyster reefs can significantly improve water quality and clarity.
There is only one criterion: the oyster must be capable of tightly closing its shell.
* Multinucleated sphere X (MSX) is caused by the protozoan ''Haplosporidium nelsoni'', generally seen as a multinucleated ''Plasmodium''.
In many areas, non-native oysters have been introduced in attempts to prop up failing harvests of native varieties.
Because of this, it is technically possible for an oyster to fertilize its own eggs.
While it is most serious in warmer waters, it has gradually spread up the east coast of the United States.
Traditionally, oysters that do not open have been assumed to be dead before cooking and therefore unsafe.
The "oyster-tecture" movement promotes the use of oyster reefs for water purification and wave attenuation.
Dietary supplements may contain calcium carbonate from oyster shells, though no evidence shows this offers any benefits beyond what calcium may offer.
The word '''oyster''' is used as a common name for a number of different families of saltwater clams, bivalve molluscs that live in marine or brackish habitats.
Oysters are harvested by simply gathering them from their beds.
They were naturally quite popular in New York City, and helped initiate the city's restaurant trade.
This family includes the edible oysters, which mainly belong to the genera ''Ostrea'', ''Crassostrea'', ''Ostreola'', and ''Saccostrea''.
Willapa Bay in Washington produces more oysters than any other estuary in the US.
Purists insist on eating them raw, with no dressing save perhaps lemon juice, vinegar (most commonly shallot vinegar), or cocktail sauce.
In some areas, a scallop dredge is used.
The largest pearl-bearing oyster is the marine ''Pinctada maxima'', which is roughly the size of a dinner plate.
Bagging has the cultivator putting spat in racks or bags and keeping them above the bottom.
In fact their behavior follows very strict circatidal and circadian rhythms according to the relative moon and sun positions.
Large beds of edible oysters are also found in Japan and Australia.
Oysters' popularity has put ever-increasing demands on wild oyster stocks.
Today, that would take nearly a year.
Variations in water salinity, alkalinity, and mineral/nutritional content influence their flavor profile.
While different methods are used to open an oyster (which sometimes depend on the type), the following is one commonly accepted oyster-shucking method.
As the ecological and economic importance of oyster reefs has become more widely acknowledged, creation of oyster reef habitat through restoration efforts has become more important- often with the goal of restoring multiple ecosystem services associated with natural oyster reefs.
Furthermore, assimilation of nitrogen and phosphorus into shellfish tissues provides an opportunity to remove these nutrients from the environment, but this benefit has only recently been recognized.
It is a prevalent pathogen, causes massive mortality, and poses a significant economic threat to the oyster industry.
An oyster reef can increase the surface area of a flat bottom 50-fold.
The current market is dominated by the larger Pacific oyster and rock oyster varieties which are farmed year round.
These pearls are not as valuable as natural pearls, but look exactly the same.
Opening or "shucking" oysters has become a competitive sport.
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) formally recognizes depuration and has published detailed documents on the process, whereas the Codex Alimentarius, encourages the application of seafood depuration.
In California's Tomales Bay, native oyster presence is associated with higher species diversity of benthic invertebrates but other ecosystem services have not been studied.
That is far lower than in the late 1880s, when the bay's population was in the billions, and watermen harvested about  annually.
A small, three-chambered heart, lying under the adductor muscle, pumps colorless blood to all parts of the body.
Some kinds of pearl oysters are harvested for the pearl produced within the mantle.
Until 1965, Maryland limited dredging to sailboats, and even since then motor boats can be used only on certain days of the week.
Within Europe, France remained the industry leader.
Widely acknowledged to be the premiere event, the Guinness World Oyster Opening Championship is held in September at the Galway Oyster Festival.
Ruello found 11.5% of all mussels failed to open during cooking, but when forced open, 100% were "both adequately cooked and safe to eat."
An oyster's mature shape often depends on the type of bottom to which it is originally attached, but it always orients itself with its outer, flared shell tilted upward.
The Chesapeake Bay's once-flourishing oyster population historically filtered excess nutrients from the estuary's entire water volume every three to four days.
In the United Kingdom, the town of Whitstable is noted for oyster farming from beds on the Kentish Flats that have been used since Roman times.
An oyster-tecture project has been implemented at Withers Estuary, Withers Swash, South Carolina, by Neil Chambers-led volunteers, at a site where pollution was affecting beach tourism.
Throughout the 19th century, oyster beds in New York Harbor became the largest source of oysters worldwide.
However, according to at least one marine biologist, Nick Ruello, this advice may have arisen from an old, poorly researched cookbook's advice regarding mussels, which has now become an assumed truism for all shellfish.
The other  goes into the pond and after mineralization, provides food for phytoplankton, which in turn feeds the oyster.
In very shallow waters, they can be gathered by hand or with small rakes.
They may be allowed to mature further to form 'seed oysters'.
Oysters which are open and unresponsive are dead and must be discarded.
MSX was first noted in Delaware Bay in 1957, and is now found all up and down the East Coast of the United States.
One valve is cupped and the other is flat.
Care should be taken when consuming oysters.
Upscale restaurants pair raw oysters with a home-made Mignonette sauce, which consists primarily of fresh chopped shallot, mixed peppercorn, dry white wine and lemon juice or sherry vinegar.
In some species the valves are highly calcified, and many are somewhat irregular in shape.
Some oysters contain live crabs, known as oyster crabs.
''Crassostrea'' and ''Saccostrea'' live mainly in the intertidal zone, while ''Ostrea'' is subtidal.
Some oysters also harbor bacterial species which can cause human disease; of importance is ''Vibrio vulnificus'', which causes gastroenteritis, which is usually self-limiting, and cellulitis.
They regularly shut their valves to enter a resting state, even when they are permanently submersed.
Then they are taken to market, where they are either canned or sold live.
Sergius Orata of the Roman Republic is considered the first major merchant and cultivator of oysters.
During neap tides, they exhibit much longer closing periods than during the spring tideThe website  MolluSCAN eye is largely devoted to the online study of their daily valve behavior in Europe (France).
In the U.S., Delaware is the only East Coast state without aquaculture, but making aquaculture a state-controlled industry of leasing water by the acre for commercial harvesting of shellfish is being considered.
Opening oysters, referred to as ''oyster-shucking'', requires skill.
Researchers claim the keys to the project were:
Once the female is fertilized, she discharges millions of eggs into the water.
Depuration of oysters is a common industry practice and widely researched in the scientific community but is not commonly known by end consumers.
Oysters influence nutrient cycling, water filtration, habitat structure, biodiversity, and food web dynamics.
* building larger reefs, ranging up to  in size
In Trinidad in the West Indies, tourists are often astounded when they are told, in the Caribbean, "oysters grow on trees".
Oysters are filter feeders, drawing water in over their gills through the beating of cilia.
Oysters should be refrigerated out of water, not frozen, and in 100% humidity.
Oyster-tecture projects have been proposed to protect coastal cities, such as New York, from the threat of rising sea levels due to climate change.
Oyster depuration begins after the harvest of oysters from farmed locations.
While dredges collect oysters more quickly, they heavily damage the beds, and their use is highly restricted.
Oysters were an important food source in all coastal areas where they could be found, and oyster fisheries were an important industry where they were plentiful.
While some oysters have two sexes (European oyster and Olympia oyster), their reproductive organs contain both eggs and sperm.
The main objective of seafood depuration is to remove fecal contamination in seafood before being sold to end consumers.
As filter feeders, oysters remove plankton and organic particles from the water column.
Oysters stored in water under refrigeration will open, consume available oxygen, and die.
Many, but not all, oysters are in the superfamily Ostreoidea.
Heavy gloves are necessary; apart from the knife, the shell itself can be razor sharp.
The annual Clarenbridge Oyster Festival 'Oyster Opening Competition' is also held in Galway, Ireland.
They are protandric; during their first year, they spawn as males by releasing sperm into the water.
Open oysters should be tapped on the shell; a live oyster will close up and is safe to eat.
An oyster can filter up to  of water per hour.
The oysters are transported and placed into tanks pumped with clean water for periods of 48 to 72 hours.
In any case, when the oysters are collected, they are sorted to eliminate dead animals, bycatch (unwanted catch), and debris.
The 2009 harvest was less than .
Inexperienced shuckers can apply too much force, which can result in injury if the blade slips.
*Twist the blade until there is a slight pop.
Oysters have been cultured for well over a century.
Their high zinc content aids the production of testosterone.
* disease-resistant broodstock
Excess sediment, nutrients, and algae can result in the eutrophication of a body of water.
Dermo first appeared in the Gulf of Mexico in the 1950s, and until 1978 was believed to be caused by a fungus.
Bay oysters usually spawn from the end of June until mid-August.
*Insert the blade, with moderate force and vibration if necessary, at the hinge between the two valves.
A single female oyster can produce up to 100 million eggs annually.
*Slide the blade upward to cut the adductor muscle which holds the shell closed.
North American varieties include: Kumamoto and Yaquina Bay from Oregon, Duxbury and Wellfleet from Cape Cod, Massachusetts, Malpeque from Prince Edward Island, Canada, Blue Point from Long Island, New York, Pemaquid from Maine, and Cape May oysters from New Jersey.
It is infectious and causes heavy mortality in the eastern oyster; survivors, however, develop resistance and can help propagate resistant populations.
To prevent spawning, sterile oysters are now cultured by crossbreeding tetraploid and diploid oysters.
The dredge is towed through an oyster bed by a boat, picking up the oysters in its path.
Many species of bivalves, oysters included, seem to be stimulated to settle near adult conspecifics.
It is estimated that one acre can produce nearly 750,000 oysters, which could filter between  of water daily.
Well-known contaminants include ''Vibrio parahaemolyticus'' which is a bacterium found in seawater animals that is temperature sensitive, and ''Escherichia coli'' which is a bacterium found in coastal waters near highly populated cities having sewage systems discharging waste nearby, or from agricultural discharges.
The latter method prevents losses to some predators, but is more expensive.
Over the years, the irritating object is covered with enough layers of nacre to become a pearl.
Oysters can also be collected by divers.
Unlike most shellfish, oysters can have a fairly long shelf life of up to four weeks.
* using waste oyster shells to elevate the reef floor  to keep the spat free of bottom sediments
Harvesting involves simply lifting the bags or rack to the surface and removing the mature oysters.
Also see nutrient pollution for an extended explanation of nutrient remediation.
Because of its good flavor, it commands high prices.
Some dead oysters, or oyster shells which are full of sand may be closed.
Evidence suggests it was brought to the US when ''Crassostrea gigas'', a Japanese oyster variety, was introduced to Delaware Bay.
Professional shuckers require fewer than three seconds to open the shell.
Hundreds of animals, such as sea anemones, barnacles, and hooked mussels, inhabit oyster reefs.
The texture is soft and fleshy, but crisp on the palate.
Suspended plankton and particles are trapped in the mucus of a gill, and from there are transported to the mouth, where they are eaten, digested, and expelled as feces or pseudofeces.
Cellulitis can be so severe and rapidly spreading, often it requires amputation.
It is usually acquired when the contents of the oyster come in contact with a cut skin lesion, as when shucking an oyster.
''Vibrio vulnificus'' is the most deadly seafood-borne pathogen.
Eventually, possibly following adaptation to the local conditions, the Pacific oyster spread up and down the coast and now is the basis of the North American west coast oyster industry.
Not all individual oysters produce pearls naturally.
The disease is not a direct threat to humans consuming infected oysters.
Eating can be as simple as opening the shell and eating the contents, including juice.
Other large oyster farming areas in the US include the bays and estuaries along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico from Apalachicola, Florida in the east to Galveston, Texas in the west.
This myth is based in truth, in that in the Northern Hemisphere, oysters are much more likely to spoil in the warmer months of May, June, July, and August.
In the case of Oysters Rockefeller, preparation can be very elaborate.
Common oyster predators include crabs, seabirds, starfish, and humans.
The Pacific oyster (''Crassostrea gigas'') is presently the most widely grown bivalve around the world.
Depuration expands beyond oysters into many shellfish and other related products, especially in seafood that is known to come from potentially polluted areas; depurated seafood is effectively a product cleansed from inside-out to make it safe for human consumption.
Butter and salt are often added.
Over the following years, spat spread out sporadically and populated adjacent areas.
This is a toothed bar attached to a chain bag.
MSX is associated with high salinity and water temperatures.
When fish or prawns are grown in ponds, it takes typically  of feed to produce  of product (dry-dry basis).
