He was thus released from internment a few months before his sixtieth birthday—the age at which civilian internees were released by the Nazis.
Several libraries removed Wodehouse novels from their shelves.
After he had completed his notes, he would draw up a fuller scenario of about thirty thousand words, which ensured plot holes were avoided, and allowed for the dialogue to begin to develop.
The reaction in America was mixed: the left-leaning publication ''P.M.''
They cannot be got into a play and they are at least half the fun of the novels."
Cooper complained to the French authorities, and the couple were moved to a different hotel.
He wrote or adapted four plays for the West End; ''Leave it to Psmith'' (1930), which he adapted in collaboration with Ian Hay, was the only one to have a long run.
He carried this view through into his writing, describing the approach as "making the thing a sort of musical comedy without music, and ignoring real life altogether".
The first Kern-Wodehouse collaboration, a comic number for ''The Beauty of Bath'' titled "Mr Joseph Chamberlain", was a show-stopper and was briefly the most popular song in London.
Further screen adaptations of his books were made between then and 1927,  but it was not until 1929 that Wodehouse first went to Hollywood, where Bolton was then working as a highly paid writer for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM).
The talks were comic and apolitical, but his broadcasting over enemy radio prompted anger and strident controversy in Britain, and a threat of prosecution.
The biographer Barry Phelps writes that Wodehouse "loved the college as much as he loved anything or anybody".
Wodehouse was never sure that his books had literary merit as well as popular appeal, and, Donaldson suggests, must have been overwhelmed when the University of Oxford conferred an honorary doctorate of letters on him in June 1939.
Housman, Max Beerbohm and Hilaire Belloc; on the radio and in print Belloc called Wodehouse "the best writer of our time: the best living writer of English... the head of my profession".
I suppose prison life saps the intellect".
French writes that, of Wodehouse's work from this period, almost all that deserves to survive is the school fiction.
The boy was baptised at the Church of St Nicolas, Guildford, and was named after his godfather, Pelham von Donop.
While there, he suffered a heart attack and died on 14 February 1975 at the age of 93.
While still detained by the French, Wodehouse was again mentioned in questions in the House of Commons in December 1944 when MPs wondered if the French authorities could repatriate him to stand trial.
It was published in hardback in the US and the UK in the same year (the British edition being retitled ''Something Fresh'').
Wodehouse had made any real assault on the intelligence of the song-listening public."
He was a prolific writer throughout his life, publishing more than ninety books, forty plays, two hundred short stories and other writings between 1902 and 1974.
At the outbreak of the Second World War he was earning £40,000 a year from his work, which had broadened to include novels and short stories.
Such an arrangement was then normal for middle-class families based in the colonies.
The novels showed a largely unchanging world, regardless of when they were written, and only rarely—and mistakenly in McCrum's view—did Wodehouse allow modernity to intrude, as he did in the 1966 story "Bingo Bans the Bomb".
The form of expression is used sparingly by Wodehouse in comparison with other mechanisms, only once or twice in a story or novel, according to Hall.
Examples can be seen in ''Joy in the Morning'', Chapter 29: "There was a sound in the background like a distant sheep coughing gently on a mountainside.
He loved the camaraderie, distinguished himself at cricket, rugby and boxing, and was a good, if not consistently diligent, student.
'What, in your opinion, will the harvest be?'
The show was successful, but they thought the song lyrics weak and invited Wodehouse to join them on its successor.
With the advance of the Germans, the nearby Royal Air Force base withdrew; Wodehouse was offered the sole spare seat in one of the fighter aircraft, but he turned down the opportunity as it would have meant leaving behind Ethel and their dog.
The management of the BBC, who considered Wodehouse's actions no worse than "ill advised", pointed out to Cooper that there was no evidence at that point whether Wodehouse had acted voluntarily or under compulsion.
It's an austere, almost bloodless preference for pristine artifice over the pain and messy outcomes of actual existence, but it's a case of Wodehouse keeping faith with his own unique art."
Born in Guildford, the son of a British magistrate based in Hong Kong, Wodehouse spent happy teenage years at Dulwich College, to which he remained devoted all his life.
When he was two, the brothers were brought to England, where they were placed under the care of an English nanny in a house adjoining that of Eleanor's father and mother.
Nonetheless, Donaldson adds, the book and lyrics for the Princess Theatre shows made the collaborators an enormous fortune and played an important part in the development of the American musical.
Hicks had already recruited the young Jerome Kern to write the music for such songs.
Bolton and his wife lived in the prosperous hamlet of Remsenburg, part of the Southampton resort area of Long Island,  east of Manhattan.
They were delayed by Ethel's insistence on acquiring suitable new clothes and by Wodehouse's wish to finish writing his current novel, ''The Mating Season'', in the peace of the French countryside.
He commented, "It's odd how soon one comes to look on every minute as wasted that is given to earning one's salary."
Wodehouse was born in Guildford, Surrey, the third son of Henry Ernest Wodehouse (1845–1929), a magistrate resident in the British colony of Hong Kong, and his wife, Eleanor (1861–1941), daughter of the Rev John Bathurst Deane.
Donaldson lists among those with whom he was on friendly terms writers including A.A. Milne, Ian Hay, Frederick Lonsdale and E. Phillips Oppenheim, and stage performers including George Grossmith, Jr., Heather Thatcher and Dorothy Dickson.
The internees were placed four to a cell, each of which had been designed for one man.
The Wodehouses returned to England, where they had a house in London for some years, but Wodehouse continued to cross the Atlantic frequently, spending substantial periods in New York.
Concentrating on writing novels and short stories, Wodehouse reached the peak of his productivity in this decade, averaging two books each year, and grossing an annual £100,000.
There had been films of Wodehouse stories since 1915, when ''A Gentleman of Leisure'' was based on his 1910 novel of the same name.
In his younger years, he would write around two to three thousand words a day, although he slowed as he aged, so that in his nineties he would produce a thousand.
—''Joy in the Morning'', Chapter 5
In addition to his sporting achievements he was a good singer and enjoyed taking part in school concerts; his literary leanings found an outlet in editing the school magazine, ''The Alleynian''.
Peveril was then found to have a "weak chest"; sea air was prescribed, and the three boys were moved to Elizabeth College on the island of Guernsey.
"&thinsp;'It seems to me, Jeeves, that the ceremony may be one fraught with considerable interest.'
Wodehouse stayed with them frequently, and in 1952 he and Ethel bought a house nearby.
Wodehouse said that he based Psmith on the hotelier and impresario Rupert D'Oyly Carte—"the only thing in my literary career which was handed to me on a silver plate with watercress around it".
She was visiting one of her sisters in Guildford when Wodehouse was born there prematurely.
He was considered for the award of a knighthood three times from 1967, but the honour was twice blocked by British officials.
The Wodehouses, who traced their ancestry back to the 13th century, belonged to a collateral branch of the family of the earls of Kimberley.
In 1891 Wodehouse went on to Malvern House Preparatory School in Kent, which concentrated on preparing its pupils for entry to the Royal Navy.
''The Times'' commented that Wodehouse's honour signalled "official forgiveness for his wartime indiscretion....
In April 1947 they sailed to New York, where Wodehouse was relieved at the friendly reception he received from the large press contingent awaiting his arrival.
(1917–18) and ''Oh, Lady!
McCrum, writing in 2004, observes, "Wodehouse is more popular today than on the day he died", and "his comic vision has an absolutely secure place in the English literary imagination."
Although his captors refused to release him, Wodehouse was provided with a typewriter and, to pass the time, he wrote ''Money in the Bank''.
In the ''Oxford Dictionary of National Biography'', Iain Sproat counts twenty aunts and considers that they played an important part not only in Wodehouse's early life, but, thinly disguised, in his mature novels, as the formidable aunts who dominate the action in the Wooster, Blandings, and other stories.
Wodehouse was in New York when the war began.
In the same year ''The Saturday Evening Post'' paid $3,500 to serialise ''Something New'', the first of what became a series of novels set at Blandings Castle.
Two miles from home their car broke down, so they returned and borrowed a car from a neighbour; with the routes blocked with refugees, they returned home again.
In the ''Grove Dictionary of American Music'' Larry Stempel writes, "By presenting naturalistic stories and characters and attempting to integrate the songs and lyrics into the action of the libretto, these works brought a new level of intimacy, cohesion, and sophistication to American musical comedy."
In a study of Wodehouse's works, Richard Usborne argues that "only a writer who was himself a scholar and had had his face ground into Latin and Greek (especially Thucydides) as a boy" could sustain the complex sequences of subordinate clauses sometimes found in Wodehouse's comic prose.
This was ''Miss Springtime'' (1916), which ran for 227 performances—a good run by the standards of the day.
Another biographer, Frances Donaldson, writes, "Deprived so early, not merely of maternal love, but of home life and even a stable background, Wodehouse consoled himself from the youngest age in an imaginary world of his own".
In ''Jeeves and the Feudal Spirit'' Bertie asks Jeeves "Let a plugugly like young Thos loose in the community with a cosh, and you are inviting disaster and&nbsp;... what's the word?
The writer Alan Bennett thinks that "inspired though his language is, I can never take more than ten pages of the novels at a time, their relentless flippancy wearing and tedious", while the literary critic F.R.
He preferred working between 4 and 7&nbsp;pm—but never after dinner—and would work seven days a week.
Following the furore ensuing from the wartime broadcasts, he suffered a downturn in his popularity and book sales; ''The Saturday Evening Post'' stopped publishing his short stories, a stance they reversed in 1965, although his popularity—and the sales figures—slowly recovered over time.
Wodehouse", where he stated that "it is important to realise that the events of 1941 do not convict Wodehouse of anything worse than stupidity".
After the scenario was complete he would write the story.
A third milestone in Wodehouse's life came towards the end of 1915: his old songwriting partner Jerome Kern introduced him to the writer Guy Bolton, who became Wodehouse's closest friend and a regular collaborator.
Ineligible for military service because of his poor eyesight, he remained in the US throughout the war, detached from the conflict in Europe and absorbed in his theatrical and literary concerns.
As a young man he enjoyed the literary works of Arthur Conan Doyle and Jerome K. Jerome, and the operatic works of Gilbert and Sullivan.
In 1886 the brothers were sent to a dame-school in Croydon, where they spent three years.
When dealing with the dialogue in his novels, Wodehouse would consider the book's characters as if they were actors in a play, ensuring that the main roles were kept suitably employed throughout the storyline, which must be strong: "If they aren't in interesting situations, characters can't be major characters, not even if you have the rest of the troop talk their heads off about them."
Although it made little impact on its first publication, the 1906 novel ''Love Among the Chickens'' contained what French calls the author's first original comic creation: Stanley Featherstonehaugh Ukridge.
His lyric for Hall, "Put Me in My Little Cell", was a Gilbertian number for a trio of comic crooks, with music by Frederick Rosse; it was well received and launched Wodehouse on a career as a theatre writer that spanned three decades.
There were no children of the marriage, but Wodehouse came to love Ethel's daughter Leonora (1905–1944) and legally adopted her.
He stayed there at his own expense; royalties from the German editions of his books had been put into a special frozen bank account at the outset of the war, and Wodehouse was permitted to draw upon this money he had earned whilst  staying in Berlin.
At the age of twelve in 1894, to his great joy, Wodehouse was able to follow his brother Armine to Dulwich College.
The broadcast was made at the direct instruction of Duff Cooper, the Minister of Information, who overruled strong protests made by the BBC against the decision to air the programme.
'You mean imagination boggles?'
He sold many more stories, but none of the American publications offered a permanent relationship and guaranteed income.
His visit to England for the awarding ceremony was the last time he set foot in his native land.
He always completed the plot before working on specific character actions.
"The first thing he did was to prod Jeeves in the lower ribs with an uncouth forefinger."
Most of Wodehouse's canon is set in an undated period around the 1920s and 1930s.
After a week the men were transferred to Huy in Liège, Belgium, where they were incarcerated in the local citadel.
Psmith featured in three more novels: ''Psmith in the City'' (1910), a burlesque of banking; ''Psmith, Journalist'' (1915) set in New York; and ''Leave It to Psmith'' (1923), set at Blandings Castle.
The boys had fifteen uncles, four of whom were clergymen.
A new magazine for boys, ''The Captain'', provided further well-paid opportunities, and during his two years at the bank, Wodehouse had eighty pieces published in a total of nine magazines.
Hall, Jr., in his study of Wodehouse's style and technique, describes the author as a master of prose, an opinion also shared by Levin, who considers Wodehouse "one of the finest and purest writers of English prose".
In April he sailed to New York, which he found greatly to his liking.
Instead of a university career, in September 1900 Wodehouse was engaged in a junior position in the London office of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank.
In ''Performing Flea'', a 1953 collection of letters, Wodehouse wrote, "Of course I ought to have had the sense to see that it was a loony thing to do to use the German radio for even the most harmless stuff, but I didn't.
The reviewer in ''The Manchester Guardian'' praised the play, but commented: "It is Mr Wodehouse's own inimitable narrative comments and descriptions in his own person of the antics of his puppets that one misses.
The magazines that had paid lavishly for his stories were in decline, and those that remained were not much interested in him.
In reply, Sir Aylmer, confusing the two meanings of the word "by", asks: "How the devil can you be assaulted by a duck pond?"
These were the families of Canadian prisoners of war, and the news from Wodehouse was the first indication that their sons were alive and well.
Some come through exaggeration, such as Bingo Little's infant child who "not only has the aspect of a mass murderer, but that of a mass murderer suffering from an ingrown toenail", or Wooster's complaint that "the rumpuses that Bobbie Wickham is already starting may be amusing to her, but not to the unfortunate toads beneath the harrow whom she ruthlessly plunges into the soup."
In Sproat's phrase, she "took charge of Wodehouse's life and made certain that he had the peace and quiet he needed to write".
Numerous letters appeared in the British press, both supporting and criticising Wodehouse.
According to ''The Times'', the broadcast "provoked a storm of complaint&nbsp;... from listeners all over the country".
"I balanced a thoughtful lump of sugar on the teaspoon."
Donaldson suggests that this is the reason why his lyrics have largely been overlooked in recent years: they fit the music perfectly, but do not stand on their own in verse form as Gilbert's do.
The Blandings Castle stories, set in an English stately home, depict the attempts of the placid Lord Emsworth to evade the many distractions around him, which include successive pairs of young lovers, the machinations of his exuberant brother Galahad, the demands of his domineering sisters and super-efficient secretaries, and anything detrimental to his prize sow, the Empress of Blandings.
The reduced speed in writing slowed his production of books: when younger he would produce a novel in about three months, while ''Bachelors Anonymous'', published in 1973, took around six months.
The marriage proved happy and lifelong.
Housman and Evelyn Waugh—the last of whom opines: "One has to regard a man as a Master who can produce on average three uniquely brilliant and entirely original similes on each page."
He was subsequently visited by Malcolm Muggeridge, recently arrived in Paris as an intelligence officer with MI6.
After leaving school he was employed by a bank but disliked the work and turned to writing in his spare time.
In these musicals Wodehouse's lyrics won high praise from critics as well as fellow lyricists such as Ira Gershwin.
On 21 June 1941, while he was in the middle of playing a game of cricket, Wodehouse received a visit from two members of the Gestapo.
He was unsparing of the studio owners in his early-1930s short stories set in Hollywood, which contain what Taves considers Wodehouse's sharpest and most biting satire.
In the same decade, his literary career reached a new peak.
The Germans occupied Le Touquet on 22 May 1940 and Wodehouse had to report to the authorities daily.
Wodehouse's biographer, Joseph Connolly, thinks the broadcast "inaccurate, spiteful and slanderous"; Phelps calls it "probably the most vituperative attack on an individual ever heard on British radio".
He continued to hanker after a revival of his theatrical career.
Wodehouse quotes from and alludes to numerous poets throughout his work.
Richard Voorhees, Wodehouse's biographer, believes that the author used clichés in a deliberate and ironic manner.
He would take up to two years to build a plot and write a scenario of about thirty thousand words.
Wodehouse would ensure that his first draft was as carefully and accurately done as possible, correcting and refining the prose as he wrote, and would then make another good copy, before proof reading again and then making a final copy for his publisher.
They lived at Remsenburg for the rest of their lives.
When Wodehouse's contract ended after a year it was not renewed.
In November 1900 his first comic piece, "Men Who Missed Their Own Weddings", was accepted by ''Tit-Bits''.
Ethel secured a comfortable penthouse apartment in Manhattan's Upper East Side, but Wodehouse was not at ease.
Wind's view of Wodehouse's naïveté is not universally held.
In 1955 Wodehouse became an American citizen, though he remained a British subject, and was therefore eligible for UK state honours.
This large salary was particularly welcome because the couple had lost considerable sums in the Wall Street Crash of 1929.
Bertie and Jeeves, Lord Emsworth and his circle, and Ukridge appeared in novels and short stories; Psmith made his fourth and last appearance; two new characters were the Oldest Member, narrating his series of golfing stories, and Mr Mulliner, telling his particularly tall tales to fellow patrons of the bar at the Angler's Rest.
Biographers including Donaldson, McCrum and Phelps suggest that his unworldliness was only part of a complex character, and that in some respects he was highly astute.
Two months later George Orwell wrote the essay "In Defence of P.G.
The boys' parents returned to Hong Kong and became virtual strangers to their sons.
His recollection was that "it went like a breeze from start to finish, with everybody I met understanding me perfectly".
Wodehouse remained unsettled until he and Ethel abandoned the city.
For a novel the note-writing process could take up to two years, and he would usually have two or more novels in preparation simultaneously.
The composer Richard Rodgers wrote, "Before Larry Hart, only P.G.
During the 1930s Wodehouse's theatrical work tailed off.
The work begins as a conventional school story, but Wodehouse introduces a new and strikingly original character, Psmith, whose creation both Evelyn Waugh and George Orwell regarded as a watershed in Wodehouse's development.
The two collaborated between 1907 and 1913 on two books, two music hall sketches, and a play, ''Brother Alfred''.
Other leading literary figures who admired Wodehouse were A.E.
The theatre writer Gerald Bordman calls Wodehouse "the most observant, literate, and witty lyricist of his day".
Many writers have considered that the interview precipitated a radical overhaul of the studio system, but Taves believes it to have been "a storm in a teacup", and Donaldson comments that in the straitened post-crash era the reforms would sooner or later have been inevitable.
On 21 May 1940, with German troops advancing through northern France, the Wodehouses decided to drive to Portugal and fly from there to the US.
Between 1952 and 1975 he published more than twenty novels, as well as two collections of short stories, a heavily edited collection of his letters, a volume of memoirs, and a selection of his magazine articles.
"As I sat in the bath-tub, soaping a meditative foot&nbsp;..."
On 15 July the journalist William Connor, under his pen name Cassandra, broadcast a postscript to the news programme railing against Wodehouse.
Towards the end of the year the librettist Owen Hall invited him to contribute an additional lyric for a musical comedy ''Sergeant Brue''.
Wodehouse expected to follow Armine to the University of Oxford, but the family's finances took a turn for the worse at the crucial moment.
His opinion is shared by the academic Stephen Medcalf, who deems Wodehouse's skill is to "bring a cliché just enough to life to kill it", although Pamela March, writing in ''The Christian Science Monitor'', considers Wodehouse to have "an ability to decliché a cliché".
Hall also identifies that periodically Wodehouse used the stylistic device of a transferred epithet, with an adjective that properly belongs to a person applied instead to some inanimate object.
He was given ten minutes to pack his things before he was taken to the Hotel Adlon, a top luxury hotel in Berlin.
There are dissenters to the praise.
Although most of Wodehouse's fiction is set in England, he spent much of his life in the US and used New York and Hollywood as settings for some of his novels and short stories.
Eleanor Wodehouse was also of ancient aristocratic ancestry.
In September 1914 he married Ethel May Wayman, ''née'' Newton (1885–1984), an English widow.
In November 1944 Duff Cooper was appointed British ambassador to France and was provided accommodation at the Hôtel Le Bristol, where the Wodehouses were living.
Jeeves sailing into action", or ''Psmith'', Chapter 7: "A sound like two or three pigs feeding rather noisily in the middle of a thunderstorm interrupted his meditation."
This prediction proved correct: few British writers had first-hand experience of the US, and his articles about life in New York brought him higher than usual fees.
He also wrote non-musical plays, including ''The Play's the Thing'' (1926), adapted from Ferenc Molnár, and ''A Damsel in Distress'' (1928), a dramatisation of his 1919 novel.
Ethel's personality was in contrast with her husband's: he was shy and impractical; she was gregarious, decisive and well organised.
Both the UK Inland Revenue and the US Internal Revenue Service sought to tax him as a resident.
He continued to work in the theatre.
Leavis writes that Wodehouse had a "stereotyped humour&nbsp;... of ingenious variations on a laugh in one place".
Most of those defending Wodehouse against accusations of disloyalty, including Sax Rohmer, Dorothy L. Sayers and Gilbert Frankau, conceded that he had acted stupidly.
Much of Wodehouse's use of slang terms reflects the influence of his time at school in Dulwich, and partly reflects Edwardian slang.
The critic Anthony Lejeune describes the settings of Wodehouse's novels, such as the Drones Club and Blandings Castle, as "a fairyland".
Orwell's rationale was that Wodehouse's "moral outlook has remained that of a public-school boy, and according to the public-school code, treachery in time of war is the most unforgivable of all the sins", which was compounded by his "complete lack—so far as one can judge from his printed works—of political awareness".
Wodehouse received great praise from many of his contemporaries, including Max Beerbohm, Rudyard Kipling, A.E.
They were subsequently arrested by French police and placed under preventive detention, despite no charges being presented.
In 1934 Wodehouse collaborated with Bolton on the book for Cole Porter's ''Anything Goes'' (Porter wrote his own lyrics), but at the last minute their version was almost entirely rewritten by others at the instigation of the producer, who disliked the original script.
The Wodehouses remained in Germany until September 1943, when Allied bombing led to the couple being allowed to move back to Paris.
Wodehouse's other new venture in 1904 was writing for the stage.
Worth many guineas in the future but none for the moment".
Between the publication of ''The Pothunters'' 1902 and that of ''Mike'' in 1909, Wodehouse wrote eight novels and co-wrote another two.
Wodehouse also uses metaphor and mixed metaphor to add humour.
He did not complete one until 1951.
Before starting a book Wodehouse would write up to four hundred pages of notes bringing together an outline of the plot; he acknowledged that "It's the plots that I find so hard to work out.
Wodehouse wrote in the 1970s that a cousin of his who had been at school with Carte told him of the latter's monocle, studied suavity, and stateliness of speech, all of which Wodehouse adopted for his new character.
It's probably because you were born that way."
The proposed nominations of Wodehouse for a knighthood in 1967 and 1971 were blocked for fear that such an award would "give currency to a Bertie Wooster image of the British character which the embassy was doing its best to eradicate".
In 1936 Wodehouse created the last of his regular cast of principal characters, Lord Ickenham, otherwise known as Uncle Fred, who, in Usborne's words, "leads the dance in four novels and a short story... a whirring dynamo of misrule".
The first name was rapidly elided to "Plum", the name by which Wodehouse became known to family and friends.
Shortly afterwards Wodehouse was, in the words of Phelps, "cleverly trapped" into making five broadcasts to the US via German radio, with the Berlin-based correspondent of the Columbia Broadcasting System.
Wodehouse believed that one of the factors that made his stories humorous was his view of life, and he stated that "If you take life fairly easily, then you take a humorous view of things.
It was Wodehouse's first farcical novel; it was also his first best-seller, and although his later books included some gentler, lightly sentimental stories, it was as a farceur that he became known.
Medcalf provides an example from ''Right Ho, Jeeves'' in which the teetotal Gussie Fink-Nottle has surreptitiously been given whisky and gin in a punch prior to a prize-giving:
Since Wodehouse's death there have been numerous adaptations and dramatisations of his work on television and film, and,  2015, the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' contains over 1,750 quotations from Wodehouse, illustrating terms from ''crispish'' to ''zippiness''.
His practice of dividing his time between Britain and America caused Wodehouse difficulties with the tax authorities of both countries.
The prisoners were not kept long in Loos before they were transported in cattle trucks to a former barracks in Liège which was run as a prison by the SS.
The German propaganda ministry arranged for the recordings to be broadcast to Britain in August.
The biographer Robert McCrum suggests that nonetheless Wodehouse's isolation from his parents left a psychological mark, causing him to avoid emotional engagement both in life and in his works.
From his boyhood Wodehouse had been fascinated by America, which he conceived of as "a land of romance"; he "yearned" to visit the country, and by 1904 he had earned enough to do so.
After two months of occupation the Germans interned all male enemy nationals under 60, and Wodehouse was sent to a former prison in Loos, a suburb of Lille, on 21 July; Ethel remained in Le Touquet.
