On 11 May 2015 his painting ''Women of Algiers'' set the record for the highest price ever paid for a painting when it sold for  US$179.3 million at Christie's in New York.
Braque and Derain were mobilized and Apollinaire joined the French artillery, while the Spaniard Juan Gris remained from the Cubist circle.
She became his lover, and then his second wife in 1961.
Born in the city of Málaga in the Andalusian region of Spain, he was the first child of Don José Ruiz y Blasco (1838–1913) and María Picasso y López.
the German asked Picasso.
There, he met his first Parisian friend, journalist and poet Max Jacob, who helped Picasso learn the language and its literature.
Picasso made his first trip to Paris, then the art capital of Europe, in 1900.
* Maya (5 September 1935 – ) (Born Maria de la Concepcion Picasso) – with Marie-Thérèse Walter
File:Pablo Picasso, 1913, Bouteille, clarinette, violon, journal, verre.jpg|1913, ''Bouteille, clarinet, violon, journal, verre'', 55 × 45&nbsp;cm.
Soon they shared an apartment; Max slept at night while Picasso slept during the day and worked at night.
Between 1915 and 1917, Picasso began a series of paintings depicting highly geometric and minimalist Cubist objects, consisting of either a pipe, a guitar or a glass, with an occasional element of collage.
Picasso was married twice and had four children by three women:
Presumably, he is talking about "Young Naked Girl with Flower Basket".
This "return to order" is evident in the work of many European artists in the 1920s, including André Derain, Giorgio de Chirico, Gino Severini, Jean Metzinger, the artists of the New Objectivity movement and of the Novecento Italiano movement.
Picasso's training under his father began before 1890.
His use of the minotaur came partly from his contact with the surrealists, who often used it as their symbol, and it appears in Picasso's ''Guernica''.
''Les Demoiselles'' was reproduced for the first time in Europe in the same issue.
During the Second World War, Picasso remained in Paris while the Germans occupied the city.
He was commissioned to make a maquette for a huge -high public sculpture to be built in Chicago, known usually as the ''Chicago Picasso''.
In the summer of 1918, Picasso married Olga Khokhlova, a ballerina with Sergei Diaghilev's troupe, for whom Picasso was designing a ballet, Erik Satie's ''Parade'', in Rome; they spent their honeymoon near Biarritz in the villa of glamorous Chilean art patron Eugenia Errázuriz.
That's why I put a date on everything I do."
The same mood pervades the well-known etching ''The Frugal Repast'' (1904), which depicts a blind man and a sighted woman, both emaciated, seated at a nearly bare table.
(However, in 1940 he did apply for French citizenship, but it was refused on the grounds of his "extremist ideas evolving towards communism".
In 1944 Picasso joined the French Communist Party, attended an international peace conference in Poland, and in 1950 received the Stalin Peace Prize from the Soviet government, But party criticism of a portrait of Stalin as insufficiently realistic cooled Picasso's interest in Soviet politics, though he remained a loyal member of the Communist Party until his death.
Picasso painted mostly from imagination or memory.
The two had a son, Paulo Picasso, who would grow up to be a dissolute motorcycle racer and chauffeur to his father.
His work is often categorized into periods.
After returning from his honeymoon, and in desperate need of money, Picasso started his exclusive relationship with the French-Jewish art dealer Paul Rosenberg.
According to Jean Cocteau's diaries, Picasso once said to him in reference to the communists: "I have joined a family, and like all families, it's full of shit".
In addition, Picasso had a considerable collection of the work of other famous artists, some his contemporaries, such as Henri Matisse, with whom he had exchanged works.
His mother was of Italian descent, from the territory of Genoa.
They renewed their friendship, but Picasso began to frequent new social circles.
He was among the first champions of Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque and the Cubism that they jointly developed.
Jacqueline Roque prevented his children Claude and Paloma from attending the funeral.
This painting from the collection of Wilhelm Uhde was confiscated by the French state and sold at the Hôtel Drouot in 1921
Picasso painted portraits of both Gertrude Stein and her nephew Allan Stein.
This large canvas embodies for many the inhumanity, brutality and hopelessness of war.
He had also remained aloof from the Catalan independence movement during his youth despite expressing general support and being friendly with activists within it.
Picasso's family was of middle-class background.
Picasso thrived in the city, regarding it in times of sadness or nostalgia as his true home.
Asked to explain its symbolism, Picasso said, "It isn't up to the painter to define the symbols.
In his paintings, Picasso used color as an expressive element, but relied on drawing rather than subtleties of color to create form and space.
Eventually they had two children: Claude, born in 1947 and Paloma, born in 1949.
He was an international celebrity, with often as much interest in his personal life as his art.
Picasso showed a passion and a skill for drawing from an early age.
During the spring of 1916 Apollinaire returned from the front wounded.
While the names of many of his later periods are debated, the most commonly accepted periods in his work are the Blue Period (1901–1904), the Rose Period (1904–1906), the African-influenced Period (1907–1909), Analytic Cubism (1909–1912), and Synthetic Cubism (1912–1919), also referred to as the Crystal period.
Marie-Thérèse lived in the vain hope that Picasso would one day marry her, and hanged herself four years after Picasso's death.
In 2003, relatives of Picasso inaugurated a museum dedicated to him in his birthplace, Málaga, Spain, the Museo Picasso Málaga.
The Picasso Administration functions as his official Estate.
This information was not revealed until 2003.)
Between 1935 and 1959 he wrote over 300 poems.
The minotaur and Picasso's mistress Marie-Thérèse Walter are heavily featured in his celebrated ''Vollard Suite'' of etchings.
His strained relationship with Claude and Paloma was never healed.
Eventually Leo Stein moved to Italy.
:(Picasso is a painter, so am I; ... Picasso is a Spaniard, so am I; Picasso is a communist, neither am I.)
On 21 June 2016 a painting by Pablo Picasso titled ''Femme Assise'' (1909) sold for £43.2 million ($63.4 million) at Sotheby's London, exceeding the estimate by nearly $20 million, setting a world record for the highest price every payed at auction for a Cubist work.
Picasso's early sculptures were carved from wood or modeled in wax or clay, but from 1909 to 1928 Picasso abandoned modeling and instead made sculptural constructions using diverse materials.
For most of his life Ruiz was a professor of art at the School of Crafts and a curator of a local museum.
In 1895, Picasso was traumatized when his seven-year-old sister, Conchita, died of diphtheria.
Picasso was baptized Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso, a series of names honoring various saints and relatives.
The Museu Picasso in Barcelona features many of his early works, created while he was living in Spain, including many rarely seen works which reveal his firm grounding in classical techniques.
Photographer and painter Dora Maar was also a constant companion and lover of Picasso.
Yet Picasso exhibited Cubist works at the first Surrealist group exhibition in 1925; the concept of 'psychic automatism in its pure state' defined in the ''Manifeste du surréalisme'' never appealed to him entirely.
In the period following the upheaval of World War I, Picasso produced work in a neoclassical style.
The two argued frequently.
'''Pablo Ruiz y Picasso''', also known as '''Pablo Picasso''' (; ; 25 October 1881 – 8 April 1973), was a Spanish painter, sculptor, printmaker, ceramicist, stage designer, poet and playwright who spent most of his adult life in France.
He sometimes added sand to his paint to vary its texture.
Picasso had affairs with women of an even greater age disparity than his and Gilot's.
He approached the project with a great deal of enthusiasm, designing a sculpture which was ambiguous and somewhat controversial.
Largely untitled except for a date and sometimes the location of where it was written (for example "Paris 16 May 1936"), these works were gustatory, erotic and at times scatological, as were his two full-length plays ''Desire Caught by the Tail'' (1941) and ''The Four Little Girls'' (1949).
Biographer and art critic John Berger felt his talents as an artist were "wasted" by the communists.
In 1925 the Surrealist writer and poet André Breton declared Picasso as 'one of ours' in his article ''Le Surréalisme et la peinture'', published in ''Révolution surréaliste''.
In her 1964 book ''Life with Picasso'', Gilot describes his abusive treatment and myriad infidelities which led her to leave him, taking the children with her.
Regarded as one of the greatest and most influential artists of the 20th century, he is known for co-founding the Cubist movement, the invention of constructed sculpture, the co-invention of collage, and for the wide variety of styles that he helped develop and explore.
The 1932 work, which depicts Picasso's mistress Marie-Thérèse Walter reclining and as a bust, was in the personal collection of Los Angeles philanthropist Frances Lasker Brody, who died in November 2009.
Picasso's final works were a mixture of styles, his means of expression in constant flux until the end of his life.
During the first decade of the 20th century, his style changed as he experimented with different theories, techniques, and ideas.
In an interview published in 1923, Picasso said, "The several manners I have used in my art must not be considered as an evolution, or as steps towards an unknown ideal of painting ...
Observing the precision of his son's technique, an apocryphal story relates, Ruiz felt that the thirteen-year-old Picasso had surpassed him, and vowed to give up painting, though paintings by him exist from later years.
Picasso carried on a long-standing affair with Marie-Thérèse Walter and fathered a daughter with her, named Maya.
Picasso was devastated by her premature death from illness at the age of 30 in 1915.
He was interred at the Chateau of Vauvenargues near Aix-en-Provence, a property he had acquired in 1958 and occupied with Jacqueline between 1959 and 1962.
Picasso was one of 250 sculptors who exhibited in the 3rd Sculpture International held at the Philadelphia Museum of Art in mid-1949.
Picasso demonstrated extraordinary artistic talent in his early years, painting in a naturalistic manner through his childhood and adolescence.
As of 2004, Picasso remained the top-ranked artist (based on sales of his works at auctions) according to the Art Market Trends report.
During the 1930s, the minotaur replaced the harlequin as a common motif in his work.
Although his Cubist works approach abstraction, Picasso never relinquished the objects of the real world as subject matter.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1913-14, Head (Tête), cut and pasted colored paper, gouache and charcoal on paperboard, 43.5 x 33 cm, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh.jpg|1913–14, ''Head (Tête)'', cut and pasted colored paper, gouache and charcoal on paperboard, 43.5 × 33&nbsp;cm, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh
The two remained legally married until Khokhlova's death in 1955.
What the figure represents is not known; it could be a bird, a horse, a woman or a totally abstract shape.
''Ruiz y Picasso'' were included for his father and mother, respectively, as per Spanish law.
He was even older at the onset of World War II, and could not be expected to take up arms in those conflicts.
In 1927 Picasso met 17-year-old Marie-Thérèse Walter and began a secret affair with her.
Blindness is a recurrent theme in Picasso's works of this period, also represented in ''The Blindman's Meal'' (1903, the Metropolitan Museum of Art) and in the portrait of ''Celestina'' (1903).
During the same period that Picasso collaborated with Diaghilev's troupe, he and Igor Stravinsky collaborated on ''Pulcinella'' in 1920.
Towards the end of World War I, Picasso made a number of important relationships with figures associated with Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes.
These "little gems" may have been produced by Picasso in response to critics who had claimed his defection from the movement, through his experimentation with classicism within the so-called return to order following the war.
The art critic Kirsten Hoving Keen says that it is "inspired by reports of American atrocities" and considers it one of Picasso's communist works.
While Picasso expressed anger and condemnation of Francisco Franco and fascists through his art, he did not take up arms against them.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1913-14, Woman in a Chemise in an Armchair, oil on canvas, 149.9 x 99.4 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art.jpg|1913, ''Femme assise dans un fauteuil (Eva), Woman in a Chemise in an Armchair'', oil on canvas, 149.9 × 99.4&nbsp;cm, Leonard A. Lauder Cubist Collection, Metropolitan Museum of Art
Picasso's African-influenced Period (1907–1909) begins with the two figures on the right in his painting, ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon'', which were inspired by African artefacts.
These were times of severe poverty, cold, and desperation.
Prominent in his Cubist paintings are forms easily recognized as guitars, violins, and bottles.
Although this transition in Picasso's work was informed by Cubism for its spatial relations, "the fusion of ritual and abandon in the imagery recalls the primitivism of the Demoiselles and the elusive psychological resonances of his Symbolist work", writes McQuillan.
Pablo Picasso died on 8 April 1973 in Mougins, France, while he and his wife Jacqueline entertained friends for dinner.
File:Pablo Picasso, c.1911, Le Guitariste.jpg|c.1911, ''Le Guitariste''.
The academic realism apparent in the works of the mid-1890s is well displayed in ''The First Communion'' (1896), a large composition that depicts his sister, Lola.
Picasso's Blue Period (1901–1904), characterized by somber paintings rendered in shades of blue and blue-green, only occasionally warmed by other colors, began either in Spain in early 1901, or in Paris in the second half of the year.
This was a severe blow to Picasso.
"No," he replied, "You did".
* Claude (15 May 1947&nbsp;–) (Born Claude Pierre Pablo Picasso) – with Françoise Gilot
Later in the book, Hemingway mentions looking at one of Picasso's paintings.
Exhibited at the Armory Show, New York, Chicago, Boston 1913.jpg|1910, ''Woman with Mustard Pot (La Femme au pot de moutarde)'', oil on canvas, 73 × 60&nbsp;cm, Gemeentemuseum, The Hague.
During the war Picasso was able to continue painting uninterrupted, unlike his French comrades.
Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco; elements such as his elongated limbs, arresting colors, and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso's later work.
At one of her gatherings in 1905, he met Henri Matisse, who was to become a lifelong friend and rival.
At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1937, Picasso was already in his late fifties.
His progress can be traced in the collection of early works now held by the Museu Picasso in Barcelona, which provides one of the most comprehensive records extant of any major artist's beginnings.
The Steins introduced him to Claribel Cone and her sister Etta who were American art collectors; they also began to acquire Picasso and Matisse's paintings.
* Paloma (19 April 1949&nbsp;– ) (Born Anne Paloma Picasso) – with Françoise Gilot
Although the Germans outlawed bronze casting in Paris, Picasso continued regardless, using bronze smuggled to him by the French Resistance.
Picasso's artistic style did not fit the Nazi ideal of art, so he did not exhibit during this time.
When Picasso  depicted complex narrative scenes it was usually in prints, drawings, and small-scale works; ''Guernica'' (1937) is one of his few large narrative paintings.
Several paintings by Picasso rank among the most expensive paintings in the world.
Picasso included declarations of his love for Eva in many Cubist works.
Only later, after Picasso's death, when the rest of the art world had moved on from abstract expressionism, did the critical community come to see that Picasso had already discovered Neo-Expressionism and was, as so often before, ahead of his time.
Picasso met Fernande Olivier, a bohemian artist who became his mistress, in Paris in 1904.
In 1992 the painting was put on display in Madrid's Reina Sofía Museum when it opened.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1914-15, Nature morte au compotier (Still Life with Compote and Glass), oil on canvas, 63.5 x 78.7 cm (25 x 31 in), Columbus Museum of Art, Ohio.jpg|1914–15, ''Nature morte au compotier (Still Life with Compote and Glass)'', oil on canvas, 63.5 × 78.7&nbsp;cm (25 × 31 in), Columbus Museum of Art, Ohio
The US copyright representative for the Picasso Administration is the Artists Rights Society.
Khokhlova introduced Picasso to high society, formal dinner parties, and all the social niceties attendant to the life of the rich in 1920s Paris.
From the age of seven, Picasso received formal artistic training from his father in figure drawing and oil painting.
In February 1917, Picasso made his first trip to Italy.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1910, Woman with Mustard Pot (La Femme au pot de moutarde), oil on canvas, 73 x 60 cm, Gemeentemuseum, The Hague.
In a 1945 interview with Jerome Seckler, Picasso stated: "I am a Communist and my painting is Communist painting.
Olivier  appears in many of his Rose Period paintings, many of which are influenced by his warm relationship with her, in addition to his increased exposure to French painting.
"Hard-edged square-cut diamonds", notes art historian John Richardson, "these gems do not always have upside or downside".
The sculpture, one of the most recognizable landmarks in downtown Chicago, was unveiled in 1967.
In the 1950s, Picasso's style changed once again, as he took to producing reinterpretations of the art of the great masters.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1911, Still Life with a Bottle of Rum, oil on canvas, 61.3 x 50.5 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.jpg|1911, ''Still Life with a Bottle of Rum'', oil on canvas, 61.3 × 50.5&nbsp;cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
The autobiographical nature of Picasso's art is reinforced by his habit of dating his works, often to the day.
The art critic Arthur Danto said Picasso's work constitutes a "vast pictorial autobiography" that provides some basis for the popular conception that "Picasso invented a new style each time he fell in love with a new woman".
The student lacked discipline but made friendships that would affect him in later life.
He explained: "I want to leave to posterity a documentation that will be as complete as possible.
In his austere use of color and sometimes doleful subject matter – prostitutes and beggars are frequent subjects – Picasso was influenced by a trip through Spain and by the suicide of his friend Carlos Casagemas.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1909, Femme assise (Sitzende Frau), oil on canvas, 100 x 80 cm, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Neue Nationalgalerie.jpg|1909, ''Femme assise (Sitzende Frau)'', oil on canvas, 100 × 80&nbsp;cm, Staatliche Museen, Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin
By 1905, Picasso became a favorite of American art collectors Leo and Gertrude Stein.
In "A Moveable Feast" by Ernest Hemingway, Hemingway tells Gertrude Stein that he would like to have some Picassos, but cannot afford them.
Throughout his life Picasso maintained several mistresses in addition to his wife or primary partner.
Image:Art Museum Pablo Picasso Münster Arkaden.jpg|Art Museum Pablo Picasso Münster Arkaden
Reproduced in Albert Gleizes and Jean Metzinger, ''Du "Cubisme"'', 1912
Madrid held many other attractions.
Exceptionally prolific throughout the course of his long life, Picasso achieved universal renown and immense fortune for his revolutionary artistic accomplishments, and became one of the best-known figures in 20th-century art.
Their older brother Michael Stein and his wife Sarah also became collectors of his work.
Much of his work was burned to keep the small room warm.
Both artists took apart objects and "analyzed" them in terms of their shapes.
Many paintings of gaunt mothers with children date from the Blue Period, during which Picasso divided his time between Barcelona and Paris.
Formal ideas developed during this period lead directly into the Cubist period that follows.
Soler solicited articles and Picasso illustrated the journal, mostly contributing grim cartoons depicting and sympathizing with the state of the poor.
His marriage to Roque was also a means of revenge against Gilot; with Picasso's encouragement, Gilot had divorced her then husband, Luc Simon, with the plan to marry Picasso to secure the rights of her children as Picasso's legitimate heirs.
His paintings became more sombre and his life changed with dramatic consequences.
As part of his first duties, Rosenberg agreed to rent the couple an apartment in Paris at his own expense, which was located next to his own house.
His father rented a small room for him close to home so he could work alone, yet he checked up on him numerous times a day, judging his drawings.
Aside from the several anti-war paintings that he created, Picasso remained personally neutral during World War I, the Spanish Civil War, and World War II, refusing to join the armed forces for any side or country.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1916, L'anis del mono (Bottle of Anis del Mono) oil on canvas, 46 x 54.6 cm, Detroit Institute of Arts, Michigan.jpg|1916, ''L'anis del mono (Bottle of Anis del Mono)'', oil on canvas, 46 × 54.6&nbsp;cm, Detroit Institute of Arts, Michigan
After the loss of Eva Gouel, Picasso had an affair with Gaby Lespinasse.
In 1921 he simultaneously painted several large neoclassical paintings and two versions of the Cubist composition ''Three Musicians'' (Museum of Modern Art, New York; Philadelphia Museum of Art).
File:Picasso Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler 1910.jpg|1910, ''Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler'', The Art Institute of Chicago.
Devoting his full energies to his work, Picasso became more daring, his works more colorful and expressive, and from 1968 to 1971 he produced a torrent of paintings and hundreds of copperplate etchings.
Apollinaire pointed to his friend Picasso, who was also brought in for questioning, but both were later exonerated.
This was the start of a deep brother-like friendship between two very different men, that would last until the outbreak of World War II.
The Rose Period (1904–1906) is characterized by a more cheery style with orange and pink colors, and featuring many circus people, acrobats and harlequins known in France as saltimbanques.
His exposure to the work of Rossetti, Steinlen, Toulouse-Lautrec and Edvard Munch, combined with his admiration for favorite old masters such as El Greco, led Picasso to a personal version of modernism in his works of this period.
By this time, Picasso had constructed a huge Gothic home, and could afford large villas in the south of France, such as Mas Notre-Dame-de-Vie on the outskirts of Mougins, and in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.
His father was a painter who specialized in naturalistic depictions of birds and other game.
If the subjects I have wanted to express have suggested different ways of expression I have never hesitated to adopt them."
According to William Rubin, Picasso "could only make great art from subjects that truly involved him ...
The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez, Francisco Goya, and Francisco Zurbarán.
: '' Picasso es pintor, yo también; ... Picasso es español, yo también; Picasso es comunista, yo tampoco.''
He refers to it as Picasso's nude of the girl with the basket of flowers.
Though baptized a Catholic, Picasso would later on become an atheist.
File:Pablo Picasso, 1911-12, Violon (Violin), oil on canvas, Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, Netherlands.jpg|1911–12, ''Violon (Violin)'', oil on canvas, 100 × 73&nbsp;cm (oval), Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, Netherlands.
After acquiring some fame and fortune, Picasso left Olivier for Marcelle Humbert, who he called Eva Gouel.
During the first five months of 1901, Picasso lived in Madrid, where he and his anarchist friend Francisco de Asís Soler founded the magazine ''Arte Joven'' (''Young Art''), which published five issues.
While still involved with Gilot, in 1951 Picasso had a six-week affair with Geneviève Laporte, who was four years younger than Gilot.
The medium in which Picasso made his most important contribution was painting.
Kahnweiler promoted burgeoning artists such as André Derain, Kees van Dongen, Fernand Léger, Juan Gris, Maurice de Vlaminck and several others who had come from all over the globe to live and work in Montparnasse at the time.
Ruiz was a traditional academic artist and instructor, who believed that proper training required disciplined copying of the masters, and drawing the human body from plaster casts and live models.
In Paris, Picasso entertained a distinguished coterie of friends in the Montmartre and Montparnasse quarters, including André Breton, poet Guillaume Apollinaire, writer Alfred Jarry, and Gertrude Stein.
This surreal fusion of words and images was intended to be sold as a series of postcards to raise funds for the Spanish Republican cause.
Around this time, Picasso took up writing as an alternative outlet.
Kahnweiler was a German art historian and art collector who became one of the premier French art dealers of the 20th century.
During 1893 the juvenile quality of his earliest work falls away, and by 1894 his career as a painter can be said to have begun.
He did at the time develop new imagery and formal syntax for expressing himself emotionally, "releasing the violence, the psychic fears and the eroticism that had been largely contained or sublimated since 1909", writes art historian Melissa McQuillan.
The Spanish Civil War provided the impetus for Picasso's first overtly political work, ''The Dream and Lie of Franco'' which was produced "specifically for propagandistic and fundraising purposes."
More of his paintings have been stolen than any other artist's; the Art Loss Register has 550 of his works listed as missing.
This painting from the collection of Wilhelm Uhde was confiscated by the French state and sold at the Hôtel Drouot in 1921
As a Spanish citizen living in France, Picasso was under no compulsion to fight against the invading Germans in either World War.
After her death, the family moved to Barcelona, where Ruiz took a position at its School of Fine Arts.
