Teriyaki restaurants are particularly common in the Seattle area.
The Georgia Strait–Puget Sound basin is shared between British Columbia and Washington, and the Pacific temperate rain forests ecoregion, which is the largest of the world's temperate rain forest ecozones in the system created by the World Wildlife Fund, stretches along the coast from Alaska to California.
Peréz made landfall on the Queen Charlotte Islands on July&nbsp;18, 1774.
In 1840 American Charles Wilkes explored in the area.
Environmentally conscious services such as recycling and public transportation are widespread, most notably in the more populous areas.
The Spanish explorers knew of Admiralty Inlet and the unexplored region to the south, but they decided to sail north.
Potential French, Austrian, and Portuguese claims were never advanced.
A New Thought church called Living Enrichment Center with 4,000 members was located in Wilsonville, Oregon from 1992 to 2004.
Although unprotected by national parks and only a handful of provincial parks, the south-central Coast Mountains in British Columbia contain the five largest mid-latitude icefields in the world.
The Asian presence in the U.S. section of the Pacific Northwest is comparably smaller, with all Asian groups together comprising about 8% of Washington state's population, and smaller figures in Oregon and Idaho.
Often these definitions are made by government agencies whose scope is limited to the United States.
American merchant sea-captain Robert Gray traded along the coast and discovered the mouth of the Columbia River.
In 1786 Jean-François de La Pérouse, representing France, sailed to the Queen Charlotte Islands after visiting Nootka Sound but any possible French claims to this region were lost when La Pérouse and his men and journals were lost in a shipwreck near Australia.
Alessandro Malaspina, sailing for Spain, explored and mapped the coast from Yakutat Bay to Prince William Sound in 1791, then sailed to Nootka Sound.
Quadra sent Caamaño north, to carefully explore the coast between Vancouver Island and Bucareli Bay, Alaska.
Disputes between British Columbia and Alaska over the Dixon Entrance of the Hecate Strait between Prince Rupert and the Queen Charlotte Islands have not been resolved.
Other outstanding natural features include the Oregon Coast, the Columbia River Gorge, the Columbia River, Mount St. Helens, and Hells Canyon.
In 1779 a third Spanish expedition, under the command of Ignacio de Artega in the ship ''Princesa'', and with Quadra as captain of the ship ''Favorite'', sailed from Mexico to the coast of Alaska, reaching 61° N. Two further Spanish expeditions, in 1788 and 1789, both under Esteban Jose Martínez and Gonzalo López de Haro, sailed to the Pacific Northwest.
The Pacific Northwest has been occupied by a diverse array of Native American peoples for millennia.
Several of these jurisdictions have made arrests for cannabis a low enforcement priority.
Also, within the region there is a fairly strong representation of Orthodox churches (Greek, Russian, Serbian and others), as well as the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church.
The major cities of Vancouver, Portland, Seattle, and Tacoma all began as seaports supporting the logging, mining, and farming industries of the region but have developed into major technological and industrial centers (such as the Silicon Forest), which benefit from their location on the Pacific Rim.
Aluminum smelting was once an important part of the region's economy due to the abundance of once-cheap hydroelectric power.
The coastal areas—especially in the cities of Vancouver, Victoria, Bellingham, Seattle, Tacoma, Olympia, Portland, Corvallis, Eugene, and Ashland—are some of the most politically liberal parts of North America, regularly supporting left-wing political candidates and causes by significant majorities, while the Interior and North tend to be more conservative and consistently support right-wing candidates and causes.
By the first decade of the 21st century the aluminum industry in the Pacific Northwest was essentially defunct.
Portland is a major microbrewery center in America, and is home to the Widmer Brothers Brewery.
This area is sometimes seen as a megacity (also known as a conurbation, an agglomeration, or a megalopolis).
The term "Pacific Northwest" should not be confused with the Northwest Territory (also known as the Great Northwest, a historical term in the United States) or the Northwest Territories of Canada.
Chinook Jargon was a pidgin or trade language established among indigenous inhabitants of the region.
After the Mississippi River, more water flows through the Columbia than any other river in the lower 48 states.
After establishing a base at Nootka, Eliza sent out several exploration parties.
These zones are not associated with a typical Mediterranean climate, and would be classified as Temperate Oceanic (''Cfb''), except dry-summer patterns typical to the Pacific Northwest meet Koeppen's minimum ''Cs'' thresholds.
Hockey is the most popular spectator sport in British Columbia, with the Vancouver Canucks of the NHL being the most popular professional team, although the Vancouver Giants of the Western Hockey League also have a very strong following.
Under the Köppen climate classification, a cool-summer version of the ''dry-summer subtropical'' (''Csb'') designation, typically referred to as "Mediterranean", is assigned to many areas of the Pacific Northwest as far north as southern Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands, including cities such as Victoria, British Columbia, Seattle, and Portland.
The dryland area inland from the Cascade Range and Coast Mountains is very different from the terrain and climate of the coastal area due to the rain shadow effect of the mountains, and comprises the Columbia, Fraser and Thompson Plateaus and mountain ranges contained within them.
This is due to immigration quotas at the federal level, as while Canada has one-tenth the population of the United States, it takes in one-quarter as many immigrants.
A major divide in political opinion separates the region's greatly more populated urban core and rural areas west of the mountains from its less populated rural areas to their east and (in British Columbia and Alaska) north.
The coastline of the Pacific Northwest is dotted by numerous gulches, bays, mouths of rivers, coastal plains, and mountains or rocky features that seem to reach directly out of the sea.
Initial formal claims to the region were asserted by Spain in 1513 with explorer Nuñez de Balboa, the first European to sight the Pacific Ocean from the Americas.
Portland's Waterfront Blues Festival is the largest blues-based festival west of the Mississippi River.
The mainland territory north of the 49th parallel remained unincorporated until 1858, when a mass influx of Americans and others during the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush forced the hand of Colony of Vancouver Island's Governor James Douglas, who declared the mainland a Crown Colony, although official ratification of his unilateral action was several months in coming.
During the early 1740s, Imperial Russia sent the Dane Vitus Bering to the region.
Narrower conceptions may be limited to the northwestern US or to the coastal areas west of the Cascade and Coast mountains.
Upon entering Nootka Sound, they found William Douglas and his ship the ''Iphigenia''.
Cannabis use is relatively popular, especially around Vancouver, B.C., Bellingham, Seattle, Olympia, Spokane, Portland and Eugene.
The Northwest Tibetan Cultural Association, claimed to be the largest organization of its kind in the world, was founded in Portland in 1993.
Although the dominant culture in the Pacific Northwest today is Anglo-American and Anglo-Canadian, there is significant Mexican and Chinese influence.
There are several Canadian National Parks in the Pacific Northwest, including Pacific Rim National Park on the west coast of Vancouver Island, Mount Revelstoke National Park and Glacier National Park in the Selkirk Range alongside Rogers Pass, Kootenay National Park and Yoho National Park on the British Columbia flank of the Rockies, Gwaii Haanas National Park Reserve in the Queen Charlotte Islands, and the Gulf Islands National Park Reserve in the Strait of Georgia.
In the U.S. side of the region, Latinos make up a large portion of the agricultural labor force east of the Cascade Range, and are an increasing presence in the general labor force west of the Cascades.
Definitions based on the historic Oregon Country reach east to the Continental Divide, thus including nearly all of Idaho and parts of western Montana and western Wyoming.
The Pacific Northwest has the lowest rate of church attendance in the United States and consistently reports the highest percentage of atheism; this is most pronounced on the part of the region west of the Cascades.
Upon encountering the Salish coastal tribes, either Pérouse or someone in his crew remarked, "What must astonish most is to see painting everywhere, everywhere sculpture, among a nation of hunters".
The Lieutenant-Governor from 2007 to 2012, Steven Point, was of aboriginal origin, being Stó:lō (the dominant type of Coast Salish in BC's Lower Mainland) from the Chilliwack area.
These areas, especially around Puget Sound, have a long history of political radicalism.
Politically, the Pacific Northwest is actively involved in environmental efforts.
As of July&nbsp;1, 2015, recreational marijuana use was legalized in Oregon as well.
This prompted Spain to send expeditions north to assert Spanish ownership, while Captain James Cook and subsequent expeditions by George Vancouver advanced British claims.
Throughout the Pacific Northwest, thousands of indigenous people live, and some continue to practice their rich cultural traditions, "organizing their societies around cedar and salmon."
An oceanic climate ("marine west coast climate") occurs in most coastal areas, typically between the ocean and high mountain ranges.
* Gangaji, an internationally recognized spiritual teacher and disciple of Poonjaji, lives in Ashland, Oregon
Eateries featuring Persian, Asian Fusion, and Indo-Canadian cuisines are common throughout in Greater Vancouver, as are ethnic specialty restaurants of all kinds.
The Harney Basin of Oregon is an example of arid climate in the Pacific Northwest.
Canadian raising occurs in British Columbia and some speakers in Washington to a similar degree as it does in southern Ontario, but weaker than other parts of Canada.
Vancouver had explored Puget Sound just previously.
Salvador Fidalgo was sent north to the Alaska coast.
Evergreen Speedway hosts the NASCAR Whelen All American Series, the NASCAR K&N Pro Series West, National Figure Eight Events, USAC, SCCA, plus Touring Groups and Formula Drift.
This region was jointly claimed by the United States and Great Britain after the Treaty of 1818, which established a co-dominion of interests in the region in lieu of a settlement.
At the time of his election to the office of Portland mayor in 2008, Sam Adams was the first openly gay individual to represent a city of Portland's size in the United States.
In 1774 the viceroy of New Spain sent Spanish navigator Juan Pérez in the ship ''Santiago'' to the Pacific Northwest.
Portland is also the hub of American bicycle manufacturing; as a whole it generated over $68 million in revenue in 2007 alone.
According to Canadian historian Ken Coates, the border has not merely influenced the Pacific Northwest—rather, "the region's history and character have been determined by the boundary."
By the end of World War II these smelters were producing over a third of the United States' aluminum.
The northernmost latitude he reached was 54°40′ N. This was followed, in 1775, by another Spanish expedition, under the command of Bruno de Heceta and including Juan Peréz and Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra as officers.
However, beyond the megacity with few exceptions, the PNW region is characterized by a relatively low density population distribution.
The Skid Road Group, a shelter offering soup and sermons to the unemployed and recovering alcoholics, was launched in Vancouver, with the Salvation Army having deep roots in the Gastown district, dating back to the era of the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway (1880s) and attained prominence in the same centers during the Klondike Gold Rush.
That said, three of the four major international charities in the region are religious in nature: Northwest Medical Teams International, World Concern, World Vision International, and Mercy Corps.
The CFL's BC Lions are considered Vancouver's second most popular team, although soccer and the Whitecaps FC have been rising in popularity in recent years.
The United States later established a claim following the exploration of the region by the Lewis and Clark Expedition, partly through the negotiation of former Spanish claims north of the Oregon-California boundary.
After a war scare with the United Kingdom, the Oregon boundary dispute was settled in the 1846 Oregon Treaty, partitioning the region along the 49th parallel and resolving most but not all of the border disputes (see Pig War).
The Mennonite Central Committee Supportive Care Services is based in Abbotsford, BC.
A common conception of the Pacific Northwest includes the U.S. states of Oregon and Washington as well as the Canadian province of British Columbia.
An Alpine climate dominates in the high mountains.
Major companies headquartered in the region include Microsoft (Seattle Metropolitan Area), Microsoft Canada (Vancouver), Nintendo of America (Seattle Metropolitan Area), Nintendo (Vancouver), and video games maker Electronic Arts (Vancouver), as well as Valve Corporation, Bungie, and Sony subsidiary Sucker Punch Productions, all three are located in the Seattle Metropolitan Area.
There he met Quadra, who was in command of the Spanish settlement and Fort San Miguel.
As in professional sports, college fans in the Pacific Northwest are known for being particularly passionate about their teams.
Humid continental climates occur inland on windward sides, in places such as Revelstoke, British Columbia.
Chinook Jargon reached its height of usage in the 19th century though remained common in resource and wilderness areas, particularly but not exclusively by Native Americans and Canadian First Nations people, well into the 20th century.
their history in Canada includes resistance to state education and industrial development (see Sons of Freedom).
* Oregon's Willamette Valley has a large population of Russian Old Believers
Today its influence is felt mostly in place names and a handful of localized slang terms, particularly the word ''skookum'', which remains hallmark of people raised in the region.
After contact with Europeans, French, English, and Cree words entered the language, and "eventually Chinook became the lingua franca for as many as 250,000 people along the Pacific Slope from Alaska to Oregon."
For example, all cities within the portion of California included in the Pacific Northwest have populations less than 100,000, with that portion of the state containing millions of acres of national forests and parks.
Religion plays a smaller part in Pacific Northwest politics than in the rest of the United States.
They passed through Johnstone Strait and returned to Nootka Sound.
The Lower Mainland of British Columbia has a very large Sikh community.
Broader definitions of the region may include the U.S. state of Alaska,  the Canadian territory of Yukon, the northwestern portion of the state of California, and may reach east to the Rocky Mountains.
Washington State was the second when I-1000 passed in 2008.
In part as a result, the region enjoys the lowest electrical power rates on the continent.
Oregon has a considerable Quaker (Society of Friends) population.
The Alcan smelter at Kitimat continues in operation and is fed by the diversion of the Nechako River (a tributary of the Fraser) to a powerhouse on the coast at Kemano, near Kitimat.
In the US, this region, semi-arid and often completely arid, is known as the Columbia Plateau, while in British Columbia it is the Interior Plateau, also called the Fraser Plateau.
Some definitions include, in addition to Washington, Oregon, Idaho and British Columbia, Southeast Alaska, western Montana, the coast of northern California and a small part of northwestern Wyoming.
The region is home to many unique Christian communities, ranging from the Doukhobors to the Mennonites.
East of the Cascades, in eastern Washington, eastern Oregon, and Idaho, the population is much more conservative.
After his election, supporters coined the famous slogan "Fifty-four Forty or Fight", referring to 54°40' north latitude—the northward limit of the region.
British Columbians of many ethnicities are prominent in all levels of politics and government, and the province has a number of "firsts" in Canadian political history, including the first non-white Premier, Ujjal Dosanjh (who is Indo-Canadian) and the first Asian Lieutenant-Governor, the Hon.
On August&nbsp;17, 1775, he sighted the mouth of the Columbia River and named it ''Bahia de la Asunción''.
Colonial governor James Douglas was himself mulatto of Guyanese extraction and his wife was of Cree origin.
Lately the region has also gained notice for its Hip hop music in the Pacific Northwest.
Many are associated with the independent label Sub Pop.
Various Spanish maps, including Caamaño's, were given to George Vancouver in 1792, as the Spanish and British worked together to chart the complex coastline.
African Americans tend to concentrate in western urban areas such as Tacoma, south Seattle, and Portland.
In Seattle many fans are still upset over the move of the Seattle SuperSonics while supporters of the Seattle Seahawks football team are known officially as the 12th Man.
Though no agreed boundary exists, a common conception includes the U.S. states of Oregon and Washington and the Canadian province of British Columbia.
Yogic teachings, Sufism, tribal and ancient beliefs and other philosophies are widely studied and appreciated in the region.
Socialist beliefs were once widespread (thanks in large part to the area's large numbers of Scandinavian immigrants) and the region has had a number of Socialist elected officials.
Production rose during the 1950s and 1960s, then declined.
* The Emissaries of Divine Light are a notable presence in the region of 100 Mile House, British Columbia and also have a large ashram on Kootenay Lake, northeast of Nelson, British Columbia
Much of the Pacific Northwest is forested.
Hydroelectric power generated by the hydroelectric dams on the Columbia River powered at least ten aluminum smelters during the mid-20th century.
Religious sees that are based in the Pacific Northwest include the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical provinces of Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver, Province 8 of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, the Anglican Ecclesiastical Province of British Columbia and the Yukon, and the suffragan dioceses that make up those provinces.
In Oregon the major programs are the University of Oregon Ducks and the Oregon State Beavers.
In 1986 King County, Washington, which contains Seattle, renamed itself in honor of Martin Luther King.
Vancouver himself had entered the Strait of Juan de Fuca directly without going to Nootka first, so had not sailed completely around the island.
The Columbia River cuts a deep and wide gorge around the rim of the Columbia Plateau and through the Cascade Range on its way to the Pacific Ocean.
In 1790 the Spanish sent three ships to Nootka Sound, under the command of Francisco de Eliza.
The USSF Division 4 USL Premier Development League also has seven teams in the Northwest Division.
Broader conceptions reach north into Alaska and Yukon, south into far northern California and east to include Idaho, Western Montana and western Wyoming, i.e., to the Continental Divide.
The Pacific Coast is seen by a growing number of scholars as a major migration route for late Pleistocene peoples moving from northeast Asia into the Americas.
The expedition returned to Nootka Sound by August 1791.
Some people in the area also embrace alternative religion, such as New Age spirituality and Neo-Paganism.
Large geographical areas may only have one mid-sized to small sized city as a regional center (often a county seat) with smaller cities and towns scattered around.
John McLoughlin, Chief Factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, headquartered at Fort Vancouver, was the ''de facto'' local political authority for most of this time.
The leader of the opposition party from 2005 to 2011, the NDP, was Carole James, of partial Métis origin.
The Mennonite Central Committee and the Mennonite Disaster Service enjoy a heavy rate of enlistment and donations from the strong Mennonite community in British Columbia's Fraser Valley.
In more recent times, during the so-called "Salmon War" of the 1990s, Washington Senator Slade Gorton called for the U.S. Navy to "force" the Inside Passage, even though it is not an official international waterway.
It possess the low back vowel merger, or the cot–caught merger.
The direct-intervention oceanic protection group known as the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society has its headquarters in Friday Harbor on San Juan Island.
Another Spanish explorer, Jacinto Caamaño, sailed the ship ''Aranzazu'' to Nootka Sound in May 1792.
Among the area's largest music festivals are the Merritt Mountain Music Festival, the Vancouver Folk Music Festival, the Sasquatch!
The region also contains specimens of the tallest trees on earth, the coast redwoods, in southwestern Oregon, but the largest of these trees are located just south of the California border in northwestern California.
With three oval tracks, a figure eight track and various road course variants, Evergreen Speedway operates year round events.
There have been proposals for certain parts of the Pacific Northwest becoming its own country because of the shared ecoregion and culture, the most well-known being Cascadia.
A 2007 statistical analysis ranked the 50 Greenest Cities in the United States, placing Portland, Oregon first, Eugene, Oregon fifth, and Seattle, Washington eighth.
While Heceta sailed south, Quadra continued north in the expedition's second ship, the ''Sonora''.
Liberal and Conservative Northwesterners, such as former U.S.
Parts of Oregon and Washington are bilingual in both English and Spanish, and Native American culture is strong throughout the Pacific Northwest.
If defined as Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, the Pacific Northwest has four US National Parks: Crater Lake in Oregon, plus Olympic, Mount Rainier, and North Cascades in Washington.
The Oregon Coast, Burrard Inlet, Puget Sound, the mouth of the Columbia River, Coos Bay, and Humboldt Bay are some of the larger features along the hundreds of miles of coast that has been shaped and reshaped by weather and geologic forces.
At this landing site, probably near present-day San Francisco, Drake made a symbolic claim of the region for England, naming it New Albion.
As a result, the Spanish explorers, who had set out from Nootka, became the first Europeans to circumnavigate Vancouver Island.
This "megacity" stretches along Interstate 5 in the states of Oregon and Washington and Hwy 99 in the province of British Columbia.
The California Vowel Shift also affects speech in the region.
Semi-arid and arid climates are found east of the higher mountains, especially in rainshadow areas.
The Russian River was named after these settlements.
Vancouver is home to a 4-team league for Australian football, the British Columbia Australian Football League, one of several Canadian Australian football leagues.
The international organization Greenpeace was born in Vancouver in 1970 as part of a large public opposition movement in British Columbia to US nuclear weapons testing on Amchitka Island in the Aleutians.
It also has a long history of publicly owned power and utilities, with many of the region's cities owning their own public utilities.
These universities are all considered rivals of one another, particularly in college football.
A subarctic climate can be found farther north, especially in Yukon and Alaska.
African-Americans have held the positions of Mayor in Seattle and Spokane; King County executive, while the state of Washington elected a Chinese American governor during the 1990s, Gary Locke.
By the late 18th&nbsp;century and into the mid-19th&nbsp;century, Russian settlers had established several posts and communities on the northeast Pacific coast, eventually reaching as far south as Fort Ross, California.
Eastern spiritual beliefs have been adopted by an unusually large number of people (by North American standards), and Tibetan Buddhism in particular has a strong local following.
These areas are also leading "creative class" economic drivers, feeding thriving cultural sectors, and include many knowledge workers and numerous international advertising, media and design firms present.
The Pacific Northwest is a diverse geographic region, dominated by several mountain ranges, including the Coast Mountains, the Cascade Range, the Olympic Mountains, the Columbia Mountains, and the Rocky Mountains.
The religious right has considerably less political influence than in other regions.
As of the Nootka Conventions, the last in 1794, Spain gave up its exclusive a priori claims and agreed to share the region with the other Powers, giving up its garrison at Nootka Sound in the process.
The strait was named for him, but whether he discovered it or not has long been questioned.
Spanish is also spoken in parts of Oregon and Washington by Mexicans, both recent immigrants and long-standing communities.
After sharing maps and agreeing to cooperate, Galiano, Valdés, and Vancouver sailed north to Desolation Sound and the Discovery Islands, charting the coastline together.
The radical labor organizers called Wobblies were particularly strong there in the mines, lumber camps and shipyards.
Performing a scientific expedition in the manner of James Cook, Malaspina's scientists studied the Tlingit and Nuu-chah-nulth peoples before returning to Mexico.
Active volcanoes in the region include Mount Garibaldi, Mount Baker, Mount Rainier, Mount Saint Helens, Mount Hood, Mount Jefferson, and Mount Shasta.
The region as a whole, but especially several specific areas are concentrated high-tech areas: Seattle eastern suburbs, the Portland Silicon Forest area, and Vancouver, BC.
Medical marijuana is legal in British Columbia, Washington and Oregon, as well as in Alaska, though that state prohibits its sale and has no licensed dispensaries, and in the Yukon, although less than 50 of the territory's residents are licensed to use medical marijuana and no legal dispensaries operate within its borders.
As of 2004, the combined populations of the Lower Mainland region (which includes Greater Vancouver), the Seattle metropolitan area and the Portland metropolitan area totaled around eight million people.
African Americans are less numerous in the Pacific Northwest; however, the overall African American population has been growing in other smaller urban areas throughout the region, such as Spokane and Eugene.
Carl Abbott argues that, given the twin factors of limited economic integration vis-a-vis NAFTA, and cultural similarities, he views the major cities as "going their separate ways" as  east-west gateways of commerce, competing with each other, rather than forming north-south connectors of a tentative "megaregion. "
Coastal features are defined by the interaction with the Pacific and the North American continent.
* Eckhart Tolle, author of ''The Power Of Now'', lives in Vancouver, British Columbia
Political conservatives in the Pacific Northwest tend to identify more strongly with free-market libertarian values than they do with more religious social conservatives.
Local artists who became ground-breaking rock bands of their times include Jimi Hendrix, Queensrÿche, Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden,  Alice in Chains, Foo Fighters and The Presidents of the United States of America, But the history of Northwest rock can be traced back to the mid 1950s and 1960s with such bands such as The Sonics, The Ventures, The Kinsmen, and Paul Revere and the Raiders.
Most Americans and Canadians consider the Pacific Northwest English accent "neutral," though indistinct from the Midwestern dialects that some believe typify American speech.
Vast areas of the region may have little or no population at all, largely due to the presence of extensive mountains and forests, and plateaus containing both extensive farm and range lands, much of which is protected from development in large parks and preserves, or by zoning use regulation related to traditional land use.
In the interior of the Pacific Northwest, the indigenous peoples, at the time of European contact, had a diversity of cultures and societies.
Much of the plateau, especially in eastern Washington, is irrigated farmland.
Seattle is one of a handful of major cities in North America in which the populace engaged in a general strike (in 1919) and was the first major American city to elect a woman mayor, Bertha Knight Landes (in 1926).
The '''Pacific Northwest''' (in the United States, commonly abbreviated as '''PNW'''), sometimes referred to as '''Cascadia''', is a geographic  region and megaregion in western North America bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the west and loosely, by the Rocky Mountains on the east.
As of the first decade of the 21st century, many Asians were moving out and into middle class suburbs, though some would voice concern about preserving historical communities particularly in Vancouver.
Some areas were home to mobile and egalitarian societies.
In British Columbia and Southeast Alaska, the Tlingit and Haida erected large and elaborately carved totem poles that have become iconic of Pacific Northwest artistic traditions.
In 1579 the British captain and erstwhile privateer Francis Drake sailed up the west coast of North America perhaps as far as Oregon before returning south to land and make ship repairs.
the Apple Cup (named so because of Washington's notoriety for apple production) and the Oregon-Oregon State game a.k.a.
Most of the population of the Pacific Northwest is concentrated in the Portland–Seattle–Vancouver corridor.
Sometimes the Pacific Northwest is defined as being the Northwestern United States, wholly in the United States.
Similarly, according to the 2011 National Household Survey, 44% of British Columbia residents reported no religion.
In addition to all this the region has its own representative non-FIFA team which joined the N.F.-Board officially in 2013 to participate in friendlies and the VIVA World Cup.
Definitions of the Pacific Northwest region vary, and there is no commonly agreed-upon boundary, even among Pacific Northwesterners.
Maritime fur trader Charles William Barkley also visited the area in the ''Imperial Eagle'', a British ship falsely flying the flag of the Austrian Empire.
Many jurisdictions have relatively liberal abortion laws, gender equality laws, legal cannabis, and strong LGBT rights, especially British Columbia, where gay marriage has been legal since 2003, Washington, where it has been legal since 2012, and Oregon, where same-sex marriage was made legal in May 2014.
