Nevertheless, it is both fictional and comical, and though it offers a pragmatic opposition to the destructiveness of war, its message seems to stem from frustration with the existing conflict (then in its twentieth year) rather than from a philosophical position against violence or war.
These included the French politician Duc de Sully, the philosophers Émeric Crucé and the Abbe de Saint-Pierre, and the English Quakers William Penn and John Bellers.
Pacifist churches vary on whether physical force can ever be justified in self-defense or protecting others, as many adhere strictly to nonresistance when confronted by violence.
The Quakers were prominent advocates of pacifism, who as early as 1660 had repudiated violence in all forms and adhered to a strictly pacifist interpretation of Christianity.
Anti-war and "pacifist" political parties seeking to win elections may moderate their demands, calling for de-escalation or major arms reduction rather than the outright disarmament which is advocated by many pacifists.
"Dove" or "dovish" are informal terms used, especially in politics, for people who prefer to avoid war or prefer war as a last resort.
The United States government allowed sincere objectors to serve in noncombatant military roles.
During the Warring States period, the pacifist Mohist School opposed aggressive war between the feudal states.
After the war, the Trocmés were declared Righteous Among the Nations.
They believe that the answer of hate should be given by love.
South African Bishop Desmond Tutu is the most prominent Anglican pacifist.
The first peace movements appeared in 1815–16.
The London Peace Society (also known as the Society for the Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace) was formed in 1816 to promote permanent and universal peace by the philanthropist William Allen.
Adolf Hitler told the British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax in 1937 that the British should "shoot Gandhi, and if this doesn't suffice to reduce them to submission, shoot a dozen leading members of the Congress, and if that doesn't suffice shoot 200, and so on, as you make it clear that you mean business."
In 1998 the Third Pre-conciliar Pan-Orthodox Conference drew up a text on "the contribution of the Orthodox Church to the achievement of peace" emphasizing respect for the human person and the inseparability of peace from justice.
Hermann Göring described, during an interview at the Nuremberg Trials, how denouncing and outlawing pacifism was an important part of the Nazis' seizure of power: "The people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders.
The Southern Baptist Convention has stated in the Baptist Faith and Message, "It is the duty of Christians to seek peace with all men on principles of righteousness.
Principled pacifism holds that at some point along the spectrum from war to interpersonal physical violence, such violence becomes morally wrong.
He considers that everyone has the right to use any means necessary to prevent deprivation of their civil liberties and force could be necessary.
They stated their beliefs in a declaration to King Charles II:
"If anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other also; and if anyone wants to sue you and take your coat, give your cloak as well&nbsp;... Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you."
Its effectiveness served as inspiration to Martin Luther King Jr., James Lawson, James Bevel, Thich Nhat Hanh and many others in the Civil Rights Movement.
Teichman's beliefs have been summarized by Brian Orend as "...&nbsp;A pacifist rejects war and believes there are no moral grounds which can justify resorting to war.
Within Roman Catholicism there has been a discernible move towards a more pacifist position through the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
Tolstoy's work inspired a movement named after him advocating pacifism to arise in Russia and elsewhere.
Pacifist ideals emerged from two strands of thought that coalesced at the end of the 18th century.
Equally fictional is the nonviolent protest of Hegetorides of Thasos.
King gave his famous speech at the Riverside Church in New York City in 1967, his first to publicly question the U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
Narveson claims that everyone has rights and corresponding responsibilities not to violate others' rights.
In 1918, The United States Congress passed the Sedition Act of 1918.
Throughout the many 18th century wars in which Britain participated, the Quakers maintained a principled commitment not to serve in the army and militia or even to pay the alternative £10 fine.
Many pacifists would argue that not only are there other ways to protect oneself but that some of those ways are far more effective than violence, and that physical harm is not the only variety that can be done.
On the level of society, Bahá'u'lláh promotes the principle of collective security, which does not abolish the use of force, but prescribes "a system in which Force is made the servant of Justice."
Mohandas K. Gandhi was a major political and spiritual leader of India, instrumental in the Indian independence movement.
In New Zealand, during the latter half of the 19th century British colonists used many tactics to confiscate land from the indigenous Māori, including warfare.
Forces which deterred the democracies from acting to stop Hitler early on and at a much, much lower cost in human life were pacifism, appeasement, and isolationism.
Others have interpreted the non-pacifist statements in the New Testament to be related to self-defense or to be metaphorical and state that on no occasion did Jesus shed blood or urge others to shed blood.
The peace movement began to grow in influence by the mid-nineteenth century.
In the United States, The National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund works to pass a national law to allow conscientious objectors to redirect their tax money to be used only for non-military purposes.
He was the pioneer of a brand of nonviolence (or ''ahimsa'') which he called ''satyagraha''—translated literally as "truth force".
The Taoist scripture "''Classic of Great Peace'' (''Taiping jing'')" foretells "the coming Age of Great Peace (''taiping'')."
The idea of collective security from the Bahá'í teachings states that if a government violates a fundamental norm of international law or provision of a future world constitution which Bahá'ís believe will be established by all nations, then the other governments should step in.
Other examples from this period include the 1986 People Power Revolution in the Philippines led by Cory Aquino, and the 1989 Tiananmen Square Protests which included the broadly publicized "Tank Man" incident.
Jay Beaman's thesis states that 13 of 21, or 62% of American Pentecostal groups formed by 1917 show evidence of being pacifist sometime in their history.
During World War II, pacifist leaders like Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy of the Catholic Worker Movement urged young Americans not to enlist in military service.
In Australia Peter Carnley similarly led a front of bishops opposed to the Government of Australia's involvement in the invasion of Iraq.
Economic sanctions were used against states that committed aggression, such as Italy when it invaded Abyssinia, but there was no will on the part of the principal League powers, Britain and France, to subordinate their interests to a multilateral process or to disarm at all themselves.
As a result, some six million people were exterminated by various means because the Nazis considered them Jews and therefore unworthy of life.
The Lemba religion of southern French Congo, along with its symbolic herb, is named for pacifism : "''lemba, lemba''" (peace, peace), describes the action of the plant ''lemba-lemba'' (''Brillantaisia patula T. Anders'').
In the 1870s and 1880s, Parihaka, then reputed to be the largest Māori village in New Zealand, became the centre of a major campaign of non-violent resistance to European occupation of confiscated land in the area.
In Ancient Greece, pacifism seems not to have existed except as a broad moral guideline against violence between individuals.
The League of Nations also convened several disarmament conferences in the inter-war period such as the Geneva Conference.
Narveson then discusses how rational persuasion is a good but often inadequate method of discouraging an aggressor.
("Lay Down Your Arms!")
Many pacifists who would be conscientious objectors to military service are also opposed to paying taxes to fund the military.
The Greek Orthodox Church also tends towards pacifism, though it has accepted defensive warfare through most of its history.
Pacifism may be based on moral principles (a deontological view) or pragmatism (a consequentialist view).
The British pacifists Reginald Sorensen and C. J. Cadoux, while bitterly disappointed by the outbreak of war, nevertheless urged their fellow pacifists "not to obstruct the war effort".
Peace churches are Christian denominations explicitly advocating pacifism.
An absolute pacifist is generally described by the British Broadcasting Corporation as one who believes that human life is so valuable, that a human should never be killed and war should never be conducted, even in self-defense.
The organization was founded in 1941 in order to support Jewish conscientious objectors who sought exemption from combatant military service.
The term "historic peace churches" refers specifically to three church traditions: the Church of the Brethren, the Mennonites (and some other Anabaptists, such as Amish and Hutterites), and the Quakers (Religious Society of Friends).
The historic peace churches have, from their origins as far back as the 16th century, always taken the position that Jesus was himself a pacifist who explicitly taught and practiced pacifism, and that his followers must do likewise.
Dick Sheppard established the Peace Pledge Union in 1934 totally renouncing war and aggression.
Bohemian Bernard Bolzano (1781–1848) taught about the social waste of militarism and the needlessness of war.
In a sense the philosophy is based on the idea that the ends do not justify the means.
The United Methodist Church explicitly supports conscientious objection by its members "as an ethically valid position" while simultaneously allowing for differences of opinion and belief for those who do not object to military service.
In turn, this led to their almost complete annihilation in 1835 by invading Ngāti Mutunga and Ngāti Tama Māori from the Taranaki region of the North Island of New Zealand.
Unlike residents of many of the colonies, Quakers chose to trade peacefully with the Indians, including for land.
We believe that we can be consistent in serving our Government in certain noncombatant capacities, but not in the bearing of arms."
The concept of ahimsa grew gradually within Hinduism, one of the signs being the discouragement of ritual animal sacrifice.
His philosophy was cited as a major inspiration by Mohandas Gandhi, an Indian independence leader and pacifist who self-identified as an anarchist.
(For further information and sources see social defence.)
In hindsight, there were opportunities for a number of years to defeat Nazi Germany before it could build a military force strong enough to capture and kill most of the Jews of Europe.
In 1881 he convinced 2000 Maori to welcome battle-hardened British soldiers into their village and even offered food and drink.
However, in power, Greens often compromise.
Still more pacifists would argue that a nonviolent reaction may not save lives immediately but would in the long run.
As the threat from Nazi Germany increased in the 1930s, the Labour Party abandoned its pacifist position and supported re-armament, largely due to the efforts of Ernest Bevin and Hugh Dalton who by 1937 had also persuaded the party to oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement.
Pacifists have typically explained that verse as Jesus fulfilling prophecy, since in the next verse, Jesus continues to say: "It is written: 'And he was numbered with the transgressors'; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me.
The British Labour Party had a strong pacifist wing in the early 1930s and between 1931 and 1935 was led by George Lansbury, a Christian pacifist who later chaired the No More War Movement and was president of the PPU.
Often pacifists would much rather take the physical harm inflicted by another rather than cause themselves emotional or psychological harm, not to mention harming the other.
In 1958 British activists formed the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament with Bertrand Russell as its president.
Even the communist-controlled American Peace Mobilization reversed its anti-war activism once Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941.
War, for the pacifist, is always wrong."
Violence is the last option only to be used to protect religion and one's own life in extreme situations of persecution.
In response to the threat of fascism, some pacifist thinkers, such as Richard B. Gregg, devised plans for a campaign of nonviolent resistance in the event of a fascist invasion or takeover.
He is remembered as a great leader because the "passive resistance" he practiced prevented British massacres and even protected far more land than violent resistance.
"Labour's official position, however, although based on the aspiration towards a world socialist commonwealth and the outlawing of war, did not imply a renunciation of force under all circumstances, but rather support for the ill-defined concept of 'collective security' under the League of Nations.
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith abolished holy war and emphasized its abolition as a central teaching of his faith.
This enabled the Moriori to preserve what limited resources they had in their harsh climate, avoiding waste through warfare.
The ensuing debate among prominent internationalists modified Holt's plan to align it more closely with proposals offered in Great Britain by Viscount James Bryce, a former ambassador from the U.K. to the U.S.
The invading Māori killed, enslaved and cannibalised the Moriori.
In the twentieth century there was a notable trend among prominent Roman Catholics towards pacifism.
In 1915 the League of Nations Society was formed by British liberal leaders to promote a strong international organisation that could enforce the peaceful resolution of conflict.
Shortly before the outbreak of war, British writers such as E. M. Forster, Leonard Woolf, David Garnett and Storm Jameson all rejected their earlier pacifism and endorsed military action against Nazism.
Although the onset of the First World War was generally greeted with enthusiastic patriotism across Europe, peace groups were still active in condemning the war.
The book was a major early influence on Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869–1948), and the two engaged in regular correspondence while Gandhi was active in South Africa.
The founder of this religion Rael has said "''The one holding the weapon is as responsible as the one giving the orders''".
Japanese, Italian and Nazi aggression that precipitated World War II often is cited as an argument against pacifism.
Many leaders and participants in such movements, while recognizing the importance of using non-violent methods in particular circumstances, have not been absolute pacifists.
It can also help people to think more creatively and find more effective ways to stop violence without more violence.
On the European continent, wracked by social upheaval, the first peace congress was held in Brussels in 1848 followed by Paris a year later.
The French socialist pacifist leader Jean Jaurès was assassinated by a nationalist fanatic on July 31, 1914.
A devout Buddhist, Suu Kyi won the Rafto Prize and the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought in 1990 and in 1991 was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her peaceful and non-violent struggle under a repressive military dictatorship.
Aung San Suu Kyi is a Buddhist nonviolent pro-democracy activist and leader of the National League for Democracy in Myanmar (Burma), who became State Counsellor (similar to prime minister) of Myanmar in April 2016.
The idea of collective security was also popular; instead of outright pacifism the public generally exhibited a determination to stand up to aggression, but preferably with the use of economic sanctions and multilateral negotiations.
It is further claimed that such a pacifist could logically argue that violence leads to more undesirable results than non-violence.
After experiencing a recession in support due to the resurgence of militarism during the American Civil War and Crimean War, the movement began to spread across Europe and began to infiltrate the new working class socialist movements.
Austrian farmer Franz Jägerstätter was executed in 1943 for refusing to serve in the Wehrmacht.
Others support destruction of property in such emergencies or for conducting symbolic acts of resistance like pouring red paint to represent blood on the outside of military recruiting offices or entering air force bases and hammering on military aircraft.
With the start of World War II, pacifist and anti-war sentiment declined in nations affected by war.
He argued that anarchism must by nature be nonviolent since it is, by definition, opposition to coercion and force and since the state is inherently violent, meaningful pacifism must likewise be anarchistic.
Pacifists may argue that military action could be justified should it subsequently advance the general cause of peace.
Euripides also expressed strong anti-war ideas in his work, especially ''The Trojan Women''.
In 1949, the abolition of the military was introduced in Article 12 of the Costa Rican constitution.
The attitude of Jews toward pacifism, as with most other aspects of religion, is heavily influenced by the Holocaust which was a program of Nazi Germany to murder every man, woman and child who was Jewish as well as people of other religions who had a Jewish grandparent.
During the periods between World Wars I and World War II, pacifist literature and public advocacy was banned in Italy under Benito Mussolini, Germany after the rise of Adolf Hitler,
The principle is described as difficult to abide by consistently, due to violence not being available as a tool to aid a person who is being harmed or killed.
Richard became the secretary of the Peace Society in 1850 on a full-time basis, a position which he would keep for the next 40 years, earning himself a reputation as the 'Apostle of Peace'.
Pacifists generally reject theories of Just War.
Representatives of the former, included Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in ''Extrait du Projet de Paix Perpetuelle de Monsieur l'Abbe Saint-Pierre'' (1756), Immanuel Kant, in his ''Thoughts on Perpetual Peace'' and Jeremy Bentham who proposed the formation of a peace association in 1789.
Advocacy of pacifism can be found far back in history and literature.
However, the Bahá'í Faith does not have an absolute pacifistic position.
The Moriori, of the Chatham Islands, practiced pacifism by order of their ancestor Nunuku-whenua.
The humanist writer Desiderius Erasmus was one of the most outspoken pacifists of the Renaissance, arguing strongly against warfare in his essays ''The Praise of Folly'' (1509) and ''The Complaint of Peace'' (1517).
He helped secure one of the earliest victories for the peace movement by securing a commitment from the Great Powers in the Treaty of Paris (1856) at the end of the Crimean War, in favour of arbitration.
In the United States the first such movement was the New York Peace Society, founded in 1815 by the theologian David Low Dodge, and the Massachusetts Peace Society.
Following the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, French pacifist René Gérin (1892–1957) urged support for the Spanish Republic.
In light of the common criticism of pacifism as not offering a clear alternative policy, one approach to finding "more effective ways" has been the attempt to develop the idea of "defence by civil resistance", also called "social defence".
On December 1, 1948, President José Figueres Ferrer of Costa Rica abolished the Costa Rican military.
These and other initiatives were pivotal in the change in attitudes that gave birth to the League of Nations after the war.
In the sermon Jesus stated that one should "not resist an evildoer" and promoted his turn the other cheek philosophy.
Aristophanes, in his play Lysistrata, creates the scenario of an Athenian woman's anti-war sex strike during the Peloponnesian War of 431–404 BC, and the play has gained an international reputation for its anti-war message.
A debate at the University of Oxford in 1933 on the motion 'one must fight for King and country' captured the changed mood when the motion was resoundingly defeated.
The United Pentecostal Church, the largest Apostolic/Oneness denomination, takes an official stand of conscientious objection: its Articles of Faith read, "We are constrained to declare against participating in combatant service in war, armed insurrection&nbsp;... aiding or abetting in or the actual destruction of human life.
However, some pacifists, such as the Christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy and autarchist Robert LeFevre, consider the state a form of warfare.
Later that year the League to Enforce Peace was established in America to promote similar goals.
Likewise in Cabinda, "''Lemba'' is the spirit of peace, as its name indicates."
The National Peace Council was founded in after the 17th Universal Peace Congress in London (July August 1908).
Mohandas Gandhi (1869–1948) propounded the practice of steadfast nonviolent opposition which he called "satyagraha", instrumental in its role in the Indian Independence Movement.
However, those draft resisters who refused any cooperation with the war effort often spent much of each war in federal prisons.
He urged a total reform of the educational, social, and economic systems that would direct the nation's interests toward peace rather than toward armed conflict between nations.
The ''Taiping Jing'' advocates "a world full of peace".
Historians of pacifism Peter Brock and Thomas Paul Socknat define pacifism "in the sense generally accepted in English-speaking areas" as "an unconditional rejection of all forms of warfare".
Pacifism and revulsion with war were very popular sentiments in 1920s Britain.
"These heretics are worse than the saracens" exclaimed Pope Innocent III, and on March 10, 1208, after the murder of the papal legate Pierre de Castelnau, probably by Raymond VI, Count of Toulouse, the pope took full advantage of it and proclaimed a crusade against a sect in southern France.
The national parties in the Second International increasingly supported their respective nations in war and the International was dissolved in 1916.
The immense loss of life during the war, for what became regarded as futile reasons, caused a sea-change in public attitudes to militarism.
After the end of the war, it was discovered that "The Black Book" or ''Sonderfahndungsliste G.B.''
Some European governments like Switzerland, Greece, Norway and Germany offer civilian service.
Philosopher Jenny Teichman defines the main form of pacifism as "anti-warism", the rejection of all forms of warfare.
The Cathars were actually branded heretics, persecuted, and eventually annihilated by the Catholic Church through the Albigensian Crusade and the Inquisition that followed.
The acceptance of violence for any reason makes it easier to use in other situations.
The small Neturei Karta group of anti-Zionist, ultra-orthodox Jews, supposedly take a pacifist line, saying that "Jews are not allowed to dominate, kill, harm or demean another people and are not allowed to have anything to do with the Zionist enterprise, their political meddling and their wars.".
The Nobel prize winning great poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was also an Indian, gave him the honorific  "Mahatma", usually translated "Great Soul."
Although all pacifists are opposed to war between nation states, there have been occasions where pacifists have supported military conflict in the case of civil war or revolution.
In the 1960s, some pacifists associated with the New Left supported wars of national liberation and supported groups such as the Viet Cong and the Algerian FLN, arguing peaceful attempts to liberate such nations were no longer viable, and war was thus the only option.
It became an active organization, holding regular weekly meetings, and producing literature which was spread as far as Gibraltar and Malta, describing the horrors of war and advocating pacificism on Christian grounds.
Sometimes, as with the civil rights movement's march from Selma to Montgomery in 1965, they have called for armed protection.
The controversial democratic peace theory holds that liberal democracies have never (or rarely) made war on one another and that lesser conflicts and internal violence are rare between and within democracies.
For example, either violent rebellion, or foreign nations sending in troops to end a dictator's violent oppression may save millions of lives, even if many thousands died in the war.
However, even during periods of peace, many pacifists still refuse to register for or report for military duty, risking criminal charges.
The congress decided on two aims: the ideal of peaceable arbitration in the affairs of nations and the creation of an international institution to achieve that.
in 1889 and founded an Austrian pacifist organization in 1891.
Fear of losing power corrupts those who wield it and fear of the scourge of power corrupts those who are subject to it."
Throughout history many have understood Jesus of Nazareth to have been a pacifist, drawing on his Sermon on the Mount.
list of Britons to be arrested in the event of a Nazi invasion of the UK included three active pacifists; Vera Brittain, Sybil Thorndike and Aldous Huxley (who had left the country).
Narveson said that "the prevention of infractions of that right is precisely what one has a right to when one has a right at all".
But all agree that violence on behalf of a country or a government is prohibited for Christians.
In modern times, interest was revived by Leo Tolstoy in his late works, particularly in ''The Kingdom of God Is Within You''.
Many of its early members were imprisoned for their opposition to conscription.
The German Greens in the cabinet of Social Democrat Gerhard Schröder supported an intervention by German troops in Afghanistan in 2001 if that they hosted the peace conference in Berlin.
Lansbury was eventually persuaded to resign as Labour leader by the non-pacifist wing of the party and was replaced by Clement Attlee.
The interconnections between civil resistance and factors of force are numerous and complex.
One Māori leader, Te Whiti-o-Rongomai, inspired warriors to stand up for their rights without using weapons, which had led to defeat in the past.
Jeannette Rankin, the first woman elected to Congress, was another fierce advocate of pacifism, the only person to vote no to America's entrance into both World Wars.
Bertrand Russell argued that the necessity of defeating Adolf Hitler and the Nazis was a unique circumstance where war was not the worst of the possible evils; he called his position ''relative pacifism''.
Killing any person, no matter what crime he may have committed, is considered unimaginably terrible.
Pacifists in the Third Reich were dealt with harshly; German pacifist Carl von Ossietzky, and Olaf Kullmann, a Norwegian pacifist active during the Nazi occupation, were both imprisoned in concentration camps and died as a result of their mistreatment there.
One such instance portrays an angry Jesus driving dishonest market traders from the temple.
The text states in part: "Orthodoxy condemns war in general, for she regards it as a consequence of the evil and sin in the world."
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, said that in contrary to the current views, Islam ''does not allow the use of sword in religion, except in the case of defensive wars, wars waged to punish a tyrant, or those meant to uphold freedom''.
For example, Bahá'ís are advised to do social service instead of active army service, but when this is not possible because of obligations in certain countries, the Bahá'í law of ''loyalty to one's government'' is preferred and the individual should perform the army service.
Other Rael statements include "''even if the Elohim asked them to kill someone they should refuse''".
It holds positions similar to APF, and the two organisations are known to work together on ecumenical projects.
They took this belief into action by using their famed defensive strategies to defend smaller states from invasion from larger states, hoping to dissuade feudal lords from costly warfare.
Organisations formed in this period included the War Resisters' International the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, the No More War Movement and the Peace Pledge Union (PPU).
There were conscientious objectors and war tax resisters in both World War I and World War II.
The Catholic Worker Movement is concerned with both social justice and pacifist issues, and voiced consistent opposition to the Spanish Civil War and World War II.
However, the Neturei Karta group do support groups such as Hezbollah and Hamas that are violent towards Israel.
Some of the many groups that protested against the war, as well as the traditional peace churches, were the Woman's Peace Party (which was organized in 1915 and led by noted reformer Jane Addams), the International Committee of Women for Permanent Peace (ICWPP) (also organized in 1915), the American Union Against Militarism, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and the American Friends Service Committee.
This means that such groups refuse to participate in government office or serve under an oath to a government.
Pacifism was widely associated with the much publicized image of Tiananmen Square Protests of 1989 with the "Tank Man", where one protester stood in nonviolent opposition to a column of tanks.
For instance, during the American Civil War, both the American Peace Society and some former members of the Non-Resistance Society supported the Union's military campaign, arguing they were carrying out a "police action" against the Confederacy, whose act of Secession they regarded as criminal.
From the 16th to the 18th centuries, a number of thinkers devised plans for an international organisation that would promote peace, and reduce or even eliminate the occurrence of war.
For example, the ''Three Strategies of Huang Shigong'' says: "As for the military, it is not an auspicious instrument; it is the way of heaven to despise it", and the ''Wei Liaozi'' writes: "As for the military, it is an inauspicious instrument; as for conflict and contention, it runs counter to virtue".
Roy Bourgeois in 1990 and uses strictly pacifist principles to protest the training of Latin American military officers by United States Army officers at the School of the Americas in the state of Georgia.
It is affiliated to the International Fellowship of Reconciliation.
Learning and committing to pacifism helps to send a message that violence is, in fact, not the most effective way.
The League of Nations attempted to play its role of ensuring world peace in the 1920s and 30s, although with the increasingly revisionist and aggressive behaviour of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and Imperial Japan, it ultimately failed to maintain such a world order.
