One study found that eight days after amputation, 72 percent of patients had phantom limb pain, and six months later, 65 percent reported it.
Pain-related activity in the thalamus spreads to the insular cortex (thought to embody, among other things, the feeling that distinguishes pain from other homeostatic emotions such as itch and nausea) and anterior cingulate cortex (thought to embody, among other things, the affective/motivational element, the unpleasantness of pain).
Another theory that came to prominence in the 18th and 19th centuries was intensive theory, which conceived of pain not as a unique sensory modality, but an emotional state produced by stronger than normal stimuli such as intense light, pressure or temperature.
Indifference to pain can also rarely be present from birth; these people have normal nerves on medical investigations, and find pain unpleasant, but do not avoid repetition of the pain stimulus.
People with congenital insensitivity to pain have reduced life expectancy.
The characteristics of breakthrough cancer pain vary from person to person and according to the cause.
Pain is a symptom of many medical conditions.
Many people fear the stigma of addiction and avoid pain treatment so as not to be prescribed potentially addicting drugs.
Some amputees experience continuous pain that varies in intensity or quality; others experience several bouts a day, or it may occur only once every week or two.
It&nbsp;is&nbsp;an important part of animal life, vital to healthy survival.
To argue why that red flag might be insufficient, Dawkins explains that drives must compete with each other within living beings.
Bernard Rollin of Colorado State University, the principal author of two U.S. federal laws regulating pain relief for animals, writes that researchers remained unsure into the 1980s as to whether animals experience pain, and that veterinarians trained in the U.S. before 1989 were simply taught to ignore animal pain.
Specificity theory saw pain as "a specific sensation, with its own sensory apparatus independent of touch and other senses".
Several epidemiological studies from different countries have reported widely varying prevalence rates for chronic pain, ranging from 12 to 80% of the population.
In vertebrates, endogenous opioids are neuromodulators that moderate pain by interacting with opioid receptors.
Sexual differences can be the result of social and cultural expectations, with women expected to be emotional and show pain and men stoic, keeping pain to themselves.
Gender can also be a factor in reporting pain.
Before reaching the brain, the spinothalamic tract splits into the lateral, neospinothalamic tract and the medial, paleospinothalamic tract.
Depression may also keep the older adult from reporting they are in pain.
To assess intensity, the patient may be asked to locate their pain on a scale of 0&nbsp;to&nbsp;10, with 0 being no pain at all, and 10 the worst pain they have ever felt.
Self-esteem, often low in chronic pain patients, also shows improvement once pain has resolved.
However other reviews have found benefit.
They may feel certain pain treatment is against their religion.
One area where assessments of pain are effectively required to be made is in legal awards for pain and suffering.
Religious beliefs may prevent the individual from seeking help.
Pain that lasts a long time is called ''chronic'' or persistent, and pain that resolves quickly is called ''acute''.
Mirror box therapy produces the illusion of movement and touch in a phantom limb which in turn may cause a reduction in pain.
(p.&nbsp;432) The paper ends with a call to action: "Pain can be treated not only by trying to cut down the sensory input by anesthetic block, surgical intervention and the like, but also by influencing the motivational-affective and cognitive factors as well."
More generally, it is often as a part of pain in the broad sense, i.e.
It is possible for many chronic pain sufferers to become so absorbed in an activity or entertainment that the pain is no longer felt, or is greatly diminished.
It is a type of neuropathic pain.
About 35% of people report marked relief after receiving a saline injection they believe to have been morphine.
The most common categories are "thermal" (e.g.
Onset may be immediate or may not occur until years after the disabling injury.
The examples represent respectively the three classes of nociceptive pain – mechanical, thermal and chemical – and neuropathic pain.
Philosophy of pain is a branch of philosophy of mind that deals essentially with physical pain, especially in connection with such views as dualism, identity theory, and functionalism.
Phantom limb pain may accompany urination or defecation.
In some cultures, extreme practices such as mortification of the flesh or painful rites of passage are highly regarded.
perhaps some forms of toothache, or injury to fingernails).
Patients experiencing pain may exhibit withdrawn social behavior and possibly experience a decreased appetite and decreased nutritional intake.
Physical pain is an important political topic in relation to various issues, including pain management policy, drug control, animal rights or animal welfare, torture, and pain compliance.
In patients who possess language but are incapable of expressing themselves effectively, such as those with dementia, an increase in confusion or display of aggressive behaviors or agitation may signal that discomfort exists, and further assessment is necessary.
The relative intensities of pain, then, may resemble the relative importance of that risk to our ancestors (lack of food, too much cold, or serious injuries are felt as agony, whereas minor damage is felt as mere discomfort).
People with diabetes-related nerve damage, for instance, sustain poorly-healing foot ulcers as a result of decreased sensation.
Carbone writes that the view that animals feel pain differently is now a minority view.
suffering, that physical pain is dealt with in culture, religion, philosophy, or society.
This phantom body pain is initially described as burning or tingling but may evolve into severe crushing or pinching pain, or the sensation of fire running down the legs or of a knife twisting in the flesh.
Analysis of MPI results by Turk and Rudy (1988) found three classes of chronic pain patient: "(a) dysfunctional, people who perceived the severity of their pain to be high, reported that pain interfered with much of their lives, reported a higher degree of psychological distress caused by pain, and reported low levels of activity; (b) interpersonally distressed, people with a common perception that significant others were not very supportive of their pain problems; and (c) adaptive copers, patients who reported high levels of social support, relatively low levels of pain and perceived interference, and relatively high levels of activity."
Psychological factors such as social support, hypnotic suggestion, excitement, or distraction can significantly affect pain's intensity or unpleasantness.
Simple pain medications are useful in 20% to 70% of cases.
Examples of injuries that produce superficial somatic pain include minor wounds and minor (first degree) burns.
A number of meta-analyses have found clinical hypnosis to be effective in controlling pain associated with diagnostic and surgical procedures in both adults and children, as well as pain associated with cancer and childbirth.
If the pain is continuous for a long period, parts of the intact body may become sensitized, so that touching them evokes pain in the phantom limb.
The intensity of chronic pain was higher for girls, and girls' reports of chronic pain increased markedly between ages 12 and 14.
In particular, there are no known nociceptors in groups such as plants, fungi, and most insects, except for instance in fruit flies.
also meaning "torment, hardship, suffering") and that from Greek ποινή (''poine''), generally meaning "price paid, penalty, punishment".
When long-term pain is relieved by therapeutic intervention, scores on the neurotic triad and anxiety fall, often to normal levels.
Local anesthetic injections into the nerves or sensitive areas of the stump may relieve pain for days, weeks, or sometimes permanently, despite the drug wearing off in a matter of hours; and small injections of hypertonic saline into the soft tissue between vertebrae produces local pain that radiates into the phantom limb for ten minutes or so and may be followed by hours, weeks or even longer of partial or total relief from phantom pain.
A person's self-report is the most reliable measure of pain.
Sugar taken orally reduces the total crying time but not the duration of the first cry in newborns undergoing a painful procedure (a single lancing of the heel).
Breakthrough pain is transitory acute pain that comes on suddenly and is not alleviated by the patient's regular pain management.
A definition of pain widely employed in nursing, emphasizing its subjective nature and the importance of believing patient reports, was introduced by Margo McCaffery in 1968: "Pain is whatever the experiencing person says it is, existing whenever he says it does".More recently, McCaffery defined pain as "whatever the experiencing person says it is, existing whenever the experiencing person says it does."
Another 20th-century theory was gate control theory, introduced by Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall in the 1965 ''Science'' article "Pain Mechanisms: A New Theory".
The most fit creature would be the one whose pains are well balanced.
Phantom limb pain is a common experience of amputees.
The International Association for the Study of Pain advocates that the relief of pain should be recognized as a human right, that chronic pain should be considered a disease in its own right, and that pain medicine should have the full status of a specialty.
iodine in a cut or chemicals released during inflammation).
A change in condition that deviates from baseline such as moaning with movement or when manipulating a body part, and limited range of motion are also potential pain indicators.
For instance, the way in which one experiences and responds to pain is related to sociocultural characteristics, such as gender, ethnicity, and age.
For example, chest pain described as extreme heaviness may indicate myocardial infarction, while chest pain described as tearing may indicate aortic dissection.
Many Asians do not want to lose respect in society by admitting they are in pain and need help, believing the pain should be borne in silence, while other cultures feel they should report pain right away and get immediate relief.
Experimental subjects challenged by acute pain and patients in chronic pain experience impairments in attention control, working memory, mental flexibility, problem solving, and information processing speed.
However, after a series of clinical observations by Henry Head and experiments by Max von Frey, the psychologists migrated to specificity almost en masse, and by century's end, most textbooks on physiology and psychology were presenting pain specificity as fact.
Their ability to recognize pain may be blunted by illness or the use of multiple prescription drugs.
Thus, excitement in games or war appears to block both dimensions of pain, while suggestion and placebos may modulate the affective-motivational dimension and leave the sensory-discriminative dimension relatively undisturbed."
In 1644, René Descartes theorized that pain was a disturbance that passed down along nerve fibers until the disturbance reached the brain, a development that transformed the perception of pain from a spiritual, mystical experience to a physical, mechanical sensation .
Other spinal cord fibers, known as wide dynamic range neurons, respond to A-delta and C fibers, but also to the large A-beta fibers that carry touch, pressure and vibration signals.
In some arguments put forth in physician-assisted suicide or euthanasia debates, pain has been used as an argument to permit terminally ill patients to end their lives.
However, specialists consider that it is no less actual or hurtful than pain from any other source.
A very rare syndrome with isolated congenital insensitivity to pain has been linked with mutations in the ''SCN9A'' gene, which codes for a sodium channel (Nav1.7) necessary in conducting pain nerve stimuli.
The presence of pain in an animal cannot be known for certain, but it can be inferred through physical and behavioral reactions.
Hedonic adaptation means that actual long-term suffering due to physical illness is often much lower than expected.
The authors concluded that "although the findings provide support for the general applicability of hypnosis in the treatment of chronic pain, considerably more research will be needed to fully determine the effects of hypnosis for different chronic-pain conditions."
Nociceptive pain is caused by stimulation of sensory nerve fibers that respond to stimuli approaching or exceeding harmful intensity (nociceptors), and may be classified according to the mode of noxious stimulation.
The ability of invertebrate species of animals, such as insects, to feel pain and suffering is also unclear.
By the mid-1890s, specificity was backed mostly by physiologists and physicians, and the intensive theory was mostly backed by psychologists.
First attested in English in 1297, the word ''peyn'' comes from the Old French ''peine'', in turn from Latin ''poena'' meaning "punishment, penalty" (in L.L.
Placebos are more effective in intense pain than mild pain; and they produce progressively weaker effects with repeated administration.
Such patients report that they have pain but are not bothered by it; they recognize the sensation of pain but suffer little, or not at all.
Sufferers are often stigmatized, because both medical professionals and the general public tend to think that pain from a psychological source is not "real".
''Visceral pain'' is diffuse, difficult to locate and often referred to a distant, usually superficial, structure.
Acute and chronic pain are also associated with increased depression, anxiety, fear, and anger.
Peripheral neuropathic pain is often described as "burning", "tingling", "electrical", "stabbing", or "pins and needles".
The result is often glitches in animals, including supernormal stimuli.
fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, tension type headache, etc.
Incident pain is pain that arises as a result of activity, such as movement of an arthritic joint, stretching a wound, etc.
Some die before adulthood, and others have a reduced life expectancy.
Pain motivates the individual to withdraw from damaging situations, to protect a damaged body part while it heals, and to avoid similar experiences in the future.
Additionally, there is tentative evidence for a few herbal medicines.
Pain is the most common reason for physician consultation in most developed countries.
And Italian women tolerate less intense electric shock than Jewish or Native American women.
Decline in self-care activities (dressing, grooming, walking, etc.)
They may not want others to see them as weak, or may feel there is something impolite or shameful in complaining about pain, or they may feel the pain is deserved punishment for past transgressions.
Because the A-delta fiber is thicker than the C fiber, and is thinly sheathed in an electrically insulating material (myelin), it carries its signal faster (5–30&nbsp;m/s) than the unmyelinated C fiber (0.5–2&nbsp;m/s).
Traditionally, the distinction between ''acute'' and ''chronic'' pain has relied upon an arbitrary interval of time from onset; the two most commonly used markers being 3 months and 6 months since the onset of pain, though some theorists and researchers have placed the transition from acute to chronic pain at 12 months.
'''Pain''' is a distressing feeling often caused by intense or damaging stimuli, such as stubbing a toe or burning a finger.
People with long-term pain frequently display psychological disturbance, with elevated scores on the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory scales of hysteria, depression and hypochondriasis (the "neurotic triad").
Management of chronic pain, however, is much more difficult and may require the coordinated efforts of a pain management team, which typically includes medical practitioners, clinical psychologists, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners.
''Superficial'' pain is initiated by activation of nociceptors in the skin or other superficial tissue, and is sharp, well-defined and clearly located.
When a person is non-verbal and cannot self-report pain, observation becomes critical, and specific behaviors can be monitored as pain indicators.
Caffeine when added to pain medications provides some additional benefit.
These conditions feature decreased sensitivity to pain together with other neurological abnormalities, particularly of the autonomic nervous system.
Differences in pain perception and tolerance thresholds are associated with, among other factors, ethnicity, genetics, and sex.
Pain that is distinctly located also activates primary and secondary somatosensory cortex.
and "chemical" (e.g.
There were several competing early theories of pain among the ancient Greeks: Hippocrates believed that it was due to an imbalance in vital fluids.
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) is likely also effective in the treatment of chronic pain.
Combining the MPI characterization of the person with their IASP five-category pain profile is recommended for deriving the most useful case description.
Veterinary medicine uses, for actual or potential animal pain, the same analgesics and anesthetics as used in humans.
Some investigators have argued that it is this neuroticism that causes acute pain to turn chronic, but clinical evidence points the other way, to chronic pain causing neuroticism.
African and Hispanic Americans are more likely than others to suffer needlessly in the hands of a physician; and women's pain is more likely to be undertreated than men's.
In medical diagnosis, pain is a symptom.
Sometimes pain arises in the absence of any detectable stimulus, damage or disease.
They theorized that pain intensity (the sensory discriminative dimension) and unpleasantness (the affective-motivational dimension) are not simply determined by the magnitude of the painful stimulus, but "higher" cognitive activities can influence perceived intensity and unpleasantness.
The second order fibers then cross the cord via the anterior white commissure and ascend in the spinothalamic tract.
Quality can be established by having the patient complete the McGill Pain Questionnaire indicating which words best describe their pain.
Those pains which mean certain death when ignored will become the most powerfully felt.
Examples include sprains and broken bones.
The prevalence of phantom pain in upper limb amputees is nearly 82%, and in lower limb amputees is 54%.
Inadequate treatment of pain is widespread throughout surgical wards, intensive care units, accident and emergency departments, in general practice, in the management of all forms of chronic pain including cancer pain, and in end of life care.
Visceral structures are highly sensitive to stretch, ischemia and inflammation, but relatively insensitive to other stimuli that normally evoke pain in other structures, such as burning and cutting.
Insensitivity to pain may also result from abnormalities in the nervous system.
It is a specialty only in China and Australia at this time.
Acute pain is usually managed with medications such as analgesics and anesthetics.
Pain is the most common reason for people to use complementary and alternative medicine.
It becomes more common as people approach death.
Paleospinothalamic neurons carry information from C fibers and terminate throughout the brain stem, a tenth of them in the thalamus and the rest in the medulla, pons and periaqueductal gray matter.
In 1955, DC Sinclair and G Weddell developed peripheral pattern theory, based on a 1934 suggestion by John Paul Nafe.
Others apply ''acute'' to pain that lasts less than 30 days, ''chronic'' to pain of more than six months' duration, and ''subacute'' to pain that lasts from one to six months.
This resemblance will not be perfect, however, because natural selection can be a poor designer.
As for other animals, plants, or other entities, their ability to feel physical pain is at present a question beyond scientific reach, since no mechanism is known by which they could have such a feeling.
A survey of 6,636 children (0–18 years of age) found that, of the 5,424 respondents, 54% had experienced pain in the preceding three months.
Phantom pain is pain felt in a part of the body that has been lost or from which the brain no longer receives signals.
A popular alternative definition of ''chronic pain'', involving no arbitrarily fixed durations, is "pain that extends beyond the expected period of healing".
The Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI) is a questionnaire designed to assess the psychosocial state of a person with chronic pain.
Suggestion can significantly affect pain intensity.
Sweet oral liquid moderately reduces the incidence and duration of crying caused by immunization injection in children between one and twelve months of age.
It does not moderate the effect of pain on heart rate and a recent single study found that sugar did not significantly affect pain-related electrical activity in the brains of newborns one second after the heel lance procedure.
Opioids and opioid receptors occur naturally in crustaceans and, although at present no certain conclusion can be drawn, their presence indicates that lobsters may be able to experience pain.
A 2007 review of 13 studies found evidence for the efficacy of hypnosis in the reduction of chronic pain in some conditions, though the number of patients enrolled in the studies was low, bringing up issues of power to detect group differences, and most lacked credible controls for placebo and/or expectation.
René Descartes for example argued that animals lack consciousness and therefore do not experience pain and suffering in the way that humans do.
In 1968 Ronald Melzack and Kenneth Casey described pain in terms of its three dimensions: "sensory-discriminative" (sense of the intensity, location, quality and duration of the pain), "affective-motivational" (unpleasantness and urge to escape the unpleasantness), and "cognitive-evaluative" (cognitions such as appraisal, cultural values, distraction and hypnotic suggestion).
Philosophers and scientists have responded to this difficulty in a variety of ways.
In his book, ''The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution'', biologist Richard Dawkins grapples with the question of why pain has to be so very painful.
These "first order" neurons enter the spinal cord via Lissauer's tract.
Cultural barriers can also keep a person from telling someone they are in pain.
An analysis of the 13 highest quality studies of pain treatment with acupuncture, published in January 2009, concluded there is little difference in the effect of real, sham and no acupuncture.
These A-delta and C fibers connect with "second order" nerve fibers in the central gelatinous substance of the spinal cord (laminae II and III of the dorsal horns).
Descartes's work, along with Avicenna's, prefigured the 19th-century development of specificity theory.
Children with this condition incur carelessly-repeated damage to their tongues, eyes, joints, skin, and muscles.
They may not report pain because they feel it is a sign that death is near.
Opioids may mediate their pain in the same way as in vertebrates.
There is interest in the relationship between vitamin D and pain, but the evidence so far from controlled trials for such a relationship, other than in osteomalacia, is unconvincing.
Most pain resolves once the noxious stimulus is removed and the body has healed, but it may persist despite removal of the stimulus and apparent healing of the body.
A study of 4,703 patients found that 26% had pain in the last two years of life, increasing to 46% in the last month.
Second order neospinothalamic tract neurons carry information from A-delta fibers and terminate at the ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus, where they connect with third order neurons of the somatosensory cortex.
Psychogenic pain, also called ''psychalgia'' or ''somatoform pain'', is pain caused, increased, or prolonged by mental, emotional, or behavioral factors.
Some nociceptors respond to more than one of these modalities and are consequently designated polymodal.
Elsewhere, pain medicine is a subspecialty under disciplines such as anesthesiology, physiatry, neurology, palliative medicine and psychiatry.
Most people with congenital insensitivity to pain have one of five hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (which includes familial dysautonomia and congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis).
Before the relatively recent discovery of neurons and their role in pain, various different body functions were proposed to account for pain.
Behaviors such as facial grimacing and guarding indicate pain, as well as an increase or decrease in vocalizations, changes in routine behavior patterns and mental status changes.
Pain is the main reason for visiting the emergency department in more than 50% of cases and is present in 30% of family practice visits.
In the 11th century, Avicenna theorized that there were a number of feeling senses including touch, pain and titillation.
The most reliable method for assessing pain in most humans is by asking a question: a person may report pain that cannot be detected by any known physiological measure.
This neglect is extended to all ages, from neonates to the frail elderly.
Headache, back pain, and stomach pain are sometimes diagnosed as psychogenic.
crushing, tearing, shearing, etc.)
of the pain will help the examining physician to accurately diagnose the problem.
A quarter reported having experienced recurrent or continuous pain for three months or more, and a third of these reported frequent and intense pain.
Specialists currently believe that all vertebrates can feel pain, and that certain invertebrates, like the octopus, might too.
Management of breakthrough pain can entail intensive use of opioids, including fentanyl.
Second order, spinal cord fibers dedicated to carrying A-delta fiber pain signals, and others that carry both A-delta and C fiber pain signals to the thalamus have been identified.
In his interactions with scientists and other veterinarians, he was regularly asked to "prove" that animals are conscious, and to provide "scientifically acceptable" grounds for claiming that they feel pain.
Such glitches help explain pains which are not, or at least no longer directly adaptive (e.g.
Pre-term babies are more sensitive to painful stimuli than full term babies.
It is common in cancer patients who often have background pain that is generally well-controlled by medications, but who also sometimes experience bouts of severe pain that from time to time "breaks through" the medication.
Because it is a complex, subjective phenomenon, defining pain has been a challenge.
However, like infants, animals cannot answer questions about whether they feel pain; thus the defining criterion for pain in humans cannot be applied to them.
heat or cold), "mechanical" (e.g.
In various contexts, the deliberate infliction of pain in the form of corporal punishment is used as retribution for an offence, or for the purpose of disciplining or reforming a wrongdoer, or to deter attitudes or behaviour deemed unacceptable.
Bumping the "funny bone" elicits acute peripheral neuropathic pain.
For instance, patients who experience painless heart attacks have higher pain thresholds for electric shock, muscle cramp and heat.
It may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting and may be described as sickening, deep, squeezing, and dull.
Pain evoked by the A-delta fibers is described as sharp and is felt first.
This "placebo" effect is more pronounced in people who are prone to anxiety, so anxiety reduction may account for some of the effect, but it does not account for all of it.
The experience of pain has many cultural dimensions.
Infants feel pain but they lack the language needed to report it, so communicate distress by crying.
fMRI brain scanning has been used to measure pain, giving good correlations with self-reported pain.
He describes the alternative as a simple, mental raising of a "red flag".
