Commercial venues may provide amenities such as bathrooms, picnic areas, lockers, equipment rentals, air refills and food service.
Occupied and active lanes hinder player movement as the player risks getting hit and eliminated.
Many fields enforce a modified minimum distance ''surrender rule''; a player who advances to within minimum range must offer his opponent the chance to surrender before shooting.
In Pennsylvania, paintball markers have transport requirements, cannot be used against anyone not participating in a paintball activity, and cannot be used for property damage.
Both major parties in Victoria have supported the changes.
Additionally, the use of paintball markers outside a regulated environment has caused concern.
If caught, "wipers" are generally called out of the game, and in recreational paintball may be ejected from the field for multiple instances of wiping.
Some variations of paintball don't count hits to the gun or the pod pack, or require multiple hits on the arms or legs.
A Speedball league is an organization that provides a regulated competition for Speedball players to compete.
Professional teams can have different names in different leagues due to franchising and sponsorship issues.
Tampering with the marker to increase muzzle velocity above 214 fps can lead to confiscation/destruction of the marker and a fine.
, tournaments are largely organized by paintball leagues.
In Western Australia they are considered a Category E(5) miscellaneous weapon.
Eventually, inflatable fabric "bunkers" were developed based on common obstacle shapes from previous fields, such as "snake" and "can" bunkers.
Player and team strategy varies depending on the size and layout of the field and the total number and experience level of players.
Typically, strategy is limited for casual walk-on style paintball play.
The use of plastic pipe tethered with stakes became common, as it allowed for relatively easy reconfiguration of fields and at least some impact-absorption, and was the precursor to the modern inflatable bunker (in fact, certain common features in inflatable fields, such as "can" and "snake" bunkers, were derived from similar features built with plastic drainage pipe).
In 2013, paintball has become relatively mainstream in Canada, with multiple commercial indoor paintball facilities located in most large cities across Canada, as well as a variety of outdoor style commercial paintball fields located in the countryside around the cities.
There are no license requirements or age limitations in place, but with the threat of the implementation of the "Dangerous Weapons Act", this could change.
Harry Kruger has operated a paintball venue known as "Capture the Flag" in Alberta since the late 1980s.
The sports of paintball has newly been introduced in Bangladesh in 2005.
Paintball is played at both commercial venues, which require paid admission, and private land; both of which may include multiple fields of varying size and layout.
* '''Overshooting''' – Fields may discourage players from ''overshooting'' (also regarded as ''bonus balling'', "ramping", "overkill", or ''lighting up''), which is to repeatedly shoot an opposing player after they are eliminated from the game.
Today India not only manufactures paintballs and other accessories, but also manufacturers professional markers that are exported across the globe.
The minimum age for a commercial venue is generally 10, although facilities exist with lower-powered guns for children of a younger age.
The minimum ages are 12 for South Australia and Western Australia, 15 for Queensland, 16 for New South Wales, Australian Capital Territory and Victoria.
Virginia is one of two states that permit its towns to adopt ordinances on paintball guns, allowing its local authorities to do so.
However, in December 2013, the Royal Malaysian Police stated that all paintball markers must be owned with a licence and owners must hand in their markers.
* '''Ramping''' – Ramping is a feature of many electronic markers, where after a certain number of rapid shots or upon a threshold rate-of-fire being achieved by the player, the gun will begin firing faster than the trigger is being pulled.
All Paintball markers sold officially in Germany must be certified by the government "Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt" (PTB) (Federal Physical and Technical Institute) to operate within these limits and must have a registered serial number and an official stamp on the firing mechanism.
Speedball, which tends to use small open fields with relatively few obstacles, requires each player to use hundreds of paintballs in the course of a game keeping their opponents pinned down, or else they'll be pinned themselves.
Fisticuffs in particular are dangerous not only to the participants but to all players on or off the field, and referees are generally trained to respond immediately and aggressively to stop the fight, and to eject and ban instigators of these fights.
A variety of different rules govern the legality of a hit, ranging from "anything counts" (hits cause elimination whether the paintball broke and left a mark or not) to the most common variation: the paintball must break and leave a mark the size of a US quarter or larger.
The most basic game rule is that players must attempt to accomplish a goal without being shot and marked with a paintball.
Paintball has spawned popular variants, including woodsball, which is played in the natural environment and spans across a large area.
Other times, FPO policies are in keeping with municipal laws for wastewater and runoff; paintballs contain food dyes, and some formulations have metallic flakes and/or cornstarch to make them more visible, all of which can pose problems in water reservoirs and treatment plants.
Though the game is not widespread and popular in the country, some number of the educated group of the population are being acquainted with paint-balling.
Hezbollah, the militant group and political party based in Lebanon, has trained with paintball.
Magazine-fed markers in standard .68 caliber paintball specs but with styling approximating powder firearms have been developed for MilSim games.
The Malaysian paintball community is considered the largest in Asia.
Thai teams have taken home the Division 1 Paintball Asia League Series (PALS) World Cup and series titles in year 2012, 2014, and 2015.
The minimum age to be in possession of a marker is seventeen, except in target shooting clubs or galleries, or on private property so long as projectiles are not fired beyond the premises.
Paintball technology is also used by military forces, law enforcement, para-military and security organizations to supplement military training, as well as playing a role in riot response, and non-lethal suppression of dangerous suspects.
In Northern Ireland all paintballs guns are classified as firearms and as such all gun owners needs to obtain a license from the PSNI (Police Service of Northern Ireland).
In Victoria they are now classified as a Category P firearm.
A second basic goal is to control as much of the field as possible, as early as possible, either by being the first to get to advantageous obstacles on the field or by quickly eliminating one or more opponents to reduce the number of directions each player has to watch for incoming paint.
The world's largest paintball company, some have around 37 paintball centers globally and provides movie themed fields complete with movie-quality props and structures.
Field operators may specify variations to this rule, such as requiring a tag to certain body locations only – such as the head and torso only.
A grey area of "splatter" often occurs when a paintball breaks on a nearby surface and that paint deflects onto the player; this usually does not count as a hit but it can be difficult to tell the difference between significant splatter and a genuine direct hit.
It is also considered overshooting if a player knew the opponent was eliminated but continued to shoot, disregarding the safety of the opposing player and risking dangerous injury to others.
Paintball is played with a potentially limitless variety of rules and variations, which are specified before the game begins.
In team paintball tournaments, more serious planned team tactics and strategy is seen throughout each game from the opening to the endgame.
They organize tournaments and events around the Asian region.
In Illinois, owners must be over the age of twelve and can only use their markers in private land or on safely constructed target ranges.
It is required that all players must wear protective mask as well and neck and chest protection.
They are an independent organisation which ensure the safety and quality of paintball venues and events in the UK.
With the growth of outsourcing and offshoring of IT companies, especially in New Delhi and Bangalore, paintball as a sport is being used as a tool for corporate training.
UKPSF accreditation ensures the venue meets the basic health and safety criteria of the UKPSF and has full public liability insurance.
The SARPL currently play PSP Race-to-2 format and use the PSP rule set as well as using APPA system for player classification.
South Africa has seen a steady growth of the sport of paintball since its introduction.
Owners do not require a license unless the marker fires above .
The game is regularly played at a sporting level with organized competition involving major tournaments, professional teams, and players.
In the Northern Territory they are considered a Class C firearm and private ownership is illegal.
Internationally, the Paintball Asia League Series(PALS) in Asia, the Millennium Series in western Europe, the Centurio series in Eastern Europe, and the National Collegiate Paintball Association in the US and Canada (A league was also created for high school and college players, the NCPA.
The penalties are also established by law, as 30 days of communitarian work or other modalities.
all paintball markers must be registered and licensed, the field must be in certain standards that is inspected by police in order to obtain the license for a paintball field.
The term is commonly used as a synonym for specialized scenario-based play, but it technically refers to virtually any form of paintball played in fields primarily composed of natural terrain and cover such as trees and berms, instead of manmade obstacles.
There are game rules that can be enforced depending on the venue, to ensure safety, balance the fairness of the game or eliminate cheating.
There are 6 divisions from division 5 to division 1 besides various professional  leagues.
A key element of intermediate and advanced strategy is the concept of "firing lanes".
The only legal enforcement regarding paintball is the concealment of paintball (and airsoft) guns in public areas.
The act of shooting a player at close range is colloquially called "bunkering"; it happens most often when a player uses covering fire to force his opponent behind the cover of a bunker, then advances on that bunker while still shooting to eliminate the opponent point-blank.
Players are generally prohibited from physically contacting other players, such as colliding with them, physically restraining them, and especially using fists, feet, protective gear or the markers themselves to hit other players.
The nature and timing of paintball events are specified by the league running the tournament, with the league also defining match rules – such as number of players per team (anywhere from 3-7 players per team), or acceptable equipment for use.
Bangalore hosts the Paintball Indian open every year in which teams come from all over the world to compete for the championship.
Tournament rules can vary as specified by the league, but may include for example – not allowing players to use devices to communicate with other persons during a game, or not allowing players to unduly alter the layout of terrain on the field.
The particular goal of the game is determined before play begins; examples include ''capture the flag'' or ''Elimination''.
In Australia, the sport attracted criticism when a 39-year-old man playing at a registered field in Victoria died of a suspected heart attack, after being struck in the chest.
Paintball is governed by the local Gardaí in the Republic of Ireland.
The Markers used are usually more "High Tech" in a sense that they are controlled by an electronic board and have very high rates of fire(upwards to 20 ball per second).
However, in 2014 in the UK, one company advertised and hired a Human Bullet Tester.
To promote the sport, PALS & TPCI joined with the Sports Authority of India in 2007 and trained several unemployed youth, who run more than 200 paintball fields across India today.
Games can be played on indoor or outdoor fields of varying sizes.
Open fields with sparse cover often have long open lanes between most or all bunkers on the field, most of which will be occupied if not active and so players have to keep track of which lanes to and from their bunker become occupied by the other team, so the player can make sure the bunker is between himself and the opponent(s).
In 2007, paintball training was engaged in by five terrorists to prepare for an attack aimed at killing American soldiers in Fort Dix, New Jersey; they were later convicted.
The first speedball fields were constructed with flat wooden obstacles staked into the ground to provide cover; this concept was further developed into a number of urban-scenario field styles with larger building-like obstacles for casual play, but speedball itself progressed to using smaller obstacles made from plastic drainage pipe, which offered a more variable field layout and some "give" to the obstacles for increased safety.
Players under 18 are required to have a guardian sign a consent form.
The South African Paintball League has been in existence since 2002  During 2013 South Africa was invited to send a representative paintball team to the first ever Paintball World Cup held in Paris, France.
The Paintball Asia League Series (PALS) is headquartered in Petaling Jaya near the capital city of Kuala Lumpur.
Weapon storage guidelines and security must also be strictly adhered to.
Playing on a non-established field is sometimes referred to as ''renegade'' or ''gonzo'' play or ''outlaw ball'' (with the players nicknamed ''renegade ballers'' or ''outlaws'').
Certain paintball fields opened in the Eastern Townships and in the Laurentians.
The more territory a team has behind them, the more options they have for choosing effective cover and changing position to get a good shot at one or more opponents, and because the field is of finite size, the fewer options the opposing team has.
Currently, the biggest national speedball league in South Africa is the SARPL (South African Regional Paintball League) with over 500 members and hosting both a 3-man and 5-man series events in 5 provinces (including Gauteng, Kwazulu Natal, Eastern Cape, Western Cape and the Free State).
There are about ten fields in Cyprus, the most recognized of them being the Lapatsa Paintball Ranch in Nicosia, DNA-Paintball in Paphos, and Paintball Cyprus in Limassol.
The process of buying one's own paintball marker is just as complicated, the buyer must have completed military service, have a clean police record and be over the age of 18 years.
*Not recognized by the NCAA*).
* '''Non-contact''' - While paintball does involve tagging players with paintball projectiles, this is generally considered the sole point of physical contact between members of opposing teams.
Thai paintball teams are considered to be one of the strongest, if not the strongest in Asia.
There are around 25 paintball outdoor and indoor fields in Denmark.
Other fields have wooden or plastic barriers.
Paintballing is widely accepted as a recreational pastime in Ireland and is not directly subject to any governing regulations.
In most areas where regulated play is offered, players are required to wear protective masks, and game rules are strictly enforced.
In certain areas and at close range, these impacts may leave a welt or even break skin causing bleeding.
There has been a sharp increase in the woodsball, speedball and scenario gaming arenas and is growing at a fast pace.
However, several mishaps have been reported at paintball fields generally because of ill-trained staff, use of fake or low quality equipment, and dilution of the international quality standards.
Since 2007 TPCI has been organizing a national-level league tournament every year with sponsorship from the government and various leading industrial and corporate houses.
India's second league, the National Paintball League, was formed in 2010 by one of the senior employees of TPCI to concentrate on promoting the sport in southern India.
NPCI & PALS are  in talks with the Sports Authority of India to regulate the rise of uncertified paintball parks and introduce a comprehensive training, certification and audit process.
Operators must adhere to legislation on gun storage, safety training and field sizes; private owners have to secure their markers according to state law on storage, as by law paintball markers are considered firearms in Australia.
Some fields are "BYOP" (Bring Your Own Paint), allowing players to buy paint at unrelated retail stores or online and use it at their field.
In Denmark paintball is a very popular sport.
UKPSF are recognised by the Home Office for legal consultation
A 2003 study of the 24 patients with modern sports eye injuries presenting to the eye emergency department of Porto São João Hospital between April 1992 and March 2002 included five paintball eye injuries.
The Paintball World Cup Asia is also held annually in Langkawi island.
Tournaments such as the PSP hold different events throughout the summer months all over the United States.
To own a paintball marker privately in Australia (outside Tasmania and the Northern Territory) one must hold a valid firearms license endorsed for paintball use.
There are also the Malaysian Paintball Official Circuit (MPOC), Malaysian National Paintball League (MY-NPL), the Malaysian Super Sevens Series, World Paintball Players League (WPPL), the Malaysian Ultimate Woodsball League (UWL Malaysia), and Tactical Paintball Championship (TPC).
In 2014, Thai teams made the history books by taking victories in all Divisions 1, 2, and 3 at the PALS World Cup at Langkawi Island, Malaysia.
Urban scenarios and woodsball fields tend to be larger and with more cover, shortening firing lanes and requiring players to move more to get good shots against their opponent.
In the United States, eight states define explicit legislation for paintball guns.
Paintball is a very popular sport in Malaysia.
For aesthetic reasons, MilSim often uses airsoft guns rather than paintball guns, as their prominent hoppers appear unrealistic, however Airsoft pellets, being smaller caliber and fired at higher velocity, have an increased risk of player injury if the scenario involves high rates of fire or close range.
The South African team got officially ranked 13th in the world.
Thai paintball continues to grow at a slow pace, thus allowing the community to be a very well knit family.
In the United States in 1998, 14-year-old Jorel Lynn Travis was shot with a paintball gun while standing outside a Fort Collins, Colorado ice cream parlor – blinding her in one eye.
The Republic of Cyprus has a number of ongoing paintball leagues, including CRL (Cyprus Rec-ball League) and CSL (Cyprus Speedball League).
Most professional fields and tournaments, though, count any hit on a person, the equipment on their person, or even objects picked up at random from the field.
The UKPSF hopes to send an application  to the UK Sports council to make paintball a recognised sport in the UK.
In 2001, a series of pre-meditated and racially motivated drive-by shootings targeted Alaska Natives in Anchorage, Alaska, using a paintball marker.
* '''Hits''' - A player is hit if a paintball leaves a solid mark of a specified minimum size (often nickel- or quarter-sized) anywhere on the player's body or equipment.
A lane is "occupied" if at least one player of the opposing team can fire along it, and it's "active" if any player is firing along it, friend or foe.
* '''Masks On''' Even when a game isn't in progress, virtually all venues enforce a ''masks-on'' rule while players are within the playing area.
Most Indoor-Paintball-Areas in Germany have a strict "No-Mil-Sim"-Policy, meaning that no camouflage clothing or real-life looking markers are allowed.
Paintballing in Australia is controlled by the police in each state, with differing minimum age requirements.
The United Kingdom Paintball Association (UKPBA) a non-profit making body dedicated to the promotion and protection of the sport of paintball in the UK.
Popular tournaments such as The Tippmann Challenge, D-Day and the Navy Festival SWAT Challenge, see hundreds of players from around the entire country participate.
Iran itself has a national team.
Popular examples of the scenario format are Cousin's Big Game in Coram, New York (on Long Island), Hell Survivor's Monster Game (just outside Pinckney, Michigan), Invasion of Normandy at Skirmish U.S.A in Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma D-Day 9in Wyandotte, Oklahoma), events which draws in  2,000 to 4,500 players and last for two days, up to a week.
Countries may have paintball sports guidelines, with rules on specific safety and insurance standards, and paid staff (including referees) who must ensure players are instructed in proper play to ensure participants' safety.
A professional paintball team is one that plays paintball with the financial, equipment or other kind of support of one or more sponsors, often in return for advertising rights.
In South Africa, organised paintball has been played since the late 1980s.
Due to association with Delta Force the UKPBA lists a high membership by signing up every player at Delta Force sites, this covers a majority of once only players and does not include regular players such as scenario, walkons or tournament players.
Fields can be scattered with either natural or artificial terrain, and may also be themed to simulate a particular environment, such as a wooded or urban area, and may involve a historical context.
The approved law 14.492 (December 2012) regulates its use: it is totally forbidden for children under 16 years old, but can be played with written authorization by the parents, or responsible person in charge, of youths between 16 and 18 years old.
Military replicas require a permit for import.
Research published by the Minnesota Paintball Association has argued that paintball is one of the statistically safest sports to participate in, with 20 injuries per 100,000 players annually, and these injuries tend to be incidental to outdoor physical activity (e.g.
There are many commercial paintball fields operating in almost every major city across the country, with most of them concentrated around the Klang Valley region.
Paintball has been considered an inappropriate game, that promotes violence, by the Parliament of the Province of Buenos Aires.
Speedball games were originally started as a way to make the game safer for players who might trip on uneven woodland terrain.
Paintball has been recently legalized in tasmania as of 4 November 2016  .
Many semi-urban Indian cities have built indoor and outdoor paintball fields in recent years.
Each league has tournaments every month for the duration of the season which is usually about 7–9 months.
There is also a minimum age where all players need to be 16 or older.
For safety, most regulated paintball fields strictly enforce a 'masks-on' policy, and most eject players who consistently disobey.
However, other reasons relating to player safety are generally cited and have some merit, as poor quality or poorly stored paint can cause gun failures or personal injury to targeted players.
The league hosts around 31 events per year on a regional and national level with the national finals that takes place at Oviston, Lake Gariep beginning December of each year starting at the end of 2013.
New Hampshire and Rhode Island require players be at least eighteen years of age to own a marker, with students in New Hampshire faced with the possibility of expulsion from school for possessing a marker.
Woodsball or "Bushball", is a term developed late in the history of the game to refer to what was the original form of the game: teams competing in a wooded or natural environment, in which varying amounts of stealth and concealment tactics can offer an advantage.
To decrease these risks and the severity of associated injuries, commercial venues may enforce a minimum distance rule; such as , whereby players cannot shoot an opponent if they are closer than this distance.
So, fields that must wash paintball paint into municipal wastewater facilities, or that have substantial rain runoff into bodies of water that are used as sources of drinking water, are generally required by the municipality to restrict players to only certain paint formulations; the easiest way to achieve this is to sell only approved paint and require that field paint be used.
The smaller fields made use of artificial terrain such as bunkers, allowing symmetrical fields that eliminate terrain advantages for either team; woodsball fields having no such guarantee.
Recreational bushball is the most popular form throughout the country, but the last couple of years have seen a big increase in the popularity of speedball.
Some fields encourage players to aim away from opponents' heads during play if possible; splatter from mask hits can penetrate ventilation holes in the goggles and cause eye irritation, close-range hits to the mask can cause improperly maintained lenses to fail, and hits to unprotected areas of the face, head and neck are especially painful and can cause more serious injury.
Following the Arms (Military Style Semi-automatic Firearms and Import Controls) Amendment Act 2012 (Which came into effect on December 1, 2013), fully automatic Paintball guns are legal to purchase and use, although a permit to procure from the New Zealand Police is required in order to legally import them into the country.
They are supplemented by various regional and local leagues spread worldwide.
A match in a tournament is refereed by a judge, whose authority and decisions are final.
Ramping of rate of fire is prohibited or sharply limited at most paintball fields, however it is allowed in various tournament formats with specific rules governing when and how the marker may ramp.
In Germany, paintball is restricted to players over 18 years of age.
Another variant of the Big Game is the "Attack and Defend" format where large numbers of attackers try to overrun a fixed, but a well-defended objective, such as a compound or large building.
Depending on the variant played, games can last from seconds to hours, or even days in scenario play.
The use of inflatable obstacles both increases player safety by reducing potential injury from collisions with obstacles, and allows them to be easily moved to reconfigure the field or to set up temporary fields.
Previously the minimum age for Victoria was 18, but legislation has recently been introduced to lower the legal age for paintball to 16.
Large-scale Woodsball games are commonly referred to as "Big Games" or "Scenario Games".
As in Australia, paintballing in the Republic of Cyprus is controlled by police, i.e.
Eye injuries can occur when protective equipment is not properly used and such injuries often cause devastating visual loss.
Nearly every city has one or more paintball fields, and every province has one or more teams that play at the national paintball league.
Eliminated players are expected to leave the field of play; eliminations may also earn the opposing team points.
Leagues can be of various sizes (for example, regional, national or international) and offer organized tournaments and or games for professional, semi-professional, and amateur teams, sometimes with financial prizes.
Paintball markers are classified as Airguns under New Zealand law, and as such are legal for persons 18 and over to possess (those between the ages of 16 and 18 require a firearms license).
In 1995 Bigfoot Paintball opened in St. Alphonse-Rodriguez in the region of Lanaudière.
MilSim addresses the logistics of combat, mission planning and execution, and dealing with limited resources and ammunition.
Markers are limited to a kinetic energy of 7.5 J.
Regardless, paintball has received criticism due to incidents of injury.
If a player is marked with paint, they will call them out, but competitors may also be expected to follow the honor code; a broken ball means elimination.
A tap of the targeted player with the barrel of a marker, sometimes called a "barrel tag", "Murphy" or "tap-out", is generally considered equivalent to marking them with a paintball and is sometimes used in situations where one player is able to sneak up on an opponent to point-blank range.
Though tournament paintball was originally played in the woods, speedball became the standard competitive format in the 1990s.
Game types in paintball vary, but can include capture the flag, elimination, ammunition limits, defending or attacking a particular point or area, or capturing objects of interest hidden in the playing area.
Speedball is generally a fast-paced game where many more balls are used than in woodsball style games.
Most recently, fields using inflatable bunkers, tethered to the ground with stakes, have become standard for most tournament formats; the soft, yielding bunkers reduce the occurrence of injuries, the bunkers deflate to store in a compact space and anchor to the ground with tent stakes, allowing for temporary fields to be set up and torn down with less impact on the ground underneath, and the arrangement of bunkers can be easily re-configured to maintain novelty of play or to simulate a predetermined field layout for an upcoming event.
The first ever public paintball performance in South Africa was held at the Swartkop Airshow during 2013.
These are clear lines of sight between obstacles on the field and thus potentially between opposing players on the field behind them.
A game field is scattered with natural or artificial terrain, which players use for tactical cover.
The first British national league was the British Paintball League created in 1989 by Gary Morhall, Richard Hart and Derek Wildermuth in Essex England.
Several woodsball and scenario big games are also held throughout the year such as the International Scenario Paintball Games (ISPG) and by Paintball Warfare Group Malaysia (PWG-Malaysia).
In the beginning it was mostly fields with regular open fields with barricades of wood, old tires and barrels, and very basic infrastructure.
Paintball markers are not allowed to exceed 290 fps velocity and a maximum of 12bit/s firing rate.
It is expected that the paint balling will address of the pastime need of the city-dwellers.
In Ottawa, Canada in 2007, Ashley Roos was shot in the eye and blinded with a paintball gun while waiting for a bus.
In Iran, paintball is a very popular recreation.
