dorsalis'', while the other subspecies should be collapsed into one and not differentiated.
On the West Coast, it lives in British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon and offshore on southeast Vancouver Island.
It quickly juts its head into and out of vegetation to stir potential victims out into the open water, where they are pursued.
U.S. federal law prohibits sale or transport of any turtle less than , to limit human contact to salmonella.
Bigger females tend to lay bigger eggs and more eggs per clutch.
When living in a single large body of water, the painted turtles can home from up to  away.
The western painted turtle's northern range includes southern parts of western Canada from Ontario through Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia.
Hobbyists have kept turtles alive for decades.
The hatchling has a proportionally larger head, eyes, and tail, and a more circular shell than the adult.
Even there, in Washington, the painted turtle is designated S5 (demonstrably widespread).
The small and sometimes bite-size, numerous hatchlings fall prey to water bugs, bass, catfish, bullfrogs, snapping turtles, three types of snakes (copperheads, racers and water snakes), herons, rice rats, weasels, muskrats, minks, and raccoons.
The subspecies have evolved different habitat preferences.
Thus Ontario's western subspecies does not intergrade with the midland painted turtle of southeastern Ontario.
As the male is smaller than the female, he is not dominant.
Typically trappers use either floating "basking traps" or partially submerged, baited "hoop traps".
The midland painted turtle appears to be moving east, especially in Pennsylvania.
It also is found eastward through West Virginia, western Maryland and Pennsylvania.
Montgomery, who also iconically tattoed his chest with a maple-leaf, explained his visual promotion of the turtle, saying that he had assisted one to cross the road.
Neighboring Minnesota, where trappers collected more than 300,000&nbsp;painted turtles during the 1990s, commissioned a study of painted turtle harvesting.
Localities have tried to limit roadkill by constructing underpasses, highway barriers, and crossing signs.
Other factors of concern for the painted turtles include over-collection from the wild, released pets introducing diseases or reducing genetic variability, pollution, boating traffic, angler's hooks (the turtles are noteworthy bait-thieves), wanton shooting, and crushing by agricultural machines or golf course lawnmowers or all-terrain vehicles.
As of 2010, most U.S. states allow, but discourage, painted turtle pets, although Oregon forbids keeping them as pets, and Indiana prohibits their sale.
American water lily
For instance, a hurricane can destroy many nests in a region, resulting in fewer hatchlings the next year.
To the northeast it is found in western New York and much of Vermont, and it intergrades extensively with the eastern subspecies.
They favor shallows that contain dense vegetation and have an unusual toleration of pollution.
BC Hydro referred to Montgomery's action when describing its own sponsorship of conservation research for the turtle in British Columbia.
Within British Columbia, the turtle's range is not continuous and can better be understood as northward extensions of the range from the United States.
Indian tribes were familiar with the painted turtle—young braves were trained to recognize its splashing into water as an alarm—and incorporated it in folklore.
*The '''western painted turtle''' lives in streams and lakes, similar to the other painted turtles, but also inhabits pasture ponds and roadside pools.
One experiment placed 98&nbsp;turtles varying several-kilometer distances from their home wetland; 41&nbsp;returned.
Searching for water, food, or mates, the painted turtles travel up to several kilometers at a time.
Some literature has shown isolated populations much further north in British Columbia and Alberta, but these were probably pet-releases.
Darker specimens are more common where the bottom of the water body is darker.
In the 1980s, studies of turtles' cell structures, biochemistries, and parasites further indicated that ''Chrysemys,'' ''Pseudemys,'' and ''Trachemys'' should remain in separate genera.
Oregon has introduced public education on turtle awareness, safe swerving, and safely assisting turtles across the road.
Painted turtles in Virginia have been observed waiting three weeks to nest because of a hot drought.
Wisconsin formerly had virtually unrestricted trapping of painted turtles but based on qualitative observations forbade all commercial harvesting in 1997.
Many studies have been performed in the border regions to assess the intermediate turtles, usually by comparing the anatomical features of hybrids that result from intergradation of the classical subspecies.
The turtles mate in spring and autumn.
Painted turtle pet-keeping requirements are similar to those of the red-eared slider.
The borders between the four subspecies are not sharp, because the subspecies interbreed.
It lives in slow-moving fresh waters, from southern Canada to Louisiana and northern Mexico, and from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The fish it consumes are typically dead or injured.
Nests are frequently ransacked and the eggs eaten by garter snakes, crows, chipmunks, thirteen-lined ground and gray squirrels, skunks, groundhogs, raccoons, badgers, gray and red fox, and humans.
Painted Turtle is the star of the legend and uses his distinctive markings to trick a woman into holding him so he can bite her.
The painted turtle (''C.&nbsp;picta'') is the only species in the genus ''Chrysemys''.
In the southwestern United States there are only dispersed populations.
Commercial harvesting of painted turtles in the wild is controversial and, increasingly, restricted.
The hatchling's ability to survive winter in the nest has allowed the painted turtle to extend its range further north than any other American turtle.
In Manitoba, the turtle is numerous and ranges north to Lake Manitoba and the lower part of Lake Winnipeg.
Age distributions may also be skewed by migrations of adults.
The populations were not completely isolated for sufficiently long, hence wholly different species never evolved.
In late summer, 55% includes plants.
When hibernating underwater, the turtle prefers shallow depths, no more than .
Little systematic study of variations of the painted turtle's karotype among populations has been done.
It is found in much of Louisiana, where it reaches the Gulf of Mexico (in fresh water).
The eastern subspecies's range extends slightly into east central Alabama, where it intergrades with the southern subspecies.
Fossils newer than 300,000&nbsp;years old are found in almost all the United States and southern Canada.
In Oregon, the turtle is native to the northern part of the state throughout the Columbia River Valley as well as the Willamette River Valley north of Salem.
Also in 1967, J. Alan Holman, a paleontologist and herpetologist, pointed out that, although the three turtles were often found together in nature and had similar mating patterns, they did not crossbreed.
To the northwest, almost all of Montana is in range.
Wayne State University Press operates an imprint "named after the Michigan state reptile" that "publishes books on regional topics of cultural and historical interest".
Males travel the most, up to , between captures; females the second most, up to , between captures; and juveniles the least, less than , between captures.
High mountains present barriers to east-west movement of the turtles within the province or from Alberta.
Related to nesting habitat, urbanization or planting can remove needed sunny soils.
In the Midwest, turtle racing is popular at summer fairs.
Fossils from 15&nbsp;million to about 5&nbsp;million years ago are restricted to the Nebraska-Kansas area, but more recent fossils are gradually more widely distributed.
Several private entities use the painted turtle as a symbol.
As with other pond turtles, such as the bog turtle, the painted turtle's feet are webbed to aid swimming.
White for state and province borders
Although its evolutionary history—what the forerunner to the species was and how the close relatives branched off—is not well understood, the painted turtle is common in the fossil record.
In early summer, 60% of its diet comprises insects.
When fighting infection, it manipulates its temperature up to 5&nbsp;°C (8&nbsp;°F) higher than normal.
In the United States, the western subspecies forms a wide intergrade area with the midland subspecies covering much of Illinois as well as a strip of Wisconsin along Lake Michigan and part of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (UP).
As adults, the turtles' armored shells protect them from many potential predators, but they still occasionally fall prey to alligators, ospreys, crows, red-shouldered hawks, bald eagles, and especially raccoons.
However, the turtle is confirmed present in the lower elevation southwest part of the state (Archuleta and La Plata counties), where a population ranges into northern New Mexico in the San Juan River basin.
Many individuals can return to their collection points after being released elsewhere, trips that may require them to traverse land.
The decline in painted turtle populations is not a simple matter of dramatic range reduction, like that of the American bison.
Hatchlings north of a line from Nebraska to northern Illinois to New Jersey typically arrange themselves symmetrically in the nest and overwinter to emerge the following spring.
Also, the slider has a prominent red marking on the side of its head (the "ear") and a spotted bottom shell, both features missing in the painted turtle.
In August and September, the young turtle breaks out from its egg, using a special projection of its jaw called the egg tooth.
For older turtles, some attempts have been made to determine age based on size and shape of their shells or legs using mathematical models, but this method is more uncertain.
It is uncommon in far north New Hampshire and in Maine is common only in a strip about 50 miles from the coast.
Likely owing to differences of habitat and food by water body, growth rates often differ from population to population in the same area.
If heat and drought are prolonged, the turtles will bury themselves and, in extreme cases, die.
It is absent in a part of southwestern Virginia and the adjacent states as well as in north-central Alabama.
In the north, the inactive season may be as long as from October to March, while the southernmost populations may not hibernate at all.
The painted turtle's high reproduction rate and its ability to survive in polluted wetlands and artificially made ponds have allowed it to maintain its range, but the post-Columbus settlement of North America has reduced its numbers.
'''Common foods of the painted turtle'''
Adaptations of its blood chemistry, brain, heart, and particularly its shell allow the turtle to survive extreme lactic acid buildup while oxygen-deprived.
She may further temporize by excavating several false nests as the wood turtles also do.
In some northern populations, no females lay more than one clutch per year.
The four subspecies of the painted turtle are the eastern (''C.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;picta''), midland (''C.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;marginata''), southern (''C.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;dorsalis''), and western (''C.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;bellii'').
Turtles younger than four years (up to 12 years in some populations) can be aged based on "growth rings" in their shells.
Adults in the wild can live for more than 55&nbsp;years.
The turtle holds large prey in its mouth and tears the prey apart with its forefeet.
In California, it is an invasive species that endangers the local western pond turtle, although competition from similarly released red-eared sliders is a greater threat.
In Canada, Ontario protects both subspecies present, the midland and western, and British Columbia protects its dwindling western painted turtles.
Turtles bask on a variety of objects, often logs, but have even been seen basking on top of common loons that were covering eggs.
They advocate discriminating more on what studies are done, thereby putting fewer turtles into scientists' traps.
While hibernating, the body temperature of the painted turtle averages .
Pet releases are starting to establish the painted turtle outside its native range.
*The '''midland''' and '''southern painted turtles''' seek especially quiet waters, usually shores and coves.
Global warming represents an uncharacterized future threat.
At its northern extremes, the turtle tends to be restricted to the warmer areas closer to the Atlantic Ocean.
Fossils show that the painted turtle existed 15&nbsp;million years ago.
At night, the turtle drops to the bottom of its water body or perches on an underwater object and sleeps.
Nevertheless, in 2010, the IUCN recognized both ''C.
For a given length, the female has a higher (more rounded, less flat) top shell.
The subspecies name, ''marginata'', derives from the Latin for "border" and refers to the red markings on the outer (marginal) part of the upper shell; ''dorsalis'' is from the Latin for "back", referring to the prominent dorsal stripe; and ''bellii'' honors zoologist Thomas Bell, a collaborator of Charles Darwin.
In addition to direct killing, roads genetically isolate some populations.
Based on comparative measurements of turtles from throughout the range, they subordinated species to subspecies and eliminated ''treleasei''.
The painted turtle has a very similar appearance to the red-eared slider (the most common pet turtle) and the two are often confused.
The adult painted turtle female is  long; the male is smaller.
It does not appear that females choose nesting sites to influence the sex of the hatchlings; within a population, nests will vary sufficiently to give both male and female-heavy broods.
Courtship begins when a male follows a female until he meets her face-to-face.
The painted turtle is sometimes eaten but is not highly regarded as food, as even the largest subspecies, the western painted turtle, is inconveniently small and larger turtles are available.
(However, in 1967, research on ''protein'' structure of offshore island populations in New England, showed differences from mainland turtles.)
However, a loophole for scientific samples allows some small turtles to be sold, and illegal trafficking also occurs.
The turtle's upper jaw is shaped into an inverted "V" (philtrum), with a downward-facing, tooth-like projection on each side.
In Arizona, the painted turtle is native to an area in the east, Lyman Lake.
To thrive, painted turtles need fresh waters with soft bottoms, basking sites, and aquatic vegetation.
Females may use homing to help locate suitable nesting sites.
The most widespread North American turtle, the painted turtle is the only turtle whose native range extends from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
Adult sex ratios of painted turtle populations average around 1:1.
The reversal of feeding habits with age has also been seen in the false map turtle, which inhabits some of the same range.
Scientists found that harvested lakes averaged half the painted turtle density of off-limit lakes, and population modeling suggested that unrestricted harvests could produce a large decline in turtle populations.
During winter, the turtle hibernates, usually in the mud at the bottom of water bodies.
In the traditional tales of Algonquian tribes, the colorful turtle played the part of a trickster.
Nest sizes vary depending on female sizes and locations but are about  deep.
This perhaps shows that the turtle prefers small larvae and other prey, but can only obtain significant amounts while young.
Males start producing sperm in early spring, when they can bask to an internal temperature of .
Growth slows sharply at sexual maturity and may stop completely.
The midland painted turtle lives from southern Ontario and Quebec, through the eastern U.S. Midwest states, to Kentucky, Tennessee and northwestern Alabama, where it intergrades with the southern painted turtle.
Females dig nests on land and lay eggs between late spring and mid-summer.
dorsalis'' and ''C.&nbsp;p.&nbsp;dorsalis'' as valid names for the southern painted turtle.
In children's books, the painted turtle is a popular subject, with at least seven books published between 2000 and 2010.
However, in Oregon, the painted turtle is designated S2 (imperiled), and in British Columbia, the turtle's populations in the Coast and Interior regions are labeled "endangered" and "of special concern", respectively.
Painted turtles are most vulnerable to predators when young.
In the border town of Boissevain, Manitoba, a  western painted turtle, ''Tommy the Turtle'', is a roadside attraction.
*The '''eastern painted turtle's''' diet is the least studied.
According to Petco, the animals are described as being somewhat unsuitable for children as they do not enjoy being held.
The nests are vase-shaped and are usually dug in sandy soil, often at sites with southern exposures.
The female's greater body volume supports her egg-production.
Despite the imprecision, the subspecies are assigned nominal ranges.
In the southeast, the border between the eastern and midland is more sharp as mountain chains separate the subspecies to different drainage basins.
In 1931, Bishop and Schmidt defined the current "four in one" taxonomy of species and subspecies.
The turtle starts its day at sunrise, emerging from the water to bask for several hours.
The female's optimal body temperature while digging her nest is .
Of note, the western painted turtle aids in the dispersal of white water-lily seeds.
Keepers are urged to provide them with adequate space and a basking site, and water that is regularly filtered and changed.
A Potawatomi myth describes how the talking turtles, "Painted Turtle" and allies "Snapping Turtle" and "Box Turtle", outwit the village women.
*The '''western painted turtle's''' consumption of plants and animals changes seasonally.
Once the nest is complete, the female deposits into the hole.
In British Columbia, populations exist in the interior in the vicinity of the Kootenai, Columbia, Okanagan, and Thompson river valleys.
In Colorado, while range is continuous in the eastern, prairie, half of the state, it is absent in most of the western, mountainous, part of the state.
To lighten her labors, she lubricates the area with her bladder water.
Dark blue for rivers, only showing those in article
The most reliable method to study the long-lived turtles is to capture them, permanently mark their shells by notching with a drill, release the turtles, and then recapture them in later years.
Clutch sizes of the subspecies vary, although the differences may reflect different environments, rather than different genetics.
The color of the top shell (carapace) varies from olive to black.
The painted turtle's generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek words for "gold" (''chryso'') and "freshwater tortoise" (''emys''); the species name originates from the Latin for "colored" (''pictus'').
From start to finish, the female's work may take four&nbsp;hours.
The bottom shell (plastron) is yellow, sometimes red, sometimes with dark markings in the center.
Immediately after hatching, turtles are dependent on egg yolk material for sustenance.
There are also some unconfirmed sightings in parts of the far west of the state (e.g.
When the glaciers retreated, about 11,000&nbsp;years ago, all three subspecies moved north.
Outside the Southeast, where sliders are native, released pet red-eared slider turtles increasingly compete with painted turtles.
In New Mexico, the main distribution follows the Rio Grande and the Pecos River, two waterways that run in a north-south direction through the state.
After 1952, some combined ''Pseudemys'' and ''Chrysemys'' because of similar appearance.
All ages bask for warmth, often alongside other species of turtle.
The oldest samples, found in Nebraska, date to about 15&nbsp;million years ago.
Females can lay five clutches per year, but two is a normal average after including the 30–50% of a population's females that do not produce any clutches in a given year.
Dark grey for national borders
According to a trade data study, painted turtles were the second most popular pet turtles after red-eared sliders in the early 1990s.
To understand painted turtle adult age distributions, researchers require reliable methods.
The two more northerly subspecies, western and midland, are larger and have more eggs per clutch—11.9 and 7.6, respectively—than the two more southerly subspecies, southern (4.2) and eastern (4.9).
On the East Coast, it lives from the Canadian Maritimes to the U.S. state of Georgia.
He then strokes her face and neck with his elongated front claws, a gesture returned by a receptive female.
The painted turtle is not native to Nevada or California.
In New York, the painted turtle narrowly lost (5,048 to 5,005, versus the common snapping turtle) a 2006 statewide student election for state reptile.
The female stores sperm, to be used for up to three clutches, in her oviducts; the sperm may remain viable for up to three&nbsp;years.
In 1995, Michigan followed, based on the recommendation of Niles fifth graders, who discovered the state lacked an official reptile.
While habitat loss and road killings have reduced the turtle's population, its ability to live in human-disturbed settings has helped it remain the most abundant turtle in North America.
To the southwest, the painted turtle's range is fragmented.
Its skin is olive to black with red, orange, or yellow stripes on its extremities.
Warmer climates produce higher relative densities among populations, and habitat desirability also influences density.
Similar to the top shell, the turtle's skin is olive to black, but with red and yellow stripes on its neck, legs, and tail.
A primary threat category is habitat loss in various forms.
Size and age at maturity increase with latitude; at the northern edge of their range, males reach sexual maturity at 7–9&nbsp;years of age and females at 11–16.
Only within the Pacific Northwest is the turtle's range eroding.
In the West, human-introduced bass, bullfrogs, and especially snapping turtles, have increased the predation of hatchlings.
To the south, its range reaches the U.S. Gulf Coast in Louisiana and Alabama.
Eastward it is found in western Tennessee, northern Mississippi and much of Alabama, including the Gulf Coast city of Mobile  An isolated population in central Texas has been reported but is now believed to be non-native.
Females may return to the same sites several consecutive years, but if several females make their nests close together, the eggs become more vulnerable to predators.
Although they are frequently consumed as eggs or hatchlings by rodents, canines, and snakes, the adult turtles' hard shells protect them from most predators.
After becoming chilled, the turtle re-emerges for one to two more cycles of basking and feeding.
Natural disasters can confound age distributions.
It is found in one river in extreme northern Mexico.
