The Government of Pakistan exercises the ''de facto'' jurisdiction over the Frontier Regions and the western parts of the Kashmir Regions, which are organised into the separate political entities Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan (formerly Northern Areas).
Intellectual movement to counter the Hindu renaissance was led by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan who helped founding the All-India Muslim League in 1901 and envisioned as well as advocated for the two-nation theory.
Manufacturing is the third largest sector of the economy, accounting for 18.5 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and 13 percent of total employment.
Black tea with milk and sugar is popular throughout Pakistan and is taken daily by most of the population.
Preemptive strikes on India by the Pakistan's air force, navy, and marines, in response to India's support for the insurgency in East Pakistan, sparked the conventional war in 1971 which witnessed the Indian victory and East Pakistan gaining independence as Bangladesh.
much below what would be necessary to achieve a significant increase in access and service quality.
However, the powers to pardon and grant clemency vest with the President of Pakistan.
In 2013, there were country-wide protests by both Shias and Sunnis calling an end to sectarian violence in the country, toughen up the law and order, and urging for Shia-Sunni unity in the country.
The cricket team (popular as ''Shaheen'') has won the Cricket World Cup held in 1992; it had been runners-up once, in 1999, and co-hosted the tournament in 1987 and 1996.
The National Library publishes and promotes literature in the country.
A crucial instrument used in anesthesiology.
The successful launch of its first rocket into space made Pakistan the first South Asian country to have achieved such a task.
Saudi Arabia also maintains a respected position in Pakistan's foreign policy, and both countries has been a focal point in Pakistan's foreign policy.
The increasing proportion of Pakistan's youth provides the country with a potential demographic dividend and a challenge to provide adequate services and employment.
According to the World Bank, Pakistan has important strategic endowments and development potential.
The lack of vegetative cover, the severe climate and the impact of grazing on the deserts have left wild animals in a precarious position.
Pakistan is currently spending 2.2 percent of its GDP on education; which according to Institute of Social and Policy Sciences is one of the lowest in South Asia.
Human Development Index
The literacy rate of the population is ~58 %.
The Prime Minister serves as the head of government and is designated to exercise as the country's chief executive.
The Pakistan Census excludes the immigrants such as the 1.7&nbsp;million registered Afghans from Afghanistan, who are found mainly in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and tribal belt with small numbers residing in Karachi and Quetta.
The western hills are home to juniper, tamarisk, coarse grasses and scrub plants.
The earliest known inhabitants in the region were Soanian during the Lower Paleolithic, of whom stone tools have been found in the Soan Valley of Punjab.
The conflict in Afghanistan also forced millions of Afghan refugees into Pakistan, particularly in the northwestern regions.
Development on science and technology plays an influential role in Pakistan's infrastructure and helped the country to reach out to the world.
Other serious military engagements and skirmishes included the armed contacts in Siachen Glacier (1984) and Kargil (1999).
In Punjab and Sindh, the Pakistan Rangers are an internal security force with the prime objective to provide and maintain security in war zones and areas of conflict as well as maintaining law and order which includes providing assistance to the police.
Currently, Pakistan maintains a policy of credible minimum deterrence, calling its program vital nuclear deterrence against foreign aggression.
Some students choose to take the O-level and A level exams conducted by the British Council.
major outbreaks of waterborne diseases swept the cities of Faisalabad, Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar in 2006.
4.6 billion on information technology projects, with emphasis on e-government, human resource and infrastructure development.
Ideas from British and American philosophy greatly shaped philosophical development in Pakistan.
The Chairman joint chiefs controls the military from the JS HQ and maintains strategic communications between the military and the civilian government.
As of now, Pakistan has a multi-party parliamentary system with clear division of powers and responsibilities between branches of government.
Pakistan hosted an international seminar on ''Physics in Developing Countries'' for International Year of Physics 2005.
Commercial nuclear power plants generate roughly 5.8% of Pakistan's electricity, compared with about 64.0% from thermal, 29.9% from hydroelectric power, and  ~0.3% from the Coal source.
Such reforms included the enforcement of English Education Act in 1835 and the introduction of the Indian Civil Service (ICS).
In 1998 following a census, they were followed by the Bahá'í Faith, which had a following of 30,000, then Sikhism, Buddhism and Zoroastrianism, each back then claiming 20,000 adherents, and a very small community of Jains.
The majority of the sports played in Pakistan are originated and were substantially developed from the United Kingdom who introduced in the British India.
File:Dudiptsar Lake.jpg|Lulusar-Dudipatsar National Park
The northern highlands contain the Karakoram, Hindu Kush and Pamir mountain ranges (see mountains of Pakistan), which contain some of the world's highest peaks, including five of the fourteen eight-thousanders (mountain peaks over ), which attract adventurers and mountaineers from all over the world, notably K2 () and Nanga Parbat ().
This period is marked by prolonged stagflation, instability, corruption, nationalism, geopolitical rivalry with India, and the clash of left wing-right wing ideologies.
The arrival of Islam in today's Pakistan meant a sudden end of Buddhist architecture in the area and a smooth transition to the predominantly pictureless Islamic architecture.
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is the only Muslim country that maintains a research station in Antarctica and it has maintained a presence there since 1991.
Expanding access beyond Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of region by the 1820s.
In addition, many service providers do not even cover the costs of and maintenance due to low tariffs and poor efficiency.
Allegedly executed and supervised by General Javed Nasir, the program distributed and coordinated the systematic supply of arms to various groups of Bosnian mujahideen during the war.
Several of the architectural infrastructure has been influenced from the British design, and such architectural designs can be found in Lahore, Peshawar, and Karachi.
Increasing globalisation has resulted in Pakistan ranking 56th on the A.T. Kearney/FP Globalization Index.
The gradual decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 18th century enabled the Sikh Empire's influence to control larger areas until the British East-India Company gained ascendancy over the Indian subcontinent.
In athletics, Abdul Khaliq participated in 1954 Asian Games and the 1958 Asian Games.
Poor drinking water quality and sanitation lead to major outbreaks of waterborne diseases.
The country continues to face challenging problems, including overpopulation, terrorism, poverty, illiteracy, and corruption.
The Pakistan Peoples Party followed by conservative Pakistan Muslim League (N), and over the next decade whose two leaders fought for power, alternating in office while the country's situation worsened; economic indicators fell sharply, in contrast to the 1980s.
File:HawksBay.jpg|Hawke's Bay Beach in Karachi
Urdu and English are the official languages of Pakistan, however English is primarily used in official business, government, and legal contracts; the local dialect is known as Pakistani English.
Non-lethal fertilizer
Pakistan government reportedly spends ₨.
Contrastingly, in urban areas of the country, more and more women are assuming professional roles and are contributing to family economics but the ratio of these women compared with those in traditional roles is way less.
Pakistan is unique among Muslim countries as it is the only country to have been created in the name of Islam.
Pakistan covers an area of , approximately equal to the combined land areas of France and the United Kingdom.
The trade deficit in the fiscal year 2010–11 was US$11.217 billion.
Military reports indicated that the PAF was in engagement with the Soviet Air Force, supported by the Afghan Air Force during the course of the conflict; one of which belonged to Alexander Rutskoy.
Life expectancy at birth was 67 years for females and 65 years for males in 2013.
In chemistry, Salimuzzaman Siddiqui was the first Pakistani scientist to bring the therapeutic constituents of the neem tree to the attention of natural products chemists.
It has been slow during periods of democratic transition, but excellent during the three periods of martial law, although the foundation for sustainable and equitable growth was not formed.
In 2012 and 2013, the cement industry in Pakistan became the most profitable sector of the economy.
Pakistan's cement industry is also fast growing mainly because of demand from Afghanistan and from the domestic real estate sector.
A federal parliamentary republic state, Pakistan is a federation that comprises four provinces: Punjab, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, Sindh, and Balochistan.
According to the constitution, the 70 seats reserved for women and religious minorities are allocated to the political parties according to their proportional representation.
Dispute over Jammu and Kashmir led to the First Kashmir War in 1948.
The majority are Sunni, with an estimated 10–25% Shia.
Major seaports are in Karachi, Sindh (the Karachi port and Port Qasim).
The major breakthrough in crop production took place in the late 1960s and 1970s due to the Green Revolution that made a significant contribution to land and yield increases of wheat and rice.
The Congress, which initially denied the Muslim League's claim of being the sole representative of Indian Muslims, was now forced to recognise that the Muslim League represented Indian Muslims.
File:Desan, Utror Kalam Swat valley.jpg|Gilgit-Baltistan
Pakistan does not have diplomatic relations with Israel; nonetheless some Israeli citizens have visited the country on a tourist visas.
The Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee is the highest principle staff officer in the armed forces, and the chief military adviser to the civilian government though the chairman has no authority over the three branches of armed forces.
A significant decline since the 1970s when the country received unprecedented amounts of foreign tourists due to the popular Hippie trail.
Basketball enjoys regional popularity especially in Lahore and Karachi.
Namely, there are four provincial police service including the Punjab Police, Sindh Police, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Police, and the Balochistan Police; all headed by the appointed senior Inspector-Generals.
The economy is considered to be semi-industrialized, with centres of growth along the Indus River.
Energy from the nuclear power source is provided by three licensed-commercial nuclear power plants,  data.
The higher education mainly supervises by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) that sets out the policies and issues rankings of the nationwide universities.
Pakistan sent UN Peacekeeping forces to the former Yugoslavia during the Yugoslav wars.
Civil society in Pakistan is largely hierarchical, emphasising local cultural etiquettes and traditional Islamic values that govern personal and political life.
The relationship of women with the opposite gender is culturally that of gender subordination.
On 24 February 2016, the elected assembly of Pakistan's Punjab province passed a new law called "Punjab Protection of Women Against Violence Bill 2015 " which provides women with protection against a multitude of crimes including: cyber crime, domestic violence, emotional, economic and psychological abuse.
The early to middle 2000s was a period of rapid economic reforms; the government raised development spending, which reduced poverty levels by 10% and increased GDP by 3%.
Saraiki dialect is mainly spoken in South Punjab and counts up to 10% of Pakistan's population, while the Hindko dialect is spoken in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
The Mughals introduced Persian literature and high culture, establishing the roots of Indo-Persian culture in the region.
In the 1960s–1980s, Pakistan greatly helped China in reaching out to the world's major countries and helped facilitate U.S. President Nixon's state visit to China.
Vast majority residing in Southern Pakistan lives along the Indus River, with Karachi being its most populous commercial city.
This advantage was lost in the 18th century as other regions edged forward such as China and Western Europe.
The law enforcement in Pakistan also has a Motorway Patrol which is responsible for enforcement of traffic and safety laws, security and recovery on Pakistan's inter-provincial motorway network.
In most of Punjab and Sindh, the Indus plains support tropical and subtropical dry and moist broadleaf forestry as well as tropical and xeric shrublands.
The basic family unit is the extended family, although there has been a growing trend towards nuclear families for socio-economic reasons.
There were military coups which resulted in imposition of martial law and military commanders continued governing as de-facto presidents from 1958–1971, 1977–1988, and 1999–2008.
Thus the 1946 election was effectively a plebiscite where the Indian Muslims were to vote on the creation of Pakistan; a plebiscite which the Muslim League won.
Students can also attend a university for a bachelorate degree for business administration, literature, and management including the BA, BCom, BBA, and MBA programs.
The Frontier Corps serves the similar purpose in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, and the Balochistan.
Coniferous forests are found at altitudes ranging from 1,000 to 4,000 metres in most of the northern and northwestern highlands.
While Bollywood films were banned from public cinemas from 1965 until 2008, they have remained important in popular culture.
Overall, it has the 27th largest population of internet users in the world.
In 1991 Pakistan got involved with the Gulf War and sent 5,000 troops as part of a US-led coalition, specifically for the defence of Saudi Arabia.
Pakistan was the first country to have established diplomatic relations with China and relations continues to be warm since China's war with India in 1962.
Unemployment rate among aged 15 and over population is 5.5%.
Boxing, billiards, snooker, rowing, kayaking, caving, tennis, contract bridge, golf and volleyball are also actively pursued, and Pakistan has produced regional and international champions in these sports.
The traditional dress for both men and women is the ''Shalwar Kameez''; trousers, Jeans, and shirts are also popular among men.
Pakistani cuisine is similar to cuisine from other regions of South Asia, since much of it originated from the royal kitchens of sixteenth-century Mughal emperors.
Pakistan has a  coastline along the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Oman in the south and is bordered by India to the east, Afghanistan to the west, Iran to the southwest and China in the far northeast respectively.
By the early 18th century, the increasing European influence slowly disintegrated the empire as the lines between commercial and political dominance were increasingly blurred.
Of particular interest is migration that occurred in the aftermath of the independence of Bangladesh in 1971, in the form of stranded Biharis who were relocated to Pakistan.
More than sixty languages are spoken in Pakistan, including a number of provincial languages.
The court system is organised as a hierarchy, with the Supreme Court at the apex, below which are High Courts, Federal Shariat Courts (one in each province and one in the federal capital), District Courts (one in each district), Judicial Magistrate Courts (in every town and city), Executive Magistrate Courts and civil courts.
Meat industry accounts for 1.4 percent of overall GDP.
However, the figure rose to 2.0% in 2012 according to Gallup.
In the early 16th century, the region remained under the Mughal Empire ruled by Muslim emperors.
In subsequent years, People's Republic of China sold the nuclear power plant for energy and industrial growth of the country.
In each of provincial Police Service, it also maintains a respective Elite Police units led by the NACTA– a counter-terrorism police unit as well as providing VIP escorts.
Two Sufis whose shrines receive much national attention are Ali Hajweri in Lahore (c. 12th century) and Shahbaz Qalander in Sehwan, Sindh (c. 12th century).
Control over the seas, greater resources, technology, and military force projection by East India Company of British Empire led it to increasingly flex its military muscle; a factor that was crucial in allowing the Company to gain control over the subcontinent by 1765 and sidelining the European competitors.
As a result of the Pakistan Movement led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah and the subcontinent's struggle for independence, Pakistan was created in 1947 as an independent nation for Muslims from the regions in the east and west of the Subcontinent where there was a Muslim majority.
Pakistani media has also played a vital role in exposing corruption.
A significant result of the efforts of the Jamāʿat-i Islāmī and the ʿ''ulamāʿ'' was the passage of the Objectives Resolution in March 1949.
According to Mundi Index, quality ratings of Pakistan's seaports increased from 3.6 to 4 between 2006 and 2009.
On immediate basis, the Pakistan government established public universities in each four provinices including the Sindh University (1949), Peshawar University (1950), Karachi University (1953), and Balochistan University (1970).
There is a monsoon season with frequent flooding due to heavy rainfall, and a dry season with significantly less rainfall or none at all.
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, greatly espoused the two-nation theory and led the Muslim League to adopt the Lahore Resolution of 1940, popularly known as the Pakistan Resolution.
Pakistani theoretical physicist Abdus Salam won a Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the electroweak interaction.
There is an expanse of alluvial plains along it in Punjab and Sindh.
Although this network only accounts for 4.2% of total road length, it carries 85% of the country's traffic.
Democracy was stalled by the martial law enforced by President Iskander Mirza who was replaced by army chief, General Ayub Khan.
Road transport services are largely in the hands of the private sector, which handles around 95% of freight traffic.
Pakistan is home to several mountain peaks over 7000 m. The north part of Pakistan has many old fortresses, ancient architecture and the Hunza and Chitral valley, home to small pre-Islamic Animist Kalasha community claiming descent from Alexander the Great.
Pakistan has an installed capacity of 44,768,250 metric tons of cement and 42,636,428 metric tons of clinker.
The Sindhis are estimated at 24.8&nbsp;million (14.1%) with Seraikis a sub-group of Punjabis is approximated at 14.8&nbsp;million (8.4%).
Rice is also common; it is served plain, fried with spices, and in sweet dishes.
India referred the dispute to the United Nations on 1 January 1948.
With dominion status in the Commonwealth of Nations, independent Pakistan had two British monarchs before it became a republic.
The Ahmadis, are another minority sect in Pakistan, albeit in much smaller numbers and are officially considered non-Muslims by virtue of the constitutional amendment.
Requested by the Saudi monarchy in 1979, the special forces units, operatives, and commandos were rushed to assist Saudi forces in Mecca to lead the operation of the Grand Mosque.
In 1961, the military and intelligence community repelled the Afghan incursion in the Bajaur Agency near the Durand Line border.
Pakistani neurosurgeon Ayub Ommaya invented the Ommaya reservoir, a system for treatment of brain tumours and other brain conditions.
The division aims to provide better services through improved facilities at airports, and suitable schemes for housing, education and health care—its largest effort is the facilitation of the rehabilitation of returning overseas Pakistanis.
supply in urban areas and limited wastewater treatment.
Inflation reached 25.0% in 2008 and Pakistan had to depend on a fiscal policy backed by the International Monetary Fund to avoid possible bankruptcy.
This conquest set the stage for the rule of several successive Muslim empires in the region, including the Ghaznavid Empire (975–1187 AD), the Ghorid Kingdom and the Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526 AD).
The Pakistan Railways, under the Ministry of Railways (MoR), operates the railroad system.
Influential publications and the critical scientific works in the advancement of mathematics, biology, economics, computer science, and genetics have been produced by the Pakistani scientists at the domestic and international standings.
Senate members are elected by provincial legislators, with all of provinces have equal representation.
Pakistan's cultural capital, Lahore, contains many examples of Mughal architecture such as Badshahi Masjid, Shalimar Gardens, Tomb of Jahangir and the Lahore Fort.
The fashion industry has flourished well in the changing environment of the fashion world.
Pakistan is divided into three major geographic areas: the northern highlands, the Indus River plain and the Balochistan Plateau.
Electroweak interaction
File:Bueatyfull site.jpg|Naran, Kaghan Valley
As PML(N) secured a supermajority in elections in 1997, Sharif authorised the nuclear testings (See:''Chagai-I'' and ''Chagai-II''), as a retaliation to second nuclear tests ordered by India, led by Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee in May 1998.
According to a 2016 report by the Reporters Without Borders ranked Pakistan in 147th on the Press Freedom Index, while terming the Pakistani media "among the freest in Asia when it comes to covering the squabbling among politicians."
It is an ethnically and linguistically diverse country, with a similar variation in its geography and wildlife.
During this time, the English East India Company had established coastal outposts.
As the United Kingdom agreed upon partitioning of India in 1947, the modern state of Pakistan was established on 14 August 1947  in amalgamating the Muslim-majority eastern and northwestern regions of British India.
The first set was adopted in 1956 but suspended by Ayub Khan in 1958 who replaced it with the second set in 1962.
The Ahmadis are particularly persecuted, especially since 1974 when they were banned from calling themselves Muslims.
Since 1947, Pakistan has been involved in four conventional wars, the first war occurred in Kashmir with Pakistan gaining control of Western Kashmir, (Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan), and India capturing Eastern Kashmir (Jammu and Kashmir).
A non-signatory party of the Treaty on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation, Pakistan is an influential member of the IAEA.
It is the sixth-most populous country with a population exceeding 200 million people.
Complete and comprehensive Constitution was adopted in 1973—suspended by Zia-ul-Haq in 1977 but reinstated in 1985—is the country's most important document, laying the foundations of the current government.
The rebellion in 1857 (or Sepoy mutiny) was the region's major armed struggle against the British Empire and Queen Victoria.
The Chief Justice of Pakistan is the chief judge who oversees the judicature's court system at all levels of command.
There are four distinct seasons: a cool, dry winter from December through February; a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period of October and November.
The transport industry accounts for ~10.5% of the nation's GDP.
While consolidating the nuclear development, increasing Islamization, and the rise of homegrown conservative philosophy, Pakistan helped subsidize and distribute U.S. resources to factions of the mujahideen against the USSR's intervention in communist Afghanistan.
Due to heightened awareness among people, educational opportunities for Pakistani women have increased over the years.
System for the delivery of drugs into the cerebrospinal fluid for treatment of patients with brain tumours.
According to the 'Modern Protected Areas' legislation, a national park is a protected area set aside by the government for the protection and conservation of its outstanding scenery and wildlife in a natural state.
The ISI Bosnian contingent was organized with financial assistance provided by Saudi Arabia, according to the British historian Mark Curtis.
Control over the strategic arsenals, deployment, employment, development, military computers and command and control is a responsibility vested under the National Command Authority which oversaw the work on the nuclear policy as part of the credible minimum deterrence.
Mawdūdī demanded that the Constituent Assembly make an explicit declaration affirming the "supreme sovereignty of God" and the supremacy of the ''sharīʿah'' in Pakistan.
improve water and sanitation coverage and quality.
The textile industry enjoys a pivotal position in the manufacturing sector of Pakistan.
Two nations have fought at least three large-scale conventional wars in successive years of 1947, 1965, and 1971.
Many birds sighted in Pakistan are migratory, coming from Europe, Central Asia and India.
This sector contributes 9.5% to the GDP and provides employment to about 15 million people or roughly 30% of the 49 million workforce of the country.
Mohenjo Daro, Harappa and Kot Diji are among the pre-Islamic settlements that are now tourist attractions.
Relations with Russia have greatly improved since 1999 and cooperation with various sectors have increased between Russia and Pakistan.
Traditional ''madrasahs'' – primary institutions of higher learning for Muslims in the subcontinent – were no longer supported by the English Crown, and nearly all of the ''madrasahs'' lost their financial endowment.
Competition with India and tensions eventually led Pakistan's decision of conducting underground nuclear tests in 1998; thus becoming the seventh country in the world to successfully develop nuclear weapons.
The country however continues to attract an estimated of half a million foreign tourists.
Urdu— the ''lingua franca'', a symbol of Muslim identity, and national unity— is the national language which is understood by over 75% of Pakistanis and the main source of nationwide communication but is only the primary language of 8% of Pakistan's population.
Contrary to the ailing film industry, the Urdu televised dramas and theatrical performances are popular, as many entertainment media air the series regularly.
He was a strong proponent of the political and spiritual revival of Islamic civilisation and encouraged Muslims binding all over the world to bring about successful revolution.
In 2012, Pakistani textile products accounted for 3.3% or US$1.07bn of total United Kingdom's textile imports, 12.4% or US$4.61bn of total Chinese textile imports, 2.98% or $2.98b of total United States' textile imports, 1.6% or US$0.88bn of total German textile imports and 0.7% or US$0.888bn of total Indian textile imports.
Sadequain is known for his calligraphy and paintings.
The Constitution of Pakistan entrusts the superior judiciary with the obligation to preserve, protect and defend the constitution.
The most senior officers of all the civilian police forces also form part of the Police Service, which is a component of the civil service of Pakistan.
The local government system consists of a three-tier system of districts, tehsils and union councils, with an elected body at each tier.
Nationalists in British India – including Jawaharlal Nehru and Abul Kalam Azad of Congress, Jinnah of Muslim League, and Master Tara Singh representing the Sikhs—agreed to the proposed terms of transfer of power and independence in June 1947.
In the 1973 war one of the PAF pilots, Flt.
The southern plains are home to mongooses, civets, hares, the Asiatic jackal, the Indian pangolin, the jungle cat and the desert cat.
Consolidating the control from Ayub Khan in 1969, President Yahya Khan had to deal with a devastating cyclone which caused 500,000 deaths in East Pakistan.
