Other ancient palaces include the Assyrian palaces at Nimrud and Nineveh, the Minoan palace at Knossos, and the Persian palaces at Persepolis and Susa.
In 1904 This was the private Property of Prime Minister Dev S J B Rana who was forced to abdicate by Prime Minister Chandra S J B Rana and his brothers, claimed to be the biggest and most luxurious palace in Asia and until 1973 was the largest government secretariat in Asia.
There are other palaces in the Old City of Jerusalem, such as the Lady Tonsok Palace.
Karnataka is famous for the Amba Vilas Palace (commonly known as Mysore Palace) in  Mysuru / Mysore, which was the palace of the Wodeyar kings.
The first palaces in European style were built during the reign of Tsar Peter the Great and his immediate successors.
Although Indonesia is now a republic, some of its parts and provinces still retain and preserve their traditional royal heritage, for example the Sultanate of Yogyakarta, Surakarta, Mangkunegaran princedom, Kasepuhan palace in Cirebon, and Kutai in East Kalimantan.
The Jaburu Palace is the official residence of Brazil's vice-president.
''Palace'' meaning "government" can be recognized in a remark of Paul the Deacon, writing c. AD 790 and describing events of the 660s: "When Grimuald set out for Beneventum, he entrusted his palace to Lupus" (''Historia Langobardorum'', V.xvii).
Istana Nurul Iman is the world's largest palace and is the official residence of the Sultan of Brunei, Hassanal Bolkiah, and the seat of the Brunei government.
Some of the other sultan's official palace is Istana Besar, Istana Anak Bukit, Istana Pekan, Istana Maziah, Istana Alam Shah, Istana Besar Seri Menanti, Istana Iskandariah and Istana Arau.
The National Palace, or ''Palacio Nacional'', located in Mexico City's main square, the Plaza de la Constitución (El Zócalo), first built in 1563, is in the heart of the Mexican capital.
Niavarān Palace Complex is a historical complex situated in the northern part of Tehran, Iran.
However, not all palaces use the term in their name - see Holyrood Palace.
Among these palaces are the Royal Palace of Madrid, also referred to as the Palacio Real.
Today in Lebanon there are at least ten buildings that can be classified as palaces, including the Beiteddine Palace, Grand Serail (one of the biggest in the world), Baabda Palace, Sursock Museum, and Fakhreddine Palace.
His descendants, especially Nero, with his "Golden House", enlarged the house and grounds over and over until it took up the hill top.
The Alvorada Palace is the official residence of the Brazil's president.
This was the throne room, laid out around a circular hearth surrounded by four columns, the throne generally being found on the right-hand side upon entering the room.
A famed example of Chinese palaces is the Forbidden City: the imperial palace of the Chinese empire from the Ming Dynasty to the end of the Qing Dynasty.
These forts and palaces are the largest illustrations and legacy of the princely states of India.
The Rajputs (collective term for the rulers of the region) were known as brave soldiers who preferred to die than be taken prisoners.
Both of these now serve as official residences of the President of Malta.
After the establishment of the Republic of Turkey, Topkapı Palace was transformed into a museum on April 3, 1924.
At the same time, Charlemagne was consciously reviving the Roman expression in his "palace" at Aachen, of which only his chapel remains.
The Palace of the Olowo, ruler of the Yoruba Owo clan of Nigeria, is acknowledged to be the largest palace in all of Africa.
Previously, it had been known as Walkfares, but like several other palaces, the name stuck even once the royal connection ended.
The usage is essentially the same in Italy, Spain and Portugal, as well as the former Austrian Empire.
The office of the President of the Republic of Hungary, Sándor Palace was the residence of the Sándor family in the 19th century.
Former president and strongman Ferdinand Marcos had Coconut Palace constructed in 1978 to showcase the country's varied uses for the coconut.
Bishop's townhouses were always ''palazzi'', and the seat of a localized regime would also be so called.
(See List of palaces in Rajasthan.)
It was said to have been built of wood until it had to be rebuilt after a fire that burned down the entire palace complex.
Noble landowner families, like the House of Esterházy, often had several mansions in the countryside and palaces in towns.
The Palace of the Parliament (Casa Poporului) from Bucharest is a large government building.
The original "palaces" on the Palatine Hill were the seat of the imperial power while the "capitol" on the Capitoline Hill was the religious nucleus of Rome.
It was not necessary to be a nobleman to have your house considered a ''palazzo''; the hundreds of ''palazzi'' in Venice nearly all belonged to the patrician class of the city.
Due to its relatively small dimension, most of Portugal's are former royal residences.
Originally built by the Rana dynasty and it was known as the largest palace of Nepal and in Asia.
Several appointed non-royal head of state (governor), Yang di- Pertua Negeri also assign to have their official seat and residence such as The Astana,  Istana Negeri Sabah and Seri Mutiara.
In the 20th century, ''palazzo'' in Italian came to apply by extension to any large fine apartment building, as so many old ''palazzi'' were converted to this use.
In Israel there are many ancient palaces like the Masada.
Topkapı Palace is one of the largest palace-museums with its architectural structures, collections, and approximately 300,000 archive papers.
* Kikin Hall (1714) in Saint Petersburg.
When the Order began to build a new capital Valletta in 1566, a new Grandmaster's Palace and a series of new auberges were built.
A substantial portion of the Singha Durbar was destroyed by fire in 1973; much of the damage has since been rebuilt.
Other nine sultans have their own istana in their state and throughout the country sometimes called Istana Hinggap.
India is home to many palaces and vast empires.
Three former royal palaces in Romania are the Cotroceni Palace (now the Presidential residence); the Royal Palace in Bucharest, which now houses the National Museum of Art of Romania; and the Elisabeta Palace.
In Bali the royal palace compound is called ''puri''.
Kolkata is known as the City of Palaces within the Indian context, referring to the numerous grand residential buildings that dotted the city from the end of the 18th century onwards, as it grew to become one of the largest cities of the British Raj.
A typical example is the Art Nouveau Gresham Palace which was built by an insurance company.
The word itself is derived from the Latin name ''Palātium'', for Palatine Hill, the hill which housed the Imperial residences in Rome.
Along with several royal and episcopal palaces in the countryside, Blenheim does demonstrate that "palace" has no specific urban connotation in English.
The word is also sometimes used to describe a lavishly ornate building used for public entertainment or exhibitions.
In Hungary distinction is made between urban and rural residencies.
Amongst these temples there is one, the principal one, whose great size and magnificence no human tongue could describe,... All round inside this wall there are very elegant quarters with very large rooms and corridors.
Topkapı Palace is separated from the city on the land-side by the Imperial Walls, which were constructed by Mehmed the Conqueror.
The palaces reflect the long history and diverse culture of the Indonesian archipelago.
Its history is full of numerous dynasties that have ruled over various parts of the country.
In Florence (just as for other strong communal governments), the seat of government was known as Palazzo della Signoria (see ''Palazzo della Signoria'').
The National Palace continues to be the official seat of the executive authority, though it is no longer the official residence of the President.
These palaces have yielded a wealth of artifacts and fragmentary frescoes.
Over the years, the Grand Masters also built a number of large residences in the countryside, such as Verdala Palace and San Anton Palace.
The nobility, upper classes and individual knights of the Order built a number of private palaces, especially in Valletta, but also in the countryside.
With over a thousand years of monarchic history, Spain has many palaces of its own that were built for different monarchs or nobles.
In informal usage, a "palace" can be extended to a grand residence of any kind.
Blenheim Palace was built, on a different site, in the grounds of the disused royal Palace of Woodstock, and the name was also part of the extraordinary honour when the house was given by a grateful nation to a great general, the Duke of Marlborough.
* the Kolomensky Wooden Palace (1528—1532) in Kolomenskoye,
Singha Darbar was designed by Kishore Narsingh Rana as neo-classical architecture typical of the style of the 19th century.
The most important royal ''palazzi'' in Italy are those in Naples, Palermo, Turin, as well as the Quirinale Palace in Rome.
They are all very beautiful buildings.
During VOC and the colonial era of the Dutch East Indies, the colonial government built several European stately palaces as the residence of the Governor General.
Although Topkapi Palace was abandoned by the Ottoman Dynasty by moving to the Dolmabahçe Palace in the middle of the 19th century, Topkapı Palace retained its importance.
* Winter Palace (1732 - 1917), was the official residence of the Russian monarchs
The main palace was designed by the Iranian architect Mohsen Foroughi.
Despite containing the word "palace" in its name, the building was never intended to serve as a residence for royalty.
This has been used as evidence that power was widely distributed in the Empire; as in more centralized monarchies, only the monarch's residence would be a ''palace''.
Palaces in Romania, as elsewhere in Europe, were originally built for royalty, nobles and bishops.
The most famous forts and palaces in Rajasthan are located in Chittor, Jodhpur, Jaipur, Udaipur, Saphieree, Amber and Nahargarh.
In the Holy Roman Empire the powerful independent Electors came to be housed in palaces (''Paläste'').
Germany offers a variety of more than 25,000 castles and palaces and thousands of manor houses.
Speakers of English think of the "Palace of Versailles" because it was the residence of the king of France, and the king was the source of power, though the building has always remained the ''Château de Versailles'' for the French, and the seat of government under the ''Ancien Régime'' remained the '''Palais''' du Louvre.
The palace is the largest palace in Europe with over 2,800 rooms but at the current time is of use for only governmental business while the royal family resides in the smaller Palacio de la Zarzuela.
The most prominent and official palaces are the Stari Dvor and the Novi Dvor (Old and New Court, respectively) in the center of Belgrade and the Royal Compound which includes the Beli Dvor and Kraljevski Dvor (Royal Palace) in the Belgrade suburb, Dedinje.
The two dynasties of post-Ottoman Serbia, Karađorđević and Obrenović built numerous residences throughout their domain.
On the use of the term "palace" in the UK, it is notable that Buckingham Palace was known as Buckingham House before it was acquired by the monarchy.
In Denmark Christiansborg Palace in Copenhagen was built as a royal palace, but is now only used for royal receptions; Amalienborg Palace has been the Danish royal residence since 1794.
Malaysia is a constituent of nine state rule by hereditary sultans which one of them elected every five years to Yang di-Pertuan Agong post (Supreme King) as the head of state of Malaysia.
The main Niavaran Palace, completed in 1968, was the primary residence of the last shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and the Imperial family until the Iranian Revolution.
The largest palace in Asia is Singha Durbar literally known as ''Lion Palace''.
In many parts of Europe, the term is also applied to ambitious private mansions of the aristocracy.
The palace is located on a leafy sprawl of hills on the banks of the Brunei River, a few kilometres south of Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei's capital.
They feature floats of flowers in grand fountains, shimmering blue water of magnificent baths and private pools, doric pillars, ornamental brackets, decorative staircases, and light streaming in through large windows.
Typical Minangkabau vernacular architecture can be found in Pagaruyung Palace, West Sumatra.
In Roman Judaea palaces of the Herodian line of client-kings have been identified at several sites, including the main palace at Jerusalem and a winter palace at Herodium, in the Judean desert.
Palaces in East Asia, such as the imperial palaces of Korea, Thailand, Vietnam, Japan, large stone and wooden structures in the Philippines and China's Forbidden City, consist of many low pavilions surrounded by vast, walled gardens, in contrast to the single building palaces of Medieval Western Europe.
While most monuments of the ancient period have been destroyed or lie in ruins, some medieval buildings have been maintained or restored to good condition.
In 2004, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo converted the former ''Aduana'' (customs house) in Cebu City into a small palace, called Malacañang sa Sugbo.
An example of Malay palace is Istana Maimun in Medan.
The ''hôtel particulier'' remains the term for an urban residence sited ''entre cour et jardin'', behind a forecourt and opening onto a garden; when fronting directly on streets, they are ''maisons'', "houses".
Remnants of palaces and royal houses still can be found in Banten, Medan, Ternate, Bali and Bima.
Many of these buildings have a history of over 1000 years, ranging from fortifications to royal residences.
The palace complex exemplifies traditional Chinese palatial architecture.
The Sahebqraniyeh Palace, from the time of Naser al-Din Shah of the Qajar dynasty, is also inside this complex.
and the largest Palace in Asia.
Although Romania is no longer a monarchy, its former King Michael now resides at Elisabeta Palace.
In more recent years, the word has been used in a more informal sense for other large, impressive buildings, such as The Crystal Palace of 1851 (an immensely large, glazed hall erected for The Great Exhibition) and modern arenas-convention centers like Alexandra Palace.
There are as many as forty towers, all of which are so high that in the case of the largest there are fifty steps leading up to the main part of it and the most important of these towers is higher than that of the cathedral of Seville..."
It consists of several buildings and a museum.
Grand public buildings and even blocks of flat of higher standard were regularly called palaces (the contemporary term of the latter were ''bérpalota'' meaning rent palace).
There were (and are) often separate, sometimes external, stairs to the humblest attic rooms and roofs used by the staff.
This is seen in the Beiteddine Palace, which is a mixture of traditional Lebanese, Italian, Arabic and Persian architecture.
In Israel there are a number of magnificent buildings that are not considered "palaces", but they have the grandeur of a typical palace, and serve as residences, such as the House of Yehudayoff Hefetz, and the Sergei courtyard in Jerusalem.
Built during the socialist regime, no effort or expense was spared to raise this colossal neo-classic building.
The Presidential Palace in Nanjing displays European architectural influences.
Lebanese palaces are very diverse architecturally, being influenced by Arabs, Italians, French, Persians, Turkish and East Asians.
During the Second Mexican Empire, its name was changed, for a time, to the Imperial Palace.
The earliest known palaces were the royal residences of the Egyptian Pharaohs at Thebes, featuring an outer wall enclosing labyrinthine buildings and courtyards.
The knights themselves lived in auberges, but these were more large houses rather than palaces.
The largest in the world is Palace of the Parliament in Bucharest, Romania.
There are many private buildings or mansions in the United States, which, though not called "palaces", have the grandeur typical of a palace, and which have been used as residences.
Hearst Castle and the Biltmore Estate are examples.
* the Palace of Facets (1487–1491) in Moscow at the Kremlin,
India possesses some of the most fascinating forts and palaces, a true royal retreat.
It is separated from the city on the sea-side by the Byzantine Walls.
Blenheim Palace (in England) and Hamilton Palace (in Scotland, demolished in 1927) are the only non-royal (and non-episcopal) residences to have the word "palace" in their name, other than Dalkeith Palace in Scotland, which used to be the seat of the Dukes of Buccleuch (who descend from Charles II of England).
The country is known for its fairy tale-like scenery palatial buildings, such as Sanssouci, Linderhof Palace, Herrenchiemsee, Schwetzingen, Nordkirchen and Schwerin Palace.
That these were administrative centers is shown by the records found there.
When the Medici were made Grand Dukes of Tuscany, however, the centre of power shifted to their new residence in Palazzo Pitti, and the old centre of power began to be referred to as the ''Palazzo Vecchio''.
Thus the Palace of Beaulieu gained its name precisely when Thomas Boleyn sold it to Henry VIII in 1517.
The Singha Durbar (literally, ''Lion Palace'') in Kathmandu is the official seat of government of Nepal
However, unlike the "Palais du Justice" which is often encountered in the French-speaking world, modern British public administration buildings are never called "palaces"; although the formal name for the "Houses of Parliament" is the Palace of Westminster, this reflects Westminster's former role as a royal residence and centre  of administration.
The palaces of India offer an insight into the life of the royalty of the country.
Yang di-Pertuan Agong official residence are Istana Negara, Jalan Duta and Istana Melawati in Putrajaya latter as second palace and retreat while the Istana Negara, Jalan Istana is converted as Royal Museum.
In the early Middle Ages, the ''palas'' was usually that part of an imperial palace (or ''Kaiserpfalz''), that housed the Great Hall, where affairs of state were conducted; it continued to be used as the seat of government in some German cities.
These are not preserved, having been destroyed by the Mongols.
Long after the city grew to the seven hills the Palatine remained a desirable residential area.
There are other palaces built by the nobility, such as, most notably Palazzo Parisio in Valletta and Palazzo Dragonara in St Julians.
Singha Durbar is also the headquarters of Radio Nepal and Nepal Television.
Located on the top floor were probably the private quarters of the royal family and some storerooms.
The Planalto Palace is the official workplace.
In the 9th century, the "palace" indicated the housing of the government too, and the constantly travelling Charlemagne built fourteen.
In Sweden the large Stockholm Palace was built in 1760, and remains the official royal residence, but at the current time is only used for official purposes while the Swedish royal family resides in the more modest Drottningholm Palace.
Most of these kratons took the form of wooden pavilions called pendopo, while the istana of Sumatra usually consist of a single large structure.
Examples of Russian palaces include
In Norway the Royal Palace in Oslo has been used as the royal residence since 1849.
It was the private residence of the hereditary  Prime Minister of Nepal, now the Singha Durbar now houses both chambers of the Parliament of Nepal (the Pratinidhi Sabha, or House of Representatives, and the Rashtriya Sabha, or House of the States), as well as ministries and government offices.
The palace was built upon a 700,000 square meter area on an Eastern Roman Acropolis located on the Istanbul Peninsula between the Sea of Marmara, Bosphorus and the Golden Horn.
The word ''palace'' comes from Old French ''palais'' (imperial residence), from Latin ''Palātium'', the name of one of the seven hills of Rome.
Royal residencies were also called palaces, for example the Early Renaissance summer palace of King Matthias Corvinus in Visegrád or Buda Castle which was called ''Királyi-palota'' (Royal Palace).
The heart of the palace was the megaron.
Rajasthan has many forts and palaces that are major tourist destinations in North India.
Topkapı Palace was the administrative, educational, and art center of the Empire for nearly four hundred years from Mehmed the Conqueror until Sultan Abdulmecid who was the thirty-first Sultan.
Several medieval forts and palaces still stand all over India.
During the Renaissance palaces were built in Lebanon, especially in the Chouf region of Mount Lebanon.
In the Middle Ages these also functioned as warehouses and places of business, as well as homes.
Chinese palaces are designed in regular square grids and arranged in a formal layout consisting of main buildings and a number of pavilions enclosed within walls.
* the Peterhof Palace (1709—1755) in Petergof, and
Indonesian state palaces are the neoclassic Merdeka Palace and Bogor Palace.
For contemporary buildings the term is seldom used with the notable exemption of the Palace of Arts.
Unlike massive single-structured European palaces or castles, Chinese palaces are a multitude of complexes containing several larger and smaller structures with parks and courtyards.
Also in Mexico City is the ''Castillo de Chapultepec'', or Chapultepec Castle, located in the middle of Chapultepec Park which currently houses the Mexican National Museum of History.
The auberges in Valletta are much larger than their counterparts in Birgu, and can be considered as palaces.
After the conquest of Istanbul by Mehmed the Conqueror at 1453, construction of the Topkapı Palace was started in the year 1460 and completed in 1478.
(To this day many bishops' palaces house both their family apartments and their official offices.)
In modern times, the term has been applied by archaeologists and historians to large structures that housed combined ruler, court and bureaucracy in "palace cultures".
It serves as the home and office of the vice-president.
The palace features many ''objets d'art'' ranging from gifts of Napoleon III to paintings by Franz Xaver Winterhalter and Mexican painter Santiago Rebull.
In Italy, any urban building built as a grand residence is a ''palazzo''; these are often no larger than a Victorian townhouse.
Many historic palaces are now put to other uses such as parliaments, museums, hotels or office buildings.
The three Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway and Sweden all have long monarchic histories, and possess several palaces.
In Germany, the wider term was a relatively recent importation, and was used rather more restrictively.
While some royal palaces have been maintained as museums or hotels over the last decades, some are still homes for the members of the erstwhile royal families.
They were also great connoisseurs of art and brilliant builders.
Though palace culture of ancient Israel and Judea can be inferred through the Hebrew Bible, no palace of Solomon or David has been securely identified.
The pre-Israelite Canaanite site of Tel Kabri, destroyed ca 1600 BCE, was built around a palace core.
The best examples of the Bronze Age Greece palace are seen in the excavations at Mycenae, Tiryns and Pylos.
It consists of more than 100 courtyards, each with a unique traditional usage.
The Arhcbishop of Malta has a palace in Mdina.
In the United Kingdom, by tacit agreement, there have been no "palaces" other than those used as official residences by royalty or bishops, regardless of whether located in town or country.
The Louvre had begun as a fortified ''Château du Louvre'' on the edge of Paris, but as the seat of government and shorn of its fortified architecture and then completely surrounded by the city, it developed into the ''Palais du Louvre''.
The word ''Palātium'' came to mean the residence of the emperor rather than the neighbourhood on top of the hill.
It is the largest palace complex in the world and is located in the middle of Beijing, China.
The layout of traditional Balinese and Javanese kratons is similar to the Chinese concept of walled compounds of royal pavilions, squares and gardens.
The château, by contrast, has always been in rural settings, supported by its demesne, even when it was no longer actually fortified.
It is the only castle, or palace, in North America that was occupied by sovereigns - Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico, a member of the House of Habsburg and his consort, Empress Carlota of Mexico, daughter of Leopold I of Belgium.
In Malaysia, the palace is called istana.
The Palacio Legislativo (Legislative Palace) is the house of the Uruguayan Parliament.
In Central Mexico, the Aztec emperors built many palaces in the capital of their empire, Tenochtitlan (modern day Mexico City), some of which may still be seen.
Until the sixteenth century, Malta was part of the Kingdom of Sicily, and the capital Mdina housed many palaces for the nobility, such as Palazzo Falson and Palazzo Santa Sofia.
Many former capitals display a ''Palazzo Ducale'', the seat of the local duke or lord.
It was also the first museum of the Republic of Turkey.
On observing the great city Hernán Cortés wrote, "There are, in all districts of this great city, many temples or palaces,...
The staircases found in the palace of Pylos indicate palaces had two stories.
These are examples of the achievements of the architects and engineers of that age.
Topkapı Palace Museum covers approximately 400,000 square meters at the present day.
The inquisitor also had a palace in Birgu and another in Girgenti until the abolition of the inquisition in 1798.
Some examples of Portuguese palaces are Mafra National Palace, Pena National Palace, Belém Palace, Ajuda National Palace, Palácio das Necessidades, Mateus Palace, Palace Hotel of Bussaco, Palácio da Regaleira, and Palácio da Brejoeira.
Most of these European palaces have now become the state palace of the Republic of Indonesia.
The Brazilian new capital, Brasília, hosts modern palaces, most designed by the city's architect Oscar Niemeyer.
