Semitic populations, including Jews, usually possess an excess of J1 Y chromosomes compared to other populations harboring Y-haplogroup J.
File:Levant.gif|The modern Levant
Two political factions emerged.
Since various conflicts with Zionists began, some of the communities have subsequently left Palestine.
The idea of a unique Palestinian state separated out from its Arab neighbors was at first rejected by Palestinian representatives.
File:Palestinian Christian Scouts Nativity Church in Bethlehem Christmas Eve 2006.jpg|Palestinian Christian Scouts on Christmas Eve in front of the Nativity Church in Bethlehem, 2006
Historian Avi Shlaim states that the Palestinians' lack of sovereignty over the land has been used by Israelis to deny Palestinians their rights to self-determination.
Stories invariably have a happy ending, and the storyteller will usually finish off with a rhyme like: "The bird has taken flight, God bless you tonight," or "Tutu, tutu, finished is my ''haduttu'' (story)."
Biblical Hebrew's cognate word ''Plištim'', is usually translated Philistines.
The Druze became Israeli citizens and Druze males serve in the Israel Defense Forces, though some individuals identify as "Palestinian Druze".
By assigning its pursuit to the desire to predate Jewish national claims, he describes ''Canaanism'' as a "losing ideology", whether or not it is factual, "when used to manage our conflict with the Zionist movement" since ''Canaanism'' "concedes a priori the central thesis of Zionism.
This was particularly true in Palestine, where the population was transformed by such events as the Jewish rebellion against Rome and its suppression, the Arab conquest, the coming and going of the Crusaders, the devastation and resettlement of the coastlands by the Mamluk and Turkish regimes, and, from the nineteenth century, by extensive migrations from both within and from outside the region.
Religion as constitutive of individual identity was accorded a minor role within Palestinian tribal social structure until the latter half of the 19th century.
Over time, nonetheless, much of the existing population of Palestine was Arabized and gradually converted to Islam.
Southern Syria no longer exists.
The AIDRG study was also criticized by Ian Lustick, who accused its authors of multiple methodological errors and a political agenda.
Bedouins have drifted in waves into  Palestine since at least the 7th century, after the Muslim conquest.
The although the timing and causes behind the emergence of a distinctively Palestinian national consciousness among the Arabs of Palestine are matters of scholarly disagreement.
File:1840 jer salat.jpg|Muslims pray in Jerusalem, 1840.
In the meantime, pan-Arabism has waned as an aspect of Palestinian identity.
This number includes the descendants of refugees who fled or were expelled during the 1948 war, but excludes those who have since then emigrated to areas outside of UNRWA's remit.
File:Mushakhan Dish.jpg|Musakhan: The Palestinian National dish.
The PCBS numbers were cross-checked against a variety of other sources (e.g., asserted birth rates based on fertility rate assumptions for a given year were checked against Palestinian Ministry of Health figures as well as Ministry of Education school enrollment figures six years later; immigration numbers were checked against numbers collected at border crossings, etc.).
Following the Muslim conquest of the Levant by the Arab Muslim Rashiduns, the formerly dominant languages of the area, Aramaic and Greek, were gradually replaced by the Arabic language introduced by the new conquering administrative minority.
Palestinian literature forms part of the wider genre of Arabic literature.
The work of these poets was largely unknown to the wider Arab world for years because of the lack of diplomatic relations between Israel and Arab governments.
The court noted that the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip of 28 September 1995 also referred a number of times to the Palestinian people and its "legitimate rights".
Palestinian poets often write about the common theme of a strong affection and sense of loss and longing for a lost homeland.
Until the end of the 19th century, most Palestinian Muslim villagers in the countryside did not have local mosques.
Reem Kelani is one of the foremost researchers and performers in the present day of music with a specifically Palestinian narrative and heritage.
Israel rejected the resolution, calling it "shameful".
In a speech to the Knesset, Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister Yigal Allon outlined the government's view that: "No one can expect us to recognize the terrorist organization called the PLO as representing the Palestinians—because it does not.
Religion was transformed into an element "constituting the individual/collective identity in conformity with orthodox precepts", and formed a major building block in the political development of Palestinian nationalism.
They speak distinct dialects of Arabic in the Galilee and the Negev.
File:Il Falafel di Ramallah.JPG|A Palestinian youth serving Falafel in Ramallah.
File:Ben Zakai.jpg|Jews in 'Ben Zakai' house of prayer, Jerusalem, 1893.
In 2006, there were 4,255,120 Palestinians registered as refugees with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA).
Between 1948 and 1967, the Jordanians and other Arab countries hosting Arab refugees from Palestine/Israel silenced any expression of Palestinian identity and occupied their lands until Israel's conquests of 1967.
Prior to the 7th century Islamic Conquest and Arabization of the Levant, the primary languages spoken in Palestine, among the predominantly Christian and Jewish communities, were Aramaic, Greek, and Syriac.
File:Walidsfamily 1 (Palestine, GHR 13) (7556004512).jpg|Palestinian children
Among the cultural survivals from pre-Islamic times are the significant Palestinian Christian community, roughly 10% of the overall population in late Ottoman times and 45% of Jerusalem's citizens, and smaller Jewish and Samaritan ones, as well as an Aramaic sub-stratum in some local Palestinian Arabic dialects.
The role of women varies among Palestinians, with both progressive and ultra-conservative opinions existing.
Founded in 1964, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) is an umbrella organization for groups that represent the Palestinian people before the international community.
Following the 1948 establishment of Israel, the use and application of the terms "Palestine" and "Palestinian" by and to Palestinian Jews largely dropped from use.
After the killing of sheikh Izz ad-Din al-Qassam by the British in 1935, his followers initiated the 1936–39 Arab revolt in Palestine, which began with a general strike in Jaffa and attacks on Jewish and British installations in Nablus.
The expiration of this term without the recognition by Israel of the Palestinian State and without the effective termination of the occupation was followed by the Second Intifada in 2000.
Similarly, Ber Borochov, one of the key ideological architects of Marxist Zionism, claimed as early as 1905 that, "The Fellahin in Eretz-Israel are the descendants of remnants of the Hebrew agricultural community," believing them to be descendants of the ancient Hebrew and Canaanite residents 'together with a small admixture of Arab blood'".
After the 1948 Palestinian exodus, poetry was transformed into a vehicle for political activism.
The Charter also states that "Palestine with the boundaries it had during the British Mandate, is an indivisible territorial unit."
Jews in Israel and the West Bank today generally identify as Israelis.
"What is the significance of the Palestinians really being descended from the Canaanites?
Inscriptional evidence over a millennium from the peripheral areas of Palestine, such as the Golan and the Negev, show a prevalence of Arab names over Aramaic names from the Achaemenid period,550 -330 BCE onwards.
DellaPergola estimated the Palestinian population of the West Bank and Gaza at the end of 2005 as 3.33 million, or 3.57 million if East Jerusalem is included.
Israeli policy to prevent the refugees returning to their homes was initially formulated by David Ben Gurion and Joseph Weitz, director of the Jewish National Fund was formally adopted by the Israeli cabinet in June 1948.
He was confined there for 24 years.
The original conquest in the 630s had guaranteed religious freedom, improving that of the Jews and the Samaritans, who were classified with the former.
Together with the alienating policies of the Crusaders, the Mongol Invasion and the rise of the Mamluks  were turning points in the fate of  Christianity in this region, and their congregations, -many Christians had sided with the Mongols - were noticeably reduced under the Mamluks.
Tamari notes that "the ideological implications of this claim became very problematic and were soon withdrawn from circulation."
Why else would there be the need to specify who you are?
Mainstream secular Palestinian nationalism was grouped together under the umbrella of the PLO whose constituent organizations include Fatah and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, among other groups who at that time believed that political violence was the only way to "liberate" Palestine.
After the Romans adopted the term as the official administrative name for the region in the 2nd century CE, "Palestine" as a stand-alone term came into widespread use, printed on coins, in inscriptions and even in rabbinic texts.
The first Zionist bank, the Jewish Colonial Trust, was founded at the Second Zionist Congress and incorporated in London in 1899.
Traditional storytelling among Palestinians is prefaced with an invitation to the listeners to give blessings to God and the Prophet Mohammed or the Virgin Mary as the case may be, and includes the traditional opening: "There was, or there was not, in the oldness of time..." Formulaic elements of the stories share much in common with the wider Arab world, though the rhyming scheme is distinct.
He further believed that the Palestinian peasantry would embrace Zionism and that the lack of a crystallized national consciousness among Palestinian Arabs would result in their likely assimilation into the new Hebrew nationalism, and that Arabs and Jews would unite in class struggle.
Those parts of British Mandatory Palestine which did not become part of the newly declared Israeli state were occupied by Egypt or annexed by Jordan.
Rula Jebreal's novel ''Miral'' tells the story of Hind al-Husseini's effort to establish an orphanage in Jerusalem after the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the Deir Yassin massacre, and the establishment of the state of Israel.
David Seddon writes that "the creation of Palestinian identity in its contemporary sense was formed essentially during the 1960s, with the creation of the Palestine Liberation Organization".
Each of them appropriated different regions that overlapped in time and competed for sovereignty and land.
Arab citizens of Israel identify themselves as Israeli and/or Palestinian and/or Arab.
Lyrics are often sung in Arabic, Hebrew, English, and sometimes French.
According to Perry Anderson, it is estimated that half of the population in the Palestinian territories are refugees and that they have collectively suffered approximately $300 billion in property losses due to Israeli confiscations, at 2008-9 prices.
The policy which partly led to this exodus was a response to the alignment of PLO leader Yasser Arafat with Saddam Hussein.
He adds, however, that "the existence of a population with a recognizably similar name ('the Philistines') in Biblical times suggests a degree of continuity over a long historical period (much as 'the Israelites' of the Bible suggest a long historical continuity in the same region)."
Ali Qleibo, a Palestinian anthropologist, has critiqued Muslim historiography for assigning the beginning of Palestinian cultural identity to the advent of Islam in the 7th century.
Much of the Middle-Eastern and Arabic string instruments utilized in classical Palestinian music are sampled over Hip-hop beats in both Israeli and Palestinian hip-hop as part of a joint process of localization.
File:Arabic-traditional-Dress.jpg|A Traditional Women's Dress in Ramallah, c. 1920.
These groups gave voice to a tradition that emerged in the 1960s that argues Palestinian nationalism has deep historical roots, with extreme advocates reading a Palestinian nationalist consciousness and identity back into the history of Palestine over the past few centuries, and even millennia, when such a consciousness is in fact relatively modern.
The group grew in popularity in the following years, especially under the nationalistic orientation of the leadership of Yasser Arafat.
Jews who identify as Palestinian Jews are few, but include Israeli Jews who are part of the Neturei Karta group, and Uri Davis, an Israeli citizen and self-described Palestinian Jew (who converted to Islam in 2008 in order to marry Miyassar Abu Ali) who serves as an observer member in the Palestine National Council.
No one can expect us to negotiate with the heads of terror-gangs, who through their ideology and actions, endeavor to liquidate the State of Israel."
Foster argued in a 2015 ''Foreign Affairs'' article that "based on hundreds of manuscripts, Islamic court records, books, magazines, and newspapers from the Ottoman period (1516–1918), it seems that the first Arab to use the term "Palestinian" was Farid Georges Kassab, a Beirut-based Orthodox Christian."
In 1974, the PLO was recognized as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people by the Arab nation-states and was granted observer status as a national liberation movement by the United Nations that same year.
While it dispersed much of the land's Jewish community around the world, those "workers of the land that remained attached to their land," stayed behind and were eventually converted to Christianity and then Islam.
Borrowing from traditional rap music that first emerged in New York in the 1970s, "young Palestinian musicians have tailored the style to express their own grievances with the social and political climate in which they live and work."
"American historian Bernard Lewis writes: "Clearly, in Palestine as elsewhere in the Middle East, the modern inhabitants include among their ancestors those who lived in the country in antiquity.
Individual village styles were lost and replaced by an identifiable "Palestinian" style.
In his book on the Palestinians, ''The Arabs in Eretz-Israel'', Belkind advanced the idea that the dispersion of Jews out of the Land of Israel after the destruction of the Second Temple by the Roman emperor Titus is a "historic error" that must be corrected.
The concessions granted to France and other Western powers by the Ottoman Sultanate in the aftermath of the Crimean War had a significant impact on contemporary Palestinian religious cultural identity.
They further took issue with the designation of Palestine as a British "colony of the lowest order."
File:Marco Zaror 2013 (cropped).jpg|Marco Zaror is a Chilean martial artist of Palestinian descent
When Saladin overthrew the Crusaders, he restored these sites to Orthodox Christian control.
Today there remains sport centers such as in Gaza and Ramallah, but the difficulty of mobility and travel restrictions means most Palestinian are not able to compete internationally to their full potential.
Tamar Nafar says, "When I heard Tupac sing 'It's a White Man's World' I decided to take hip hop seriously".
Palestinian villagers generally trace their family (hamula)'s origins to the Arabian peninsula.
The majority of Palestinian Muslims were haplogroup J1 (37.82%) followed by E1b1b (19.33%), and T (5.88%).
And all nationalisms are defined by what they oppose."''
Since 1967, most critics have theorized the existence of three "branches" of Palestinian literature, loosely divided by geographic location: 1) from inside Israel, 2) from the occupied territories, 3) from among the Palestinian diaspora throughout the Middle East.
As a concept closely related to the land, agriculture and indigenousness, the ideal image of the Palestinian put forward at this time was that of the peasant (in Arabic, ''fellah'') who stayed put on his land, refusing to leave.
Many avow descent from nomadic Arab tribes that migrated to Palestine during or shortly after the Islamic conquest.
Ahad Ha'am believed that, "the Moslems of Palestine are the ancient residents of the land&nbsp;... who became Christians on the rise of Christianity and became Moslems on the arrival of Islam."
In his 1997 book, ''Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern National Consciousness,'' historian Rashid Khalidi notes that the archaeological strata that denote the history of Palestine&nbsp;– encompassing the Biblical, Roman, Byzantine, Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid, Crusader, Ayyubid, Mamluk and Ottoman periods&nbsp;– form part of the identity of the modern-day Palestinian people, as they have come to understand it over the last century.
The articles of the Mandate mentioned the civil and religious rights of the non-Jewish communities in Palestine, but not their political status.
According to legal historian Assaf Likhovski, the prevailing view is that Palestinian identity originated in the early decades of the 20th century.
Claude Cheysson, France's Minister for Foreign Affairs under the first Mitterrand Presidency, held in the mid eighties that, ‘even thirty years ago, (Palestinians) probably already had the largest educated elite of all the Arab peoples.’
Recent estimates of the cost to Palestinians in property confiscations by Israel from 1948 onwards has concluded that Palestinians have suffered a net $300 billion loss in assets.
The Arabic newspaper ''Falasteen'' (est.
This too was the case for Palestinian literature up to the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, but following the Palestinian Exodus of 1948 it has become "a literature written by Palestinians" regardless of their residential status.
The Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) announced at the end of 2015 that the number of Palestinians worldwide at the end of 2015 was 12.37 m of which the number still residing within historic Palestine was 6.22 million.
Historically, music has served as an integral accompaniment to various social and religious rituals and ceremonies in Palestinian society (Al-Taee 47).
The errors claimed in their analysis included: birth rate errors (308,000), immigration & emigration errors (310,000), failure to account for migration to Israel (105,000), double-counting Jerusalem Arabs (210,000), counting former residents now living abroad (325,000) and other discrepancies (82,000).
In addition, Palestinians lost from 1.5 to 2 million acres of land, an estimated 150,000 urban and rural homes, and 23,000 commercial structures such as shops and offices.
In the absence of a comprehensive census including all Palestinian diaspora populations, and those that have remained within what was British Mandate Palestine, exact population figures are difficult to determine.
1908) and ''Filasteen'' (est.
In this combined area, , Palestinians constituted 49% of all inhabitants, encompassing the entire population of the Gaza Strip (1.865 million), the majority of the population of the West Bank (approximately 2,785,000 versus close to 500,000 Jewish Israeli citizens which includes about 200,000 in East Jerusalem), and 20.8% of the population of Israel proper as Arab citizens of Israel.
For example, the English-language newspaper ''The Palestine Post'', founded by Jews in 1932, changed its name in 1950 to ''The Jerusalem Post''.
According to Thomas Giegerich, with respect to the Palestinian people's right to form a sovereign independent state, "The right of self-determination gives the Palestinian people collectively the inalienable right freely to determine its political status, while Israel, having recognized the Palestinians as a separate people, is obliged to promote and respect this right in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations".
Concurrently, among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, a new ideological theme, known as ''sumud'', represented the Palestinian political strategy popularly adopted from 1967 onward.
The process was envisioned to last five years, ending in June 1999, when the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area began.
Israel Belkind, the founder of the Bilu movement also asserted that the Palestinian Arabs were the blood brothers of the Jews.
The majority of Palestinian Christians (31.82%) were a subclade of E1b1b, followed by G2a (11.36%), and J1 (9.09%).
Ali Qleibo, a Palestinian anthropologist, states that this built evidence constitutes "an architectural testimony to Christian/Moslem Palestinian religious sensibility and its roots in ancient Semitic religions."
She also posits a temporal distinction between literature produced before 1948 and that produced thereafter.
In the 1960s the West Bank had a higher percentage of its adolescent population enrolled in high school education than did Lebanon.
Her 2006 debut solo album ''Sprinting Gazelle – Palestinian Songs from the Motherland and the Diaspora'' comprised Kelani's research and an arrangement of five traditional Palestinian songs, whilst the other five songs were her own musical settings of popular and resistance poetry by the likes of Mahmoud Darwish, Salma Khadra Jayyusi, Rashid Husain and Mahmoud Salim al-Hout.
These Palestinian youth forged the new Palestinian musical subgenre, which blends Arabic melodies and hip hop beats.
Popular feast days, like Thursday of the Dead, were celebrated by both Muslims and Christians and shared prophets and saints include Jonah, who is worshipped in Halhul as both a Biblical and Islamic prophet, and St. George, who is known in Arabic as el Khader.
Khalidi attributes this to the tramautic events of 1947-49, which included the depopulation of over 400 towns and villages and the creation of hundreds of thousands of refugees.
After the 1920 Nebi Musa riots, the San Remo conference and the failure of Faisal to establish the Kingdom of Greater Syria, a distinctive form of Palestinian Arab nationalism took root between April and July 1920.
Conflict between Palestinian nationalists and various types of pan-Arabists continued during the British Mandate, but the latter became increasingly marginalized.
Gelvin argues that this fact does not make the Palestinian identity any less legitimate:
Baruch Kimmerling and Joel S. Migdal consider the 1834 Peasants' revolt in Palestine as constituting the first formative event of the Palestinian people.
Benny Morris argues that the Arabs in Palestine nevertheless remained part of a larger national pan-Arab or, alternatively, pan-Islamist movement.
Until 20 years ago, local folk bards reciting traditional verses were a feature of every Palestinian town.
Another very popular food is Palestinian Kofta or Kufta.
The Crusaders, in wresting holy sites such as the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, and the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem from the Orthodox church were among several factors that deeply alienated the traditional Christian community, which sought relief in the Muslims.
1911), published in Jaffa by Issa and Yusef al-Issa, addressed its readers as "Palestinians".
File:Debka.jpg|Palestinian Dabke folk dance being performed by men.
Two prominent leaders of the Palestinian nationalists were Mohammad Amin al-Husayni, Grand Mufti of Jerusalem,appointed by the British, and Izz ad-Din al-Qassam.
One version is performed by men, another by women.
Many emigrants were from the Bethlehem area.
The International Court of Justice observed that since the government of Israel had decided to recognize the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people, their existence was no longer an issue.
Legal historian Assaf Likhovski states that the prevailing view is that Palestinian identity originated in the early decades of the 20th century, when an embryonic desire among Palestinians for self-government in the face of generalized fears that Zionism would lead to a Jewish state and the dispossession of the Arab majority crystallised among most editors, Christian and Muslim, of local newspapers.
Those who live in the West Bank also are represented in the legislature for the Palestinian National Authority.
Poetry, using classical pre-Islamic forms, remains an extremely popular art form, often attracting Palestinian audiences in the thousands.
There are also about 350 Samaritans who carry Palestinian identity cards and live in the West Bank while a roughly equal number live in Holon and carry Israeli citizenship.
Palestinian emigration to South America began for economic reasons that pre-dated the Arab-Israeli conflict, but continued to grow thereafter.
Ali Qleibo, a Palestinian anthropologist, explains:
The local leaders and urban notables were unhappy about the loss of traditional privileges, while the peasants were well aware that conscription was little more than a death sentence.
Southern Palestine had a large Edomite and Arab population by the 4th century BCE.
A small but statistically significant difference was found in the Y-chromosomal haplogroup distributions of Sephardic Jews and Palestinians, but no significant differences were found between Ashkenazi Jews and Palestinians nor between the two Jewish communities, However, a highly distinct cluster was found in Palestinian haplotypes.
File:Betlehem woman dancing.jpg|Palestinian women dancing traditionally, Bethlehem c. 1936.
Whatever the differing viewpoints over the timing, causal mechanisms, and orientation of Palestinian nationalism, by the early 20th century strong opposition to Zionism and evidence of a burgeoning nationalistic Palestinian identity is found in the content of Arabic-language newspapers in Palestine, such as ''Al-Karmil'' (est.
They rallied increasingly around the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which had been formed in Cairo in 1964.
These figures are only slightly lower than the official Palestinian figures.
Palestinian literature can be intensely political, as underlined by writers like Salma Khadra Jayyusi and novelist Liana Badr, who have mentioned the need to give expression to the Palestinian "collective identity" and the "just case" of their struggle.
In Jewish populations, J1 has a rate of around 15%, with haplogroup J2 (M172) (of eight sub-Haplogroups) being almost twice as common as J1 among Jews ((largest community outside the Arab world)
The already simple cuisine did not advance for centuries due to Islam's strict rules of parsimony and restraint, until the rise of the Abbasids, who established Baghdad as their capital.
File:Nicolas Massu 2007 Australian Open R1.jpg|Nicolás Massú is a Chilean tennis player of Palestinian descent
Israel was established in parts of Palestine in 1948, and in the wake of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the West Bank was occupied by Jordan, and the Gaza Strip by Egypt, with both countries continuing to administer these areas until Israel occupied them in the Six-Day War.
After 1948, a new wave of performers emerged with distinctively Palestinian themes relating to dreams of statehood and burgeoning nationalist sentiments.
Consequently, government censuses in 1922 and 1931 would categorize Palestinians confessionally as Muslims, Christians and Jews, with the category of Arab absent.
The First Congress of Muslim-Christian Associations (in Jerusalem, February 1919), which met for the purpose of selecting a Palestinian Arab representative for the Paris Peace Conference, adopted the following resolution: "We consider Palestine as part of Arab Syria, as it has never been separated from it at any time.
Over three decades, the Palestinian National Music and Dance Troupe (El Funoun) and Mohsen Subhi have reinterpreted and rearranged traditional wedding songs such as ''Mish'al'' (1986), ''Marj Ibn 'Amer''(1989) and  ''Zaghareed'' (1997).
File:Palestinian Children in Hebron.jpg|Palestinian girls
Hannah Amit-Kochavi recognizes only two branches: that written by Palestinians from inside the State of Israel as distinct from that written outside (ibid., p.&nbsp;11).
The Shawish, al-Husayni, and Al-Zayadina clans trace their heritage to Muhammad through his grandsons, Husayn ibn Ali and Hassan ibn Ali.
Educational levels among Palestinians have traditionally been high.
Even the concept of Arab nationalism in the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire, "had not reached significant proportions before the outbreak of World War I."
Saints, taboo by the standards of orthodox Islam, mediated between man and Allah, and shrines to saints and holy men dotted the Palestinian landscape.
''Syria Palestina'' continued to be used by historians and geographers and others to refer to the area between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River, as in the writings of Philo, Josephus and Pliny the Elder.
File:Dome of the Rock west.jpg|Palestinians attending prayers at the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem
Other groups of Palestinians, such as the Negev Bedouins or Druze may no longer self-identify as Palestinian for political reasons.
Palestinian folklore is the body of expressive culture, including tales, music, dance, legends, oral history, proverbs, jokes, popular beliefs, customs, and comprising the traditions (including oral traditions) of Palestinian culture.
The Mandate document divided the population into Jewish and non-Jewish, and Britain, the Mandatory Power considered the Palestinian population to be composed of religious, not national, groups.
They cannot own homes or land, and are barred from becoming lawyers, engineers and doctors.
Cross-cultural syncretism between Christian and Islamic symbols and figures in religious practice was common.
Among the new generation of Palestinian writers, the work of  Nathalie Handal an award-winning poet, playwright, and editor has been widely published in literary journals and magazines and has been translated into twelve languages.
File:Jaffa Alhambra Cinema03562ucroped.jpg|The Alhamra Cinema, Jaffa, 1937, bombed December 1947
We must defend Palestine".
It is marked by synchronized jumping, stamping, and movement, similar to tap dancing.
Salim Tamari writes that: "Implicit in their scholarship (and made explicit by Canaan himself) was another theme, namely that the peasants of Palestine represent—through their folk norms&nbsp;... the living heritage of all the accumulated ancient cultures that had appeared in Palestine (principally the Canaanite, Philistine, Hebraic, Nabatean, Syrio-Aramaic and Arab)."
Those emigrating to Latin America were mainly Christian.
More than 800 films have been produced about Palestinians, the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and other related topics, examples include ''Divine Intervention'' and ''Paradise Now''.
All the songs on the album relate to 'pre-1948 Palestine'.
In addition to the influences from American hip hop, it also includes musical elements from Palestinian and Arabic music including "zajal, mawwal, and saj" which can be likened to Arabic spoken word, as well as including the percussiveness and lyricism of Arabic music.
In keeping with an Arab League resolution in 1965, most Arab countries have refused to grant citizenship to Palestinians, arguing that it would be a threat to their right of return to their homes in Palestine.
Palestinian culture is closely related to those of the nearby Levantine countries such as Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan, and the Arab World.
Among Semitic languages, Akkadian ''Palaštu'' (variant ''Pilištu'') is used of Philistia and its 4 city states.
''"The fact that Palestinian nationalism developed later than Zionism and indeed in response to it does not in any way diminish the legitimacy of Palestinian nationalism or make it less valid than Zionism.
Palestinians who live or work in Israel generally can also speak Modern Hebrew, as do some who live in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The study sample consisted of 44 Palestinian Christians and 119 Palestinian Muslims.
File:Ramallah woman2.jpg|Young woman of Ramallah wearing dowry headdress, c. 1898–1914
The Arabic word ''Filastin'' has been used to refer to the region since the time of the earliest medieval Arab geographers.
unlike its Arabic counterparts, Palestinian literature is defined by national affiliation rather than territorially.
The Christians appear to have maintained a majority in much of both Palestine and Syria under Muslim rule until the Crusades.
Palestinian Jews&nbsp;– considered Palestinian by the Palestinian National Charter adopted by the PLO which defined them as those "Jews who had normally resided in Palestine until the beginning of the Zionist invasion"&nbsp;– today identify as Israelis (with the exception of a very few individuals).
Mezze describes an assortment of dishes laid out on the table for a meal that takes place over several hours, a characteristic common to Mediterranean cultures.
File:Betlehem woman b.jpg|A woman from Bethlehem, c. 1940s.
In Damascus, ''al-Nadi al-Arabi'', dominated by the Husayni family, defended the same values.
During the Mandatory Palestine period, the term "Palestinian" was used to refer to all people residing there, regardless of religion or ethnicity, and those granted citizenship by the British Mandatory authorities were granted "Palestinian citizenship".
