The early paleolithic hominids, Australopithecus, were the first users of stone tools.
Glacials are separated by "interglacials".
The Andes were covered in the south by the Patagonian ice cap.
The origins of music during the Paleolithic are unknown.
The Lower Paleolithic hominid ''Homo erectus'' possibly invented rafts (''c.''
Antarctica was ice-bound throughout the Pleistocene and the preceding Pliocene.
The anthropologist David Lewis-Williams has suggested that Paleolithic cave paintings were indications of shamanistic practices, because the paintings of half-human, half-animal paintings and the remoteness of the caves are reminiscent of modern hunter-gatherer shamanistic practices.
However, the earliest undisputed evidence of art during the Paleolithic period comes from Middle Paleolithic/Middle Stone Age sites such as Blombos Cave –South Africa– in the form of bracelets, beads, rock art, and ochre used as body paint and perhaps in ritual.
The effects of glaciation were global.
Southern Caucasus was occupied by 1.7 million years BP, and northern China was reached by 1.66 million years BP.
The earliest explanation, by the prehistorian Abbe Breuil, interpreted the paintings as a form of magic designed to ensure a successful hunt.
However, other sources claim that most Paleolithic groups may have been larger, more complex, sedentary and warlike than most contemporary hunter-gatherer societies, due to occupying more resource-abundant areas than most modern hunter-gatherers who have been pushed into more marginal habitats by agricultural societies.
Early examples of artistic expression, such as the Venus of Tan-Tan and the patterns found on elephant bones from Bilzingsleben in Thuringia, may have been produced by Acheulean tool users such as ''Homo erectus'' prior to the start of the Middle Paleolithic period.
During interglacial times, such as at present, drowned coastlines were common, mitigated by isostatic or other emergent motion of some regions.
Upper Paleolithic cultures were probably able to time the migration of game animals such as wild horses and deer.
The only hunting tools widely available to humans during any significant part of the Paleolithic period were hand-held spears and harpoons.
However, during the early Upper Paleolithic it was probably more common for all members of the band to participate equally and fully in religious ceremonies, in contrast to the religious traditions of later periods when religious authorities and part-time ritual specialists such as shamans, priests and medicine men were relatively common and integral to religious life.
By 40,000-50,000 BP, first humans set foot in Australia.
'''Wolstonian Stage'''
22,000 or 29,000 BP) bolas, the spear thrower (c.30,000 BP), the bow and arrow (''c.''
The small populations were then hunted out by Paleolithic humans.
Four major glacial events have been identified, as well as many minor intervening events.
Some paleolithic hunter-gatherers consumed a significant amount of meat and possibly obtained most of their food from hunting, while others are shown as a primarily plant-based diet, Most, if not all, are believed to have been opportunistic omnivores.
Sexual division of labor may have been developed to allow humans to acquire food and other resources more efficiently.
There's evidence of Paleolithic people killing and eating seals and elands as far as 100,000 years BP.
Human population density was very low, around only one person per square mile.
Men may have participated in gathering plants, firewood and insects, and women may have procured small game animals for consumption and assisted men in driving herds of large game animals (such as woolly mammoths and deer) off cliffs.
Symbol-like images are more common in Paleolithic cave paintings than are depictions of animals or humans, and unique symbolic patterns might have been trademarks that represent different Upper Paleolithic ethnic groups.
For the first time in Africa, bone artifacts and the first art appear in the archeological record.
Just as with still existing hunters and gatherers, there were many varied "diets" - in different groups - and also varying through this vast amount of time.
300,000 BP) has also indicated that both Middle and Upper Paleolithic humans used rafts to travel over large bodies of water (i.e.
This view is supported by studies of higher apes, particularly chimpanzees.
Archeological evidence from art and funerary rituals indicates that a number of individual women enjoyed seemingly high status in their communities, and it is likely that both sexes participated in decision making.
The northern seas were frozen.
Humans also probably consumed hallucinogenic plants during the Paleolithic period.
Archaeological and genetic data suggest that the source populations of Paleolithic humans survived in sparsely wooded areas and dispersed through areas of high primary productivity while avoiding dense forest cover.
Humankind gradually evolved from early members of the genus ''Homo'' such as ''Homo habilis''&nbsp;– who used simple stone tools&nbsp;– into fully behaviorally and anatomically modern humans (''Homo sapiens) ''during the Paleolithic era.
Supplementary evidence from Neanderthal and Modern human sites located around the Mediterranean Sea such as Coa de sa Multa (''c.''
Early hominids may have begun to cook their food as early as the Lower Paleolithic (''c.''
He argues that the elites of these societies (like the elites of many more contemporary complex hunter-gatherers such as the Tlingit) may have used special rituals and ancestor worship to solidify control over their societies, by convincing their subjects that they possess a link to the spirit world that also gives them control over the earthly realm.
Animal cults in the following Upper Paleolithic period, such as the bear cult, may have had their origins in these hypothetical Middle Paleolithic animal cults.
Thanks to their technology and their advanced social structures, Paleolithic groups such as the Neanderthals who had a Middle Paleolithic level of technology appear to have hunted large game just as well as Upper Paleolithic modern humans and the Neanderthals in particular may have likewise hunted with projectile weapons.
This was most likely due to low body fat, infanticide, women regularly engaging in intense endurance exercise, late weaning of infants and a nomadic lifestyle.
For example, humans probably did not possess the control of fire until the Middle Paleolithic, or tools necessary to engage in extensive fishing.
This technique increased efficiency by allowing the creation of more controlled and consistent flakes.
Some argue that there was no formal leadership during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic.
The possible use of rafts during the Lower Paleolithic may indicate that Lower Paleolithic Hominids such as ''Homo erectus'' were more advanced than previously believed, and may have even spoken an early form of modern language.
According to him, traces of the pigment ochre from late Lower Paleolithic Acheulean archeological sites suggests that Acheulean societies, like later Upper Paleolithic societies, collected and used ochre to create rock art.
Flandrian interglacial
Venus figurines have evoked similar controversy.
By 30,000 BP, Japan was reached, and by 27,000 BP humans were present in Siberia above the Arctic Circle.
Nearly all of our knowledge of Paleolithic human culture and way of life comes from archaeology and ethnographic comparisons to modern hunter-gatherer cultures such as the !Kung San who live similarly to their Paleolithic predecessors.
Very little fossil evidence is available at known Lower Paleolithic sites in Europe, but it is believed that hominids who inhabited these sites were likewise ''Homo erectus''.
However, analogies to existent hunter-gatherer societies such as the Hadza people and the Australian aborigines suggest that the sexual division of labor in the Paleolithic was relatively flexible.
The earliest known undisputed burial of a shaman (and by extension the earliest undisputed evidence of shamans and shamanic practices) dates back to the early Upper Paleolithic era (''c.''
However, it may have been for religious reasons, and would coincide with the development of religious practices thought to have occurred during the Upper Paleolithic.
Presumably, early humans used wooden spears as early as five million years ago to hunt small animals, much as their relatives, chimpanzees, have been observed to do in Senegal, Africa.
29,000–25,000 BCE).
The global cooling that occurred during the Pliocene may have spurred on the disappearance of forests and the spread of grasslands and savannas.
It contained tools such as choppers, burins and awls.
The economy of a typical Paleolithic society was a hunter-gatherer economy.
The invention of fishing allowed some Upper Paleolithic and later hunter-gatherer societies to become sedentary or semi-nomadic, which altered their social structures.
According to James B. Harrod humankind first developed religious and spiritual beliefs during the Middle Paleolithic or Upper Paleolithic.
Archeologists and anthropologists have described the figurines as representations of goddesses, pornographic imagery, apotropaic amulets used for sympathetic magic, and even as self-portraits of women themselves.
Nor was there a formal division of labor during the Paleolithic.
Human evolution is the part of biological evolution concerning the emergence of anatomically modern humans as a distinct species.
Barbara Ehrenreich controversially theorizes that the sacrificial hunting rites of the Upper Paleolithic (and by extension Paleolithic cooperative big-game hunting) gave rise to war or warlike raiding during the following Epi-Paleolithic/Mesolithic or late Upper Paleolithic period.
Paleolithic hunting and gathering people ate varying proportions of vegetables (including tubers/roots), fruit, seeds (including nuts and wild grass seeds) and insects, meat, fish, and shellfish.
the Mediterranean Sea) for the purpose of colonizing other bodies of land.
'''Beestonian stage'''
By 1.5-2 million years before present, groups of hominids began leaving Africa and settling southern Europe and Asia.
There were glaciers in New Zealand and Tasmania.
18,000 BP, the Beringia land bridge between Asia and North America was blocked by ice, which may have prevented early Paleo-Indians such as the Clovis culture from directly crossing Beringa to reach the Americas.
Recent research indicates that the Neanderthals timed their hunts and the migrations of game animals long before the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic.
Evidence from canine DNA collected by Robert K. Wayne suggests that dogs may have been first domesticated in the late Middle Paleolithic around 100,000 BP or perhaps even earlier.
The Australian Aborigines have been consuming a variety of native animal and plant foods, called bushfood, for an estimated 60,000 years, since the Middle Paleolithic.
New research suggests that the extinction of the woolly mammoth may have been caused by the combined effect of climatic change and human hunting.
The entire population of Europe between 16,000-11,000 BP likely averaged some 30,000 individuals, and, between 40,000-16,000 BP, it was even lower, at 4,000-6,000 individuals.
Both Neanderthals and modern humans took care of the elderly members of their societies during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic.
Their further northward expansion may have been limited by the lack of control of fire: studies of cave settlements in Europe indicate no regular use of fire prior to 300,000-400,000 BP.
The"Venus" figurines have been theorized, not universally, as representing a mother goddess; the abundance of such female imagery has inspired the theory that Paleolithic (and later Neolithic) societies centered their religion and societies around women.
Paleolithic humans consumed animal organ meats, including the livers, kidneys and brains.
The formation of an Arctic ice cap around three million years ago is signaled by an abrupt shift in oxygen isotope ratios and ice-rafted cobbles in the North Atlantic and North Pacific ocean beds.
In the Middle Paleolithic, Neanderthals were present in Poland.
During the Upper Paleolithic, further inventions were made, such as the net (''c.''
Archeological evidence from the Dordogne region of France demonstrates that members of the European early Upper Paleolithic culture known as the Aurignacian used calendars (''c.''
This was a lunar calendar that was used to document the phases of the moon.
Interpretations range from cutting and chopping tools, to digging implements, flake cores, the use in traps and a purely ritual significance, maybe in courting behavior.
Lower Paleolithic humans constructed shelters such as the possible wood hut at Terra Amata.
However, this hypothesis fails to explain the existence of animals such as saber-toothed cats and lions, which were not hunted for food, and the existence of half-human, half-animal beings in cave paintings.
Additionally, recent research by anthropologist and archaeologist Steven Kuhn from the University of Arizona is argued to support that this division of labor did not exist prior to the Upper Paleolithic and was invented relatively recently in human pre-history.
Although they appear to have used hand axes often, there is disagreement about their use.
Thus, a thrown hand axe would not usually have penetrated deeply enough to cause very serious injuries.
Flandrian interglacial
Upper Paleolithic (and possibly Middle Paleolithic) humans used flute-like bone pipes as musical instruments, and music may have played a large role in the religious lives of Upper Paleolithic hunter-gatherers.
Like contemporary egalitarian hunter-gatherers such as the Mbuti pygmies, societies may have made decisions by communal consensus decision making rather than by appointing permanent rulers such as chiefs and monarchs.
Adherents of the theory include archeologist Marija Gimbutas and feminist scholar Merlin Stone,the author of the 1978 book ''When God Was a Woman''.
According to current archeological and genetic models, there were at least two notable expansion events subsequent to peopling of Eurasia 2-1.5 million years BP.
Secret societies may have served a similar function in these complex quasi-theocratic societies, by dividing the religious practices of these cultures into the separate spheres of Popular Religion and Elite Religion.
Bird and other animal species produce music such as calls to attract mates.
One hypothesis is that carbohydrate tubers (plant underground storage organs) may have been eaten in high amounts by pre-agricultural humans.
Like most contemporary hunter-gatherer societies, Paleolithic and the Mesolithic groups probably followed mostly matrilineal and ambilineal descent patterns; patrilineal descent patterns were probably rarer than in the following Neolithic period.
The greater amount of meat obtained by hunting big game animals in Paleolithic diets than Neolithic diets may have also allowed Paleolithic hunter-gatherers to enjoy a more nutritious diet than Neolithic agriculturalists.
The existence of anthropomorphic images and half-human, half-animal images in the Upper Paleolithic period may further indicate that Upper Paleolithic humans were the first people to believe in a pantheon of gods or supernatural beings, though such images may instead indicate shamanistic practices similar to those of contemporary tribal societies.
Other explanations for the purpose of the figurines have been proposed, such as Catherine McCoid and LeRoy McDermott’s hypothesis that they were self-portraits of woman artists and R.Dale Gutrie's hypothesis that served as "stone age pornography".
East Asian fossils from this period are typically placed in the genus Homo erectus.
Paleolithic humans made tools of stone, bone, and wood.
In general, their actual diet in the wild is about 95% plant-based, with the remaining 5% filled with insects, eggs, and baby animals.
Undisputed evidence of art only becomes common in the following Upper Paleolithic period.
For instance, some European late Upper Paleolithic cultures domesticated and raised reindeer, presumably for their meat or milk, as early as 14,000 BP.
Lower Paleolithic humans used a variety of stone tools, including hand axes and choppers.
Humans hunted wild animals for meat and gathered food, firewood, and materials for their tools, clothes, or shelters.
In particular, it appears that animal skin drums may have been used in religious events by Upper Paleolithic shamans, as shown by the remains of drum-like instruments from some Upper Paleolithic graves of shamans and the ethnographic record of contemporary hunter-gatherer shamanic and ritual practices.
Evidence shows these early hominids intentionally selected raw materials with good flaking qualities and chose appropriate sized stones for their needs to produce sharp-edged tools for cutting.
There is evidence suggesting that Paleolithic societies were gathering wild cereals for food use at least as early as 30,000 years ago.
During the Lower Paleolithic, ancestors of modern humans are thought to have been constrained to Africa east of the Great Rift Valley.
Like in modern hunter-gatherer societies, individuals in Paleolithic societies may have been subordinate to the band as a whole.
William H. Calvin has suggested that some hand axes could have served as "killer Frisbees" meant to be thrown at a herd of animals at a water hole so as to stun one of them.
According to recent archeological findings from ''H.
Mid-latitude glaciation probably began before the end of the epoch.
R. Dale Guthrie has studied not only the most artistic and publicized paintings, but also a variety of lower-quality art and figurines, and he identifies a wide range of skill and ages among the artists.
'''Wisconsin Stage'''
130,000 BP) and Qafzeh, Israel (''c.''
Music may have developed from rhythmic sounds produced by daily chores, for example, cracking open nuts with stones.
Use of fire reduced mortality rates and provided protection against predators.
The first evidence of human fishing is also noted, from artifacts in places such as Blombos cave in South Africa.
Most of Central America formed during the Pliocene to connect the continents of North and South America, allowing fauna from these continents to leave their native habitats and colonize new areas.
For example, microliths or small stone tools or points were invented around 70,000 or 65,000 BP and were essential to the invention of bows and spear throwers in the following Upper Paleolithic period.
Genuine solar calendars did not appear until the following Neolithic period.
As with modern hunter-gatherer societies, music may have been used in ritual or to help induce trances.
Another view is that until the Upper Paleolithic, humans were frugivores (fruit eaters) who supplemented their meals with carrion, eggs, and small prey such as baby birds and mussels, and only on rare occasions managed to kill and consume big game such as antelopes.
South America became linked to North America through the Isthmus of Panama, bringing a nearly complete end to South America's distinctive marsupial fauna.
Anthropologists have typically assumed that in Paleolithic societies, women were responsible for gathering wild plants and firewood, and men were responsible for hunting and scavenging dead animals.
Neanderthals were still found in parts of Eurasia 30,000 years before present, and engaged in a limited degree of interbreeding with ''Homo sapiens''.
Additionally, it is also possible that Upper Paleolithic religions, like contemporary and historical animistic and polytheistic religions, believed in the existence of a single creator deity in addition to other supernatural beings such as animistic spirits.
Each member of the group was skilled at all tasks essential to survival, regardless of individual abilities.
Both ''Homo erectus'' and Neanderthals became extinct by the end of the Paleolithic, having been replaced by a new wave of humans, the anatomically modern Homo sapiens, which emerged in eastern Africa circa 200,000 BP, left Africa around 50,000 BP and expanded throughout the planet.
Surviving artifacts of the Paleolithic era are known as paleoliths.
However, seeds, such as grains and beans, were rarely eaten and never in large quantities on a daily basis.
For example, the Middle Paleolithic ''Homo sapiens'' in the region now occupied by the Democratic Republic of the Congo hunted large -long catfish with specialized barbed fishing points as early as 90,000 years ago.
Around 200,000 BP, Middle Paleolithic Stone tool manufacturing spawned a tool making technique known as the prepared-core technique, that was more elaborate than previous Acheulean techniques.
Cut marks on Neanderthal bones from various sites, such as Combe-Grenal and Abri Moula in France, suggest that the Neanderthals like some contemporary human cultures may have practiced ritual defleshing for (presumably) religious reasons.
Likewise, some scientists have proposed that Middle Paleolithic societies such as Neanderthal societies may also have practiced the earliest form of totemism or animal worship, in addition to their (presumably religious) burial of the dead.
Nonetheless, it remains possible that Paleolithic societies never practiced cannibalism, and that the damage to recovered human bones was either the result of ritual post-mortem bone cleaning or predation by carnivores such as saber tooth cats, lions and hyenas.
The Wrangel Island population became extinct around the same time the island was settled by prehistoric humans.
The earliest known Paleolithic shaman (''c.''
However, the use of fire only became common in the societies of the following Middle Stone Age/Middle Paleolithic Period.
Firstly among the artifacts of Africa, archeologists found they could differentiate and classify those of less than 50,000 years into many different categories, such as projectile points, engraving tools, knife blades, and drilling and piercing tools.
Around 500,000 BP, a group of early humans, frequently called Homo heidelbergensis, came to Europe from Africa and eventually evolved into Neanderthals.
Although the term "paleolithic diet", without references to a specific timeframe or locale, is sometimes used with an implication that most humans shared a certain diet during the entire era, that is not entirely accurate.
Raymond C. Kelly speculates that the relative peacefulness of Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies resulted from a low population density, cooperative relationships between groups such as reciprocal exchange of commodities and collaboration on hunting expeditions, and because the invention of projectile weapons such as throwing spears provided less incentive for war, because they increased the damage done to the attacker and decreased the relative amount of territory attackers could gain.
Vincent W. Fallio writes that ancestor cults first emerged in complex Upper Paleolithic societies.
Controversial scholars of prehistoric religion and anthropology, James Harrod and Vincent W. Fallio, have recently proposed that religion and spirituality (and art) may have first arisen in Pre-Paleolithic chimpanzees or Early Lower Paleolithic (Oldowan) societies.
Nevertheless, it could have been an effective weapon for defense against predators.
Small populations of wooly mammoths survived on isolated Arctic islands, Saint Paul Island and Wrangel Island, till circa 3700 and 1700 BCE respectively.
Harpoons were invented and used for the first time during the late Middle Paleolithic (c. 90,000 years ago); the invention of these devices brought fish into the human diets, which provided a hedge against starvation and a more abundant food supply.
Fates of these early colonists, and their relationships to modern humans, are still subject to debate.
It has been argued that the shift from hunting and gathering to agriculture resulted in an increasing focus on a limited variety of foods, with meat likely taking a back seat to plants.
Bands sometimes joined together into larger "macrobands" for activities such as acquiring mates and celebrations or where resources were abundant.
Upper Paleolithic cultures appear to have had significant knowledge about plants and herbs and may have, albeit very rarely, practiced rudimentary forms of horticulture.
However, there is little direct evidence of the relative proportions of plant and animal foods.
During the Paleolithic period, humans grouped together in small societies such as bands, and subsisted by gathering plants and fishing, hunting or scavenging wild animals.
This may have caused or contributed to the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna, although it is also possible that the late Pleistocene extinctions were (at least in part) caused by other factors such as disease and overhunting by humans.
It allowed Middle Paleolithic humans to create stone tipped spears, which were the earliest composite tools, by hafting sharp, pointy stone flakes onto wooden shafts.
In addition to improving tool making methods, the Middle Paleolithic also saw an improvement of the tools themselves that allowed access to a wider variety and amount of food sources.
During the end of the Paleolithic, specifically the Middle and or Upper Paleolithic, humans began to produce the earliest works of art and engage in religious and spiritual behavior such as burial and ritual.
30,000 BP) was female.
During the late Upper Paleolithic (Latest Pleistocene) ''c.''
People during the Middle Paleolithic, such as the Neanderthals and Middle Paleolithic Homo sapiens in Africa, began to catch shellfish for food as revealed by shellfish cooking in Neanderthal sites in Italy about 110,000 years ago and Middle Paleolithic ''Homo sapiens'' sites at Pinnacle Point, in Africa around 164,000 BP.
During the Pleistocene, the modern continents were essentially at their present positions; the tectonic plates on which they sit have probably moved at most 100&nbsp;km from each other since the beginning of the period.
Upper Paleolithic humans produced works of art such as cave paintings, Venus figurines, animal carvings and rock paintings.
Jared Diamond suggests that the status of women declined with the adoption of agriculture because women in farming societies typically have more pregnancies and are expected to do more demanding work than women in hunter-gatherer societies.
Another explanation is that humans began to make music simply because it pleased them.
They decorated themselves with beads and collected exotic stones for aesthetic, rather than utilitarian qualities.
An alternative theory originally proposed by Charles Darwin explains that music may have begun as a hominid mating strategy.
It is thought that wild foods can have a significantly different nutritional profile than cultivated foods.
The Paleolithic was an extended period of time, during which multiple technological advances were made, many of which had impact on human dietary structure.
At the end of the Paleolithic, specifically the Middle and or Upper Paleolithic, humans began to produce works of art such as cave paintings, rock art and jewellery and began to engage in religious behavior such as burial and ritual.
+ Currently agreed upon classifications as Paleolithic geoclimatic episodes
Choppers and scrapers were likely used for skinning and butchering scavenged animals and sharp ended sticks were often obtained for digging up edible roots.
During a glacial, the glacier experiences minor advances and retreats.
However, this hypothesis is disputed within the anthropological community.
The global warming that occurred during the end of the Pleistocene and the beginning of the Holocene may have made it easier for humans to reach mammoth habitats that were previously frozen and inaccessible.
This ability allowed humans to become efficient hunters and to exploit a wide variety of game animals.
The climate during the Paleolithic consisted of a set of glacial and interglacial periods in which the climate periodically fluctuated between warm and cool temperatures.
This early music would not have left an archaeological footprint.
Some comparative studies of human and higher primate digestive tracts do suggest that humans have evolved to obtain greater amounts of calories from sources such as animal foods, allowing them to shrink the size of the gastrointestinal tract relative to body mass and to increase the brain mass instead.
30,000 BP) in what is now the Czech Republic.
By 45,000 BP, humans lived at 61° north latitude in Europe.
The Paleolithic is characterized by the use of knapped stone tools, although at the time humans also used wood and bone tools.
Chimpanzees are primarily frugivores, but they could and would consume and digest animal flesh, given the opportunity.
During the preceding Pliocene, continents had continued to drift from possibly as far as 250&nbsp;km from their present locations to positions only 70&nbsp;km from their current location.
In particular, bananas and tubers may have been cultivated as early as 25,000 BP in southeast Asia.
The new technology generated a population explosion of modern humans which is believed to have led to the extinction of the Neanderthals.
The term "Paleolithic" was coined by archaeologist John Lubbock in 1865.
Some sources claim that most Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies were possibly fundamentally egalitarian and may have rarely or never engaged in organized violence between groups (i.e.
Religion was possibly apotropaic; specifically, it may have involved sympathetic magic.
In some instances (at least the Tlingit) they developed social stratification, slavery and complex social structures such as chiefdoms.
Theories to explain the apparent egalitarianism have arisen, notably the Marxist concept of primitive communism.
Nevertheless, it is also possible that the ochre traces found at Lower Paleolithic sites is naturally occurring.
