From 1954 to 1956, a Swiss expedition organized by UNESCO excavated the Temple of Baalshamin.
After Saladin's death, the Ayyubid realm was divided and Palmyra was given to Nasir al-Din Muhammad's son Al-Mujahid Shirkuh II (who built the castle of Palmyra known as Fakhr-al-Din al-Maani Castle around 1230).
In 217 BC, a Palmyrene force led by Zabdibel joined the army of King Antiochus III in the Battle of Raphia which ended in a Seleucid defeat by Ptolemaic Egypt.
The earlier walls seem to have been designed to protect the city against Bedouins and to provide a costume barrier.
It had a monumental arch in its eastern section, and a tetrapylon stands in the center.
Five years before, Syrian geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi described Palmyra's residents as living in "a castle surrounded by a stone wall".
Odaenathus was succeeded by his son; the ten-year-old Vaballathus.
Syria became part of the Ottoman Empire in 1516, and Palmyra was incorporated into Damascus Eyalet as the center of an administrative district (sanjak).
The city devoted more energy to protecting the Roman east than to commerce, and its importance increased.
Other philologists, such as Jean Starcky, consider Palmyra to be a translation of "Tadmor" (assuming that it meant palm), which had derived from the Greek word for palm, "''Palame''".
On 13 May 2015, ISIL launched an attack on the modern town of Tadmur, sparking fears that the iconoclastic group would destroy the adjacent ancient site of Palmyra.
Other exported goods included jade, muslin, spices, ebony, ivory and precious stones.
Roman authority was minimal during the first century AD, although tax collectors were resident, and a road connecting Palmyra and Sura was built in 75 AD.
The biblical description of "Tadmor" and its buildings does not fit archaeological findings in Palmyra, which was a small settlement during Solomon's reign in the 10th century&nbsp;BC.
Palmyra became part of the Roman Empire when it was annexed and paid tribute early in the reign of Tiberius, around 14&nbsp;AD.
Pliny the Elder described the town in the 70s AD as famous for its desert location, the richness of its soil, and the springs surrounding it, which made agriculture and herding possible.
However, according to France 24's report, "From the information gathered, it is impossible to determine whether pillaging was taking place."
Until the late third century AD, Palmyrenes spoke a dialect of Aramaic and used the Palmyrene alphabet.
At the beginning of the 11th century&nbsp;BC, King Tiglath-Pileser I of Assyria recorded his defeat of the "Arameans" of "Tadmar".
The Palmyrenes evacuated to Parthian lands beyond the eastern bank of the Euphrates, which they prepared to defend.
Taxation was an important source of revenue for the Palmyrene government.
Palmyra had no large libraries or publishing facilities, and it lacked an intellectual movement characteristic of other Eastern cities such as Edessa or Antioch.
In 267, Odaenathus, accompanied by Hairan I, moved north to repel Gothic attacks on Asia Minor.
In 1630 Palmyra came under the authority of another Lebanese prince, Fakhr-al-Din II, who renovated Shirkuh II's castle (which became known as Fakhr-al-Din al-Maani Castle).
To protect the borders with Persia, Zenobia fortified different settlements on the Euphrates including the citadels of Halabiye and Zalabiye.
In time, the four tribes became highly civic and tribal lines blurred; by the second century clan identity lost its importance, and it disappeared during the third century.
Thirty clans have been documented; five of which were identified as tribes (Phyle (φυλή)) comprising several sub-clans.
Local residents reported that the Syrian air force bombed the site on 13 June, damaging the northern wall close to the Temple of Baalshamin.
Commerce made Palmyra and its merchants among the wealthiest in the region.
A number of Greco-Roman busts, jewelry, and other objects looted from the museum have been found on the international market.
To appear better integrated into the Roman Empire, some Palmyrenes adopted Greco-Roman names, either alone or in addition to a second native name.
After 1568 the Ottomans appointed the Lebanese prince Ali bin Musa Harfush as governor of Palmyra's sanjak, dismissing him in 1584 for treason.
Palmyrenes worshiped regional deities, including the greater Levantine gods Astarte, Baal-hamon, Baalshamin and Atargatis; the Babylonian gods Nabu and Nergal, and the Arab Azizos, Arsu, Šams and Al-lāt.
In the middle of the Hellenistic era, Palmyra, formerly south of the al-Qubur wadi, began to expand beyond its northern bank.
It is a square platform and each corner contains a grouping of four columns.
The Arab newcomers were assimilated by the earlier inhabitants, used Palmyrene as a mother tongue, and formed a significant segment of the aristocracy.
Muhanna was forgiven and restored by an-Nasir in 1330; he remained loyal to the sultan until his death in 1335, when he was succeeded by his son.
Little painting, and none of the bronze statues of prominent citizens (which stood on brackets on the main columns of the Great Colonnade), have survived.
The shrine might have been connected to the royal family as it is the only tomb inside the city's walls.
Roman provincial authority set and approved Palmyra's tariff structure, but the provincial interference in local government was kept minimal as the empire sought to ensure the continuous success of Palmyrene trade most beneficial to Rome.
As Palmyra gained importance to French efforts to pacify the Syrian Desert, a base was constructed in the village near the Temple of Bel in 1921.
In a second campaign, the Palmyrene king defeated the Persians in 266 near Ctesiphon.
However, agriculture could not support the population and food was imported.
Like its art, Palmyra's architecture was influenced by the Greco-Roman style, while preserving local elements (best seen in the Temple of Bel).
Palmyra was annexed by the Rashidun Caliphate after its 634 capture by the Muslim general Khalid ibn al-Walid, who took the city after an 18-day march by his army through the Syrian Desert from Mesopotamia.
Nearby were the Temple of Baalshamin, residences, and the Byzantine churches, which include a 1,500-year-old church (Palmyra's fourth, and believed to be the largest ever discovered in Syria).
The Palmyrene irrigation system was discovered in 2008 by Jørgen Christian Meyer who researched the Palmyrene countryside through ground inspections and satellite images.
The site at Palmyra provided evidence for a Neolithic settlement near Efqa, with stone tools dated to 7500&nbsp;BC.
Issa was succeeded in 1284 by his son Muhanna bin Issa who was imprisoned by sultan al-Ashraf Khalil in 1293, and restored two years later by sultan al-Adil Kitbugha.
The Sasanians disbanded Palmyrene colonies in their lands, and began a war against the Roman empire.
During the early 12th century Palmyra was ruled by Toghtekin, the Burid atabeg of Damascus, who appointed his nephew governor.
During the first half of the first century AD, Palmyra incorporated some of the institutions of a Greek city (polis); the concept of citizenship (demos) appears in an inscription, dated to 10 AD, describing the Palmyrenes as a community.
Palmyra saw intensive construction during the first century, including the city's first walled fortifications and the Temple of Bel (completed and dedicated in 32&nbsp;AD).
Towers were replaced by funerary temples in the first half of the second century AD, as the most recent tower is dated to 128 AD.
The Palmyrene council consisted of about six hundred members of the local elite (such as the elders or heads of wealthy families or clans), representing the city's four-quarters.
Whether Odaenathus' title indicated a military or a priestly position is unknown, but the military role is more likely.
No signs of towers or fortified gates exist and it cannot be proven that the walls enclosed the city as many gaps appears to have never been defended.
The monarchy continued the council and most civic institutions, permitting the election of magistrates until 264.
It was built in the third century AD and has a portico of six columns and vine patterns carvings.
Although the city's walls originally enclosed an extensive area on both banks of the wadi, the walls rebuilt during Diocletian's reign surrounded only the northern-bank section.
King Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria passed through the area on his way to the Mediterranean at the beginning of the 18th century BC; by then, Palmyra was the easternmost point of the kingdom of Qatna.
Palmyra's infantry was armed with swords, lances and small round shields; the clibanarii were fully armored (including their horses), and used heavy spears (kontos)  long without shields.
Palmyra prospered as part of the Umayyad Caliphate, and its population grew.
During Zenobia's rebellion, governors were appointed by the queen.
After the Arab conquest, Greek was replaced by Arabic, from which a Palmyrene dialect evolved.
Behind the theater were a small senate building and the large Agora, with the remains of a ''triclinium'' (banquet room) and the Tariff Court.
Also north of the wadi was the Great Colonnade, Palmyra's  main street, which extended from the Temple of Bel in the east, to the Funerary Temple no.86 in the city's western part.
Palmyra changed hands on a number of occasions between different empires before becoming a subject of the Roman Empire in the first century AD.
Palmyra was given to Toghtekin's grandson, Shihab-ud-din Mahmud, who was replaced by governor Yusuf ibn Firuz when Shihab-ud-din Mahmud returned to Damascus after his father Taj al-Muluk Buri succeeded Toghtekin.
Aurelian repaired the Temple of Bel, and the Legio I Illyricorum was stationed in the city.
In 260 the Emperor Valerian fought Shapur at the Battle of Edessa, but was defeated and captured.
Similarly, according to this theory, "Palmyra" derives from the Hurrian word ''pal'' ("to know") using the same mVr formant (''mar'').
The Palmyrene pantheon included ginnaye (some were given the designation "Gad"), a group of lesser deities popular in the countryside, who were similar to the Arab jinn and the Roman genius.
Palmyra was reduced to a village without territory.
:The pre-273 walls were narrow and while encircling the whole city, they do not seem to have provided real protection against an invasion.
However, the British general Edmund Allenby persuaded his government to abandon this plan.
Zenobia began her military career in the spring of 270, during the reign of Claudius Gothicus.
According to Michael Rostovtzeff, Palmyra's art was influenced by Parthian art.
Inside the chamber, steps leads down to a vault crypt.
The second was the Roman annexation of the Nabataean capital Petra in 106, shifting control over southern trade routes of the Arabian Peninsula from the Nabataeans to Palmyra.
The city had other cemeteries in the north, southwest and southeast, where the tombs are primarily hypogea (underground).
In 1751, an expedition led by Robert Wood and James Dawkins studied Palmyra's architecture; visits by travelers and antiquarians continued, including one made by Lady Hester Stanhope in 1813.
Toward the end of the second century, Palmyra began a steady transition from a traditional Greek city-state to a monarchy due to the increasing militarization of the city and the deteriorating economic situation; the Severan ascension to the imperial throne in Rome played a major role in Palmyra's transition:
The caravan trade depended on patrons and merchants.
According to the ''Augustan History'', Odaenathus declared himself king prior to the battle.
The association of Palmyra with Solomon is a conflation of "Tadmor" and a city built by Solomon in Judea and known as "Tamar" in the Books of Kings (1 Kings 9:18).
During the summer of 2012, concerns about looting in the museum and the site increased when an amateur video of Syrian soldiers carrying funerary stones was posted.
The law regulated the tariffs paid by the merchants for goods sold at the internal market or exported from the city.
This led to new projects, including the theatre, the colonnade and the Temple of Nabu.
The reliefs emphasized clothing, jewelry and a frontal representation of the person depicted, characteristics which can be seen as a forerunner of Byzantine art.
The Palmyrenes seems to have disliked the Greeks, considered them foreigners, and restricted their settlement in the city.
According to Schultens, the Romans altered the name from "Tadmor" to "Talmura", and afterward to "Palmura" (from the Latin word "palma", meaning palm), in reference to the city's palm trees.
They connected it to the Euphrates valley, providing water and shelter.
Most of the city's monumental projects were built on the wadi's northern bank.
As evidence, he cited the inexplicability of alterations to the theorized roots of both names (represented in the addition of ''-d-'' to ''tamar'' and ''-ra-'' to ''palame'').
Palmyra entered the historical record during the Bronze Age around 2000&nbsp;BC, when Puzur-Ishtar the Tadmorean (Palmyrene) agreed to a contract at an Assyrian trading colony in Kultepe.
Palmyra had a large agora.
It has been described as "one of the most important single items of evidence for the economic life of any part of the Roman Empire".
According to one account, Roman general Marcus Aurelius Probus regained Egypt from Palmyra; Aurelian entered Issus and headed to Antioch, where he defeated Zenobia in the Battle of Immae.
Palmyra became a Christian city in the decades following its destruction by Aurelian.
The royal army in the mid 3rd century AD was under the leadership of the monarch aided by generals, and was modeled on the Sasanians in arms and tactics.
The Polish expedition concentrated its work in the Camp of Diocletian while the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities excavated the Temple of Nabu.
Although the Palmyrenes worshiped their deities as individuals, some were associated with other gods.
In an inscription dated to 252 Odaenathus appears bearing the title of exarchos (lord) of Palmyra.
In practice, Palmyra shifted from a provincial city to a de facto allied kingdom.
Its destruction by the Timurids in 1400 reduced it to a small village.
In addition to the usual route some Palmyrene merchants used the Red Sea, probably as a result of the Roman–Parthian Wars.
The Syrian Emirate's army entered Deir ez-Zor on 4 December, and Zor Sanjak became part of Syria.
The Mamluks intervened militarily several times, dismissing, imprisoning or expelling its leaders.
Earthquakes devastated the city in 1068 and 1089.
Others view Palmyra's culture as a fusion of local and Greco-Roman traditions.
In 1901, the slab was gifted by the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II to the Russian Tsar and is now in the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg.
Odaenathus approached Shapur I of Persia to request him to guarantee Palmyrene interests in Persia, but was rebuffed.
During the mid-12th century, Palmyra was ruled by the Zengid king Nur ad-Din Mahmud.
Palmyra is  northeast of the Syrian capital, Damascus, in an oasis surrounded by palms (of which twenty varieties have been reported).
Ginnaye were believed to have the appearance and behavior of humans, similar to Arab jinn.
During the Hellenistic period under the Seleucids (between 312 and 64 BC), Palmyra became a prosperous settlement owing allegiance to the Seleucid king.
The Diocletianic walls had protective towers and fortified gateways.
Since at least 27 May, Palmyra's theatre was used as a place of public executions of ISIL opponents.
Al-Ashraf Musa asked the Mamluk sultan Qutuz for pardon and was accepted as a vassal.
By 257 Odaenathus was known as a ''consularis'', possibly the ''legatus'' of the province of Phoenice.
Although he did not take the Persian capital, Odaenathus drove the Persians out of all Roman lands conquered since the beginning of Shapur's wars in 252.
The Romans used Palmyrene soldiers, but (unlike typical Roman cities) no local magistrates or prefects are recorded in the city.
The primary income-generating trade good was silk, which was exported from the East to the West.
The city became a Roman colonia during the third century, leading to the incorporation of Roman governing institutions, before becoming a monarchy in 260.
However, unlike the Greek Agoras (public gathering places shared with public buildings), Palmyra's agora resembled an Eastern caravanserai more than a hub of public life.
In 1919, as the British and French argued over the borders of the planned mandates, the British permanent military representative to the Supreme War Council Henry Wilson suggested adding Palmyra to the British mandate.
As a result of the Syrian Civil War, Palmyra experienced widespread looting and damage by combatants.
Many surviving funerary busts reached Western museums during the 19th century.
*The '''Funerary Temple no.86''' (also known as the House Tomb) is located at the western end of the Great Colonnade.
The Syrian Observatory announced that on 30 August 2015, ISIL destroyed the Temple of Bel; according to eyewitnesses, only the exterior walls remain.
Palmyra hosted an Akitu (spring festival) each Nisan.
A small amphitheatre was found in the church's courtyard.
The city grew wealthy from trade caravans; the Palmyrenes were renowned merchants who established colonies along the Silk Road and operated throughout the Roman Empire.
Toghtekin's nephew was killed by rebels, and the atabeg retook the city in 1126.
The following year, Aurelian crossed the Bosphorus and advanced quickly through Anatolia.
The soldiers of the sheikh Zabdibel, who aided the Seleucids in the battle of Raphia (217 BC), were described as Arabs; Zabdibel and his men were not actually identified as Palmyrenes in the texts, but the name "Zabdibel" is a Palmyrene name leading to the conclusion that the sheikh hailed from Palmyra.
Although merchants used the patrons to conduct business, their roles often overlapped and a patron would sometimes lead a caravan.
The use of Latin was minimal, but Greek was used by wealthier members of society for commercial and diplomatic purposes, and it became the dominant language during the Byzantine era.
In 129 Palmyra was visited by Hadrian, who named it "Hadriane Palmyra" and made it a free city.
Aurelian spared the city and stationed a garrison of 600 archers, led by Sandarion, as a peacekeeping force.
Their role was similar to the Roman genius: tutelary deities who guarded individuals and their caravans, cattle and villages.
Palmyra was left independent, trading with Rome and Parthia but belonging to neither.
The weakness of the Roman empire and the constant Persian danger were probably the reasons behind the Palmyrene council's decision to elect a lord for the city in order for him to lead a strengthened army.
The Mirdasids were followed in the second half of the 11th century by Khalaf of the Mala'ib tribe, centered in Homs.
Muhanna declared his loyalty to Öljaitü of the Ilkhanate in 1312 and was dismissed and replaced with his brother Fadl by sultan an-Nasir Muhammad.
Palmyra was a tribal community but due to the lack of sources, an understanding of the nature of Palmyrene tribal structure is not possible.
Archaeoacoustics in the tell beneath the Temple of Bel indicated traces of cultic activity dated to 2300 BC.
At its height during the reign of Zenobia, Palmyra had more than 200,000 residents.
Due to its military character and efficiency in battle, Palmyra was described by Irfan Shahîd as the "Sparta among the cities of the Orient, Arab and other, and even its gods were represented dressed in military uniforms."
The original columns were brought from Egypt and carved out of pink granite.
'''Palmyra''' (;  ''Tedmurtā'';  ''Tadmor'') is an ancient Semitic city in present-day Homs Governorate, Syria.
After his defeat Abu Muhammad took refuge in the city, which withstood an Abbasid assault long enough to allow him to escape.
Under French Mandatory rule in 1932, the inhabitants were moved into the new village of Tadmur, and the ancient site became available for excavations.
For its domestic market Palmyra imported variety of goods including slaves, prostitutes, olive oil, dyed goods, myrrh and perfume.
It was a key stop on the East-West trade route, with a large ''souq'' (market), built by the Umayyads, who also commissioned part of the Temple of Bel as a mosque.
Patrons owned the land on which the caravan animals were raised, providing animals and guards for the merchants.
In 261 Odaenathus marched against the remaining usurpers in Syria, defeating and killing Quietus and Balista.
Similar to the Second Temple, the sanctuary consisted of a large courtyard with the deity's main shrine off-center against its entrance (a plan preserving elements of the temples of Ebla and Ugarit).
Among them is the Temple of Bel, on a tell which was the site of an earlier temple (known as the Hellenistic temple).
Palmyra declined after its destruction by Timur in 1400, and was a village of 6,000 inhabitants at the beginning of the 20th century; although surrounded by Bedouin, the villagers preserved their dialect.
The Baalshamin sanctuary was in the Ma'zin quarter, the Arsu sanctuary in the Mattabol quarter, and the Atargatis sanctuary in the fourth tribe's quarter.
A relief of the person interred formed part of the wall's decoration, acting as a headstone.
In 750 a revolt, led by Majza'a ibn al-Kawthar and Umayyad pretender Abu Muhammad al-Sufyani, against the new Abbasid Caliphate swept across Syria; the tribes in Palmyra supported the rebels.
Since 1958, the site has been excavated by the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities, and Polish expeditions led by many archaeologists including Kazimierz Michałowski (until 1980) and Michael Gawlikowski (until 2011).
After being defeated by Marwan II during a civil war in the caliphate, Umayyad contender Sulayman ibn Hisham fled to the Banu Kalb in Palmyra, but eventually pledged allegiance to Marwan in 744; Palmyra continued to oppose Marwan until the surrender of the Banu Kalb leader al-Abrash al-Kalbi in 745.
In the south and the east Palmyra is exposed to the Syrian Desert.
The council, headed by a president, managed civic responsibilities; it supervised public works (including the construction of public buildings), approved expenditures, collected taxes, and appointed two archons (lords) each year.
The oasis had about  of irrigable land, which surrounded the city.
The council remained, and the ''strategos'' designated one of two annually-elected magistrates.
Syria (including Palmyra) became part of the French Mandate after Syria's defeat in the Battle of Maysalun on 24 July 1920.
The Fadl prince Nu'air escaped the battle against Timur and later fought Jakam, the sultan of Aleppo.
Before 273 AD, Palmyra enjoyed autonomy and was attached to the Roman province of Syria, having its political organization influenced by the Greek city-state model during the first two centuries AD.
A video released by ISIL shows the killing of 20 prisoners by teenage male executioners in front of hundreds of men and boys.
The Romans included Palmyra in the province of Syria, and defined the region's boundaries; a boundary marker laid by Roman governor Silanus was found  northwest of the city at Khirbet el-Bilaas.
Palmyra's first excavations were conducted in 1902 by Otto Puchstein and in 1917 by Theodor Wiegand.
In response to the destruction, on 21 October 2015, Creative Commons started an online repository of three-dimensional images published into the public domain to digitally reconstruct Palmyra.
In 273 Palmyra rebelled under the leadership of Septimius Apsaios, declaring Antiochus (a relative of Zenobia) as Augustus.
Palmyra's gods were primarily part of the northwestern Semitic pantheon, with the addition of gods from the Mesopotamian and Arab pantheons.
Arabs arrived in the city in the late first millennium BC.
The relocation was completed in 1932; ancient Palmyra was ready for excavation as its villagers settled into the new village of Tadmur.
Nearby are the Temple of Al-lāt and the Damascus Gate.
Palmyra was a minor trading center until the Timurid destruction in 1400, which reduced it to a settlement on the desert border whose inhabitants herded and cultivated small plots for vegetables and corn.
This ''duumviri'' implemented the new colonial constitution, replacing the archons.
This did not indicate the replacing of the northwestern Semitic Bol with a Mesopotamian deity, but was a mere change in the name.
Each column group supports a 150 tons cornice and contains a pedestal in its center that originally carried a statue.
Goods were imported from India, China and Transoxiana, and exported west to Emesa (or Antioch) then the Mediterranean ports, from which they were distributed throughout the Roman Empire.
Goods were carried overland from the seaports to a Nile port, and then taken to the Egyptian Mediterranean ports for export.
West of the ancient walls, the Palmyrenes built a number of large-scale funerary monuments which now form the Valley of Tombs, a  necropolis.
Khalaf's lands were given to Malik-Shah's brother, Tutush I, who gained his independence after his brother's 1092 death and established a cadet branch of the Seljuk dynasty in Syria.
The following year the façade of the Temple of Bel sustained a large hole from mortar fire, and colonnade columns have been damaged by shrapnel.
Palmyrene buildings were smashed, residents massacred and the Temple of Bel pillaged.
In 258 Odaenathus began extending his political influence, taking advantage of regional instability caused by Sasanian aggression; this culminated in the Battle of Edessa, Odaenathus' royal elevation and mobilization of troops, which made Palmyra a kingdom.
Circumstantial evidence exist for confrontations with the Sasanians; probably in 269 Vaballathus took the title ''Persicus Maximus'' ("The great victor in Persia") and the title might be linked with an unrecorded battle against a Persian army trying to regain control of Northern Mesopotamia.
Zenobia issued coins in the name of Claudius' successor Aurelian, with Vaballathus depicted as king; since Aurelian was occupied with repelling insurgencies in Europe, he permitted the Palmyrene coinage and conferred the royal titles.
Later, Odaenathus crowned his son Hairan I as co-King of Kings near Antioch in 263.
The Palmyrene leader won a decisive victory near the banks of the Euphrates later in 260 forcing the Persians to retreat.
Non-Palmyrene soldiers were also recruited; a Nabatean cavalryman is recorded in 132 as serving in a Palmyrene unit stationed at Anah.
The nature of those deities is uncertain as only names are known, most importantly Abgal.
Palmyra's military was led by ''strategoi'' (generals) appointed by the council.
