The numerous islands of the Archipiélago de Bocas del Toro, near the Beaches of Costa Rica, provide an extensive natural roadstead and shield the banana port of Almirante.
Instead of an off-the-shoulder blouse is a fitted white jacket with, shoulder pleats, and a flared hem.
Since the U.S. invasion, and resulting end to the 21-year military dictatorship, Panama has successfully completed four peaceful transfers of power to opposing political factions.
The Río Chepo, another source of hydroelectric power, is one of the more than 300 rivers emptying into the Pacific.
Panama also has a considerable Chinese and Indian (India) population.
Barletta was declared the winner of elections that had been clearly won by Madrid.
''Mola'' is the Guna word for blouse, but the term ''mola'' has come to mean the elaborate embroidered panels made by Guna women, that make up the front and back of a Guna woman's blouse.
As a whole, the range between Costa Rica and the canal is generally referred to by geographers as the Cordillera Central.
It has maintained its growth over the past five years due to government tax and price discounts to foreign guests and retirees.
The Crusade called for a general strike.
However, the National Guard would prove to be very reluctant to abandon power and soon began calling itself El Gobierno Revolucionario ("The Revolutionary Government").
The smuggling of Chinese became an enormous business, with revenues of up to 200 million dollars for Noriega's regime (see Mon 167).
By this time, General Manuel Noriega was firmly in control of both the PDF and the civilian government.
Although rainy-season thunderstorms are common, the country is outside the hurricane belt.
Presidential elections do not require a simple majority; out of the four last presidents only one, incumbent president Ricardo Martinelli, was elected with over 50% of the popular vote.
The U.S. reported 23 servicemen killed and 324 wounded, with Panamanian casualties estimated around 450.
Other popular sports are American football, rugby, hockey, softball and other amateur sports including skateboarding, BMX and surfing, because the many beaches of Panama such as Santa Catalina and Venao that have hosted events the likes of ISA World Surfing Games.
In December 1989 the United States invaded Panama to depose the dictator Manuel Noriega.
The skirt is also ruffled, so that when it is lifted up, it looks like a peacock's tail or a ''mantilla'' fan.
While the Contadora group conducted diplomatic efforts to achieve peace in the region, Noriega supplied Nicaraguan Contras and other guerrillas in the region with weapons and ammunition.
Law&nbsp;80 provides 100% exemption from income tax and real estate taxes for 15 years, duty-free imports for construction materials and equipment for five years, and capital gains tax exemption for five years.
The new constitution proclaimed Omar Torrijos the "Maximum Leader of the Panamanian Revolution", and conceded him unlimited power for six years, although, to keep a façade of constitutionality, Demetrio B. Lakas was appointed president for the same period (Pizzurno Gelós and Araúz, ''Estudios sobre el Panamá republicano'' 541).
Estimates range as high as two million people, but more recent studies place that number closer to 200,000.
For example, the ''tamborito'' is a Spanish dance that was blended with African rhythms, themes and dance moves.
The number of U.S. civilians (and their dependents), who had worked for the Panama Canal Commission and the U.S. Military, and were killed by the Panamanian Defense Forces, has never been fully disclosed.
The PRD's Martin Torrijos won the presidency and a legislative majority in the National Assembly in 2004.
In 2012, 4.345.5 million entered into the Panamanian economy as a result of tourism.
There are several theories about the origin of the name "Panama".
Archaeological finds and testimonials by early European explorers describe diverse native isthmian groups exhibiting cultural variety and suggesting people with developedned by regular regional routes of commerce.
The notes were burned by the new government, but occasionally balboa notes can be found in collections.
Ethnic groups in Panama include Mestizo people, who are a mix of European and native ancestry.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly.
Ardito Barletta inherited a country in economic ruin and hugely indebted to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
They are several layers of cloth, varying in color, that are loosely stitched together, made using a reverse appliqué process.
In practice Panama is dollarized: US dollars are legal tender and used for all paper currency, while Panama has its own coinage.
The end of the encomienda system in Azuero, however, sparked the conquest of Veraguas in that same year.
Spanish is the official and dominant language.
Most Chinese-Panamanians reside in the province of Chiriquí.
Common ingredients are maize, rice, wheat flour, plantains, ''yuca'' (cassava), beef, chicken, pork and seafood.
On the Human Development Index, Panama ranked 60th in 2015.
Others believe that the first settlers arrived in Panama in August, when butterflies abound, and that the name means "many butterflies" in an indigenous language.
National elections for the executive and legislative branches take place every five years.
Because of this, indigenous people of the area were often referred to as "indios de guerra" (war Indians) and resisted Spanish attempts to conquer them or missionize them.
Many Panamanians supported the intervention.
Vasco Núñez de Balboa's tortuous trek from the Atlantic to the Pacific in 1513 demonstrated that the isthmus was, indeed, the path between the seas, and Panama quickly became the crossroads and marketplace of Spain's empire in the New World.
When the Senate of Colombia rejected the Hay–Herrán Treaty, the United States decided to support the Panamanian independence movement.
However, others believe the word ''Panama'' comes from the Kuna word "bannaba" which means "distant" or "far away".
He succeeded Mireya Moscoso, the widow of Arnulfo Arias.
There are regional teams as well as a squad that competes internationally.
Torrijos' death altered the tone of Panama's political evolution.
Noriega also began playing a double role in Central America under the supervision of the CIA.
An example of undisturbed, unique culture in Panama is that of the Guna who are known for ''molas''.
A week and a half later, on October 11, 1968, the National Guard (Guardia Nacional) ousted Arias and initiated the downward spiral that would culminate with the United States' invasion in 1989.
It is bordered by Costa Rica to the west, Colombia (in South America) to the southeast, the Caribbean to the north and the Pacific Ocean to the south.
Mangrove swamps occur along parts of both coasts, with banana plantations occupying deltas near Costa Rica.
The most heavily affected district was impoverished El Chorrillo, where several blocks of apartments were completely destroyed.
The monumental monolithic sculptures at the Barriles (Chiriqui) site are also important traces of these ancient isthmian cultures.
The capital and largest city is Panama City, whose metropolitan area is home to nearly half of the country's 3.9 million people.
To preserve the Guard's interests, Lieutenant Colonel Omar Torrijos Herrera and Major Boris Martínez commanded the first military coup against a civilian government in Panamanian republican history.
These Pacific-oriented rivers are longer and slower running than those of the Caribbean side.
The Spanish spoken in Panama is known as Panamanian Spanish.
A Panama - United States Trade Promotion Agreement (TPA) was signed in 2007, approved by Panama on July 11, 2007 and by US President Obama on October 21, 2011, and the agreement entered into force on October 31, 2012.
For this reason education should be different in accordance with the social class to which the student should be related."
These evolved into significant populations best known through their spectacular burials (dating to c. 500–900 AD) at the Monagrillo archaeological site, and their beautiful Gran Coclé style polychrome pottery.
Subsistence farming, widely practiced from the northeastern jungles to the southwestern grasslands, consists largely of corn, bean, and tuber plots.
It is white, and is usually about 13 yards of material.
The annual average in Panama City is little more than half of that in Colón.
A project to build of a third set of locks for the Panama Canal A was overwhelmingly approved in referendum (with low voter turnout, however) on October 22, 2006.
Panama has a tropical climate.
He formed a National Anti-Corruption Council whose members represented the highest levels of government and civil society, labor organizations, and religious leadership.
Temperatures on the Pacific side of the isthmus are somewhat lower than on the Caribbean, and breezes tend to rise after dusk in most parts of the country.
Today, there are different types of ''polleras''; the ''pollera de gala'' consists of a short-sleeved ruffle skirt blouse, two full-length skirts and a petticoat.
Panama was inhabited by several indigenous tribes prior to settlement by the Spanish in the 16th century.
Panama's blended culture is reflected in traditional products, such as woodcarvings, ceremonial masks and pottery, as well as in Panama's architecture, cuisine and festivals.
United States President Ronald Reagan began a series of sanctions against the military regime.
Europe has become one of the key markets to promote Panama as a tourist destination.
Law 80 replaced an older Law&nbsp;8 of 1994.
The local folklore can be experienced through a multitude of festivals, dances and traditions that have been handed down from generation to generation.
They are descendents of the people who colonized Panama, worked on the canal, and who moved to the country.
About 93% of the population speak Spanish as their first language, though many citizens who hold jobs at international levels, or who are a part of business corporations speak both English and Spanish.
In many places, a multi-canopied rain forest abuts the swamp on one side of the country and extends to the lower reaches of slopes in the other.
See list of airports in Panama.
Its location on the Isthmus of Panama is strategic.
In the 1984 elections, the candidates were
Silver cargoes were landed at Panama and then taken overland to Portobello or Nombre de Dios on the Caribbean side of the isthmus for further shipment.
The spine that forms the divide is the highly eroded arch of an uplift from the sea bottom, in which peaks were formed by volcanic intrusions.
However, Panama was enormously important to Spain strategically because it was the easiest way to transship silver mined in Peru to Europe.
The military dictatorship, at that time supported by the United States, perpetrated the assassination and torture of more than one hundred Panamanians and forced at least a hundred more dissidents into exile.
During the last half of the 18th century and the first half of the 19th century, migrations to the countryside decreased Panama City's population and the isthmus' economy shifted from the tertiary to the primary sector.
When it was created, Gatun Lake was the largest man-made lake in the world, and the dam was the largest earth dam.
The US intention to influence the area, especially the Panama Canal's construction and control, led to the separation of Panama from Colombia in 1903 and its establishment as a nation.
Hegemonic forces have created hybrid forms of this by blending African and Native American culture with European culture.
What they had counted on, however, was the influence of the separatists in the capital.
Despite the Torrijos administration's public stance on corruption, many high-profile cases, particularly involving political or business elites, were never acted upon.
A food surplus was registered in August 2008.
In August 2016 Panama had two reigning world boxing champions: Guillermo Jones and Anselmo Moreno.
It is home to many South American species as well as North American wildlife.
Outside Panama City, regional festivals take place throughout the year featuring local musicians and dancers.
Some poets and novelists born in Panamá are:
Public education began in Panama soon after the separation from Colombia in 1903.
Mostly unnavigable, many originate as swift highland streams, meander in valleys, and form coastal deltas.
Soon after the separatist declaration of Los Santos, Fábrega convened every organization in the capital with separatist interests and formally declared the city's support for independence.
In May 1989 Panamanians voted overwhelmingly for the anti-Noriega candidates.
In its stead, a system of medium and smaller-sized landownership was promoted, thus taking away the power from the large landowners and into the hands of medium and small sized proprietors.
Two large matching pom poms (''mota'') are on the front and back, four ribbons hang from the front and back on the waist line, five gold chains (''caberstrillos'') hang from the neck to the waist, a gold cross or medallion on a black ribbon is worn as a choker, and a silk purse is worn on the waistline.
The military appointed a Provisional Government Junta that was to arrange new elections.
His administration carried out economic reforms and often worked closely with the U.S. on implementation of the Canal treaties.
There were 6997 from Germany, the most populous country in the European Union.
*Nicolás Ardito Barletta Vallarino, supported by the military in a union called UNADE
Basketball is popular in Panama.
A long-distance hiking trail called the  TransPanama Trail is being built from Colombia to Costa Rica.
Ernesto Pérez Balladares was sworn in as President on September 1, 1994, after an internationally monitored election campaign.
In total, the berths are over 2,400 meters long with alongside depth of 15 meters.
Executive power is exercised by the government.
The U.S. influence in Panama can be seen in the country's sports.
The Isthmus of Panama was placed under its jurisdiction.
The Port of Balboa has 18 super post-Panamax and Panamax quay cranes and 44 gantry cranes.
Covering around 40 percent of its land area, Panama's jungles are home to an abundance of tropical plants and animals – some of them to be found nowhere else on the planet.
Typical Panamanian foods are mild-flavored, without the pungency of some of Panama's Latin American and Caribbean neighbors.
*Price freezing on food, medicine and other goods until January 31, 1969
This usually occurs in informal settlements.
Panama is home to Tocumen International Airport, Central America's largest airport.
Ever since October 1821, when the former Governor General, Juan de la Cruz Murgeón, left the isthmus on a campaign in Quito and left the Veraguan colonel in charge, the separatists had been slowly converting Fábrega to the separatist side.
Real estate developers in Panama have increased the number of tourism destinations in the past five years because of the interest for these visitor incentives.
According to the Tourism Authority of Panama (ATP), from January to September, 71,154 tourists from Europe entered Panama, which is 13,373 more than figures for same period the previous year.
He revealed details of the electoral fraud, accused Noriega of planning Torrijos's death and declared that Torrijos had received 12 million dollars from the Shah of Iran for giving the exiled Iranian leader asylum.
The United States froze economic and military assistance to Panama in the summer of 1987 in response to the domestic political crisis in Panama and an attack on the U.S. Embassy.
In boxing, four Panamanians are in the International Boxing Hall of Fame: Roberto Durán, Eusebio Pedroza, Ismael Laguna and Panama Al Brown.
*Dr. Arnulfo Arias Madrid,Unión Nacional ("National Union")
The constitution was changed in 1972.
The Christmas parade, known as ''El desfile de Navidad'', is celebrated in the capital, Panama City.
This elitist focus changed rapidly under United States influence.
The best-known version is that a fishing village and its nearby beach bore the name "Panamá", which meant "an abundance of fish".
The official estimated cost of the project is US$5.25 billion.
Most of the European tourists were Spaniards (14,820), followed by Italians (13,216), French (10,174) and British (8,833).
At least 140 Panamanian players have played professional baseball in the United States, more than any other Central American country.
Hair is usually worn in a bun, held by three large gold combs that have pearls (''tembleques'') worn like a crown.
Panama City's streets experience frequent traffic jams due to poor planning for the now extensive private vehicle fleet.
Scholars believe that infectious disease was the primary cause of the population decline of American natives.
In 2015 Panama ranked 60th in the world in terms of the Human Development Index.
On May 4, 2014, Juan Carlos Varela won the 2014 presidential election with over 39% of the votes, against the party of his former political partner Ricardo Martinelli, Cambio Democrático, and their candidate José Domingo Arias.
They are tasked with law enforcement and can perform limited military actions.
Panama was under Spanish rule for almost 300 years (1538–1821), and became part of the Viceroyalty of Peru, along with all other Spanish possessions in South America.
As the Spanish American wars of independence were heating up all across Latin America, Panama City was preparing for independence; however, their plans were accelerated by the unilateral Grito de La Villa de Los Santos (Cry From the Town of Saints), issued on November 10, 1821, by the residents of Azuero without backing from Panama City to declare their separation from the Spanish Empire.
The Panamanian currency is officially the balboa, fixed at a rate of 1:1 with the United States dollar since Panamanian independence in 1903.
Standing for the four-party opposition Alliance for Change, Mr. Martinelli gained 60% of the vote, against 37% for the candidate of the governing left-wing Democratic Revolutionary Party.
The lake was created between 1907 and 1913 by the building of the Gatun Dam across the Chagres River.
The United States government said Operation Just Cause, which commenced on December 20, 1989, was "necessary to safeguard the lives of U.S. citizens in Panama, defend democracy and human rights, combat drug trafficking, and secure the neutrality of the Panama Canal as required by the Torrijos–Carter Treaties" (''New York Times'', A Transcript of President Bush's Address n.p.).
Forests dominate, interrupted in places by grasslands, scrub, and crops.
In the meantime, the Guard began a series of populist measures that would gain support for the coup.
El Chorrillo had been built in days of Canal construction, a series of wooden barracks which easily caught fire under the United States attack.
Arias, who had promised to respect the hierarchy of the National Guard, broke the pact and started a large restructuring of the Guard.
One such famous community amounted to a small kingdom under Bayano, which emerged in the 1552 to 1558.
Local cities host live ''reggae en español'', ''reggaeton'', ''haitiano (compas)'', jazz, blues, ''salsa'', reggae, and rock music performances.
The United States cooperates with the Panamanian government in promoting economic, political, security, and social development through U.S. and international agencies.
Parallel to this, the military began a policy of repression against the opposition, who were labeled communists.
During her administration, Moscoso attempted to strengthen social programs, especially for child and youth development, protection, and general welfare.
The political landscape is dominated by two major parties and many smaller parties, many of which are driven by individual leaders more than ideologies.
This failed for a number of reasons, and the ensuing debt contributed to the union of England and Scotland in 1707.
In that zone, the U.S. would build a canal, then administer, fortify, and defend it "in perpetuity".
More than half the population lives in the Panama City–Colón metropolitan corridor, which spans several cities.
On July 10, the Civic Crusade called for a massive demonstration that was violently repressed by the "Dobermans", the military's special riot control unit.
The prosperity enjoyed during the first two centuries (1540–1740) while contributing to colonial growth; the placing of extensive regional judicial authority (Real Audiencia) as part of its jurisdiction; and the pivotal role it played at the height of the Spanish Empire – the first modern global empire – helped define a distinctive sense of autonomy and of regional or national identity within Panama well before the rest of the colonies.
Amid negotiations for the Robles–Johnson treaty, Panama held elections in 1968.
The divide does not form part of the great mountain chains of North America, and only near the Colombian border are there highlands related to the Andean system of South America.
The size of the indigenous population of the isthmus at the time of European colonization is uncertain.
Perpetuated by dramatic educational disparities, over 25% of Panama's population lived in national poverty in 2013 and 3% of the population lives in extreme poverty, according to latest reports by the World Bank.
In 2016, the release of the Panama Papers caused a huge global financial scandal.
Panama's roads, traffic and transportation systems are generally safe, though night driving is difficult and in many cases, restricted by local authorities.
Nearly 500 rivers lace Panama's rugged landscape.
Additionally there are more than 20 smaller airfields in the country.
There are also a small number of Rastafarians.
From the outset, Panamanian identity was based on a sense of "geographic destiny", and Panamanian fortunes fluctuated with the geopolitical importance of the isthmus.
Arias Madrid was declared the winner of elections that were marked by violence and accusations of fraud against Alianza del Pueblo.
The Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between the governments of the United States and Panama was signed on October 27, 1982.
The canal is of major economic importance because it provides millions of dollars of toll revenue to the national economy and provides massive employment.
This surgical maneuver represented the largest United States military operation to that date since the end of the Vietnam War (Cajar Páez 22) The United Nations put the Panamanian civilian death toll at 500, while other sources had higher statistics.
In 1977 an agreement was signed for the total transfer of the Canal from the United States to Panama by the end of the 20th century, which culminated on 31 December 1999.
On February 5, 1988, General Manuel Antonio Noriega was accused of drug trafficking by federal juries in Tampa and Miami.
Panama recorded a population of 3,405,813 in its 2010 census.
(see Pizzurno Gelós and Araúz, Estudios sobre el Panamá republicano 508).
The Trans-Panama pipeline, running across the isthmus with a length of 131&nbsp;km, has been operating between Charco Azul and Chiriquí Grande since 1979.
The principles underlying this early education system were that children should receive different types of education in accordance with their social class and therefore the position they were expected to occupy in society.
Highways are generally well-developed for a Latin American country.
Panama was the site of the ill-fated Darien scheme, which set up a Scottish colony in the region in 1698.
In the city, a big Christmas tree is lit with Christmas lights, and everybody surrounds the tree and sings Christmas carols.
In 1981 Torrijos died in a plane crash.
When Gran Colombia dissolved in 1831, Panama and Nueva Granada remained joined, eventually becoming the Republic of Colombia.
The original ''pollera'' consists of a ruffled blouse worn off the shoulders and a skirt is on the waistline with gold buttons.
Panama maintains armed police and security forces, and small air and maritime forces.
The Port of Balboa also contains 2,100 square meters of warehouse space.
Captain Antonio Tello de Guzmán, while exploring the Pacific side in 1515, stopped in the small indigenous fishing town.
Black Panamanians are descendents of African slaves brought to the Americas on the 1500 Atlantic Slave Trade.
The mountain range of the divide is called the Cordillera de Talamanca near the Costa Rican border.
Hd also accused Noriega of the assassination by decapitation of then opposition leader Dr. Hugo Spadafora.
However, the remoteness of New Granada's capital, Santa Fe de Bogotá (the modern capital of Colombia) proved a greater obstacle than the Spanish crown anticipated as the authority of New Granada was contested by the seniority, closer proximity, and previous ties to the viceroyalty of Lima and even by Panama's own initiative.
The people of the isthmus made several attempts to secede and came close to success in 1831, and again during the Thousand Days' War of 1899–1902.
Panama was one of the few countries that didn't enter an INDC at COP21.
64.5% of the population were aged between 15 and 65, with 6.6% of the population being 65 years or older.
In recent decades, school enrollment at all levels, but especially at upper levels, has increased significantly.
