Solid pseudopapillary tumor is a rare low-grade neoplasm that mainly affects younger women, and generally has a very good prognosis.
File:Diagram showing stage T2 cancer of the pancreas CRUK 254.svg|Stage T2 pancreatic cancer
It can be performed only if the person is likely to survive major surgery and if the cancer is localized without invading local structures or metastasizing.
These cancers are thought to arise from several types of precancerous lesions within the pancreas.
Difficulty in emptying the stomach (delayed gastric emptying) is common and can be a serious problem, involving hospitalization.
The last of these are especially associated with a poor prognosis.
Tumors in the body and tail typically also cause pain.
Globally pancreatic cancer is the 11th most common cancer in women and the 12th most common in men.
The undigested fat leads to foul-smelling, fatty feces that are difficult to flush away.
Lanreotide can slow tumor growth.
The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) into three categories, based on their degree of cellular differentiation (from "NET G1" through to the poorly differentiated "NET G3").
Radiation therapy is occasionally used if there is pain due to anatomic extension, such as metastasis to bone.
For this reason, non-functioning PanNETs are often diagnosed only after the cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
The rate of these operations had increased steadily over this period, with only three of them before 1980, and the median operating time reduced from 8.8&nbsp;hours in the 1970s to 5.5&nbsp;hours in the 2000s, and mortality within 30 days or in hospital was only 1%.
In 2012, pancreatic cancers of all types were the seventh most common cause of cancer deaths, resulting in 330,000 deaths globally.
The annual incidence of clinically recognized PanNETs is low (about 5 per one million person-years) and is dominated by the non-functioning types.
Constipation is common.
These are generally less aggressive than pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The last type, pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) mainly occur in women, and may remain benign or progress to cancer.
Typically, pancreatic adenocarcinoma first spreads to nearby lymph nodes, and later to the liver or to the peritoneal cavity, large intestine or lungs.
In the UK, about half of new cases of pancreatic cancer are diagnosed following a visit to a hospital emergency department for pain or jaundice.
* Unexplained weight loss, either from loss of appetite, or loss of exocrine function resulting in poor digestion.
NETs can start in most organs of the body, including the pancreas, where the various malignant types are all considered to be rare.
The many types of pancreatic cancer can be divided into two general groups.
For cancers diagnosed early, the five-year survival rate rises to about 20%.
A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases, particularly if preliminary neoadjuvant therapy is feasible, using chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.
If they become large, cause symptoms, or have suspicious features, they can usually be successfully removed by surgery.
Signs and symptoms of the most common form of pancreatic cancer may include yellow skin, abdominal or back pain, unexplained weight loss, light-colored stools, dark urine and loss of appetite.
Other genes that are frequently mutated include ''DAXX'', ''mTOR'' and ''ATRX''.
The most widely used cancer staging system for pancreatic cancer is the one formulated by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) together with the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC).
File:Diagram showing stage T1 cancer of the pancreas CRUK 246.svg|Stage T1 pancreatic cancer
Radiotherapy may form part of treatment to attempt to shrink a tumor to a resectable state, but its use on unresectable tumors remains controversial as there are conflicting results from clinical trials.
If the tumor is not amenable to surgical removal and is causing symptoms, targeted therapy with everolimus or sunitinib can reduce symptoms and slow progression of the disease.
In such cases, bypass surgery might overcome the obstruction and improve quality of life but is not intended as a cure.
This is uncommon, found in only about 2% of cases of pancreatic cancer.
Other symptoms or complications that can be treated with palliative surgery are obstruction by the tumor of the intestines or bile ducts.
There are a number of types of pancreatic cancer.
Pain can be managed with medications such as opioids or through procedural intervention, by a nerve block on the celiac plexus (CPB).
Palliative care can also help treat depression that often comes with diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.
The first reported partial pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed by the Italian surgeon Alessandro Codivilla in 1898, but the patient only survived 18 days before succumbing to complications.
In up to two-thirds of people abdominal pain is the main symptom, for 46% of the total accompanied by jaundice, with 13% having jaundice without pain.
Since then outcomes in larger centers have improved considerably, and mortality from the operation is often less than 4%.
* The tumor may compress neighboring organs, disrupting digestive processes and making it difficult for the stomach to empty, which may cause nausea and a feeling of fullness.
Worldwide efforts on many levels are underway to understand pancreatic cancer, but progress has been slow, particularly into understanding the disease's causes.
* Jaundice, a yellow tint to the whites of the eyes or skin, with or without pain, and possibly in combination with darkened urine.
Several other types of cancer, which collectively represent the majority of the non-adenocarcinomas, can also arise from these cells.
There is typically considerable desmoplasia or formation of a dense fibrous stroma or structural tissue consisting of a range of cell types (including myofibroblasts, macrophages, lymphocytes and mast cells) and deposited material (such as type I collagen and hyaluronic acid).
The AJCC-UICC staging system designates four main overall stages, ranging from early to advanced disease, based on TNM classification of '''T'''umor size, spread to lymph '''N'''odes, and '''M'''etastasis.
An exploratory laparoscopy (a small, camera-guided surgical procedure) may therefore be performed to gain a clearer idea of the outcome of a full operation.
Research on early detection is ongoing.
Treatment options are partly based on the cancer stage.
Pancreatic cancer is usually staged following a CT scan.
Very often they also spread to the important blood or lymphatic vessels and nerves that run close to the pancreas, making surgery far more difficult.
Only one of the patients had the duodenum totally removed, but he survived for two years before dying of metastasis to the liver.
CPB is a safe and effective way to reduce the pain, which generally reduces the need to use opioid painkillers, which have significant negative side effects.
Liver function tests can show a combination of results indicative of bile duct obstruction (raised conjugated bilirubin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase levels).
For instance, the European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer (EUROPAC) trial is aiming to determine whether regular screening is appropriate for people with a family history of the disease, or who have hereditary pancreatitis.
Cancers in the pancreas may also be secondary cancers that have spread from other parts of the body.
Still others aim to affect the non-neoplastic stroma and microenvironment of the tumor, which is known to influence cell proliferation and metastasis.
Kidney cancer is by far the most common cancer to spread to the pancreas, followed by colorectal cancer, and then cancers of the skin, breast, and lung.
The vast majority of cases (about 99%) occur in the part of the pancreas which produces digestive enzymes, known as the exocrine component.
A different TNM system for PanNETs has been proposed by the European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society.
In other cases neoadjuvant therapy remains controversial, because it delays surgery.
Pancreatoblastoma is a rare form, mostly occurring in childhood, and with a relatively good prognosis.
that are identified incidentally, for example on a CT scan performed for other purposes, may be followed by watchful waiting.
A smoker's chance of developing the disease decreases if they stop smoking, and almost returns to that of the rest of the population after 20&nbsp;years.
Even if removed surgically, there remains a considerably increased risk of pancreatic cancer developing subsequently.
In 1912 the German surgeon Walther Kausch was the first to remove large parts of the duodenum and pancreas together (''en bloc'').
Neuroendocrine cancers have better outcomes; at five&nbsp;years from diagnosis, 65% of those diagnosed are living, though survival varies considerably depending on the type of tumor.
This is a major operation which involves removing the pancreatic head and the curve of the duodenum together ("pancreato-duodenectomy"), making a bypass for food from the stomach to the jejunum ("gastro-jejunostomy") and attaching a loop of jejunum to the cystic duct to drain bile ("cholecysto-jejunostomy").
It has a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 73% in detecting pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and is used for following known cases rather than diagnosis.
However, considerable research has failed to firmly establish alcohol consumption as a direct risk factor for pancreatic cancer.
Before surgery, neoadjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy  may be used in cases that are considered to be "borderline resectable" (see Staging) in order to reduce the cancer to a level where surgery could be beneficial.
The disease is divided into stages, from early (stage&nbsp;I) to late (stage&nbsp;IV).
The earliest recognition of pancreatic cancer has been attributed to the 18th-century Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni, the historical father of modern-day anatomic pathology, who claimed to have traced several cases of cancer in the pancreas.
Both groups occur mainly (but not exclusively) in people over 40, and are slightly more common in men, but some rare sub-types mainly occur in women or children.
Although it accounts for only 2.5% of new cases, pancreatic cancer is responsible for 6% of cancer deaths each year.
Others aim to target the highly resistant cancer stem cells.
* At least 50% of people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have diabetes at the time of diagnosis.
This had previously not been found to be helpful, but is being trialed again, using drug combinations which have emerged from the many trials of post-operative therapies, such as FOLFIRINOX.
Another area of interest is in assessing whether keyhole surgery (laparoscopy) would be better than Whipple's procedure in treating the disease surgically, particularly in terms of recovery time.
In the United States the risk for African Americans is over 50% greater than for whites, but the rates in Africa and East Asia are much lower than those in North America or Europe.
One type, the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) was first described by Japanese researchers in 1982.
Magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography may also be used, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography may be useful in some cases.
Studies of autopsies have uncovered small PanNETs rather frequently, suggesting that the prevalence of tumors that remain inert and asymptomatic may be relatively high.
In 2010, the WHO recommended that PanNETs be referred to as "neuroendocrine" rather than "endocrine" tumors.
There are several sub-types of exocrine pancreatic cancers, but their diagnosis and treatment have much in common.
The functioning types secrete hormones such as insulin, gastrin, and glucagon into the bloodstream, often in large quantities, giving rise to serious symptoms such as low blood sugar, but also favoring relatively early detection.
Irreversible electroporation is a relatively novel ablation technique that has shown promise in downstaging and prolonging survival in persons with locally advanced disease.
Other common manifestations of the disease include: weakness and tiring easily; dry mouth; sleep problems; and a palpable abdominal mass."
Some small tumors of less than 1&nbsp;cm.
As of 2012, pancreatic cancer resulted in 330,000 deaths globally, up from 310,000 in 2010 and 200,000 in 1990.
For localized tumors, the surgical procedure may be much less extensive than the types of surgery used to treat pancreatic adenocarcinoma described above, but otherwise surgical procedures are similar to those for exocrine tumors.
But these lesions do not always progress to cancer, and the increased numbers detected as a by-product of the increasing use of CT scans for other reasons are not all treated.
Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the fourth most common in the United States.
A doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer when the onset of diabetes in someone over 50 years old is accompanied  by typical symptoms such as unexplained weight loss, persistent abdominal or back pain, indigestion, vomiting, or fatty feces.
Surgery with the intention of a cure is only possible in around one-fifth (20%) of new cases.
Overall PanNETs are thought to account for about 1 to 2% of all pancreatic tumors.
This is despite the fact that the tissue from which it arises – the pancreatic ductal epithelium – represents less than 10% of the pancreas by cell volume.
A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses&nbsp;– particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads.
Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas: ''KRAS'' (in 95% of cases), ''CDKN2A'' (also in 95%), ''TP53'' (75%), and ''SMAD4'' (55%).
The most common functioning PanNETs are insulinomas and gastrinomas, named after the hormones they secrete.
Palliative care focuses not on treating the underlying cancer, but on treating symptoms such as pain or nausea, and can assist in decision-making, including when or if hospice care will be beneficial.
The role of radiotherapy as an auxiliary (adjuvant) treatment after potentially curative surgery has been controversial since the 1980s.
Exceptions to this are the functioning PanNETs, where over-production of various active hormones can give rise to symptoms (which depend on the type of hormone).
Drinking alcohol excessively is a major cause of chronic pancreatitis, which in turn predisposes to pancreatic cancer.
However, it lacks sensitivity and specificity, not least because 5% of people lack the Lewis (a) antigen and cannot produce CA19-9.
However, the combination of gemcitabine with erlotinib was found to increase survival modestly, and erlotinib was licensed by the FDA for use in pancreatic cancer in 2005.
The small minority of tumors that arise elsewhere in the pancreas are mainly pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs).
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryoablation, and hepatic artery embolization may also be used.
Since pancreatic cancer usually does not cause recognizable symptoms in its early stages, the disease is typically not diagnosed until it has spread beyond the pancreas itself.
The age of the person is not in itself a reason not to operate, but their general performance status needs to be adequate for a major operation.
This was in Breslau, now Wrocław in Poland.
Many 18th and 19th-century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease, given the similar appearance of pancreatitis.
The European Society for Medical Oncology recommends that adjuvant radiotherapy should only be used for people enrolled in clinical trials.
Cystadenocarcinomas account for 1% of pancreatic cancers, and they have a better prognosis than the other exocrine types.
Some of these involve targeted therapies against the cancer cells' molecular mechanisms.
It may be slightly relieved by bending forward.
In 1907–08, after some more unsuccessful operations by other surgeons, experimental procedures were tried on corpses by French surgeons.
Chemotherapy and, to a lesser extent, radiotherapy are likely to be offered to most people, whether or not surgery is possible.
The general health of the person must also be assessed, though age in itself is not an obstacle to surgery.
The United States, Central and eastern Europe, and Argentina and Uruguay all have high rates.
Gemcitabine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1997, after a clinical trial reported improvements in quality of life and a 5-week improvement in median survival duration in people with advanced pancreatic cancer.
This is one of the main reasons for the generally poor survival rates.
Early operations were compromised partly because of mistaken beliefs that people would die if their duodenum were removed, and also, at first, if the flow of pancreatic juices stopped.
Standard cytotoxic chemotherapy is generally not very effective for PanNETs, but may be used when other drug treatments fail to prevent the disease from progressing, or in poorly differentiated PanNET cancers.
This cancer originates in the ducts that carry secretions (such as enzymes and bicarbonate) away from the pancreas.
File:Diagram showing stage T4 cancer of the pancreas CRUK 267.svg|Stage T4 pancreatic cancer
Efforts are underway to develop new drugs.
Many clinical trials have tested a variety of treatment combinations since the 1980s, but have failed to settle the matter conclusively.
For instance, if the cancer is invading or compressing the duodenum or colon.
The limited success of outcomes after surgery has led to a number of trials that were running in 2014 to test outcomes using chemotherapy or radiochemotherapy before surgery.
Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis.
One particular feature that is evaluated is the encouraging presence, or discouraging absence, of a clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels.
Pancreatic cancer rarely occurs before the age of 40, and more than half of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occur in those over 70.
Early palliative care is recommended even for those receiving treatment that aims for a cure.
Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by a combination of medical imaging techniques such as ultrasound or computed tomography, blood tests, and examination of tissue samples (biopsy).
Medical imaging techniques, such as computed tomography (CT scan) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) are used both to confirm the diagnosis and to help decide whether the tumor can be surgically removed (its "resectability").
For cancers involving the head of the pancreas, the Whipple procedure is the most commonly attempted curative surgical treatment.
This was the first chemotherapy drug approved by the FDA primarily for a nonsurvival clinical trial endpoint.
PanNETs are sometimes called "islet cell cancers", even though it is now known that they do not actually arise from islet cells as previously thought.
Nowadays, this can often be done using minimally invasive surgery.
Surgery may be performed on the pancreas in such cases, whether in hope of a cure or to alleviate symptoms.
This alters or, depending on the technique used, destroys the nerves that transmit pain from the abdomen.
Some  PanNETs absorb specific peptides or hormones, and these PanNETs may respond to nuclear medicine therapy with radiolabeled peptides or hormones such as iobenguane (iodine-131-MIBG).
It was noted in 2010 that: "For the next decade, little attention was paid to this report; however, over the subsequent 15 years, there has been a virtual explosion in the recognition of this tumor."
Another series of 2,050 operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement.
Regarding the recognition of PanNETs, the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888.
While long-standing diabetes is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer (see Risk factors), the cancer can itself cause diabetes, in which case recent onset of diabetes could be considered an early sign of the disease.
Later it was thought, also mistakenly, that the pancreatic duct could simply be tied up without serious adverse effects; in fact it will very often leak later on.
Pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms are a broad group of pancreas tumors that have varying malignant potential.
The next most common type, acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas, arises in the clusters of cells that produce these enzymes, and represents 5% of exocrine pancreas cancers.
A large minority (between 35% and 47%) of people diagnosed with the disease will have had nausea, vomiting or a feeling of weakness.
Somewhere between 45% and 90% of PanNETs are thought to be of the non-functioning types.
It is uncommon for it to spread to the bones or brain.
Although CT scans help, in practice it can be difficult to determine whether the tumor can be fully removed (its "resectability"), and it may only become apparent during surgery that it is not possible to successfully remove the tumor without damaging other vital tissues.
They are being detected at a greatly increased rate as CT scans become more powerful and common, and discussion continues as how best to assess and treat them, given that many are benign.
A head-to-head trial between the two new options is awaited, and trials investigating other variations continue.
These can be treated by taking pancreatin which contains manufactured pancreatic enzymes, and is best taken with food.
This results when a cancer in the head of the pancreas obstructs the common bile duct as it runs through the pancreas.
This creates a tumor microenvironment that is short of blood vessels (hypovascular) and so of oxygen (tumor hypoxia).
The evidence is stronger for a link with heavy drinking, of at least six drinks per day.
For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide, can reduce the excessive production of hormones.
Some case reports were published in the 1820s and 1830s, and a genuine histopathologic diagnosis was eventually recorded by the American clinician Jacob Mendes Da Costa, who also doubted the reliability of Morgagni's interpretations.
In 2014, an estimated 46,000 people in the US are expected to be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and 40,000 to die of it.
Locally advanced adenocarcinomas have spread into neighboring organs, which may be any of the following (in roughly decreasing order of frequency): the duodenum, stomach, transverse colon, spleen, adrenal gland, or kidney.
The disease occurs most often in the developed world, where about 70% of the new cases in 2012 originated.
The FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy regimen using four drugs was found more effective than gemcitabine, but with substantial side effects, and is thus only suitable for people with good performance status.
By the start of the 20th century, cancer of the head of the pancreas had become a well-established diagnosis.
Surgery is the only treatment that can cure pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and may also be done to improve quality of life without the potential for cure.
Abdominal ultrasound is less sensitive and will miss small tumors, but can identify cancers that have spread to the liver and build-up of fluid in the peritoneal cavity (ascites).
''SWI/SNF'' mutations/deletions occur in about 10–15% of the adenocarcinomas.
CA19-9 (carbohydrate antigen 19.9) is a tumor marker that is frequently elevated in pancreatic cancer.
It may be used for a quick and cheap first examination before other techniques.
The spread of pancreatic cancer to other organs (metastasis) may also cause symptoms.
PanNETs are grouped into 'functioning' and 'non-functioning' types, depending on the degree to which they produce hormones.
For locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, which together represent over 80% of cases, numerous recent trials comparing chemotherapy regimes have shown increased survival times, but not to more than one year.
The first operation was unplanned, as cancer was only discovered in the operating theatre.
These are microscopic abnormalities in the pancreas, which are often found in autopsies of people with no diagnosed cancer.
In the less than 20% of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with a diagnosis of a localized and small cancerous growth (less than 2&nbsp;cm in Stage T1), about 20% of Americans survive to five years.
As with other neuroendocrine tumors, the history of the terminology and classification of PanNETs is complex.
Chemotherapy using gemcitabine alone was the standard for about a decade, as a number of trials testing it in combination with other drugs failed to demonstrate significantly better outcomes.
The exocrine group is dominated by pancreatic adenocarcinoma (variations of this name may add "invasive" and "ductal"), which is by far the most common type, representing about 85% of all pancreatic cancers.
Other exocrine cancers include adenosquamous carcinomas, signet ring cell carcinomas, hepatoid carcinomas, colloid carcinomas, undifferentiated carcinomas, and undifferentiated carcinomas with osteoclast-like giant cells.
Bearing in mind that the disease is rarely diagnosed before the age of 40, common symptoms of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occurring before diagnosis include:
The discovery in the late 1930s that vitamin&nbsp;K prevented bleeding with jaundice, and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process, both improved post-operative survival, but about 25% of people never left hospital alive as late as the 1970s.
The preliminary results of one trial, presented in 2013, "markedly reduced enthusiasm" for its use on locally advanced tumors.
The disease is more common in men than women, though the difference in rates has narrowed over recent decades, probably reflecting earlier increases in female smoking.
About 60–70% of adenocarcinomas occur in the 'head' of the pancreas.
Tumors in the head of the pancreas typically also cause jaundice, pain, loss of appetite, dark urine, and light-colored stools.
Furthermore, cancer stem cells are usually not evident microscopically, and if they are present they may continue to develop and spread.
It is especially suitable for treatment of tumors that are in proximity to peri-pancreatic vessels without risk of vascular trauma.
There are several fundamental unanswered questions.
For example, ''KRAS'' mutation is normally absent.
Tumors within the pancreas only (localized tumors), or with limited metastases, for example to the liver, may be removed by surgery.
In the 1970s a group of American surgeons wrote urging that the procedure was too dangerous and should be abandoned.
It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide.
These may progress from low to high grade and then to a tumor.
The AJCC-UICC staging system allows distinction between stage III tumors that are judged to be "borderline resectable" (where surgery is technically feasible because the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery are still free) and those that are "unresectable" (due to more locally advanced disease); in terms of the more detailed TNM classification, these two groups correspond to T3 and T4 respectively.
This depends on the assessed risk of surgery which is influenced by the site of the tumor and the presence of other medical problems.
