This event is said to have originated in Olney, England in 1445 when a housewife was still busy frying pancakes to eat before the Lenten fast when she heard the bells of St Peter and St Paul's Church calling her to the Shriving Service.
North Indian salty pancakes are made using batter prepared from gram flour or green gram paste (''moong daal'') and are sometimes garnished with ''paneer'', a cottage-style cheese.
A "pancake" in South Africa is a crêpe.
In Korea, pancakes include ''jeon'', ''pajeon'', ''bindaetteok'', ''kimchijeon'', and ''hotteok''.
It is then served with salted duck egg, grated coconut, and sugar.
The fun relay race is to raise awareness of the work of the national brain injury charity, Rehab UK, and the needs of people with acquired brain injury.
''Yaniqueques'' or ''yanikeke'' are a Dominican Republic version of the jonnycake.
English pancakes are similar to French crêpes, and Italian crespelle.
The modern johnnycake is stereotypically identified with today's "Rhode Island" foods, though jonnycakes are a cultural staple in all of the northern US.
They are often served with whipped cream and fruits, or non-sweet spreads such as vegetables.
''Injera'' thus acts simultaneously as food, eating utensil and plate.
''Æbleskiver'' are cooked on the stove top by baking in a special cast iron pan with several hemispherical indentations.
They are smaller and thicker than ''naleśniki'' and can be stuffed with apple slices.
Blini/Mlynci cooking dates back to pagan traditions and feasts, which are reflected in today's "pancake week" celebrated in the winter before the Great Lent.
Yogurt may be used to give the pancakes a relatively moist consistency.
Sourdough was used by prospectors and pioneers to make sourdough pancakes without having to buy yeast.
They are slightly thicker than crêpes and can be eaten plain or with sweet or savoury toppings.
The bannock of Aboriginal people was made of corn, nut meal and plant bulb meal.
They are slightly thicker than crêpes and can be sweet or savoury.
Savoury fillings include fried vegetables, fried chicken, minced meat, and a variety of added ingredients such as potatoes, mushrooms, cabbage or ham.
Pancakes may be ⅓ inch (1&nbsp;cm) thick and about 4 inches (10&nbsp;cm) in diameter.
(),  () or  () are cassava (manioc) starch flour unleavened pancakes.
The resulting product is significantly more watery, filling and strongly flavored than the unfermented , and care should be taken at rolling the pancakes if desired because it breaks very easily.
Beside the usual thin pancakes, called ''pannkakor'', which resembles the French crêpes and, often served with whipped cream and jam, are traditionally eaten for lunch on Thursdays with pea soup, the Swedish cuisine has ''plättar''—very small pancakes, which resemble tiny English pancakes, and are usually fried in a special pan called a "plättlagg", a sort of normal size frying pan with indentations to allow for several (normally seven) to be made at once.
In Austria, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia, pancakes are called palatschinke, palačinka and palacinka, respectively (plurals palatschinken, palačinky, palacinky).
The exotic Brazilian pancake  () is made from a mixture of coconut milk (, ) and  (), a paste extracted from fermented cassava, most prominent in the cuisines of the Northern and Northeastern regions and relatively unknown elsewhere.
All are made without the use of a raising agent.
They are a staple at Dutch Reformed Church fêtes.
In Brittany, a ''galette'' (or ''galette bretonne'') is a large thin pancake made of buckwheat flour, often cooked on one side only.
In Britain and the Commonwealth, they are associated with Shrove Tuesday, commonly known as Pancake Day, when perishable ingredients had to be used up before the fasting period of Lent began.
A traditional version includes filling pancakes with cheese, pouring yoghurt over them, and then baking in an oven.
The earliest attested references on ''tagenias'' are in the works of the 5th century BC poets Cratinus and Magnes.
''Kaiserschmarrn'', a thick but light caramelized pancake popular in Bavaria and regions of the former Austria-Hungary, is usually split into pieces, filled with fruits or nuts, sprinkled with powdered sugar and served with a fruit sauce.
Unlike Dutch pancakes, the batter for Poffertjes contains baking powder and therefore have a softer interior than pancakes.
They can be served with jam and cream or just with butter.
They are usually drizzled with honey and cinnamon, and sometimes topped with cheese, nuts, fruits or vegetables.
For those with celiac disease, corn starch might substitute the wheat flour.
Archaeological evidence suggests that pancakes are probably the earliest and most widespread cereal food eaten in prehistoric societies.
In Hungary, pancakes known as ''palacsinta'' (derived from the Latin ''placenta'') are made from flour, milk or soda water, sugar, and eggs.
In Afrikaans, it is known as a ''pannekoek'' (plural ''pannekoeke'') and, traditionally, is prepared on gas stoves and eaten on wet and cold days.
The Ancient Greeks made pancakes called τηγανίτης (''tēganitēs''), ταγηνίτης (''tagēnitēs'') or ταγηνίας (''tagēnias''), all words deriving from τάγηνον (''tagēnon''), "frying pan".
Like any crêpe or blintz, they can be served with a variety of savoury or sweet fillings as a main dish or a dessert.
In Poland, thin crêpe-style pancakes are called ''naleśniki'' (pronounced ''naleshniki'').
The European version (Scotland) was traditionally made of oatmeal.
''Raggmunk'' and ''rårakor'' are traditionally eaten with pork rinds and lingonberry jam.
Tagenites were made with wheat flour, olive oil, honey, and curdled milk, and were served for breakfast.
Gram flour Chilla (Besan ka Cheela).JPG | Besan ka cheela (gram flour cheela)
Eurokrem, Nutella, and Lino-Lada fillings are favourite among the younger population.
The Rehab UK Parliamentary Pancake Race takes place every Shrove Tuesday, with teams from the British lower house (the House of Commons), the upper house (the House of Lords), and the Fourth Estate, contending for the title of Parliamentary Pancake Race Champions.
File:Johnnycakes (cropped).jpg|Johnnycakes
''Crumpets'' and ''pikelets'' are sometimes considered a variety of pancake.
Usage of leavening agent or yeast is uncommon.
''Pönnukaka'' are traditionally served rolled up with sugar or folded with jam and whipped cream, but if eaten at a café they might have ice cream instead.
A spekdik is a pancake like-food which traditionally eaten in the provinces Groningen and Drenthe in the Netherlands around New Year.
These were much different from what are known as pancakes today.
Vegan recipes might also exist, with texturized soy protein (, ) being particularly popular.
'''Cachapas''' are corn pancakes, popular in Colombian and Venezuelan cuisine.
Tapioca flour must be moistened, strained through a sieve to become a coarse flour.
The traditional Malay pancake in Malaysia and Singapore is called ''lempeng''.
A David Eyre's pancake is a variation on the German pancake named for the American writer and editor David W. Eyre (1912–2008).
File:Dutchbaby-DSCN8394.JPG|A Dutch baby pancake
The Indonesian pancake serabi is made from rice flour and coconut milk.
Nordic pancakes are similar to the French-style crêpes.
Farinata are popular in Mediterranean regions, including Nice.
Dorayaki are a sort of sandwich made from Western-style pancakes and anko.
In North America, a raising agent is used (typically baking powder).
They are a typical Carnival sweet dessert in Galicia, Asturias and León.
Pancake syndrome is an allergic reaction which some people have after eating pancakes in tropical regions where certain mites can contaminate the flour in pancakes.
A ''silver dollar pancake'' refers to a pancake about two to three inches (5 to 7&nbsp;cm) in diameter, or just a bit bigger than the pre-1979 silver dollar coins in the United States, for which they are named.
The heat of an ungreased hot griddle or pan makes the starchy grains fuse into a flatbread which resembles a grainy pancake.
In the Netherlands, pancakes are known as ''pannenkoeken'' and are mostly eaten at lunch and dinner time.
Common fillings include shredded, seasoned chicken breast with tomato paste/sauce, and ground beef, seasoned with fried onion cubes or fried salted smashed garlic (), and often bell pepper cubes and tomato paste/sauce.
File:Indian Pancake.jpg | Uttapam
Various small shops in Cyprus sell crepes, called creperies either savoury or sweet varieties.
Pancake restaurants are popular with families and serve many sweet, savoury, and stuffed varieties.
It is common to add lemon juice to the sugar for extra taste.
In Australia and New Zealand, small pancakes (about 75&nbsp;mm in diameter) known as '''pikelets''' are also eaten.
File:Pesarattu.jpg | Pesarattu or mung bean dosa
One serving is usually five to ten silver dollar pancakes.
In these languages, the word derives from Latin ''placenta'', meaning cake.
In Cyprus the pancake recipe is used for a similar dish such as Genoese canelloni&nbsp;– ground meat with tomato sauce, cheese, and sometimes bechamel sauce&nbsp;– instead of the traditional cannelloni dried pasta sold at supermarkets.
''Pannekoeke'' are usually served with cinnamon-flavoured sugar (and, sometimes, lemon juice) that is either allowed to dissolve into and soften them or, if their crispy texture is to be retained, eaten immediately.
Made in a specially dimpled copper or cast iron pan, they are flipped once with a fork.
File:Masala Dosa as served in Tamil Nadu,India.JPG | Dosa
In the Philippines, bibingka is made from rice flour, eggs, and coconut milk.
''Gundel palacsinta'' is a Hungarian pancake stuffed with walnuts, zest, raisins and rum that is served in chocolate sauce and is often flambéed.
They are generally thicker than French-style crêpes and usually served with sweet or, occasionally, savoury fillings.
On Shrove Tuesday, it is custom to eat pancakes, when lemon juice and sugar may be added to top the pancake.
(Shrove Tuesday is better known in the United States, France, and other countries as Mardi Gras or Fat Tuesday.)
German pancakes are known as ''Pfannkuchen'' (from the German ''Pfanne'' and ''Kuchen'' meaning "pan" and "cake") except in Berlin, Brandenburg and Saxony, where ''Pfannkuchen'' are Berliner pastries and pancakes are known as ''Eierkuchen''.
The Middle English word ''Pancake'' appears in English in the 15th century.
It is usually filled with jaggery and coconut.
The thick batter contains eggs, flour, milk, and a raising agent such as baking powder.
In Finland pancakes are usually eaten as dessert with whipped cream or pancake-jam, sugar or vanilla ice-cream.
A variation of the ''pannekoek'' is the South African crumpet, made from self-raising flour, eggs, milk and a pinch of salt.
In Nepal, the Newar have a savoury rice pancake called ''chataamari'' cooked with meat or eggs on top.
The batter can have ingredients such as buttermilk, blueberries, strawberries, bananas, apples, chocolate chips, cheese, or sugar added.
The batter is runny and forms a thin layer on the bottom of the frying pan when the pan is tilted.
Greek pancakes are called ''tiganites'' (''τηγανίτες'', from the ancient Greek ''τηγανίτης'') and are popular across Greece and Cyprus.
The batter is placed in a clay pan lined with banana leaf, and is grilled over hot coal.
In Scotland pancakes are generally served at teatime.
Pannenkoeken are slightly thicker than crêpes and usually quite large,  or so in diameter.
The Norwegian variety is commonly eaten for dinner, traditionally with bacon, jam (typically bilberry) or sugar.
Traditionally, it is made out of teff flour and is a national dish in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
They are prepared by fermenting rice batter and split-skinned urad bean (black lentil) blended with water.
Spices such as cinnamon, vanilla and nutmeg can also be used.
Each region had its own variation of flour and fruit.
In Vietnamese cuisine there is a variety of traditional pancakes; these include ''bánh xèo'' and ''bánh khọt'' in southern Vietnam, and ''bánh căn'' and ''bánh khoái'' in central Vietnam.
Small thick pancakes made from yoghurt-, kefir- or soured milk-based batter (without yeast) are called ''oladyi'' (оладьи) (diminutive: ''oladushki'' оладушки, further abbreviated as ''ladushki'' ладушки), ''oladky'' ().
Pancakes in the Horn of Africa (Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia) are known as ''injera'' (sometimes transliterated as ''enjera'', ''budenaa'' (Oromo), or ''canjeero'' (Somali)).
Toutons are small, tall pancakes traditional in Newfoundland.
The filling is usually jam, sugared and ground walnuts or poppy seeds, sugared cottage cheese, sugared cocoa, or cinnamon powder, but meat and mushroom fillings are also used (see ''Hortobágyi palacsinta'').
Icelandic crepe-like pancakes are called "pönnukaka", and smaller, thicker pancakes resembling North American pancakes are called "lumma"/"skonsa".
In Japan, okonomiyaki are made from flour, egg, cabbage and a choice of ingredients.
'''Mexican hotcakes''' are similar to US pancakes.
Another kind of pancake was σταιτίτης (''staititēs''), from σταίτινος (''staitinos''), "of flour or dough of spelt", derived from σταῖς (''stais''), "flour of spelt".
Smaller than American or English pancakes at about 3.5 in / 9&nbsp;cm in diameter, they are made by the traditional method of dropping batter onto a griddle (a ''girdle'' in Northumberland or in Scots).
Blintzes ( ''blinchiki'') are thin crêpes made without yeast.
They are eaten with lemons and powdered sugar, jam, or caramelized apples, as well as fritters.
Poffertjes are another Dutch quick bread, similar to American pancakes but sweeter and much smaller.
File:Silver dollar pancakes.JPG|Stacks of "silver dollar" pancakes
American-style pancakes are also popular.
File:Indian pancakes-malpua.jpg | Malpua pancake
''Canjeero'', also known as ''lahooh'' or ''lahoh'', is a similar kind of flatbread eaten in Somalia and Yemen.
Both kinds are generally topped with Parmesan cheese.
A well-known variation originating in Southeast Europe is Palačinke, a thin moist pancake fried on both sides and filled with jam, cheese cream, chocolate, or ground walnuts, but many other fillings, both sweet or savoury, can also be used.
Charity and school events are organized on Pancake Day: in a "pancake race" each participant carries a pancake in a frying pan.
They are thin pancakes and are served with a sweet (fruit, ice cream, jam, chocolate spread) or savoury filling (cheese, ham, seafood, spinach).
In Kenya, pancakes are eaten for breakfast as an alternative to bread.
The batter may contain various additions, such as apple and raisins.
Batter is poured into the oiled indentations and as the ''æbleskiver'' begin to cook, they are turned with a knitting needle, skewer or fork to give the cakes their characteristic spherical shape.
They are a very popular breakfast meal in Guatemala.
Eager to get to church, she ran out of her house still holding the frying pan complete with pancake, tossing it to prevent it from burning, and still wearing her apron and headscarf.
Depending on the region, the "Panqueque" can be thin as a "Crêpe" or as fluffy as a North American pancake.
Another special "Swedish pancake" is the ''äggakaka'' (eggcake), also called ''skånsk äggakaka'' (Scanian eggcake), it is almost like an ordinary Swedish pancake but it is a lot thicker and also a lot more difficult to make due to the risk of burning it.
The Ancient Romans called their fried concoctions "alia dulcia", which was Latin for "other sweets".
The pancakes are usually a bit browner than the traditional Swedish ones.
Potato pancakes called ''raggmunk'' contain shredded raw potato, and may contain other vegetables (sometimes the pancake batter is omitted, producing ''rårakor'').
The main ingredients of a spekdik are syrup, eggs and rye-flour, and some varieties include bacon.
Oatcakes are a savoury variety of pancake particularly associated with Staffordshire.
Fried apple rings covered by pancake dough and served with sugar and cinnamon are called ''Apfelküchle''.
The popularity of pancakes in Australia has spawned the Pancake Parlour and Pancakes on the Rocks franchised restaurants.
They are made from flour, eggs, sugar, buttermilk or milk, salt, bicarbonate of soda and cream of tartar.
The American pancake is similar to a Scotch pancake or drop scone.
Commercially prepared pancake mixes are produced in some countries.
Hungarian pancakes are served as a main dish or as a dessert.
It is usually made by frying a small spoonful of the same batter as any other pancake.
Pancake Day is also widely celebrated in Australia.
Oyaki are pancakes often stuffed with anko, eggplant, or nozawana.
They are eaten for breakfast or as a dessert, with lemon juice and sugar, butter and maple syrup, stewed fruits such as strawberries and cream, ice cream, or mascarpone
In some circles in New Zealand, very thin, crêpe-like or English pancake-like pancakes (around  in diameter) are served with butter, or butter and lemon, possibly something sweet, and then rolled up and eaten.
File:Newfoundland breakfast.jpg|A touton (upper-right) with other breakfast foods
Crumpets are always served hot, usually for breakfast, with butter and golden syrup.
When the "tablecloth" formed by the ''injera'' is finished, the meal is over.
Costa Rican '''chorreadas''' are similar to ''cachapas''.
''Meetha pooda'' –&nbsp;sweet pancakes often eaten with pickles and chutney&nbsp;– are a common breakfast food item in the Punjab.
Spanish pancakes are called ''Frixuelos'' or ''Filloas'' and are very popular in the north-west of Spain.
There is also a variant, which includes fried pork in the batter, ''fläskpannkaka'' (pork pancake).
They are made with the same ingredients as US pancakes.
Pancakes are traditionally eaten on Shrove Tuesday, which is known as "Pancake Day" in Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, New Zealand, and Australia, and "Pancake Tuesday" in Ireland and Scotland.
In Western India, the multi-grain thalipeeth is popular.
They may be eaten as a sweet dessert with the traditional topping of lemon juice and sugar, drizzled with golden syrup, or wrapped around savoury stuffings and eaten as a main course.
''Dosa'', ''appam'', ''neer dosa'' and ''uttapam'' are pancakes made in a south Indian cooking style.
In Iceland, North American-style pancakes are cut in half and used as sandwich bread, similar to Icelandic flatbread.
Traditional Swedish variations can be exotic.
It is believed that it was first prepared for Kaiser Franz Joseph I of Austria.
''Plaatkoekies'' ("flapjacks") are American-style "silver dollar" pancakes.
Sweet wine is added to the batter.
This batter rises because the air beaten into the batter expands, without the need for baking powder; the result is eaten as part of the traditional roast beef dinner.
In British Columbia and Alberta, Canada, the restaurant chain De Dutch serves Dutch and Flemish-style pannenkoeken.
File:Pancake Machine (7714422220).jpg|An automatic pancake machine
In Finnish, "lettu" and "pannukakku" (literally "Pancake") have different meanings, the latter having structurally closer resemblance to hotcake, and baked in an oven instead of using a frying pan.
Finnish pancakes greatly resemble "Plättar" (see the description of plättar in the Sweden section below) and are called "lettu", "lätty", "räiskäle" or "ohukainen".
Sweet fillings include fresh fruits (e.g.
Johnnycake (also ''jonnycake'', ''johnny cake'' ''journey cake'' or ''Johnny Bread'') is a cornmeal flatbread that was an early American staple food, and is still eaten in the West Indies and Bermuda.
It is often eaten along with honey, ghee and tea.
Prospectors would carry a pot of sourdough to make pancakes and bread as it could last indefinitely, needing only flour and water to replenish it.
Crêpes are popular in many South American countries such as Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.
A special Swedish pancake is ''saffron pancake'' from Gotland, made with saffron and rice, baked in the oven.
Pönnukaka are usually cooked on a special Icelandic pancake pan, which is made to get the pancake as thin as possible, and it is important to never wash the pan, not even with water.
Some are very much like American pancakes, others may be made with yeast (called ''crempog furum'') or oatmeal (although this is also true of American pancakes) and some are like scotch pancakes.
The right hand is used to tear small pieces from the ''injera'' to use to pick up and eat the stews or salads.
In pre-Christian times, blini/mlynci were symbolically considered by early Slavic peoples as a symbol of the sun, due to their round form.
A crêpe is a thin Breton pancake cooked on one or both sides in a special pan or crepe maker to achieve a lacelike network of fine bubbles.
In Francophone Europe, crêpes are often sold in special stands.
In America, they are typically considered to be a breakfast food.
It is widely consumed in the far north and is a staple of chitrali cuisine.
''Blini'' (), ''Mlynci'' () are thin pancakes, however somewhat thicker than crêpes, made from wheat or buckwheat flour, butter, eggs, and milk, with yeast added to the batter.
The toppings are usually fruits and honey.
In Britain, pancakes are often unleavened, and resemble a crêpe.
The North American variety of pancakes, or "hotcakes", is also recognized, and despite it being commonly prepared for breakfast, it can also be eaten as a afternoon snack, with street kiosks selling small hotcakes topped with margarine and sugar.
They are consumed with sweet fillings (marmalade, dulce de leche) or with salty fillings (ground meat (Brazil), vegetables, tomato sauce, cheese).
Common toppings include molten butter and common sorts of savoury  filling, but creative recipes might arise, such as fake lasagne.
Their main ingredients are flour, olive oil or butter, milk and eggs.
Bannock is common to virtually all North America's first peoples.
Sweet ''cheela'' are made using sugar or jaggery with a wheat flour-based batter.
Sourdough pancakes are now a particular speciality in Alaska.
Also called "socca", these are pancakes made from chickpea flour and seasoned with black pepper.
A filling such as jam, fruits, quark, or cottage cheese, potato, cooked ground meat or chicken, and even chopped mushrooms, bean sprouts, cabbage, and onions, is rolled or enveloped into a pre-fried blintz and then the blintz is lightly re-fried, sautéed, or baked.
''Stroop'', a thick molasses-like sugar beet-based syrup is also popular, particularly in a classic filling of bacon and stroop.
