A photo of Corral with Villa, dated 1914, has been published in a collection of photos from the Revolution.
Telegraph service was interrupted to Villa's hacienda of Canutillo, likely so that Obregón's officials could secure the estate and "to prevent a possible Villista uprising triggered by his assassination."
Shortly thereafter he was assassinated, most likely on the orders of Obregón.
He also appropriated land owned by the ''hacendados'' (owners of the ''haciendas'') and redistributed it to the widows and family of dead revolutionaries.
Villa met in person with Madero in March 1911, as the struggle to oust Díaz was ongoing.
Whatever the reality behind the legends, even after his defeat Villa remained a powerful character still lurking in the Mexican mind; in 1950 Octavio Paz wrote, in his morose but thoughtful book on the Mexican soul, ''The Labyrinth of Solitude'', "The brutality and uncouthness of many of the revolutionary leaders has not prevented them from becoming popular myths.
* Battle of Ojinaga (1914 won)
U.S. Army Chief of Staff Hugh L. Scott charged Villa's American agent, Sommerfeld, with finding out what happened, but the only result of the inquiry was the finding that Bierce most likely survived after Ojinaga and died in Durango.
There are period newsreels showing views of the assassination location in Hidalgo del Parral, Chihuahua.
Villa was a brilliant tactician on the battle field, which translated to political support.
* Telly Savalas (1972) ''Pancho Villa''
Huerta left the country on 14 July 1914.
However, she was recognized by Mexican courts as Villa's legal wife and therefore heir to Villa's estate.
His military actions are worthy of listing individually.
Villa accepted his staff's advice and cancelled his resignation, and the ''División del Norte'' defied Carranza and attacked Zacatecas.
In January 1916, a group of ''Villistas'' attacked a train on the Mexico North Western Railway, near Santa Isabel, Chihuahua, and killed a number of American employees of the American Smelting and Refining Company.
Huerta immediately moved to consolidate power.
* ''Deadliest Warrior'', Spike TV's hit show, featured Pancho Villa in a match-up against Chief Crazy Horse.
Madero's "refusal personally to accommodate Orozco was a major political blunder.
Pancho Villa was forcibly inducted into the Federal Army, a practice often adopted under the Diaz regime to deal with troublemakers.
He threatened to cut off Villa's coal supply, immobilizing his supply trains, if he did not comply.
The rebel forces, including Villa, were demobilized and Madero called on the men of action to return to civilian life.
On 29 May 1911, Villa married María Luz Corral, who has been described as "the most articulate of his many wives."
Despite the fact that he did not want to have a sitting politician arrested, Obregón gave into the people's demands and had Barraza detained.
* Battle of Gómez Palacio (1914 won)
Here he received further tutelage in civics and history from imprisoned Federal Army general Bernardo Reyes.
One American was wounded, three Mexicans were reported killed, and three Mexicans were captured by Mexican government troops.
Villa's exclusion from the official narrative of the Revolution might have contributed to his continued posthumous popular acclaim.
Eighteen Americans and about 80 Villistas were killed.
Villa was transferred to the Santiago Tlatelolco Prison on 7 June 1912.
The two revolutionary generals briefly came together to take Mexico City after Carranza's forces retreated from it.
In late 1914, Villa was dealt an additional blow with the death from typhus of one of his top generals, Toribio Ortega.
These weapons were widely used by all parties in the Mexican Revolution, Mauser longarms being enormously popular.
Anti-re-electionists threatened the locals for monetary contributions to their cause, which the two women could not afford.
He also recruited fighters from Chihuahua and Durango and created a large army known as the ''Division del Norte (Division of the North)'', the most powerful and feared military unit in all of Mexico.
*Third Battle of Ciudad Juárez (1919 lost)
"22 Orozco rebelled in March 1912, both for Madero's continuing failure to enact land reform and because he felt himself insufficiently rewarded for his role in bringing the new president to power.
Villa was in alliance with southern revolutionary Emiliano Zapata, who remained fighting in his own region of Morelos.
* Alejandro Calva (2009) ''Chico Grande''
The Mexican population was against U.S. troops in Mexican territories.
* Jorge Reynoso (1982) ''Red Bells: Mexico in Flames''
*Battle of Columbus, N.M. (1916 lost)
Obregón could not run again for the presidency, so there was political uncertainty about the presidential succession.
While driving back through the city in his black 1919 Dodge touring car, Villa passed by a school, and a pumpkinseed vendor ran toward his car and shouted ''Viva Villa!
His string of victories since the beginning of the Mexican Revolution were decisive in bringing the downfall of Porfirio Díaz, the victory of Francisco Madero, and the ouster of Victoriano Huerta.
Villa struck Huerta, who then ordered Villa's execution for insubordination and theft.
As Villa's biographer Friedrich Katz has noted, "During his lifetime, Villa had never bothered with conventional arrangements in his family life," and he contracted several marriages without seeking annulment or divorce.
Others involved in the conspiracy were Félix Lara, the commander of federal troops in Parral, who was paid 50,000 pesos by Calles to remove his soldiers and policemen from the town on the day of the assassination, and Meliton Lozoya, the former owner of Villa's hacienda from whom Villa was demanding payback funds he had embezzled.
He frequently made trips from his ranch to Parral for banking and other errands, where he generally felt secure.
The celebrated Division of the North was thus eliminated as a capital military force."
It was in prison that he was tutored in reading and writing by Gildardo Magaña, a follower of Emiliano Zapata, revolutionary leader in Morelos.
When Villa's remains were transferred to the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, Corral refused to attend the huge ceremony.
He had Abraham González, governor of Chihuahua, Madero's ally and Villa's mentor, murdered in March 1913.
* Domingo Soler (1936) ''Vámonos con Pancho Villa''
John Reed, who graduated from Harvard in 1910 and became a leftist journalist, wrote magazine articles that were highly important in shaping Villa's epic image for Americans.
* Ricardo Palacios (1967) ''Los Siete de Pancho Villa''
Claro Huertado (a bodyguard), Rafael Madreno (Villa's main personal bodyguard), Danie Tamayo (his personal secretary), and Colonel Miguel Trillo (who also served as his chauffeur) were also killed.
Villa sought Luz Corral as his wife, but her mother was opposed; however,  the two were married by a priest "in a great ceremony, attended by his military chiefs and a representative of the governor.
* Carlos Roberto Majul (1999) ''Ah!
Although there is a theory that the family of Jesús Herrera, which had been feuding with Villa, was behind the assassination, a more plausible theory is that Villa was assassinated because he had talked publicly about re-entering politics as the 1924 elections neared.
The passengers included eighteen Americans, fifteen of whom worked for American Smelting.
* Raoul Walsh (1912, 1914) ''The Life of General Villa''
The search for Villa was unsuccessful.
When assessing claims of Villa conspiring with Germans, portrayal of Villa as a German sympathizer served the propaganda needs of both Carranza and Wilson and has to be taken into account.
With so many sources of money, Villa expanded and modernized his forces, purchasing draft animals, cavalry horses, arms, ammunition, mobile hospital facilities (railroad cars and horse ambulances staffed with Mexican and foreign volunteer doctors, known as ''Servicio sanitario''), and other supplies, and rebuilt the railroad south of Chihuahua City.
Until Huerta's ouster, Villa joined with the revolutionary forces in the north under "First Chief" Carranza and his Plan of Guadalupe.
As he was about to be executed by firing squad, he made appeal to Generals Emilio Madero and Raul Madero, brothers of President Madero.
* Wallace Beery (1917) ''Patria''
There was only one survivor, who gave the details to the press.
*Battle of Zacatecas (1914 won)
This helped pave the way for the return of Carranza and his followers.
Given the area's size and mineral wealth, it provided him with extensive resources.
Although Villa's secretary Perez Rul also broke with Villa, he refused to become a supporter of Carranza.
Angeles was later captured by Carranza's forces and was executed on 26 November 1919.
Villa met her when she was living with her widowed mother in San Andrés, where Villa for a time had his headquarters.
It was not long before he realized that all this high praise was hearsay and that not a single man in Natera's army had ever laid eyes on Villa."
Fearful of U.S. intervention, Madero ordered his officers to call off the siege of the strategic border city of Ciudad Juárez.
Villa captured a large hacienda, then a train of Federal Army soldiers, and the town of San Andrés.
... On Jan. 8, 1916, 18 U.S. businessmen were massacred by Villa's men in a train robbery in northern Mexico.
Meeting at the Battle of Celaya in the Bajío, Villa and Obregón first fought from 6 to 15 April 1915, and Villa's army was badly defeated, suffering 4,000 killed and 6,000 captured.
Villa told a number of conflicting stories about his early life, and his "early life remains shrouded in mystery."
The ''Constitucionalista'' adjective was added to stress the point that Huerta had not legally obtained power through lawful avenues laid out by Mexico's Constitution of 1857.
* Heraclio Zepeda (1973) ''Reed, México insurgente''
Carranza opposed the agreements of the Convention, which rejected his leadership as "first chief" of the Revolution.
* Antonio Aguilar (1974) ''La Muerte de Pancho Villa''
To combat Villa, Carranza sent his ablest general Obregón north, who defeated Villa in a series of battles.
''USA Today'' reported, "A terrorist in 1916, a tourist attraction in 2011.
Villa's observation was that the occupation merely hurt Huerta.
Magana also  informed him of Zapata's Plan de Ayala, which repudiated Madero and called for land reform in Mexico.
In October 1915, Villa crossed into Sonora, the main stronghold of Obregón and Carranza's armies, where he hoped to crush Carranza's regime.
Oral accounts of his execution by firing squad were never verified.
Reed's articles were collected as '''Insurgent Mexico''' and published in 1914 for an American readership.
Corral inherited Villa's estate and played the key role in maintaining his public memory.
* Antonio Banderas (2003) ''And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself'' HBO
He confiscated gold from several banks, and in the case of the Banco Minero he held a member of the bank's owning family, the wealthy Terrazas clan, as a hostage until the location of the bank's hidden gold reserves was revealed.
According to most sources, he was born on 5 June 1878, and named José Doroteo Arango Arámbula at birth.
San Ygnacio, Texas - four soldiers were killed and five soldiers were wounded by bandits, six Mexicans were killed.
In 1923, as presidential elections approached, he re-involved himself in Mexican politics.
On 21 May 1920, a break for Villa came when Carranza, along with his top advisers and supporters, was assassinated by supporters of Álvaro Obregón.
Other attacks in U.S. territory were allegedly carried out by Villa, but none of these attacks were confirmed to have been carried out by Villistas.
In 1915, Villa was forced to abandon the capital after a number of incidents involving his troops.
He was further enraged by Obregón's use of searchlights, powered by American electricity, to help repel a ''Villista'' night attack on the border town of Agua Prieta, Sonora, on 1 November 1915.
Huerta initially welcomed the successful Villa, and sought to bring him under his control by naming Villa an honorary brigadier general in the Federal Army, but Villa was not so easily flattered or controlled.
* Siege of Durango (1919 lost)
Glenn Springs, Texas - one civilian was killed, three American soldiers were wounded, and two Mexicans were estimated killed.
Carranza was able to collect more revenue than Villa.
However, Madero signed the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez with the Díaz regime, which kept the same power structure, including the just defeated Federal Army.
He was celebrated during the Revolution and long afterward by corridos, movies about his life, and novels by prominent writers.
The six surviving assassins hid out in the desert and were soon captured, but only two of them served a few months in jail, and the rest were commissioned into the military.
Obregón engaged Villa again at the Battle of Trinidad, which was fought between 29 April and 5 June 1915, where Villa suffered another huge loss.
*Battle of Celaya (1915 lost)
He forced the wealthy to give loans to fund the revolutionary war machinery.
Villa then met with his lieutenants Martin Lopez, Pablo Lopez, Francisco Beltran, and Candelario Cervantes, and commissioned an additional 100 men to the command of Joaquin Alvarez, Bernabe Cifuentes, and Ernesto Rios.
In 1913, local military commanders elected him provisional governor of the state of Chihuahua against the wishes of First Chief Carranza, who wished to name Manuel Chao instead.
Once Huerta was ousted, the power struggle between factions of the revolution came into the open.
Each day of delay cost thousands of pesos.
* José Villamor (1980) ''Viva México'' (TV)
* Héctor Elizondo (1976) ''Wanted: The Sundance Woman'' (TV)
The Federal Army collapsed, ceasing to exist as an institution.
The governor of Coahuila, Venustiano Carranza, who had been appointed by Madero, also refused to recognize Huerta's authority.
* Battle of Chihuahua (1913 won)
Rentería and Seañez eventually were granted small government pensions decades after Villa's death.
However, some of Villa's senior commanders, including (Colonel Candelario Cervantes, General Francisco Beltrán, Beltrán's son, Villa's second-in-command Julio Cárdenas), and a total of 190 of his men were killed during the expedition.
Their intervention delayed the execution until the president could be contacted by telegraph, and he ordered Huerta to spare Villa's life but imprison him.
In Villa's opinion, his agreement to withdraw from politics and retire to an hacienda indicated he might re-enter politics.
This proved to be the case for Madero, who was murdered during a military coup in February 1913 in a period known as the Ten Tragic Days (''Decena Trágica'').
While some believed the raid was conducted because of the U.S. government's official recognition of the Carranza regime and for the loss of lives in battle due to defective cartridges purchased from the U.S., it was accepted from a military standpoint that Villa carried out the raid because he needed more military equipment and supplies in order to continue his fight against Carranza.
The last remaining 200 guerrillas and veterans of Villa's militia who were still loyal to him would reside with him in his new hacienda as well, and the Mexican government also granted them a pension that totalled 500,000 gold pesos.
Villa had long term relationships with several women.
Villa's outlook on banditry changed after he met Abraham González, the local representative for presidential candidate Francisco Madero, a rich hacendado turned politician from the northern state of Coahuila, who opposed the continued rule of Díaz and convinced Villa that through his banditry he could fight for the people and hurt the hacienda owners.
After his death, he was excluded from the pantheon of revolutionary heroes until the Sonoran generals Obregón and Calles, whom he battled during the Revolution, were gone from the political stage.
President Obregón intervened in the dispute between competing claims to Villa's estate in Luz Corral's favor, perhaps because she had saved his life when Villa threatened to execute him in 1914.
Eventually, he became a member of an bandit band headed by Ignacio Parra, one of the most famous bandits in Durango at the time.
Carranza and Alvaro Obregón retreated to Veracruz, leaving Villa and Zapata to occupy Mexico City.
Villa was again defeated by Carranza, 1 November 1915, at the Second Battle of Agua Prieta 1 November 1915, after which Villa's army collapsed as a significant military force.
In 1903, after killing an army officer and stealing his horse, he was no longer known as Arango but Francisco "Pancho" Villa after his paternal grandfather, Jesús Villa.
There were several demonstrations of opposition to the Punitive Expedition and that counted towards the failure of that expedition.
Historian and biographer Friedrich Katz, wrote in 1998 that Villa died instantly.
At this point Villa agreed that he would cease fighting if it were made worth his while.
The German consul in Torreón made entreaties to Villa, offering him arms and money to occupy the port and oil fields of Tampico to enable German ships to dock there, but Villa rejected the offer.
Villa felt betrayed by the Americans.
While Villa still remained active, Carranza shifted his focus to dealing with the more dangerous threat posed by Zapata in the south.
However, Carranza had reinforced Sonora, and Villa was again badly defeated.
While it has never been proven who was responsible for the assassination, most historians attribute Villa's death to a well planned conspiracy, most likely initiated by Plutarco Elías Calles and Joaquín Amaro with at least tacit approval of the then president of Mexico, Álvaro Obregón.
Austreberta Rentería was Villa's "official wife" at his hacienda of Canutillo, and Villa had two sons with her, Francisco and Hipólito.
Villa was usually accompanied by his entourage of ''Dorados'' (his bodyguards), but had gone into the town without them on that day, taking only a few associates with him.
At the time of Villa's assassination in 1923, Luz Corral was banished from Canutillo.
Huerta then sought to discredit and eliminate Villa by accusing him of stealing a fine horse and calling him a bandit.
The siege failed, and Villa's new second-in-command, his longtime lieutenant Martín López, was killed during the fighting.
* Yul Brynner (1968) ''Villa Rides''
According to his dictated remembrances, published as ''Memorias de Pancho Villa,'' at the age of 16 he moved to Chihuahua, but soon returned to Durango to track down and kill a hacienda owner named Agustín López Negrete who had raped his sister, afterward stealing a horse and fleeing to the Sierra Madre Occidental region of Durango, where he roamed the hills as a thief.
They were standard issue in the Mexican Army, which had begun adopting 7&nbsp;mm Mauser system arms as early as 1895.
It was not the first or last of Villa's atrocities; he personally shot a priest who begged for clemency for his villagers, as well as a woman who blamed him for her husband's death."
His remains were reburied in the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City in 1976.
On 9 March 1916, General Villa ordered nearly 100 Mexican members of his revolutionary group to make a cross-border attack against Columbus, New Mexico.
*Battle of Agua Prieta (1915 lost)
Severianco Ceniceros also accepted amnesty from Carranza and turned on Villa as well.
* Victor Alcocer (1955) ''El siete leguas''
In Mariano Azuela's novel ''The Underdogs'', anti-federal soldiers talk about him as an archetype of an anti-authoritarian bandit: "Villa, indomitable lord of the sierra, the eternal victim of all governments... Villa tracked, hunted down like a wild beast... Villa the reincarnation of the old legend; Villa as Providence, the bandit, that passes through the world armed with the blazing torch of an ideal: to rob the rich and give to the poor.
Madero refused, saying that the government would buy the properties from their owners and then distribute them to the revolutionaries at some future date.
In one notable escapade, after robbing a train he held 122 bars of silver and a Wells Fargo employee hostage, forcing Wells Fargo to help him sell the bars for cash.
This was principally in the person of Felix A. Sommerfeld (noted in Katz's book), who allegedly funneled $340,000 of German money to the Western Cartridge Company in 1915, to purchase ammunition.
Villa and Pascual Orozco attacked instead, capturing the city after two days of fighting, thus winning the first Battle of Ciudad Juárez in 1911.
However, Villa's actions were hardly that of a German catspaw; rather, it appeared that Villa resorted to German assistance only after other sources of money and arms were cut off.
Villa's last major military action was a raid against Ciudad Juárez in 1919.
Six days later, de la Huerta met with Villa and successfully negotiated a peace settlement.
* Rafael Campos (1959) ''Have Gun Will Travel, Season 3-Episode 6 (Pancho)''
Before the Villa-Carranza irregular forces had left to the mountains in 1915, there is no credible evidence that Villa cooperated with or accepted any help from the German government or agents.
*First Battle of Ciudad Juárez (1911 won)
was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture.
In 2003, HBO  broadcast ''And Starring Pancho Villa as Himself'', with Antonio Banderas as Villa that focuses on the making of the film ''The Life of General Villa''.
Barraza also admitted that he and his co-conspirators watched Villa's daily car rides and paid the pumpkinseed vendor at the scene of Villa's assassination to shout "Viva Villa!"
Fearing that Carranza was intending to impose a dictatorship, Villa and Zapata broke with him.
They attempted to plot with Victoriano Huerta to assist him to retake the country and, in the infamous Zimmermann Telegram to the Mexican government, proposed an alliance with the government of Venustiano Carranza.
* Leo Carrillo (1949) ''Pancho Villa Returns''
This was an expensive and disruptive diversion for the ''División del Norte''.
He had even at some point  kept a butcher's shop for the purpose of distributing to the poor the proceeds of his innumerable cattle raids."
None of the armed revolutionaries were allowed to be nominated for government positions, and Eulalio Gutierrez was chosen as interim president.
Attacking up steep slopes, the ''División del Norte'' defeated the Federals in the ''Toma de Zacatecas'' (Taking of Zacatecas), the single bloodiest battle of the Revolution, with Federal casualties numbering approximately 7,000 dead and 5,000 wounded, and unknown numbers of civilian casualties.
During the expedition, Carranza's forces captured one of Villa's top generals, Pablo Lopez, and executed him on 5 June 1916.
In 1902, the rurales, the crack rural police force of President Porfirio Díaz, arrested Pancho for stealing mules and for assault.
The period 1913–1914 was the time of Villa's greatest international fame and military and political success.
In November 1915, Carranza's forces captured and executed Contreras, Pereyra, and  son.
The well-known American journalist and fiction writer Ambrose Bierce, then in his seventies, accompanied Villa's army during this period and witnessed the Battle of Tierra Blanca.
(A memorial to and museum of the ''Toma de Zacatecas'' is on the ''Cerro de la Bufa'', a key defense point where the Federal Army was entrenched.)
* Guillermo Gil (1987) ''Senda de Gloria'' (TV series)
In 1920, Villa made an agreement with the Mexican government, following the ousting and death of Carranza, to retire from hostilities and was given a hacienda near Parral, Chihuahua, which he turned into a "military colony" for his former soldiers.
He was also known to his friends as ''La Cucaracha'' or ("the cockroach").
Villa's position was further weakened by the United States' refusal to sell him weapons.
It is the Revolution, the magical word, the word that is going to change everything, that is going to bring us immense delight and a quick death."
Villa's victory at Zacatecas in June 1914 broke the back of the Huerta regime.
Díaz arrested Madero and staged fraudulent elections, but Madero had united a broad base of pro-democracy, anti-re-electionists who sought an end to the Díaz regime.
This was widely seen as an attempt by Carranza to divert Villa from a direct assault on Mexico City in order to allow Carranza's forces under Álvaro Obregón, driving in from the west via Guadalajara, to take the capital first.
Villa considered Tierra Blanca, fought from 23 to 24 November 1913, his most spectacular victory, although General Talamantes died in the fighting.
All three women were often present at ceremonies at Villa's grave in Parral.
Since the colonial era, Zacatecas was the source of much of Mexico's silver, and thus a supply of funds for whoever held it.
The use of Mauser rifles and carbines by Villa's forces does not necessarily indicate a German connection.
* Antonio Aguilar (1993) ''La sangre de un valiente''
Because of his connections with the powerful Pablo Valenzuela, who had allegedly been a recipient of goods stolen by Villa/Arango, he was spared the death sentence sometimes imposed on captured bandits.
In Mexico City, there is a Metro División del Norte station, in an oblique honoring of Villa via the name of his revolutionary army.
