Another option is self-help based on principles of cognitive-behavioral therapy.
The ICD-10 diagnostic criteria:
* choking sensations
The DSM-IV-TR describes panic disorder and anxiety differently.
Respiratory abnormalities have been found in children with high levels of anxiety, which suggests that a person with these difficulties may be susceptible to panic attacks, and thus more likely to subsequently develop panic disorder.
Nicotine and other psychoactive compounds with antidepressant properties in tobacco smoke which act as monoamine oxidase inhibitors in the brain can alter mood and have a calming effect, depending on dose.
Although these medications are described as "antidepressants", nearly all of them — especially the tricyclic antidepressants — have anti-anxiety properties, in part, due to their sedative effects.
The key to the induction is that the exercises should mimic the most frightening symptoms of a panic attack.
The best-studied conditions are panic disorder and social phobia.
Panic attacks are currently classified into three types: unexpected, situationally bounded, and situationally predisposed.
It is not known definitively whether such symptoms persisting long after withdrawal are related to true pharmacological withdrawal or whether they are due to structural neuronal damage as result of chronic use of benzodiazepines or withdrawal.
Each of these studies contribute to a new avenue of research that allows effective treatment interventions to be made more easily accessible to the population.
In fact, for some patients panic disorder is only diagnosed after they seek treatment for their self-medication habit.
*Spinning in a chair – creates dizziness, disorientation
Their study demonstrates that it is possible for SCBT in combination with an SSRI to be as effective as therapist-guided CBT with SSRI.
In addition, the person usually has thoughts of impending doom.
The National Institute of Clinical Excellence came to a different conclusion, they pointed out the problems of using uncontrolled clinical trials to assess the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy and based on placebo controlled research they concluded that benzodiazepines were not effective in the long-term for panic disorder and recommended that benzodiazepines not be used for longer than 4 weeks for panic disorder.
Other attacks may appear unprovoked.
Panic disorder should not be given as the main diagnosis if the patient has a depressive disorder at the time the attacks start; in these circumstances the panic attacks are probably secondary to depression.
About 30% of people with panic disorder use alcohol and 17% use other psychoactive drugs.
Despite the evidence pointing to the existence of early-onset panic disorder, the DSM-IV-TR currently only recognizes six anxiety disorders in children: separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety disorder (a.k.a.
'''Panic disorder''' is an anxiety disorder characterized by recurring panic attacks, causing a series of intense episodes of extreme anxiety during panic attacks.
Despite increasing focus on the use of antidepressants and other agents for the treatment of anxiety as recommended best practice, benzodiazepines have remained a commonly used medication for panic disorder.
*Intentional hyperventilation – creates lightheadedness, derealization, blurred vision, dizziness
However, some sources say that the majority of young people affected for the first time are between the ages of 25 and 30.
A systematic analysis of trials testing this kind of self-help found that websites, books, and other materials based on cognitive-behavioral therapy could help some people.
* feelings of unreality (depersonalization or derealization)
The majority of individuals participating in a study determined (63%) of those abusing alcohol reported that alcohol use began prior to onset of panic, and the majority (59%) of those abusing illicit drugs reported that drug use began first.
The latter are called ''anticipatory attacks'' (DSM-IVR).
In some cases, the symptoms persist at the same level indefinitely.
Current research also supports this perspective as it has been found that those with panic disorder also have a brain circuit that performs improperly.
Substance abuse began prior to onset of panic and substances were used to self-medicate for panic attacks by only a few subjects.
Because of the symptoms that accompany panic disorder, it is often mistaken for a physical illness, such as a heart attack.
Panic disorder has been found to run in families, and suggests that inheritance plays a strong role in determining who will get it.
The anxiety disorders co-exist with staggeringly high numbers of other mental disorders in adults.
This circuit consists of the amygdala, central gray matter, ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the locus ceruleus.
(1999) also found a high number of comorbid disorders in a community-based sample of adolescents with panic attacks or juvenile panic disorder.
In some cases the attack may continue at unabated high intensity, or seem to be increasing in severity.
The essential feature is recurrent attacks of severe anxiety (panic), which are not restricted to any particular situation or set of circumstances and are therefore unpredictable.
These respiratory changes in turn can lead to the formation of panic attacks, as respiratory symptoms are a prominent feature of panic.
heart palpitations, sweating, trembling, hot flashes, nausea, abdominal distress, and chills).
People who have panic disorder are more sensitive to the anxiety-provoking effects of caffeine.
Approximately 10% of patients will experience notable protracted withdrawal symptoms, which can include panic disorder, after discontinuation of benzodiazepines.
Whereas anxiety is preceded by chronic stressors which build to reactions of moderate intensity that can last for days, weeks or months, panic attacks are acute events triggered by a sudden, out-of-the-blue cause: duration is short and symptoms are more intense.
SSRIs are also known to produce withdrawal symptoms which include rebound anxiety and panic attacks.
Although there is little evidence that pharmacological interventions can directly alter phobias, few studies have been performed, and medication treatment of panic makes phobia treatment far easier (an example in Europe where only 8% of patients receive appropriate treatment).
Psychotherapy can improve the effectiveness of medication, reduce the likelihood of relapse for someone who has discontinued medication, and offer help for people with panic disorder who do not respond at all to medication.
While the mechanism of how smoking increases panic attacks is not fully understood, a few hypotheses have been derived.
Most stimulant drugs (caffeine, nicotine, cocaine) would be expected to worsen the condition, since they directly increase the symptoms of panic, such as heart rate.
This is in comparison with 61% (alcohol) and 7.9% (other psychoactive drugs)  of the general population who use alcohol and psychoactive drugs, respectively.
Panic disorder affects about 2.3% of people at some point in their life.
These findings are consistent with the suggestion made by Cox, Norton, Dorward, and Fergusson (1989) that panic disorder patients self-medicate if they believe that certain substances will be successful in alleviating their symptoms.
CBT and one tested form of psychodynamic psychotherapy have been shown efficacious in treating panic disorder with and without agoraphobia.
(2011) discuss the efficacy of self-administered cognitive behavioural therapy (SCBT) in situations where patients are unable to retain the services of a therapist.
Diagnosis is excluded by attacks due to a drug or medical condition, or by panic attacks that are better accounted for by other mental disorders.
For patients whose panic disorder involves agoraphobia, the traditional cognitive therapy approach has been in vivo exposure, in which the affected individual, accompanied by a therapist, is gradually exposed to the actual situation that provokes panic.
Panic attacks may be provoked by exposure to certain stimuli (e.g., seeing a mouse) or settings (e.g., the dentist's office).
Anxiety may pre-exist alcohol or sedative independence, which then acts to perpetuate or worsen the underlying anxiety disorder.
Many clients are encouraged to keep journals.
These attacks typically last about ten minutes, and can be as short-lived as 1–5 minutes, but can last twenty minutes to more than an hour, or until helpful intervention is made.
They can help children give a name to their experience, and empower them to overcome the fear they are experiencing
One such mediator is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, which mediates the relationship between panic disorder patients receiving breathing training and anxiety sensitivity; thus, breathing training affects the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in a patient’s arterial blood, which in turn lowers anxiety sensitivity.
Perceived threat control has been identified as a moderator within panic disorder, moderating the relationship between anxiety sensitivity and agoraphobia; thus, the level of perceived threat control dictates the degree to which anxiety sensitivity results in agoraphobia.
Smoking cigarettes may lead to panic attacks by causing changes in respiratory function (e.g.
Parents often feel helpless when they watch a child suffer.
Another recently identified moderator of panic disorder is genetic variations in the gene coding for galanin; these genetic variations moderate the relationship between females suffering from panic disorder and the level of severity of panic disorder symptomatology.
During an attack, it is not uncommon for the sufferer to develop irrational, immediate fear, which can often be dispelled by a supporter who is familiar with the condition.
There are other researchers studying some individuals with panic disorder and propose they may have a chemical imbalance within the limbic system and one of its regulatory chemicals GABA-A.
It has also been found to exist as a co-morbid condition with many hereditary disorders, such as bipolar disorder, and a genetic predisposition to alcoholism.
In fact, breathing exercises may actually increase the risk of relapse.
While alcohol initially helps ease panic disorder symptoms, medium- or long-term alcohol abuse can cause panic disorder to develop or worsen during alcohol intoxication, especially during alcohol withdrawal syndrome.
Children can only describe the physical symptoms.
People who tend to take on excessive responsibilities may develop a tendency to suffer panic attacks.
* Antianxiety agents (benzodiazepines): Use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder is controversial with opinion differing in the medical literature.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are first line treatments rather than benzodiazapines due to concerns with the latter regarding tolerance, dependence and abuse.
The underlying theory posits that due to biochemical vulnerability, traumatic early experiences, or both, people with panic disorder have a fearful dependence on others for their sense of security, which leads to separation anxiety and defensive anger.
Prepulse inhibition has been found to be reduced in patients with Panic Disorder.
Most people with PD experience both panic attacks and limited symptom attacks.
* secondary fear of dying, losing control, or going mad
The second involves the treatment process in which the therapist should meet with the family as a unit as frequently as possible.
The first involves the initial assessment.
Relapses may occur, but they can often be effectively treated just like the initial episode.
Some improvement may be noticed in a fairly short period of time, about 6 to 8 weeks.
Individuals suffering from an episode have often a strong wish of escaping from the situation that provoked the attack.
Tobacco smoking increases the risk of developing panic disorder with or without agoraphobia and panic attacks; smoking started in adolescence or early adulthood particularly increases this risk of developing panic disorder.
A significant proportion of patients attending mental health services for conditions including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia have developed these conditions as a result of alcohol or sedative abuse.
Symptom inductions generally occur for ''one minute'' and may include:
There are two types, one with and one without agoraphobia.
Many SSRIs also have stimulant side-effects during the beginning of treatment which may exacerbate the condition and have actually caused first-time panic attacks in otherwise healthy individuals being treated for depression.
vanApeldoorn, F.J. et al.
Nevertheless, such symptoms do typically lessen as the months and years go by eventually disappearing altogether.
Panic disorder is not the same as agoraphobia (fear of public places), although many afflicted with panic disorder also suffer from agoraphobia.
If panic disorder patients are indeed self-medicating, there may be a portion of the population with undiagnosed panic disorder who will not seek professional help as a result of their own self-medication.
The therapy begins with calming breathing exercises, followed by noting the changes in physical sensations felt as soon as anxiety begins to enter the body.
While there is not just one explanation for the cause of panic disorder, there are certain perspectives researchers use to explain the disorder.
The reason chronic alcohol misuse worsens panic disorder is due to distortion of the brain chemistry and function.
They point out that there are several levels at which parental involvement should be considered.
Therapy involves first exploring the stressors that lead to panic episodes, then probing the psychodynamics of the conflicts underlying panic disorder and the defense mechanisms that contribute to the attacks, with attention to transference and separation anxiety issues implicated in the therapist-patient relationship.
Panic disorder sufferers usually have a series of intense episodes of extreme anxiety during panic attacks.
These bodily sensations cause some people to feel as though are out of control which may lead to feelings of panic.
McKay & Storch (2011) suggest training/modeling of therapeutic techniques and in session involvement of the parents in the treatment of children to enhance treatment efficacy.
*Running in place – creates increased heart rate, respiration, perspiration
Panic disorder may be differentiated as a medical condition.
In other cases, therapists may try and induce feelings of anxiety so that the root of the fear can be identified.
Recovery from sedative symptoms may temporarily worsen during alcohol withdrawal or benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Consistent with this previous work, Diler et al.
Panic disorder is a serious health problem that in many cases can be successfully treated, although there is no known cure.
The anxiety of Panic Disorder is particularly severe and noticeably episodic compared to that from Generalized Anxiety Disorder.
Some people with panic disorder may conceal their condition because of the stigma of mental illness.
(2004) found similar results in their study in which 42 youths with juvenile panic disorder were examined.
Panic disorder can continue for months or years, depending on how and when treatment is sought.
*Body tensing – creates feelings of being tense and vigilant
Identification of treatments that engender as full a response as possible, and can minimize relapse, is imperative.
They simply know that something is going wrong and that they are very afraid.
The goal of cognitive behavior therapy is to help a patient reorganize thinking processes and anxious thoughts regarding an experience that provokes panic.
They randomized patients into two groups:  one being treated with CBT in a therapist guided environment, and the second receiving CBT through instruction only, with no therapist guided sessions.
Often it will take a period of weeks for the afflicted to feel no anxiety in relation to the induced symptoms.
Some evidence exists supporting the superiority of combined treatment approaches.
These findings lend credibility to the application of CBT programs to patients who are unable to access therapeutic services due to financial, or geographic inaccessibility.
Often the first attacks are triggered by physical illnesses, major stress, or certain medications.
Compared to non-panic anxiety disordered youths, children with panic disorder had higher rates of comorbid major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder.
The outward symptoms of a panic attack often cause negative social experiences (e.g., embarrassment, social stigma, social isolation, etc.
People frequently go to hospital emergency rooms during a panic attack, and extensive medical tests may be performed to rule out other conditions, thus creating further anxiety.
Panic attacks can occur in children, as well as adults.
Panic in young people may be particularly distressing because children tend to have less insight about what is happening, and parents are also likely to experience distress when attacks occur.
(2011) went on to examine the role of the therapist in CBT.
The subject may have no fear of fast heart rate, hyperventilation or derealization, but may nevertheless feel terror, and it is the terror that may cause the other symptoms.
Clonazepam, an anticonvulsant benzodiazepine with a long half-life, has been successful in keeping the condition under control.
In another study, 100 methamphetamine dependent individuals were analyzed for co-morbid psychiatric disorders; of the 100 individuals, 36% were categorized as having co-morbid psychiatric disorders.
as they do not address the root cause of the symptoms.
Within the sample, adolescents were found to have the following comorbid disorders: major depressive disorder (80%), dysthymic disorder (40%), generalized anxiety disorder (40%), somatoform disorders (40%), substance abuse (40%), and specific phobia (20%).
Women are twice as likely as men to develop panic disorder and it occurs more often in people with above average intelligence.
Limited symptom attacks are similar to panic attacks, but have fewer symptoms.
Another form of psychotherapy which has shown effectiveness in controlled clinical trials is panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy, which focuses on the role of dependency, separation anxiety, and anger in causing panic disorder.
There is also the cognitive perspective.
Appropriate treatment by an experienced professional can prevent panic attacks or at least substantially reduce their severity and frequency — bringing significant relief to percent of people with panic disorder.
However, in real-life situations panic may escalate independently of whether the subject is fearful of the minor symptoms associated with panic.
There is some evidence to suggest hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism, mitral valve prolapse, Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome, labyrinthitis, pheochromocytoma and respiratory conditions can cause or aggravate panic disorder.
An approach that proved successful for 87% of patients in a controlled trial is interoceptive therapy, which simulates the symptoms of panic to allow patients to experience them in a controlled environment.
Someone suffering the toxic effects of alcohol abuse or chronic sedative use or abuse will not benefit from other therapies or medications for underlying psychiatric conditions.
This misconception of bodily sensations is referred to as anxiety sensitivity and studies suggest that the people who score higher on anxiety sensitivity surveys than other people, are fives times more likely to be diagnosed with panic disorder.
Utilization of recreational drugs or alcohol generally make symptoms worse.
With repeated trials, a person learns through experience that these internal sensations do not need to be feared and becomes less sensitized or desensitized to the internal sensation.
Theorists believe that people with panic disorder may experience panic reactions because they mistake their bodily sensations for life-threatening situations.
Panic attacks can wax and wane for a period of hours (panic attacks rolling into one another), and the intensity and specific symptoms of panic may vary over the duration.
Symptom inductions should be repeated three to five times per day until the patient has little to no anxiety in relation to the symptoms that were induced.
Comorbid clinical depression, personality disorders and alcohol abuse are known risk factors for treatment failure.
The role of the parent in treatment and intervention for children diagnosed with panic disorder is discussed by McKay & Starch (2011).
Medications can include:
For more serious or active treatment, there are support groups for anxiety sufferers which can help people understand and deal with the disorder.
Some individuals deal with these events on a regular basis, sometimes daily or weekly.
Psychological factors, stressful life events, life transitions, and environment as well as often thinking in a way that exaggerates relatively normal bodily reactions are also believed to play a role in the onset of panic disorder.
It is also possible that panic disorder patients smoke cigarettes as a form of self-medication to lessen anxiety.
The same comorbid disorders that are seen in adults are also reported in children with juvenile panic disorder.
Over 3 million Americans experience panic disorder during their lifetime.
Panic disorder typically begins during early adulthood; roughly half of all people who have panic disorder develop the condition before age 24, especially those subjected to traumatic experiences.
SSRIs have been known to exacerbate symptoms in panic disorder patients, especially in the beginning of treatment and have even provoked panic attacks in otherwise healthy individuals.
One of the major anxiety-provoking effects of caffeine is an increase in heart rate.
Last and Strauss (1989) examined a sample of 17 adolescents with panic disorder and found high rates of comorbid anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, and conduct disorders.
Comparative clinical studies suggest that muscle relaxation techniques and breathing exercises are not efficacious in reducing panic attacks.
They reported that in their view there is insufficient evidence to recommend one treatment over another for panic disorder.
The study that was conducted documented the panic-substance abuse relationship.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients also show a much higher rate of panic disorder than the general population.
In 2000, the World Health Organization found prevalence and incidence rates for panic disorder to be very similar across the globe.
A number of randomized clinical trials have shown that CBT achieves reported panic-free status in 70–90% of patients about 2 years after treatment.
Children differ from adolescents and adults in their interpretation and ability to express their experience.
(2011) demonstrated the additive value of a combined treatment incorporating an SSRI treatment intervention with cognitive behavior therapy (CBT).
Panic attacks cannot be predicted, therefore an individual may become stressed, anxious or worried wondering when the next panic attack will occur.
*Breath holding – creates sensation of being out of breath
Ideally all family members should be aware and trained in the process of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) in order to encourage the child to rationalize and face fears rather than employ avoidant safety behaviours.
Past research concluded that there is irregular norepinephrine activity in people who have panic attacks.
Panic disorder is a disabling disorder, but can be controlled and successfully treated.
* Antidepressants (SSRIs, MAOIs, tricyclic antidepressants and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors): these are taken regularly every day, and alter neurotransmitter configurations which in turn can help to block symptoms.
The findings indicated that the first group had a somewhat better response rate, but that both groups demonstrated a significant improvement in reduction of panic symptomatology.
Protracted withdrawal symptoms tend to resemble those seen during the first couple of months of withdrawal but usually are of a subacute level of severity compared to the symptoms seen during the first 2 or 3 months of withdrawal.
Cognitive behavioural therapy and positive self-talk specific for panic are the treatment of choice for panic disorder.
A retrospective study has shown that 40% of adult panic disorder patients reported that their disorder began before the age of 20.
When cognitive behavioral therapy is not an option, pharmacotherapy can be used.
Common symptoms of an attack include rapid heartbeat, perspiration, dizziness, dyspnea, trembling, uncontrollable fear such as: the fear of losing control and going crazy, the fear of dying   and hyperventilation.
Mood and Psychotic disorders were more prevalent than anxiety disorders, which accounted for 7% of the 100 sampled individuals.
If left untreated, it may worsen to the point where one's life is seriously affected by panic attacks and by attempts to avoid or conceal the condition.
It may also include significant behavioral changes, and ongoing worries about having other attacks.
Like adults, children experience physical symptoms including accelerated heart rate, sweating, trembling or shaking, shortness of breath, nausea or stomach pain, dizziness or light-headedness.
*Straw breathing – creates dyspnea, airway constriction
Age-standardized prevalence per 100,000 ranged from 309 in Africa to 330 in East Asia for men and from 613 in Africa to 649 in North America, Oceania, and Europe for women.
In an article examining the phenomenon of panic disorder in youth, Diler et al.
There is also some evidence that many individuals (especially those who develop symptoms at an early age) may experience symptom cessation later in life (e.g.
feeling short of breath).
Appropriate medications are effective for panic disorder.
Current treatment guidelines American Psychiatric Association and the American Medical Association primarily recommend either cognitive-behavioral therapy or one of a variety of psychopharmacological interventions.
As with many disorders, having a support structure of family and friends who understand the condition can help increase the rate of recovery.
The American Psychiatric Association states that benzodiazepines can be effective for the treatment of panic disorder and recommends that the choice of whether to use benzodiazepines, antidepressants with antipanic properties or psychotherapy should be based on the individual patient's history and characteristics.
According to the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, panic disorder usually begins during adolescence and can be hereditary.
The first one is the biological perspective.
Panic disorder is notably excluded from this list.
social phobia), and post-traumatic stress disorder.
In addition children also experience cognitive symptoms like fear of dying, feelings of being detached from oneself, feelings of losing control or going crazy, but they are unable to vocalize these higher order manifestations of fear.
In fact, many people have had problems with personal relationships or employment while struggling to cope with panic disorder.
(2004) found that only a few past studies have examined the occurrence of juvenile panic disorder.
SSRIs are considered a first-line pharmacotherapeutic option.
