Parashurama and Bhishma, two of the greatest warriors of the epics, shared an interesting history together as guru and student.
Parashurama then gave his divine axe to Ganesha and blessed him.
Parashurama then accepts him as his student and teaches him of all the powerful Brahmanda astra weapons.
In some versions, Lord Indra became afraid of the fighting prowess of Karna and he himself took the form of a bee and stung Karna's thigh in order to benefit his son Arjuna.
The spirit of Parashurama's father, Jamadagni and his grandfather, Ruchika, spoke to him:
Fighting continuously for three days, Parashurama slew 12 entire akshauhinis.
Shri Parashurama, clipped the thousand arms of Kartavirya Arjuna (Sahastrarjun), one by one, with his Parshu and killed him.
One day while at the river, a group of Gandharvas in a chariot passed by in the sky above.
To this day, the silver pedestal remains a center of pilgrimage.
Pitrs then appeared and obstructed the chariot of Parashurama, forbidding him from fighting any longer.
Kingdoms included Kerala, Mushika, Karnata and Konkana.
Returning home, Parashurama was infuriated upon learning what happened and rashly swore that he would exterminate the race of Kshatriyas 21 times after seeing his aggrieved mother beat her chest 21 times.
* Bhriguvanshi (भृगुवंशी) - he who belongs to Bhrigu lineage
Parashurama slaughtered the seven akshauhinis and all the 100,000 warriors.
Lord Parshuram also brought 60 'Vipras' to settle in Konkan.
Karna used this bow to fight on the 17th day of the Kurukshetra war.
Lord Shiva accepted his request.
His eldest son, Richika, acquired the Dhanurvidya (arts of warfare) spontaneously solely by fiat of his will, without any formal instruction.
Parashurama blessed her, saying "Dheergha Sumangali bhavah," or "You will have your husband alive for your lifetime."
Vishnu blessed Parashurama for victory and told him what the future held.
Shiva warned Parashurama that Kartavirya also acquired the Kavacha from Dattatreya.
With the blessing of Lord Shiva, Vishnu answered their wishes and was born from the womb of Renuka as their fifth and youngest son, whom they named Rambhadra.
Parashurama is worshipped as ''mūlapuruṣa'', or male ancestral founder by some  Anavil , Dravidulu, Bhumihar,Tyagi ,Chitpavan , Nambudiri Brahmin communities.
War broke out and Parashurama began to wreak havoc among the Haihayas.
Warm blood, however, trickled down his leg and woke Parashurama.
There are a number of stories of Parashurama in different Puranas, detailing his interactions with different gods of the Hindu pantheon and even occurring during different Yuga due to his being Chiranjivi.
Puranas record that Parashurama placed statues of Shiva at 108 different locations throughout the reclaimed land, which still exist today.
Parashurama slaughtered the remaining kings and allies of Kartavirya and routed the Haihayas, emerging victorious and returned with the Kamadhenu cow.
Parashurama prayed to Lord Brahma for guidance.
The Kshatriyas were advised by Brahmarishi Vasistha not to confront the sage, but Sita still approached.
Parshurama is also the kul guru of Bharadwaj and Kashyap gotra.
Parashurama was a disciple of Shiva and learned the scriptures and the arts of warfare from Shiva.
Parashurama grew up to be a powerful youth.
Dev Indra had destroyed demon dynasties with this bow.
As a test of worthiness, suitors were asked to lift and string the mystic weapon.
Shiva granted all these boons to him.
While travelling, his path was blocked by Ganesha, son of Shiva and Parvati.
In the end, the Gods showered praise on Bhishma and he sought the blessing of Parashurama as his guru.
He then did penance to Varuna and was blessed with the horses that the King had requested.
Shiva gave him mastery over many celestial weapons as well as a chariot and horses which could go anywhere at will, a celestial armour, divine bows, a conch shell and two inexhaustible quivers of arrows.
Parashurama is a mighty Maharathi and he will reappear as the martial instructor of Vishnu's 10th avatar Kalki.
The time of Parashurama was a tumultuous one for the Indian subcontinent, with puranas indicating frequent battles between several rival ''Kshatriya'' clans and kingdoms.
Kshetra scripture has a legend in which a king named Ramabhoja worshipped Parashurama.
It is foretold that he will instruct Kalki to perform a difficult penance to Shiva, and receive the celestial weaponry needed to bring about end time.
The boy recovered and decided to follow Parashurama as a friend and disciple.
The surrounding land is known as Thoulava, in remembrance of the Tulabhara of Rambhoja.
Parashurama is unique in that although he is the sixth avatar of Vishnu, as an immortal, he has also lived to see the subsequent incarnations of Vishnu in Rama and Krishna.
The Haihaya were ruled by a powerful and cruel King named Kartavirya Arjuna.
If he killed Arjuna, Duryodhana would be king instead of Yudhishthira and chaos would ensue.
The God then gave the armour as well as many divine weapons to Parashurama.
Suchandra and Parashurama fought one another.
Parashurama asked her for the means to slay Suchandra.
The avatar then acknowledged that his former student was truly invincible, telling Amba:
Impressed by the affection and devotion of his son, Jamadagni granted his request.
Pleased Jamadagni then offered two boons to Parashurama.
Parashurama also fought back the advancing seas to save the lands of Konkan and Kerala.
He acquired many boons from Lord Shiva.
The rishi called his eldest son, handed him an axe and asked the boy to kill his mother.
Parashurama will also become one of the saptarishi in the 8th Manvantara.
Convinced that only a Kshatriya could have borne such pain in silence, Parashurama realized that Karna had lied and cursed his student that his knowledge would fail him when it was most crucial.
Kartavirya regretted the incident but he decided not to return the cow after what happened, fearing the wrath of the sage.
He threatens to kill Sri Rama
Parashurama then performed a tapasya for Nagaraja, the King of Snakes.
When he traveled to China to spread Buddhism, he brought the martial art with him, which in turn was adapted to become the basis of Shaolin Kung Fu.
Satyavati begged the rishi to instead make her grandson become the great warrior and her son a rishi.
Parashurama recovered and hacked of Kartavirya's thousand arms.
Though a Brahmin by birth, Parashurama expressed unusual interest in weapons and studied warfare as well as sacred scriptures under the tutelage of his father who was himself a powerful archer.
When he then turned to confront Rama, Parashurama was unable to lift his axe.
Karna lies to Parashurama that he is a Brahmin and a descendant of Brigu Maharishi.
The rishi agreed to the demand of the King.
Parshurama ascended on a single chariot and without any ally, marched against the formidable Haihayas.
He then acquired celestial weapons from Shiva and the other gods on Shiva's instructions.
''Rama with an axe'') is the sixth avatar of Vishnu in Hinduism.
Parashurama also asked her forgiveness and she finally relented when Ganesha himself spoke on behalf of the warrior-saint.
Karna accepted his guru's words and in return the grateful guru, Parashurama blessed Karna with immortal glory and everlasting fame.
Parashurama threw his axe at the elephant-god.
Satyavati adjusted well to an ascetic life as she was blessed with a good countenance, but she did not have any children.
Kartavirya's ministers urged the king to steal the cow.
Hence Parasurama gives him the divine Sharanga bow (the personal bow of Supreme
Parashurama played an important role in both Ramayana and Mahabharata.
Kartavirya became so powerful that he was even able to defeat and imprison the demon King Ravana at the Godavari.
Parashurama hurled the trident of Shiva (Shivashula), but upon striking the chest of the king, it turned into a garland of flowers.
When Parashurama ran out of arrows and sent his wife Dharani to bring more, the sun god then focused his rays on her, causing her to collapse.
In repentance, Rambhoja was directed by Parashurama to build a ''rajathatpeetha'' or large silver pedestal, with the image of a serpent at its four corners in obeisance.
Parashurama, a Brahmin, received his famous axe after undertaking terrible penance to please Shiva, who in turn taught him Kalaripayattu (the mother of all martial arts).
Upon Karna's pleading, Parshurama gifted him the celestial weapon called Bhargavastra, along with his personal bow called Vijaya, for being such a diligent student.
Shiva, is the source of Kundalini energy and it around his neck that Nagaraja is coiled and so the statues were in gratitude for their baneful cleansing of the land.
Parshuram, being a devotee of Shiva, requested Shiva to give him audience everyday, while he is living in the newly created land.
One day, as Parashurama slept, resting his head on the lap of Karna, a scorpion crawled up the leg of the student and bit Karna's thigh.
Parushurama asked which Drona would have, to which the clever Brahmin responded:
The king of Deities, Indra was in possession of Lord Shiva's Vijaya Dhanusha.
Since he was unwounded, he was called Akritavana.
Many months later, Chyavana told Parashurama to meet his own father, Sage Bhrigu, the very progenitor of the Bhargava race himself.
He was the ruler of the lands between Gokarna and Kanyakumari and was proclaimed king of the entire Parashurama Kshetra.
Thus, Parashurama pushed back the coastline between the foothills of the Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea, creating modern day konkan and malabar.
Parashurama lived with Bhrigu for many months and Bhrigu trained his descendant in performing harsh penances.
As per the Mahabharata, Parashurama single-handedly successfully conquered the entire world and killed crores of kshatriyas.
Later Shri Parashurama presented the Vijaya bow to his disciple Karna when he was pleased with his intense devotion to the Guru.
* Jamadagnya (जामदग्न्य) - son of Jamadagni
translating to 'Oh, what a river!'.
Now, with her honor tainted, no man would take her for bride and she was condemned to remain destitute.
None were successful until Rama, but in the process of being strung, the bow snapped in half.
In one version played in Ramlilas across India, Parashurama arrived to the scene deeply angry.
Chyavana foresaw that a violent Brahmana would be born in his line in consequence of King Kusika and tried to curse him.
Kartavirya's preceptor, Sage Garga admonished the king not to follow the evil counsel, but Kartavirya gave the orders to procure the cow.
Thus Parashurama slew Kartavirya Arjuna.
Karna was brother to the Pandavas and the son of Surya, but was raised by a Suta charioteer.
He harassed his own subjects and the very gods were afraid of him.
Filled with desire for only a moment, the unbaked pot she held dissolved in the river.
Their conflict began years later, with the beautiful princess Amba.
Finally only his youngest son, Parashurama was left.
The warrior-sage realized he was looking at his own subsequent reincarnation and gives his divine weapons to Rama and retires to further penance.
He traveled to central India at the northern end of the Eastern Ghats and Western Odisha and ascended the Mahendra Mountains.
Parashurama and Indrajit (Ravana's son) are believed to be the only humans who ever possessed the three ultimate weapons: the Brahmanda astra, Vaishnava astra and Pashupatastra.
Satyavati gave the potions to her mother.
After seeing the impoverished condition of some Brahmins in northern India involved in priestly services Parshuram gave him the land that he had conquered.
During their fight, Parashurama threw his axe into the sea.
The word ''Parashurama'' is derived from two words ''parashu'' (परशु) meaning 'axe' and ''rama'' (राम).
One such Vipra named 'Vyad' installed a Shivalinga at Guhagar.
Parashurama trains Karna to such a point that he declares Karna to be equal to himself in the art of warfare and archery.
Ravana, in turn, would later be the nemesis of the Ramayana.
Richika's son, Jamadagni, also acquired the Dhanurvidya in the same way and became a highly skilled warrior.
Lord Shiva preserved this wound as an ornament so that the reputation of his disciple remained imperishable and insurmountable.
and his father, King Dasharatha, begs him to forgive his son and punish him instead.
Parashurama then shot arrows, cutting off Kartavirya's ears and smashing his crown.
It is said that Lord Parashurama carried Lord Vishnu's "Sudharshana Chakra" and "Bow" and Lord Balram's "Gadha" while they fulfilled their education with Guru Sandipani.
His mighty axe stained the entire river red and the women exclaimed "Ai hole!"
The exact location of Bhargav's birth is contested, although puranas claim that he was born at Renuka Tirth as the sixth incarnation of Lord Vishnu.
Afraid to return to her husband, she waited at the river bank, uncertain of what to do next.
Satyavati gave birth to a son, Jamadagni, who became a great saptarishi, while her grandson Bhargav was the sixth incarnation of Vishnu and one of the greatest warriors of all ages.
Nath tradition holds that Parashurama, after enacting his vengeance, sought out Dattatreya atop Mount Gandhamadana for spiritual guidance.
Parashurama did so and incinerated Suchandra on the battlefield.
Parashurama expressed his desire to obtain celestial weapons and skills in warfare from the God.
Rama does that in a blink and points an arrow at Parasurama.
Parashurama's first boon was that he should surpass everyone in divine weapons, in the skill of wielding weapons and in mastery of sacred scriptures.
Curious about his ancestors, Parashurama went to the hermitage of Richika's father Aurva and a few months later, he went to Aurva's father, Chyavana.
Brahma warned Parashurama that slaying Kartavirya was an extremely daunting task since he had thousands of powerful allies.
This land is called Kerala, or 'Siirparaka'(Brahmanda Purana, Chapters 98 and 99).
As the day progressed, Drona, then a poor Brahmin, approached Parashurama asking for alms.
Renuka gave birth to four sons before Parashurama: Vasu, Visva Vasu, Brihudyanu and Brutvakanva.
Meanwhile, at the Kingdom, her father had no heir to the throne as well and this also worried Satyavati.
Kartavirya hurled a trident he acquired from Dattatreya at Parashurama and knocked him unconscious.
Parashurama then turned towards the 11,000 sons of Kartavirya.
Once, Lord Shiva challenged Parashurama to a battle to test his skills in warfare.
The warrior-sage shot several arrows into the sky, terrifying Surya.
He is the son of Renuka and one of the saptarishis, Jamadagni.
Parashurama went to Shiva and told him of his task.
One legend describes Parasharuma returning to a village after battle in what is now the Badami Taluka, in the Bagalkot district of Karnataka.
Parshuram is descendant of Bhrigu.
Jamadagni's youngest son was Parashurama.
This same Shivalinga is the well known Vyadeshwar.
Kartavirya had a 1000 human arms endued with tremendous strength and dexterity.
However, the sage noticed that when he looked at his wife he saw a Kshatriya aura and he asked what had happened.
Parashurama was a master in the art of weaponry, as taught to him by Shiva.
Karna become unconquerable with help of the Vijaya.
His other names include:
'Khanda-parshu' (wounded by Parashu) is one of the thousand names of Lord Shiva.
Parashurama revealed that he had known all along Karna was a Kshatriya, but because he was a worthy student Parashurama had instructed him regardless.
This resulted in the birth of Kaushika who later became known as the sage Vishwamitra.
Richika then married Satyavati after fulfilling wishes of the King.
* Ramabhadra (रामभद्र) - gracious Rama
His third boon was to be free of sins and diseases and remain in his prime and health forever.
Aurva had a hundred sons.
Ever obedient, the boy beheaded his mother.
The grandfather of Bhargava Parashurama was a great rishi named Richika who was the great grandson of a famous sage Bhrigu.
Along with the sages Vyasa, Kripa and  Ashwatthama, Parashurama is considered to be foremost among the rishis in Kaliyuga.
Bhadrakali told him to use the Agneyastra and slay him.
Parashurama and the saptarishi Agastya are regarded as the founders of kalaripayattu, the oldest martial art in the world.
The boy asked that his mother be brought back to life and his brothers to be returned from stone to flesh and they should not remember anything about the incident happened.
All three students of Parashurama - Bhishma, Drona and Karna fought on the Kaurava side (for different reasons) and were killed by unfair tricks.
He killed them all and returned with the head of his father to conduct the cremation.
The water retreated and from the place the basket fell at Gokarna, land rose again.
Afterwards, they decapitated his body and took his head with them.
His fifth boon was to be capable of performing arduous tasks and penances and to remain devoted to Shiva forever.
Then he requested different Gods and Goddesses to settle in the newly created land and to take responsibility of various clans.
Bhishma was a Kuru prince and Parashurama instructed him in the martial arts as a boy.
According to the Brahmanda Purana, when Parashurama was a teenager, he expressed his desire to meet his paternal grandfather  Richika.
While performing aswamedha yajna, he was plowing the land, but mistakenly killed a snake that was a raksha in disguise.
Unlike other incarnations of Vishnu, Parashurama is a Chiranjivi and is said to still be doing penance today in Mahendragiri.
As a blessing, he was granted the Parashu of Shiva, after which he was known as ''Parashurama'' or 'Rama with axe'.
Ganesha, knowing the weapon had been given to Parashurama by his father, allowed it to sever his left tusk.
Parashurama once became annoyed with the sun god Surya for making too much heat.
Bhrigu's son was Chyavana.
He was held back by his own word and pacified by the brilliance of Rama.
Afterwards, Parashurama devoted himself in serving his parents and brothers, helping Jamadagni to run his hermitage.
Suchandra's son, Pushkaraksha rushed against Parashurama, but the latter cleaved him into halves with his axe and slaughtered nine akshauhinis.
Parashurama also ordered that he distribute gold to the needy equal to his own weight as ''Tulabhara''.
By that time, the warrior-sage had already given the Brahmins his gold and Kashyapa his land, so all that was left were his body and weapons.
He plays important roles in the ''Mahabharata'' and ''Ramayana'', serving as mentor to Bhishma, Drona and Karna.
He lived during the last Treta and Dvapara Yugas and is one of the Chiranjivi (immortals) of Hinduism.
Parashurama asked him to spread serpents throughout the land so their venom would neutralize the salt filled earth.
Sri Rama proves to be equal with him in all common weapons.
Then the Ikshvaku King Suchandra advanced against Parashurama with a 100,000 princes and seven akshauhinis.
During the time of Parashurama, there was once a Yadava named Kartavirya Arjuna, who was the most powerful king of his time.
This would have given Bhishma the victory.
On the 23rd day of battle, Bhishma attempted to use the Prashwapastra against Parashurama.
With these boons, Kartavirya became immeasurably powerful, conducting many military conquests after which he made Mahishmati in present-day Maheshwar capital of his Kingdom.
While the warrior-sage washed his axe in the river Malaprabha, unknown to him, downstream beyond a bend in the river, village women were cleaning their clothes.
Another name for Ganesha because of this encounter is ''Ekadanta'', or 'One Tooth'.
As such, he developed northern kalaripayattu or ''vadakkan kalari'', with more emphasis on weapons than striking and grappling.
