A now-famous depiction of a parachute that he dubbed ''Homo Volans'' (Flying Man), showing a man parachuting from a tower, presumably St Mark's Campanile in Venice, appeared in his book on mechanics, ''Machinae Novae'' (1615 or 1616), alongside a number of other devices and technical concepts.
On August 16, 1960, Joseph Kittinger, in the Excelsior III test jump, set the previous world record for the highest parachute jump.
Ribbon parachutes have a ring-shaped canopy, often with a large hole in the centre to release the pressure.
In 1919, Irvin successfully tested the parachute by jumping from an airplane.
However, because Eustace's jump involved a drogue parachute while Baumgartner's did not, their vertical speed and free fall distance records remain in different record categories.
As a safety measure, four straps run from the ends of the rods to a waist belt.
Reducing the amount of fabric decreases the air resistance.
In 1911, Solomon Lee Van Meter, Jr. of Lexington Kentucky, submitted for and in July 1916 received a patent for a backpack style parachute – the Aviatory Life Buoy.
The jump utilized a "pack" style parachute stored or housed in a casing on the jumper's body.
All reserve ram-air parachutes are of the square variety, because of the greater reliability, and the less-demanding handling characteristics.
Overly rapid deployment was an early problem with ram-air designs.
* storing the parachute in a soft pack worn on the back, as demonstrated by Charles Broadwick in 1906;
Professional Canopy pilots compete with wing loading of 10 to over 15 kilograms per square meter.
The ram-air parachute's development and the subsequent introduction of the sail slider to slow deployment reduced the level of experimentation in the sport parachuting community.
The earliest evidence for the parachute dates back to the Renaissance period.
Sport skydivers are always trained to pack their own primary "main" parachutes.
Aspect ratios of parachutes are measured the same way as aircraft wings, by comparing span with chord.
Numerous injuries and fatalities in sport skydiving occur under a fully functional main parachute because the skydiver made an error in judgment while flying the canopy, resulting in high-speed impact with the ground or with a hazard on the ground that might otherwise have been avoided, or collision with another skydiver under canopy.
Their canopies can be anywhere from slightly elliptical to highly elliptical, indicating the amount of taper in the canopy design, which is often an indicator of the responsiveness of the canopy to control input for a given wing loading, and of the level of experience required to pilot the canopy safely.
This is known as a free-bag configuration, and the components are often lost during a reserve deployment.
The team eventually created the Airplane Parachute Type-A.
'', cone-shaped, or parabolic (a flat circular canopy with an extended skirt) shapes, such as the United States Army T-10 static-line parachute.
Causes may be that the pilot chute is caught in the turbulent wake of the jumper (the "burble"), the closing loop holding the pin is too tight, or the pilot chute is generating insufficient force.
The feasibility of Leonardo's pyramidal design was successfully tested in 2000 by Briton Adrian Nicholas and again in 2008 by the Swiss skydiver Olivier Vietti-Teppa.
High-performance, ram-air parachutes have a slightly tapered shape to their leading and/or trailing edges when viewed in plan form, and are known as ellipticals.
Modern sport parachutes' deployment speeds vary considerably.
With high-performance elliptical canopies, nuisance malfunctions can be much more serious than with a square design, and may quickly escalate into emergencies.
Medium-performance canopies (reserve-, BASE-, canopy formation-, and accuracy-type) are usually rectangular.
And the parachute was pulled from the pack by a static line attached to the balloon.
This reduces the speed at which the canopy can open and inflate.
The unique design characteristics of cruciform parachutes decreases oscillation (its user swinging back and forth) and violent turns during descent.
The slider is slowed by air resistance as it descends and reduces the rate at which the lines can spread.
According to the historian of technology Lynn White, these conical and pyramidal designs, much more elaborate than early artistic jumps with rigid parasols in Asia, mark the origin of "the parachute as we know it."
Flying highly loaded, elliptical canopies is a major contributing factor in many skydiving accidents, although advanced training programs are helping to reduce this danger.
This yields an even smaller probability of a double malfunction, although the possibility of a main malfunction that cannot be cut away causing a reserve malfunction is a very real risk.
An early brochure of the Irvin Air Chute Company credits William O'Connor as having become, on August 24, 1920 at McCook Field near Dayton, Ohio, the first person to be saved by an Irvin parachute.
Reserve parachutes are packed and deployed somewhat differently.
If a parachute is not packed properly it can result in a malfunction where the main parachute fails to deploy correctly or fully.
Current world records exceed .
A parachute is carefully folded, or "packed" to ensure that it will open reliably.
A race course is set up in the landing area for expert pilots to measure the distance they are able to fly past the  tall entry gate.
Smaller parachutes tend to fly faster for the same load, and ellipticals respond faster to control input.
Other modifications sometimes used are cuts in various sections (gores) to cause some of the skirt to bow out.
It is not known whether the Italian inventor was influenced by the earlier design, but he may have learned about the idea through the intensive oral communication among artist-engineers of the time.
Thomas Orde-Lees, known as the "Mad Major," demonstrated that parachutes could be used successfully from a low height (he jumped from Tower Bridge in London) which led to parachutes being used by the balloonists of the Royal Flying Corps, though they were not available for aircraft.
In 1924 Gleb Kotelnikov of Russia became the first parachutist to apply the soft packing of a parachute instead of a hard casing.
A hand-deployed pilot chute, once thrown into the air stream, pulls a closing pin on the pilot chute bridle to open the container, then the same force extracts the deployment bag.
Felix Baumgartner broke Joseph Kittinger's record on October 14, 2012, with a jump from an altitude of 127,852 feet (38,969.3 m) and reaching speeds up to 833.9&nbsp;mph (1,342.0&nbsp;km/h or 372.8&nbsp;m/s).
The deployment process is inherently chaotic.
Subsequent development of the parachute focused on it becoming more compact.
A  '''parachute''' is a device used to slow the motion of an object through an atmosphere by creating drag (or in the case of ram-air parachutes, aerodynamic lift).
During the descent, Kittinger experienced temperatures as low as .
The main part of the parachute was in a bag suspended from the balloon with the pilot wearing only a simple waist harness attached to the main parachute.
These fatalities were mostly due to the chute or ripcord becoming entangled in the airframe of their spinning aircraft or because of harness failure, a problem fixed in later versions.
The ground crew would then attempt to retrieve and deflate the balloon as quickly as possible.
Forward speed (5–13&nbsp;km/h) and steering can be achieved by cuts in various sections (gores) across the back, or by cutting four lines in the back thereby modifying the canopy shape to allow air to escape from the back of the canopy, providing limited forward speed.
They often have smaller, more numerous fabric cells and are shallower in profile.
Otto Heinecke, a German airship ground crewman, designed a parachute which the German air service introduced in 1918, becoming the world's first air service to introduce a standard parachute.
All ram-air parafoils have two layers of fabric—top and bottom—connected by airfoil-shaped fabric ribs to form "cells".
The experience with parachutes during the war highlighted the need to develop a design that could be reliably used to exit a disabled airplane.
While the early parachutes were made of linen stretched over a wooden frame, in the late 1790s, Blanchard began making parachutes from folded silk, taking advantage of silk's strength and light weight.
Some skydivers call them "jellyfish 'chutes" because of the resemblance to the marine organisms.
The Type-A parachute was put into production and over time saved a number of lives.
Wing loading of parachutes is measured similarly to that of aircraft, comparing exit weight to area of parachute fabric.
Most sport jumpers fly with wing loading between 5 and 7&nbsp;kg per square meter, but many interested in performance landings exceed this wing loading.
The Venetian polymath and inventor Fausto Veranzio (1551–1617) examined da Vinci's parachute sketch, and set out to implement one of his own.
Most modern parachutes open comfortably, but individual skydivers may prefer harsher deployment.
These were usually an attempt to increase the forward speed and reduce the landing speed offered by the other options at the time.
Occasionally, a pilot chute does not generate enough force either to pull the pin or to extract the bag.
When the balloon crew jumped the main part of the parachute was pulled from the bag by the crew's waist harness, first the shroud lines, followed by the main canopy.
The T-11 is designed to have an average rate of descent 14% slower than the T-10D, thus resulting in lower landing injury rates for jumpers.
Leonardo's canopy was held open by a square wooden frame, which alters the shape of the parachute from conical to pyramidal.
These were tempting targets for enemy fighter aircraft, though difficult to destroy, due to their heavy anti-aircraft defenses.
When Broadwick jumped from the balloon, the static line became taut, pulled the parachute from the pack, and then snapped.
The French, British, American and Italian air services later based their first parachute designs on the Heinecke parachute to varying extents.
The puppet's weight was 75&nbsp;kg; the parachute's weight was 21&nbsp;kg.
The cables between puppet and the parachute were 9&nbsp;m long.
They also have decreased horizontal drag due to their flatter shape and, when combined with rear-facing vents, can have considerable forward speed.
Most have large dome-shaped canopies made from a single layer of triangular cloth gores.
200v), showing a free-hanging man clutching a cross bar frame attached to a conical canopy.
Although the surface area of the parachute design appears to be too small to offer effective resistance to the friction of the air and the wooden base-frame is superfluous and potentially harmful, the revolutionary character of the new concept is obvious.
In 1937, drag chutes were used in aviation for the first time, by Soviet airplanes in the Arctic that were providing support for the polar expeditions of the era, such as the first manned drifting ice station North Pole-1.
Aircraft crew were routinely equipped with parachutes for emergencies as well.
Invented by a Frenchman named Pierre-Marcel Lemoigne, it is called a Para-Commander canopy in some circles, after the first model of the type.
'', span 1.8 times the chord, are now limited to precision landing competitions.
The first ram-air test jump was performed by United States Navy test jumper Joe Crotwell.
* a pilot chute that draws the main canopy from the pack.
Most medium aspect ratio parachutes have seven cells.
The first military use of the parachute was by artillery observers on tethered observation balloons in World War I.
Carrying a parachute impeded performance and reduced the useful offensive and fuel load.
Shortly after, a more sophisticated parachute was sketched by the polymath Leonardo da Vinci in his ''Codex Atlanticus'' (fol.
Rapid deployments can still occur even with well-behaved canopies.
Morton's device was of the "throw-out" type where he held the parachute in his arms as he left the aircraft.
In this configuration the deployment bag is known as a direct-bag system, in which the deployment is rapid, consistent, and reliable.
Round parachutes are purely a drag device (that is, unlike the ram-air types, they provide no lift) and are used in military, emergency and cargo applications.
After the war, Major Edward L. Hoffman of the United States Army led an effort to develop an improved parachute by bringing together the best elements of multiple parachute designs.
The reserve deployment bag and pilot chute are not connected to the canopy in a reserve system.
While this type of unit worked well from balloons, it had mixed results when used on fixed-wing aircraft by the Germans, where the bag was stored in a compartment directly behind the pilot.
In the same year, a Russian inventor Gleb Kotelnikov invented the first knapsack parachute, although Hermann Lattemann and his wife Käthe Paulus had been jumping with bagged parachutes in the last decade of the 19th century.
High aspect ratio parachutes have the flattest glide and the largest tolerance for timing the landing flare, but the least predictable openings.
Low aspect ratio parachutes, ''i.e.
The ATPS system will reduce the rate of descent by 30 percent from  to .
The cells fill with high pressure air from vents that face forward on the leading edge of the airfoil.
Many military applications adopted conical, ''i.e.
Main parachutes used by skydivers today are designed to open softly.
However, in this book, John Wilkins wrote about flying, not about parachutes.
By the time of World War II, large airborne forces were trained and used in surprise attacks, as in the battles for Fort Eben-Emael and The Hague, the first large-scale, opposed landings of paratroopers in military history, by the Germans.
This can be done by making the slider smaller, inserting a mesh panel, or cutting a hole in the slider.
High-speed, cross-braced parachutes, such as the Velocity, VX, XAOS and Sensei, have given birth to a new branch of sport parachuting called "swooping."
A round parachute with no holes in it is more prone to oscillate, and is not considered to be steerable.
In various publications it was falsely claimed that the event was documented some thirty years later by John Wilkins, founder and secretary of the Royal Society in London in his book ''Mathematical Magick or, the Wonders that may be Performed by Mechanical Geometry'', published in London in 1648.
On March 1, 1912, U.S. Army Captain Albert Berry made the first (attached-type) parachute jump in the United States from a fixed-wing aircraft, a Benoist pusher, while flying above Jefferson Barracks, St. Louis, Missouri.
He neither mentions Fausto Veranzio nor a parachute jump nor any event in 1617, and doubts about this test along with no written evidence of its occurrence, lead to the conclusion that it never occurred, and was caused by a misreading of historical notes.
This incorporated three key elements,
Some designs have the fabric removed from the apex to open a hole through which air can exit, giving the canopy an annular geometry.
In the U.K., Everard Calthrop, a railway engineer and breeder of Arab horses, invented and marketed through his Aerial Patents Company a "British Parachute" and the "Guardian Angel" parachute.
According to ''Guinness World Records'', Yevgeni Nikolayevich Andreyev (Soviet Union) held the official FAI record for the longest free-fall parachute jump (without drogue chute) after falling for 24,500&nbsp;m (80,380&nbsp;ft) from an altitude of 25,457&nbsp;m (83,523&nbsp;ft) near the city of Saratov, Russia on November 1, 1962, until broken by Felix Baumgartner in 2012.
During deployment, the slider slides down from the canopy to just above the risers.
They are generally safer to operate, because they are less prone to dive rapidly with relatively small control inputs, they are usually flown with lower wing loadings per square foot of area, and they glide more slowly.
The effort was recognized by the awarding of the Robert J. Collier Trophy to Major Edward L. Hoffman in 1926.
It is a round parachute, but with suspension lines to the canopy apex that apply load there and pull the apex closer to the load, distorting the round shape into a somewhat flattened or lenticular shape.
The design is a marked improvement over another folio (189v), which depicts a man trying to break the force of his fall by the means of two long cloth streamers fastened to two bars which he grips with his hands.
Depending on the situation, parachutes are used with a variety of loads, including people, food, equipment, space capsules, and bombs.
This is why the German type was stowed in the fuselage, rather than being of the "backpack" type.
In the free-fall stage, he reached a top speed of 614&nbsp;mph (988&nbsp;km/h or 274&nbsp;m/s).
Weight was – at the very beginning – also a consideration, since planes had limited load capacity.
He folded his parachute into a pack he wore on his back.
While ram-air parachutes with wing loading higher than 20 kilograms per square meter have been landed, this is strictly the realm of professional test jumpers.
All ascending canopies refer to paragliders, built specifically to ascend and stay aloft as long as possible.
In the UK Sir Frank Mears who was serving as a Major in the Royal Flying Corps in France (Kite Balloon section) registered a patent in July 1918 for a parachute with a quick release buckle, known as the "Mears parachute" which was in common use from then onwards.
In the United States, the average fatality rate is considered to be about 1 in 175,851 jumps.
However, the primary safety advantage of a reserve chute comes from the probability of an unlikely main malfunction being multiplied by the even less likely probability of a reserve malfunction.
In 1912, on a road near Tsarskoye Selo, years before it became part of St. Petersburg, Kotelnikov successfully demonstrated the braking effects of a parachute by accelerating a Russo-Balt automobile to its top speed and then opening a parachute attached to the back seat, thus also inventing the drogue parachute.
Alan Eustace made a jump from the stratosphere on October 24, 2014 from an altitude of 135,889.108 feet (41,419 m).
Here, the scale of the parachute is in a more favorable proportion to the weight of the jumper.
At an altitude of , Kittinger opened his main chute and landed safely in the New Mexico desert.
Ribbon and ring parachutes have similarities to annular designs.
Airplane cockpits at that time also were not large enough to accommodate a pilot and a parachute, since a seat that would fit a pilot wearing a parachute would be too large for a pilot not wearing one.
They typically have a lower glide ratio.
Flying a fast elliptical requires much more skill and experience.
A small stabilizer chute deployed successfully, and Kittinger fell for 4 minutes and 36 seconds, also setting a still-standing world record for the longest parachute free-fall, if falling with a stabilizer chute is counted as free-fall.
They are frequently designed to deploy at supersonic speeds.
It was widely believed that in 1617, Veranzio, then aged 65 and seriously ill, implemented his design and tested the parachute by jumping from St Mark's Campanile, from a bridge nearby, or from St Martin's Cathedral in Bratislava.
On June 21, 1913, Georgia Broadwick became the first woman to parachute-jump from a moving aircraft, doing so over Los Angeles, California.
Shortly after Harris' jump, two Dayton newspaper reporters suggested the creation of the Caterpillar Club for successful parachute jumps from disabled aircraft.
The ATPS canopy is a highly modified version of a cross/ cruciform platform and is square in appearance.
Sport parachuting has experimented with the Rogallo wing, among other shapes and forms.
While low aspect ratio parachutes tend to be extremely stable, with gentle stall characteristics, they suffer from steep glide ratios and a small tolerance, or "sweet spot", for timing the landing flare.
This airfoil is sometimes maintained by use of fabric one-way valves called ''airlocks''.
The first round parachutes were simple, flat circulars.
Although a number of famous German fighter pilots were saved by this type of parachute, including Hermann Göring, no parachutes were issued to Allied "heavier-than-air" aircrew, since it was thought at the time that if a pilot had a parachute he would jump from the plane when hit rather than trying to save the aircraft.
Garnerin also invented the vented parachute, which improved the stability of the fall.
Some modern parachutes are classified as semi-rigid wings, which are maneuverable and can make a controlled descent to collapse on impact with the ground.
A conventional parachute would instantly burst upon opening and be shredded at such speeds.
Four collections of lines go through the grommets to the risers (risers are strips of webbing joining the harness and the rigging lines of a parachute).
This effect is known as "pilot chute hesitation," and, if it does not clear, it can lead to a total malfunction, requiring reserve deployment.
Drogue chutes are used to aid horizontal deceleration of a vehicle (a fixed-wing aircraft, or a drag racer), or to provide stability (certain types of light aircraft in distress; tandem free-fall).
They are also designed more conservatively, and are built and tested to more exacting standards, making them more reliable than main parachutes.
On February 4, 1912, Franz Reichelt jumped to his death from the tower during initial testing of his wearable parachute.
Štefan Banič from Slovakia patented an umbrella-like design in 1914 and sold (or donated) the patent to the United States military.
Parachutes often take the shape of a dome, but shapes may vary including some taking the shape of an inverted dome.
At the same time, the overall design of a parachute still has a significant influence on the deployment speed.
In 1911 a successful test took place with a dummy at the Eiffel tower in Paris.
This type of parachute was first adopted on a large scale for their observation balloon crews by the Germans, and then later by the British and French.
Sometimes all the taper is in the leading edge (front), and sometimes in the trailing edge (tail).
The drag chute allowed airplanes to land safely on smaller ice-floes.
He jumped from a balloon at an altitude of  (which was also a manned balloon altitude record at the time).
Irvin became the first person to make a premeditated free-fall parachute jump from an airplane.
Typical wing loading for students, accuracy competitors, and BASE jumpers is less than 5&nbsp;kg per square meter – often 0.3 kilograms per square meter or less.
Paratroopers' main parachutes are usually deployed by static lines that release the parachute, yet retain the deployment bag that contains the parachute—without relying on a pilot chute for deployment.
On rare occasions deployment can even be so rapid that the jumper suffers bruising, injury, or death.
Popular precision landing parachutes include Jalbert (now NAA) Para-Foils and John Eiff's series of Challenger Classics.
This gives the jumpers the ability to steer the parachute (such as the United States Army MC series parachutes), enabling them to avoid obstacles and to turn into the wind to minimize horizontal speed at landing.
Although many pilots were saved by these, their efficacy was relatively poor.
Fast ellipticals are also considerably more dangerous to land.
Aspect ratio is another way to measure ram-air parachutes.
In 1914, while doing demonstrations for the U.S. Army, Broadwick deployed her chute manually, thus becoming the first person to jump free-fall.
In 1797, André Garnerin made the first descent using such a parachute.
The primary innovation that slows the deployment of a ram-air canopy is the slider; a small rectangular piece of fabric with a grommet near each corner.
Most student skydivers fly with wing loading below 5&nbsp;kg per square meter.
Exact numbers are difficult to estimate, but approximately one in a thousand sport main parachute openings malfunctions, requiring the use of the reserve parachute, although some skydivers have many thousands of jumps and never needed to use their reserve parachute.
Because it was difficult to escape from them, and dangerous when on fire due to their hydrogen inflation, observers would abandon them and descend by parachute as soon as enemy aircraft were seen.
His self-contained device featured a revolutionary quick-release mechanism – the ripcord – that allowed a falling aviator to expand the canopy only when safely away from the disabled aircraft.
For instance, tethered parachutes did not work well when the aircraft was spinning.
Because of their predictable opening characteristics, parachutes with a medium aspect ratio around 2.1 are widely used for reserves, BASE, and canopy formation competition.
The oldest parachute design appears in an anonymous manuscript from 1470s Renaissance Italy (British Museum Add.
This technology will be used by the United States Army as it replaces its older T-10 parachutes with T-11 parachutes under a program called Advanced Tactical Parachute System (ATPS).
A hole in the apex helped to vent some air and reduce the oscillations.
In many instances where it did not work the shroud lines became entangled with the spinning aircraft.
Some parachutes have inverted dome-shaped canopies.
The rectangular parachute designs tend to look like square, inflatable air mattresses with open front ends.
High aspect ratio canopies typically have nine or more cells.
Reserves, on the other hand, do not retain their pilot chutes after deployment.
He kept the square frame, but replaced the canopy with a bulging sail-like piece of cloth that he came to realize decelerates the fall more effectively.
Turning is accomplished by forming the edges of the modifications, giving the parachute more speed from one side of the modification than the other.
The regular Soviet Airborne Troops were established as early as 1931 after a number of experimental military mass jumps starting from August 2, 1930.
Reserve parachutes usually have a ripcord deployment system, which was first designed by Theodore Moscicki, but most modern main parachutes used by sports parachutists use a form of hand-deployed pilot chute.
A ripcord system pulls a closing pin (sometimes multiple pins), which releases a spring-loaded pilot chute, and opens the container; the pilot chute is then propelled into the air stream by its spring, then uses the force generated by passing air to extract a deployment bag containing the parachute canopy, to which it is attached via a bridle.
Beginning with Italy in 1927, several countries experimented with using parachutes to drop soldiers behind enemy lines.
Personal ram-air parachutes are loosely divided into two varieties – rectangular or tapered – commonly called "squares" or "ellipticals", respectively.
