A characteristic of this cultural fusion is the extensive bilingualism present to this day: more than 80% of Paraguayans speak both Spanish and the indigenous language, Guaraní.
The terrain consists mostly of grassy plains and wooded hills in the eastern region.
They were further divided into tribes by speaking languages in branches of these families.
Lugo's rivals blamed him for the deaths of 17 people – eight police officers and nine farmers – in armed clashes after police were ambushed by armed peasants when enforcing an eviction order against rural trespassers.
Many Brazilian Paraguayans are of German, Italian and Polish descent.
Infant mortality was 20 per 1,000 births in 2005.
A year later, Paraguay joined Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay to found Mercosur, a regional economic collaborative.
Because of Francia’s restrictions of freedom, Fulgencio Yegros and several other Independence-era leaders in 1820 planned a ''coup d’état'' against Francia, who discovered the plot and had its leaders either executed or imprisoned for life.
During the late 1980s, Spanish was spoken just by 75% of Paraguay’s population.
In December 1998, Paraguay's Supreme Court declared these actions unconstitutional.
January is the hottest summer month, with an average daily temperature of 28.9 degrees Celsius (84 degrees F).
The government exerted control on all exports.
The ''reducciones'' flourished in Eastern Paraguay for about 150 years, until the expulsion of the Jesuits by the Spanish Crown in 1767.
Public expenditure on education was about 4.3% of GDP in the early 2000s.
Paraguay's primary manufacturing focus is on food and beverages.
Brazil's records from the war have remained classified.
Maternal mortality was 150 per 100,000 live births in 2000.
After his overthrow, the ''Colorado'' continued to dominate national politics until 2008.
He had long followed liberation theology, which was controversial in South American societies, but he was backed by the center-right Liberal Party, the Colorado Party's traditional opponents.
In this tense atmosphere, the murder of Vice President and long-time Oviedo rival Luis María Argaña on 23 March 1999, led the Chamber of Deputies to impeach Cubas the next day.
Spanish settlers and Jesuit missions introduced Christianity and Spanish culture to the region.
This protectionism made the society self-sufficient, and it also avoided the debt suffered by Argentina and Brazil.
As president, Rodríguez instituted political, legal, and economic reforms and initiated a ''rapprochement'' with the international community.
During the pillaging of Asunción in 1869, the Brazilian Imperial Army packed up and transported the Paraguayan National Archives to Rio de Janeiro.
The economic recession has worsened income inequality, notably in the rural areas, where the Gini coefficient has risen from 0.56 in 1995 to 0.66 in 1999.
Similarly, land concentration in the Paraguayan countryside is one of the highest in the globe: 10% of the population controls 66% of the land, while 30% of the rural people are landless.
The Organization of American States, which sent a mission to Paraguay to gather information, concluded that the impeachment process had been carried out in accordance with the Constitution of Paraguay.
A U.S. State Department report on Religious Freedom names Roman Catholicism, evangelical Protestantism, mainline Protestantism, Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform), Mormonism, and the Baha'i Faith as prominent religious groups.
The unresolved border conflict with Bolivia over Chaco region finally erupted in early 1930s in the Chaco War.
Following the disastrous Paraguayan War (1864–1870), the country lost 60 to 70 percent of its population through war and disease, and about , one quarter of its territory, to Argentina and Brazil.
Hermes Rafael Saguier, another key leader of the ''PLRA'', was imprisoned for four months in 1987 on charges of sedition.
The Liberal rule started a period of great political instability.
Traditionally, the majority of the Paraguayan population is considered mixed (''mestizo'' in Spanish).
A popular dish is ''sopa paraguaya'', similar to a thick corn bread.
It also mentions a large Muslim community in Alto Paraná (as a result of Middle-Eastern immigration, especially from Lebanon) and a prominent Mennonite community in Boquerón.
The World Bank has helped the Paraguayan government reduce the country's maternal and infant mortality.
Altogether these results suggest the predominance of the Spanish genetic in the Paraguayan population.
Paraguay lies on both banks of the Paraguay River, which runs through the center of the country from north to south.
Such demonstrations were gathered and quickly disbanded before the arrival of the police.
Paraguay overthrew the local Spanish administration on 14 May 1811.
# Paraguayan poet and ex-president Juan Natalicio González (1897–1966) said it meant "river of the habitants of the sea."
Reflecting the deep hunger of the rural poor for land, hundreds immediately occupied thousands of acres of unused territories belonging to Stroessner and his associates; by mid-1990, 19,000 families occupied .
Production of cement, iron ore, and steel occurs commonly throughout Paraguay's industrial sector.
For the 2008 general elections, the Colorado Party was favored in polls.
* Universidad Americana (private).
This increased opposition to Cubas, who resigned on 28 March.
Catholicism in Paraguay was influenced by the indigenous peoples; the syncretic religion has absorbed native elements.
There are an estimated 63,000 Afro-Paraguayans, comprising 1% of the population.
In 1904 the Liberal revolution against the rule of Colorados broke out.
In 2003 manufacturing made up 13.6% of the GDP, and the sector employed about 11% of the working population in 2000.
''PLRA'' leader Domingo Laino served as the focal point of the opposition in the second half of the 1980s.
In 2003, Nicanor Duarte Frutos was elected as president.
Only 2.5% of Paraguay's indigenous population has access to clean drinking water and only 9.5% have electricity.
HLA-DRB1 polymorphism studies have shown the genetic distances between Paraguayans and Spanish populations were closer than between Paraguayans and Guaranis.
Today 17 separate ethnolinguistic groups remain.
* Autonomous University of Asunción (private and founded in 1979)
Torture and death for political opponents was routine.
The export of yerba mate and valuable wood products maintained the balance of trade between Paraguay and the outside world.
The dictator oversaw an era of economic expansion, but also had a poor human rights and environmental record (see "Political History").
The 1950s and 1960s were the time of the flowering of a new generation of Paraguayan novelists and poets such as José Ricardo Mazó, Roque Vallejos, and Nobel Prize nominee Augusto Roa Bastos.
Rainfall varies dramatically across the country, with substantial rainfall in the eastern portions, and semi-arid conditions in the far west.
The indigenous Guaraní had been living in Paraguay for at least a millennium before the Spanish conquered the territory in the 16th century.
After the war military officers used popular dissatisfaction with the Liberal politicians to grab the power for themselves.
The Paraguayan Congress continued to be dominated by right-wing elected officials.
One of them is the so-called "Maquila law" by which companies can relocate to Paraguay, enjoying minimal tax rates.
Wood products, paper products, hides and furs, and non-metallic mineral products also contribute to manufacturing totals.
They developed Jesuit reductions to bring Guarani populations together at Spanish missions and protect them from virtual slavery by Spanish settlers, in addition to seeking their conversion to Christianity.
Through the 20th century, Paraguay continued to endure a succession of authoritarian governments, culminating in the regime of Alfredo Stroessner, who led South America's longest-lived military dictatorship from 1954 to 1989.
Paraguay also suffered extensive territorial losses to Brazil and Argentina.
The Spanish explorer Juan de Salazar de Espinosa founded the settlement of Asunción on 15 August 1537.
In rural areas, 41.20% of the people lack a monthly income to cover basic necessities, whereas in urban centers this figure is 27.6%.
Lugo's supporters gathered outside Congress to protest the decision as a "politically motivated coup d'état".
To this end, the project also targeted improving the quality and efficiency of the health service network within certain areas, in addition to increasing the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare's (MSPBS) management.
The Paraguayans, led by the Marshal of the Republic Francisco Solano López, held a fierce resistance, but were ultimately defeated in 1870 after the Death of Solano López, who was killed in action.
Paraguay has one of the most prominent German communities in South America, with some 25,000 German-speaking Mennonites living in the Paraguayan Chaco.
Between 1940 and 1948 the country was ruled by general Higinio Moríñigo.
Fortifications were built, especially along the Apa River and in Gran Chaco.
On his sixth attempt to re-enter the country in 1986, Laino returned with three television crews from the U.S., a former United States ambassador to Paraguay, and a group of Uruguayan and Argentine congressmen.
Moreover, 71% of the latter live in rural areas of the country.
On 21 June 2012, impeachment proceedings against President Lugo began in the country's lower house, which was controlled by his opponents.
For most of its history, Paraguay has been a recipient of immigrants, owing to its low population density, especially after the demographic collapse that resulted from the Paraguayan War.
Like most lands in the region, Paraguay has only wet and dry periods.
The capital and largest city is Asunción, of which the metropolitan area is home to nearly a third of Paraguay's population.
Guaraní is recognized as an official language alongside Spanish, and both languages are widely spoken in the country.
He used national police and civilian vigilantes of the ''Colorado'' Party to break up demonstrations.
The ''Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Project'' aimed to contribute to reducing mortality by increasing the use of selected life-saving services included in the country's Mother and Child Basic Health Insurance Program (MCBI) by women of child-bearing age, and children under age six in selected areas.
On 14 January 2011, the Colorado Party convention nominated Horacio Cartes as the presidential candidate for the party.
On 26 March, eight student anti-government demonstrators were murdered, widely believed to have been carried out by Oviedo supporters.
At the time, 2.06 million people lived in rural areas, more than half of the 4.1 million total population, and most were landless.
In contrast to most Latin American nations, Paraguay's indigenous language and culture, Guaraní, remains highly influential.
Many of these communities have retained their languages and culture, particularly the Brazilians, who represent the largest and most prominent immigrant group, at around 400,000.
Indigenous peoples have inhabited this area for thousands of years.
The first Europeans in the area were Spanish explorers in 1516.
Additionally, Spanish is understood by about 90 percent of the population, which alongside Guaraní is an official language.
Strong growth also is evident in the production of edible oils, garments, organic sugar, meat processing, and steel.
The opposition attributed the results in part to the virtual Colorado monopoly on the mass media.
He signed a non-aggression pact with Argentina and officially declared independence of Paraguay in 1842.
Their candidate was Minister of Education Blanca Ovelar, the first woman to be nominated as a candidate for a major party in Paraguayan history.
More than 93% of Paraguayans are ''mestizos'', making Paraguay one of the most homogeneous countries in Latin America.
In response to the upsurge in opposition activities, Stroessner condemned the Accord for advocating "sabotage of the general elections and disrespect of the law."
* National University of Asunción (public and founded in 1889)
The Stroessner regime relented in April 1987, and permitted Laino to return to Asunción.
The judiciary is vested on tribunals and Courts of Civil Law and a nine-member Supreme Court of Justice, all of them independent of the executive and the legislature.
The real causes of this war, which remains the bloodiest international conflict in Latin American history, are still highly debated.
According to the CIA World Factbook, Paraguay has a population of 6,669,086, 95% of which are mestizo (mixed European and Amerindian) and 5% are labelled as "other", which includes members of indigenous tribal groups.
Francisco Solano López, the son of Carlos Antonio López, replaced his father as the President-Dictator in 1862, and generally continued the political policies of his father.
Reports suggested that the businessman Horacio Cartes became the new political figure amid disputes.
Paraguay is quickly supplanting foreign suppliers in meeting the country's drug needs.
In July 2005, military aid in the form of U.S. Special Forces began arriving at Paraguay's Mariscal Estigarribia air base, a sprawling complex built in 1982.
These indigenous tribes belonged to five distinct language families, which was the basis of their major divisions.
The regime of the López family was characterized by pervasive and rigid centralism in production and distribution.
López modernized Paraguay and opened it to foreign commerce.
Paraguay’s population is distributed unevenly through the country, with the vast majority of people living in the eastern region near the capital and largest city, Asunción, which accounts for 10% of the country's population.
The work was continued by his son Francisco Solano.
Paraguay put in place many incentives aimed to attract industries to the country.
Laino and several other opposition figures were arrested before dawn on the day of the election, 14 February, and held for twelve hours.
Slavery existed in Paraguay, although not in great numbers, until 1844, when it was legally abolished in the new Constitution.
More recent data (2009) show that 35% of the Paraguayan population is poor, 19% of which live in extreme poverty.
The country also boasts the third most important free commercial zone in the world: Ciudad del Este, trailing behind Miami and Hong Kong.
'''Paraguay''' (; ; , ), officially the '''Republic of Paraguay''' (; ), is a landlocked country in central South America, bordered by Argentina to the south and southwest, Brazil to the east and northeast, and Bolivia to the northwest.
Paraguay’s first dictator was José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia who ruled Paraguay from 1814 until his death in 1840, with very little outside contact or influence.
Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the National Congress.
74% believed that the political situation needed changes, including 45% who wanted a substantial or total change.
There is no official data on the ethnic composition of the Paraguayan population, as the Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses of Paraguay does not ask about ''race'' and ''ethnicity'' in census surveys, although it does inquire about the indigenous population.
The opposition was unable to reach agreement on a common strategy regarding the elections, with some parties advocating abstention, and others calling for blank voting.
Paraguay is a representative democratic republic, with a multi-party system and separation of powers in three branches.
About the disaster suffered by the Paraguayans at the outcome of the war, William D. Rubinstein wrote: ''"The normal estimate is that of a Paraguayan population of somewhere between 450,000 and 900,000, only 220,000 survived the war, of whom only 28,000 were adult males."''
Several popular dishes contain manioc, a local staple crop similar to the yuca also known as Cassava root found in the Southwestern United States and Mexico, as well as other indigenous ingredients.
The mineral industry of Paraguay produces about 25% of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) and employs about 31% of the labor force.
About 56% of Paraguayans live in urban areas, making Paraguay one of the least urbanized nations in South America.
The top 10% of the population holds 43.8% of the national income, while the lowest 10% has 0.5%.
* Universidad Católica Nuestra Señora de la Asunción (private and run by the church).
Impeachment was quickly approved and the resulting trial in Paraguay's Senate, also controlled by the opposition, ended with the removal of Lugo from office and Vice President Federico Franco assuming the duties of president.
On 3 February 1989, Stroessner was overthrown in a military coup headed by General Andrés Rodríguez.
He was toppled in an internal military coup, and free multi-party elections were organized and held for the first time in 1993.
Laino took the lead in organizing demonstrations and reducing infighting among the opposition party.
This also leads to significant changes in temperature within a short span of time; between April and September, temperatures will sometimes drop below freezing.
They are divided into 17 distinct ethnolinguistic groupings, many of which are poorly documented.
Christianity, particularly Roman Catholicism, is the dominant religion in Paraguay.
The music of Paraguay, which consists of lilting polkas, bouncy ''galopas,'' and languid ''guaranias'' is played on the native harp.
After sixty years of Colorado rule, voters chose Fernando Lugo, a former Roman Catholic Bishop and not a professional politician in civil government.
The Paraguayan government was extremely protectionist, never accepted loans from abroad and levied high tariffs against imported foreign products.
Public expenditure on health is 2.6% of GDP, while private health expenditure is 5.1%.
In each census, residents predominantly identify as mestizo, reflecting years of intermarriage among the different ethnic groups.
Several Paraguayan films have been made.
Stroessner and the ''Colorado'' party ruled the country from 1954 to 1989.
On 17 February 1936 the February Revolution brought colonel Rafael Franco to power.
This cultural fusion is expressed in arts such as embroidery (''ao po'í'') and lace making (''ñandutí'').
Lugo was sworn in on 15 August 2008.
An attempt to create an autonomous Christian Indian nation  was undertaken by Jesuit missions and settlements in this part of South America in the eighteenth century, which included portions of Uruguay, Argentina, and Brazil.
There was no distinction between the public and the private spheres, and the López family ruled the country as it would a large estate.
The rains in the west tend to be irregular and evaporate quickly, contributing to the aridity of the area.
Executive power is exercised solely by the President, who is head of state and head of government.
River warships were built in the shipyards of Asunción.
The economy grew rapidly between 2003 and 2013 as growing world demand for commodities combined with high prices and favorable weather to support Paraguay's commodity-based export expansion.
According to the 2002 census, 89.9% of the population is Catholic, 6.2% is Evangelical Protestant, 1.1% identify with other Christian sects, and 0.6% practice indigenous religions.
The Lugo administration set its two major priorities as the reduction of corruption and economic inequality.
To the west are mostly low, marshy plains.
Many other dishes consist of different kinds of cheeses, onions, bell peppers, cottage cheese, cornmeal, milk, seasonings, butter, eggs and fresh corn kernels.
Political instability following Lugo's election and disputes within his cabinet encouraged some renewal of popular support for the Colorado Party.
Paraguay was a peripheral colony of the Spanish Empire, with few urban centers and settlers.
Various poverty estimates suggest that 30–50% of the population is poor.
Lugo's removal from office on 22 June 2012 is considered by UNASUR and other neighboring countries, especially those currently governed by leftist leaders, as a coup d'état.
However, the party's constitution didn't allow it.
Lugo won with nearly 41% of the vote, compared to almost 31% for Blanca Ovelar of the Colorado party.
A large percentage of the population, especially in rural areas, derives its living from agricultural activity, often on a subsistence basis.
Pre-Columbian society in the region which is now Paraguay consisted of semi-nomadic tribes that were known for their warrior traditions.
Differing language groups were generally competitive over resources and territories.
The departments are further divided into districts (''distritos'').
In lower classes, godparents have a special relationship to the family, since usually, they are chosen because of their favorable social position, in order to provide extra security for the children.
The eastern region (Región Oriental); and the western region, officially called Western Paraguay (Región Occidental) and also known as the Chaco, which is part of the Gran Chaco.
The absence of mountain ranges to provide a natural barrier allows winds to develop speeds as high as .
The overall climate is tropical to subtropical.
The country lies between latitudes 19° and 28°S, and longitudes 54° and 63°W.
The government declared Stroessner's re-election with 89% of the vote.
The ruins of two 18th-century Jesuit Missions of La Santísima Trinidad de Paraná and Jesús de Tavarangue have been designated as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO.
Despite the international contingent, the police violently barred Laino's return.
Due to its central location in South America, it is sometimes referred to as ''Corazón de Sudamérica'' ("Heart of South America").
Following independence from Spain in 1811, Paraguay was ruled by a series of dictators who generally implemented isolationist and protectionist policies.
In 2012, Paraguay's government introduced the MERCOSUR(FOCEM) system in order to stimulate the economy and job growth through a partnership with both Brazil and Argentina.
Between 1904 and 1954 Paraguay had thirty-one presidents, most of whom were removed from office by force.
This has made Paraguayan history in the Colonial and early National periods difficult to research and study.
A number of opposition leaders were imprisoned or otherwise harassed.
Despite the US Drug Enforcement Administration's strong accusations against Cartes related to drug trafficking, he continued to amass followers in the political arena.
The growth of the industry was further fueled by the maquila industry, with large industrial complexes located in the eastern part of the country.
Because of the importance of the informal sector, accurate economic measures are difficult to obtain.
After López’s death in 1862, power was transferred to his eldest son, Francisco Solano López.
According to George Thompson, C.E., Lieutenant Colonel of Engineers in the Paraguayan Army prior to and during the war, López's government was comparatively a good one for Paraguay:
The parties held numerous 'lightning demonstrations' (''mítines relámpagos''), especially in rural areas.
The far eastern forest belt receives an average of  of rain annually, while the western Chaco region typically averages no more than  a year.
Primary education is free and mandatory and takes nine years.
Particular respect is owed them, in return for which the family can expect protection and patronage.
Conflicts between the factions of the ruling Liberal party led to the Paraguayan Civil War of 1922.
Senate President Luis González Macchi, a Cubas opponent, was peacefully sworn in as president the same day.
In the immediate aftermath of the 1989 overthrow of Stroessner, some 19,000 rural families occupied hundreds of thousands of acres of unused lands formerly held by the dictator and his associates by mid-1990, but many rural poor remained landless.
After great losses Paraguay defeated Bolivia and established its sovereignty over most of the disputed Chaco region.
Outgoing President Nicanor Duarte Frutos hailed the moment as the first time in the history of the nation that a government had transferred power to opposition forces in a constitutional and peaceful fashion.
His former running mate, Raúl Cubas, became the Colorado Party's candidate, and was elected in May in elections deemed by international observers to be free and fair.
In 12 October 1864, despite Paraguayan ultimatums, the Brazilian Empire (sided with Argentina and the rebellious Gen. Venancio Flores) invaded the Republic of Uruguay (which then was an ally of the Lopez's Government), thus starting the Paraguayan War.
After Francia's death in 1840, Paraguay was ruled by various military officers under a new ''junta'', until Carlos Antonio López (allegedly De Francia’s nephew) came to power in 1841.
