On 14 June 1940, the German army marched into Paris, which had been declared an "open city".
Paris has most recently been the host for UEFA Euro 2016 at the Parc des Princes.
The population of Paris dropped from 2,850,000 in 1954 to 2,152,000 in 1990, as middle-class families moved to the suburbs.
It provides health care, teaching, research, prevention, education and emergency medical service in 52 branches of medicine.
Paris' most popular sport clubs are the association football club Paris Saint-Germain F.C.
A central hub of the national rail network, Paris' six major railway stations (Gare du Nord, Gare de l'Est, Gare de Lyon, Gare d'Austerlitz, Gare Montparnasse, Gare Saint-Lazare) and a minor one (Gare de Bercy) are connected to three networks: the TGV serving four high-speed rail lines, the normal speed Corail trains, and the suburban rails (Transilien).
During the 19th century, Paris was the home and subject for some of France's greatest writers, including Charles Baudelaire, Stéphane Mallarmé, Mérimée, Alfred de Musset, Marcel Proust, Émile Zola, Alexandre Dumas, Gustave Flaubert, Guy de Maupassant and Honoré de Balzac.
The French Revolution and political and social change in France had a profound influence on art in the capital.
This served as France's top art school until 1793.
On 28 March, a revolutionary government called the Paris Commune seized power in Paris.
The national police has its own special unit for riot control and crowd control and security of public buildings, called the ''Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité'' (''CRS''), a unit formed in 1944 right after the liberation of France.
Though the Metropole has a population of nearly seven million persons and accounts for 25 percent of the GDP of France, it has a very small budget;  just 65 million Euros, compared with eight billion Euros for the City of Paris.
Violent crime is relatively rare in the city centre.
The main source of income for the city is direct taxes (35 percent), supplemented by a 13-percent real estate tax; 19 percent of the budget comes in a transfer from the national government.
It is slightly smaller than the Paris Region.
The city had been neglected for decades; by the time of his assassination in 1610, Henry IV had rebuilt the ''Pont Neuf'', the first Paris bridge with sidewalks and not lined with buildings, linked with a new wing the Louvre to the Tuileries Palace, and created the first Paris residential square, the ''Place Royale'', now Place des Vosges.
There are currently 83 synagogues in the city; The Marais-quarter Agoudas Hakehilos Synagogue, built in 1913 by architect Hector Guimard, is a Paris landmark.
Modern Paris owes much to its late 19th century Second Empire remodelling by the Baron Haussmann: many of modern Paris' busiest streets, avenues and boulevards today are a result of that city renovation.
Another news agency is France Diplomatie, owned and operated by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, and pertains solely to diplomatic news and occurrences.
During the reign of François I, in the Renaissance era, the lute became popular in the French court.
The city was also bombed by Zeppelins and shelled by German long-range guns.
Crime in Paris is similar to that in most large cities.
Some companies, like Société Générale, have offices in both Paris and La Défense.
The first railway line to Paris opened in 1837, beginning a new period of massive migration from the provinces to the city.
Unemployment was estimated at 8.2 percent in the city of Paris and 8.8 percent in the Île-de-France region in the first trimester of 2015.
In May 1968, protesting students occupied the Sorbonne and put up barricades in the Latin Quarter.
The city also played host to the finals of the 1938 FIFA World Cup (at the Stade Olympique de Colombes), as well as the 1998 FIFA World Cup and the 2007 Rugby World Cup Final (both at the Stade de France).
The Socialists had governed the region for seventeen years.
Artists such as Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, Vincent van Gogh, Paul Cézanne, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Henri Rousseau, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani and many others became associated with Paris.
Georges Bizet's ''Carmen'' premiered 3 March 1875.
and high-tech manufacturing (electronics, optics, aerospace, etc.).
From the 1860 area of , the city limits were expanded marginally to  in the 1920s.
Two and half years later, on 1 December 1420, Henry V of England made his solemn entrance into the French capital.
Paris is located in northern central France.
Bertrand Delanoë also transformed a section of the highway along the left bank of the Seine into an urban promenade and park, the ''Promenade des Berges de la Seine'', which he inaugurated in June 2013.
The most prestigious names of French and foreign sculptors, who made their reputation in Paris in the modern era, are Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi (Statue of Liberty), Auguste Rodin, Camille Claudel, Antoine Bourdelle, Paul Landowski (statue of Christ the Redeemer in Rio de Janeiro) and Aristide Maillol.
The story is similar  in the Paris Region, or Île-de-France.
Louis XVI and the royal family were brought to Paris and made virtual prisoners within the Tuileries Palace.
Twenty-five percent of residents in the 19th arrondissement lived below the poverty line; 24 percent in the 18th, 22 percent in the 20th and 18 percent in the 10th.
Among the Impressionist composers who created new works for piano, orchestra, opera, chamber music and other musical forms, stand in particular, Claude Debussy (''Suite bergamasque'', and its well-known third movement, ''Clair de lune'', ''La Mer'', ''Pelléas et Mélisande''), and Maurice Ravel (''Miroirs'', ''Boléro'', ''La valse'', ''L'heure espagnole'').
The high residential population of its city centre makes it much different from most other western global cities.
The most-viewed network in France, TF1, is in nearby Boulogne-Billancourt; France 2, France 3, Canal+, France 5, M6 (Neuilly-sur-Seine), Arte, D8, W9, NT1, NRJ 12, La Chaîne parlementaire, France 4, BFM TV, and Gulli are other stations located in and around the capital.
Django Reinhardt rose to fame in Paris, having moved to the 18th arrondissement in a caravan as a young boy, and performed with violinist Stéphane Grappelli and their Quintette du Hot Club de France in the 1930s and 1940s.
New suburban cemeteries were created in the early 20th century: The largest of these are the ''Cimetière parisien de Saint-Ouen'', the ''Cimetière parisien de Pantin'' (also known as ''Cimetière parisien de Pantin-Bobigny'', the ''Cimetière parisien d'Ivry'', and the ''Cimetière parisien de Bagneux'').
Some  of specially marked bus lanes are free to be used by cyclists, with a protective barrier protecting against encroachments from vehicles.
Pierre Mignard became the first painter to King Louis XIV during this period.
By the 12th century, Paris was the largest city in the western world, a prosperous trading centre, and the home of the University of Paris, one of the oldest universities in history.
Paris has an average annual precipitation of , and experiences light rainfall distributed evenly throughout the year.
The principal Roman Catholic church in Paris is the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris, the seat of the Archbishop of Paris.
The anti-independence ''Organisation de l'armée secrète'' (OAS), for their part, carried out a series of bombings in Paris throughout 1961 and 1962.
There are also many business schools, including HEC, INSEAD, ESSEC, and ESCP Europe.
In 1982, Mayor Chirac introduced the motorcycle-mounted Motocrotte to remove dog faeces from Paris streets.
Excluding the outlying parks of ''Bois de Boulogne'' and ''Bois de Vincennes'', Paris covers an oval measuring about  in area, enclosed by the  ring road, the Boulevard Périphérique.
The population of Paris today is lower than its historical peak of 2.9 million in 1921.
Christianity was introduced in the middle of the 3rd century AD.
Each year, however, there are a few days where the temperature rises above .
Orly Airport, located in the southern suburbs of Paris, replaced Le Bourget as the principal airport of Paris from the 1950s to the 1980s.
The banks of the Seine from the Pont de Sully to the Pont d'Iéna have been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1991.
This music became popular during the 1980s.
Paris in its early history had only the Seine and Bièvre rivers for water.
The Sorbonne Library in the 5th arrondissement is the largest university library in Paris.
In a 2015 worldwide cost of living survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit, Paris ranked as the world's second most expensive city.
On 2 February 2000, Philippe Binant realised the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.
Its name is said to have come in 1814 from the Russian soldiers who occupied the city; "bistro" means "quickly" in Russian, and they wanted their meals served rapidly so they could get back their encampment.
By road it is  south-east of London,  south of Calais,  south-west of Brussels,  north of Marseille,  north-east of Nantes, and  south-east of Rouen.
The centre of Paris contains the most visited monuments in the city, including the Notre Dame Cathedral and the Louvre as well as the Sainte-Chapelle; Les Invalides, where the tomb of Napoleon is located, and the Eiffel Tower are located on the Left Bank south-west of the centre.
The Jewish population of the Paris Region was estimated in 2014 to be 282,000, the largest concentration of Jews in the world outside of Israel and the United States.
Painting and sculpture became the pride of the French monarchy and the French royals commissioned many Parisian artists to adorn their palaces during the French Baroque and Classicism era.
The council of each arrondissement is composed of members of the ''Conseil de Paris'' and also members who serve only on the council of the arrondissement.
According to tradition, it was brought by Saint Denis, the first Bishop of Paris.
The river's mouth on the English Channel (''La Manche'') is about  downstream of the city, established around 7600 BC.
In 1793, as the revolution turned more and more radical, the king, queen, and the mayor were guillotined, along with more than 16,000 others (throughout France), during the Reign of Terror.
On 16–17 July 1942, following German orders, the French police and gendarmes arrested 12,884 Jews, including 4,115 children, and confined them during five days at the ''Vel d'Hiv'' (''Vélodrome d'Hiver''), from which they were transported by train to the extermination camp at Auschwitz.
In recent developments, a 1974–2010 building height limitation of  was raised to  in central areas and  in some of Paris' peripheral quarters, yet for some of the city's more central quarters, even older building-height laws still remain in effect.
The Saint George's Anglican Church in the 16th arrondissement is the principal Anglican church in the city.
It reached 2.25 million in 2011.
It is an administrative structure for cooperation between the City of Paris and its nearest suburbs.
Paris Fashion Week, held in January and July in the Carrousel du Louvre and other city locations, is among the top four events of the international fashion calendar, along with the fashion weeks in Milan, London and New York.
The first president of the metropolitan council, Patrick Ollier, a Republican and the mayor of the town of Rueil-Malmaison,  was elected on January 22, 2016.
The merchants who controlled the trade on the river formed a league and quickly became a powerful force.
Other famous Paris music halls include ''Le Lido'', on the Champs-Élysées, opened in 1946; and the Crazy Horse Saloon, featuring strip-tease, dance and magic, opened in 1951.
Among Paris' important museums and cultural institutions are the most visited art museum in the world, the Louvre, as well as the Musée d'Orsay, noted for its collection of French Impressionist art, and the Musée National d'Art Moderne in the Pompidou Centre, the largest collection of modern and contemporary art in Europe.
Health care and emergency medical service in the city of Paris and its suburbs are provided by the ''Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP)'', a public hospital system that employs more than 90,000 people (including practitioners, support personnel, and administrators) in 44 hospitals.
Other difficult areas are located in the Seine valley, in Évry et Corbeil-Essonnes (Essonne), in Mureaux, Mantes-la-Jolie (Yvelines), and scattered among social housing districts created by Delouvrier's 1961 "ville nouvelle" political initiative.
The city was not granted municipal autonomy by the National Assembly until 1974.
In 2011, the City of Paris and the national government approved the plans for the Grand Paris Express, totaling  of automated metro lines to connect Paris, the innermost three departments around Paris, airports and high-speed rail (TGV) stations, at an estimated cost of €35 billion.
The Region of Île de France, including Paris and its surrounding communities, is governed by the Regional Council, which has its headquarters in the 7th arrondissement of Paris.
Busiest destinations from Parisairports (CDG, ORY, BVA) in 2014
There are several important churches for the English-speaking community: the American Church in Paris, founded in 1814, was the first American church outside the United States; the current church was finished in 1931.
During the Middle Ages, Paris was a centre of Jewish learning with famous Talmudic scholars, such as Yechiel of Paris who took part in the Disputation of Paris between Christian and Jewish intellectuals.
Paris hosts the annual French Open Grand Slam tennis tournament on the red clay of Roland Garros.
The arrival of the railways and the Paris Exposition of 1855 brought the first flood of tourists and the first modern grand hotels; the Hôtel du Louvre (now an antiques marketplace) in 1855; the Grand Hotel (now the Intercontinental LeGrand) in 1862; and the Hôtel Continental in 1878.
In addition to the Sorbonne location, there are branches in Malesherbes, Clignancourt-Championnet, Michelet-Institut d'Art et d'Archéologie, Serpente-Maison de la Recherche, and Institut des Etudes Ibériques.
In 2015, measured by the MasterCard Global Cities Destination Index, Paris was the third busiest airline destination in the world, with 16.06 million visitors, behind London (18.8 million) and Bangkok (18.24 million).
The basketball team Paris-Levallois Basket play at the 4,000 capacity Stade Pierre de Coubertin.
, around 50% of electricity generated in the Île-de-France comes from cogeneration energy plants located near the outer limits of the region; other energy sources include the Nogent nuclear power plant (35%), trash incineration (9% – with cogeneration plants, these provide the city in heat as well), methane gas (5%), hydraulics (1%), solar power (0.1%) and a negligible amount of wind power (0.034 GWh).
In 2015 Paris received 22.2 million visitors, making it one of the world's top tourist destinations.
During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), Paris was besieged by the Prussian army.
Some of the finest manouche musicians in the world are found here playing the cafés of the city at night.
Other yearly festivals are ''Paris-Plages'', a festive event that lasts from mid-July to mid-August when the Right Bank of the Seine is converted into a temporary beach with sand, deck chairs and palm trees; ''Journées du Patrimoine'', ''Fête de la Musique'', ''Techno Parade'', ''Nuit Blanche'', ''Cinéma au clair de lune'', ''Printemps des rues'', ''Festival d'automne'' and ''Fête des jardins.''
There are an additional 10 Eastern Orthodox parishes, and bishops for the Armenian and Ukrainian Orthodox Churches.
A gradual immigration by the Franks also occurred in Paris in the beginning of the Frankish domination of Gaul which created the Parisian Francien dialects.
Arrivals from the rest of the Europe numbered 1 million, down 4.9 percent from 2014.
The largest part of the budget (38 percent) went for public housing and urbanism projects; 15 percent for roads and transport; 8 percent for schools (which are mostly financed by the state budget); 5 percent for parks and gardens; and 4 percent for culture.
France's two most prestigious newspapers, ''Le Monde'' and ''Le Figaro'', are the centrepieces of the Parisian publishing industry.
Parisian examples of European architecture date back more than a millennium; including the Romanesque church of the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés (1014–1163); the early Gothic Architecture of the Basilica of Saint-Denis (1144), the Notre Dame Cathedral (1163–1345), the Flamboyant Gothic of Saint Chapelle (1239–1248), the Baroque churches of Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis (1627–1641) and Les Invalides (1670–1708).
They repelled an attempt by Joan of Arc to liberate the city in September 1429.
Note that the immigrants from the Americas and the South Pacific in Paris are vastly outnumbered by migrants from French overseas regions and territories located in these regions of the world.
In the Paris region, Disneyland Paris, in Marne-la-Vallée,  east of the centre of Paris, was the most visited tourist attraction in France, with 14.8 million visitors in 2015.
One of the most popular of all French writers, Jules Verne, worked at the Theatre Lyrique and the Paris stock exchange, while he did research for his stories at the National Library.
The Hôtel Ritz on Place Vendôme opened in 1898, followed by the Hôtel Crillon in an 18th-century building on the Place de la Concorde in 1909; the Hotel Bristol on rue de Fabourg Saint-Honoré in 1925; and the Hotel George V in 1928.
The Louvre museum had  8.4 million visitors in 2015, making it the most visited museum in the world.
The majority of Paris' salaried employees fill 370,000 businesses services jobs, concentrated in the north-western 8th, 16th and 17th arrondissements.
Paris' manufacturing is mostly focused in its suburbs, and the city itself has only around 75,000 manufacturing workers, most of which are in the textile, clothing, leather goods and shoe trades.
Most of the clubs closed by the early 1960s, as musical tastes shifted toward rock and roll.
The city of Paris has sixty homeless shelters, called ''Centres d'hébergement et de réinsertion sociale'' or CHRS, which are funded by the city and operated by private charities and associations.
Louis XIV distrusted the Parisians and moved his court to Versailles in 1682, but his reign also saw an unprecedented flourishing of the arts and sciences in Paris.
In March 2001, Bertrand Delanoë became the first socialist mayor of Paris.
Immediately after the War The Saint-Germain-des-Pres quarter  and the nearby Saint-Michel quarter became home to many small jazz clubs, mostly found in cellars because of a lack of space;  these included the Caveau des Lorientais, the Club Saint-Germain, the Rose Rouge, the Vieux-Colombier, and the most famous, Le Tabou.
The Paris Region economy has gradually shifted from industry to high-value-added service industries (finance, IT services, etc.)
In the city's wealthiest neighbourhood, the 7th arrondissement, 7 percent lived below the poverty line; 8 percent in the 6th arrondissement; and 9 percent in the 16th arrondissement.
In 2011, while only 56,927 construction workers worked in Paris itself, its metropolitan area employed 246,639, in an activity centred largely around the Seine-Saint-Denis (41,378) and Hauts-de-Seine (37,303) departments and the new business-park centres appearing there.
This system is still a major part of Paris' modern water-supply network.
The Paris region hosts three other UNESCO Heritage sites: the Palace of Versailles in the west, the Palace of Fontainebleau in the south and the medieval fairs site of Provins in the east.
In the late 19th century, many artists in the French provinces and worldwide flocked to Paris to exhibit their works in the numerous salons and expositions and make a name for themselves.
The current mayor is Anne Hidalgo, a socialist, elected 5 April 2014.
In the 1970s, 80 percent of French-language publishing houses were found in Paris, almost all on the Left Bank in the 5th, 6th and 7th arrondissements.
Inhabitants are known in English as "Parisians" and in French as ''Parisiens'' (), pejoratively also called ''Parigots'' ().
After months of blockade, hunger, and then bombardment by the Prussians, the city was forced to surrender on 28 January 1871.
On 11 January an estimated 1.5 million people marched in Paris–along with international political leaders–to show solidarity against terrorism and in defence of freedom of speech.
The ''Seine département'' had been governing Paris and its suburbs since its creation in 1790, but the rising suburban population had made it difficult to govern as a unique entity.
Troubadours, from the south of France, were also popular.
Eurostat, the statistical agency of the EU, places Paris (6.5 million people) second behind London (8 million) and ahead of Berlin (3.5 million), based on the 2012 populations of what Eurostat calls "urban audit core cities".
and the rugby union club Stade Français.
Fortification of the Île-de-France failed to prevent sacking by Vikings in 845 but Paris' strategic importance—with its bridges preventing ships from passing—was established by successful defence in the Siege of Paris (885–86).
There is also one general aviation airport, Paris-Le Bourget, historically the oldest Parisian airport and closest to the city centre, which is now used only for private business flights and air shows.
Small Paris bookstores are protected against competition from discount booksellers by French law; books, even e-books, cannot be discounted more than five percent below their publisher's cover price.
Radio France Internationale, another public broadcaster is also based in the city.
The property of the aristocracy and the church was nationalised, and the city's churches were closed, sold or demolished.
Fourteen percent of Parisians work in hotels and restaurants and other services to individuals.
There are also notable museums devoted to individual artists, including the Picasso Museum the Rodin Museum, and the Musée national Eugène Delacroix.
In the 18th century, the literary life of Paris revolved around the cafés and salons, and was dominated by Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Pierre de Marivaux, and Beaumarchais.
For the executive, the two chief officers each have their own official residences, which also serve as their offices.
Almost all Protestant denominations are represented in Paris, with 74 evangelical churches from various denominations, including 21 parishes of the  United Protestant Church of France and two parishes of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints.
Paris was the centre of an explosion of philosophic and scientific activity known as the Age of Enlightenment.
Paris hosted the 1900 and 1924 Summer Olympics, the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups, the 2007 Rugby World Cup and UEFA Euro 2016.
The Golden Age of the School of Paris ended between the two world wars,
With Paris' growth many of these, particularly the city's largest cemetery, ''les Innocents'', were filled to overflowing, creating quite unsanitary conditions for the capital.
The ranking compares more than 400 individual prices across 160 products and services, and is designed to calculate cost-of-living allowances and build compensation packages for expatriates and business travellers.
Paris was in its artistic prime in the 19th century and early 20th century, when it had a colony of artists established in the city and in art schools associated with some of the finest painters of the times: Manet, Monet, Berthe Morisot, Gauguin, Renoir and others.
It has an area of  and a population in 2013 of 2,229,621 within the city limits.
The Hotel Meurice, opened for British travellers in 1817, was one of the first luxury hotels in Paris.
Sculptors such as Girardon, Coysevox and Coustou acquired reputations as the finest artists in the royal court in 17th-century France.
Cyclists have also been given the right to ride in both directions on certain one-way streets.
It ranged from €22,095 in the 19th arrondissement to €82,449 in the 7th arrondissement.
The system is scheduled to be completed by 2030.
While the Paris region's population accounted for 18.8 percent of metropolitan France in 2011, the Paris region's GDP accounted for 30 percent of metropolitan France's GDP.
The winner of the 2014 Nobel Prize in Literature, Patrick Modiano–who lives in Paris–, based most of his literary work on the depiction of the city during World War II and the 1960s–1970s.
Bal-musette is a style of French music and dance that first became popular in Paris in the 1870s and 1880s; by 1880 Paris had some 150 dance halls in the working-class neighbourhoods of the city.
On 25 August 1944, the city was liberated by the French 2nd Armoured Division and the 4th Infantry Division of the United States Army.
According to INSEE, the Paris Urban Area had a population of 10,550,350 at the January 2012 census, the most populous in the European Union, and third most populous in Europe, behind Istanbul and Moscow.
The administrative school such as ENA has been relocated to Strasbourg, the political science school Sciences-Po is still located in Paris' 7th arrondissement and the most prestigious university of economics and finance, Paris-Dauphine, is located in Paris' 16th.
Charles de Gaulle Airport, located on the edge of the northern suburbs of Paris, opened to commercial traffic in 1974 and became the busiest Parisian airport in 1993.
Other hospitals include Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital (one of the largest in Europe), Hôpital Cochin, Hôpital Bichat, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, Bicêtre Hospital, Beaujon Hospital, the Curie Institute, Lariboisière Hospital, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Hôpital de la Charité and the American Hospital of Paris.
In the early 21st century, the population of Paris began to increase slowly again, as more young people moved into the city.
In 2011 there were nineteen large mosques within the city limits of Paris, all except the Grand Mosque located in the outer arrondissements of the city, as well as hundreds of small prayer rooms.
Although 75% of the Jewish population in France survived the Holocaust during World War II, half the city's Jewish population perished in Nazi concentration camps, while some others fled abroad.
According to the same census, three departments bordering Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne, had population densities of over ten thousand people per square kilometre, ranking among the ten most densely populated areas of the EU.
Paris has several prominent hills, the highest of which is Montmartre at .
Grand Paris covers 814 square kilometers and has a population of 6.945 million persons.
'''Paris''' (French: ) is the capital and the most populous city of France.
The Metropole covers  and has a population of 6.945 million persons.
In winter, sunshine is scarce; days are cool, nights cold but generally above freezing with low temperatures around .
The traditional kepis of the ''gendarmes'' were replaced in 2002 with caps, and the force modernised, though they still wear kepis for ceremonial occasions.
Paris also owes its style to its aligned street-fronts, distinctive cream-grey "Paris stone" building ornamentation, aligned top-floor balconies, and tree-lined boulevards.
Now brasseries, like cafés, serve food and drinks throughout the day.
The agglomeration has grown well beyond Paris' administrative limits.
When he refused to renounce his faith, he was beheaded on the hill which became known as the "Mountain of Martyrs" (''Mons Martyrum''), eventually "Montmartre".
The elected council members select the mayor.
The police are supported by the National Gendarmerie, a branch of the French Armed Forces, though their police operations now are supervised by the Ministry of the Interior.
There are two other small temples located in the Asian community in the 13th arrondissement.
Government ministries are located in various parts of the city; many are located in the 7th arrondissement, near the Matignon.
Paris was the financial capital of continental Europe, the primary European centre of book publishing, fashion, and the manufacture of fine furniture and luxury goods.
Parisian and Italian musicians who played the accordion adopted the style and established themselves in Auvergnat bars especially in the 19th arrondissement, and the romantic sounds of the accordion has since become one of the musical icons of the city.
In 2012, 14 percent of households in the city earned less than €977 per month, the official poverty line.
The movie industry was born in Paris when Auguste and Louis Lumière projected the first motion picture for a paying audience at the Grand Café on 28 December 1895.
Paris was central to the development of Romanticism in art, with painters such as Gericault.
During the Restoration, the bridges and squares of Paris were returned to their pre-Revolution names, but the July Revolution of 1830 in Paris, (commemorated by the July Column on Place de la Bastille), brought a constitutional monarch, Louis Philippe I, to power.
The last of these wars, the eighth one, ended in 1594, after Henri IV had converted to Catholicism and was finally able to enter Paris as he supposedly declared ''Paris vaut bien une messe'' ("Paris is well worth a Mass").
The first book printed in France, ''Epistolae'' ("Letters"), by Gasparinus de Bergamo (Gasparino da Barzizza), was published in Paris in 1470 by the press established by Johann Heynlin.
Most of this is due to companies relocating outside the Paris region.
of Other famous theaters include the Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe, next to the Luxembourg Gardens, also a state institution and theatrical landmark;  the Théâtre Mogador, and the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse.
When inner-city burials were condemned from 1786, the contents of all Paris' parish cemeteries were transferred to a renovated section of Paris' stone mines outside the "Porte d'Enfer" city gate, today place Denfert-Rochereau in the 14th arrondissement.
The ''Conservatoire de Musique de Paris'' was founded in 1795.
Beauvais-Tillé Airport, located 69&nbsp;km (43&nbsp;mi) north of Paris' city centre, is used by charter airlines and low-cost carriers such as Ryanair.
Paris became a major centre for jazz and still attracts jazz musicians from all around the world to its clubs and cafés.
The 19th century produced the neoclassical church of La Madeleine (1808–1842); the Palais Garnier Opera House (1875); the neo-Byzantine Basilica of Sacré-Cœur (1875–1919), and the exuberant Belle Époque modernism of the Eiffel Tower (1889).
During the Hundred Years' War, in the night of 28–29 May 1418, a force of 800 men attached to John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy, and led by Jean de Villiers de L'Isle-Adam made its way into Paris.
From then on, the new reservoir system became Paris' principal source of drinking water, and the remains of the old system, pumped into lower levels of the same reservoirs, were from then on used for the cleaning of Paris' streets.
The May 1968 events in France resulted in the breakup of the University of Paris into 13 independent campuses.
