The scale of the problem can be seen in the Tony Silva case of 1996, in which a parrot expert and former director at Tenerife's Loro Parque (Europe's largest parrot park) was jailed in the United States for 82 months and fined $100,000 for smuggling hyacinth macaws (Such birds command a very high price.)
A popular attraction that many zoos employ is a feeding station for lories and lorikeets, where visitors feed small parrots with cups of liquid food.
As of 2009, the IUCN recognises 19 species of parrot as extinct since 1600 (the date used to denote modern extinctions).
On the ground, parrots often walk with a rolling gait.
Initially, a neoavian named ''Mopsitta tanta'', uncovered in Denmark's Early Eocene Fur Formation and dated to 54&nbsp;Mya, was assigned to the Psittaciformes; it was described from a single humerus.
The two other tribes in the subfamily are the closely related fig parrots (two genera in the tribe Cyclopsittini) and budgerigar (tribe Melopsittacini).
Parrots also tend to range widely, and consequently many gaps occur in knowledge of their behaviour.
* '''Vastanavidae'''
Alex was trained to use words to identify objects, describe them, count them, and even answer complex questions such as "How many red squares?"
Feather destruction and self-mutilation, although not commonly seen in the wild, occur frequently in captivity.
As with many birds, pair bond formation is preceded by courtship displays; these are relatively simple in the case of cockatoos.
Among the superfamilies, the three extant Strigopoidea species are all large parrots, and the cockatoos tend to be large birds, as well.
For example, Amitābha once changed himself into a parrot to aid in converting people.
They state they have helped conservation work in 22 countries.
In Psittacidae parrots' common breeding displays, usually undertaken by the male, include slow, deliberate steps known as a "parade" or "stately walk" and the "eye-blaze", where the pupil of the eye constricts to reveal the edge of the iris.
African grey parrots are thought to be excellent talkers, but not all African grey parrots want to talk, though they have the capability to do so.
The female remains in the nest for almost all of the incubation period and is fed both by the male and during short breaks.
Most species are capable of using their feet to manipulate food and other objects with a high degree of dexterity, in a similar manner to a human using their hands.
the mostly land-living birds that emerged in close proximity to the K-Pg extinction.
In addition, individual countries may have laws to regulate trade in certain species; for example, the EU has banned parrot trade, whereas Mexico has a licensing system for capturing parrots.
One, the Carolina parakeet, lived in temperate North America, but was hunted to extinction in the early 20th century.
Only the monk parakeet and five species of lovebirds build nests in trees, and three Australian and New Zealand ground parrots nest on the ground.
If so, they probably had not evolved their morphological autapomorphies yet, but were generalised arboreal birds, roughly similar (though not necessarily closely related) to today's potoos or frogmouths.
The intelligence of parrots means they are quick to learn tricks and other behaviours—both good and bad—that get them what they want, such as attention or treats.
The superfamily Strigopoidea contains three living species of aberrant parrots from New Zealand.
An absence of stimuli can delay the development of young birds, as demonstrated by a group of vasa parrots kept in tiny cages with domesticated chickens from the age of 3 months; at 9 months, these birds still behaved in the same way as 3-month-olds, but had adopted some chicken behaviour.
These are probably not "missing links" between ancestral and modern parrots, but rather psittaciform lineages that evolved parallel to true parrots and cockatoos and had their own peculiar autapomorphies:
Many parrots are vividly coloured, and some are multi-coloured.
Escaped or released pets rarely contribute to establishing feral populations.
The lories and lorikeets, hanging parrots, and swift parrot are primarily nectar and pollen consumers, and have tongues with brush tips to collect this source of food, as well as some specialised gut adaptations to accommodate this diet.
Some parrots are intelligent and talk at the level of a four-to-five year old human.
The journal ''Animal Cognition'' stated that some birds preferred to work alone, while others like to work together as with African grey parrots.
The newly born young are altricial, either lacking feathers or with sparse white down.
However, in areas where there are existing feral parrot populations, escaped pets may sometimes successfully join these flocks.
** ''Quercypsitta''
Some parrot species can be quite loud, and many of the larger parrots can be destructive and require a very large cage, and a regular supply of new toys, branches, or other items to chew up.
Another old story tells how after a forest caught fire, the parrot was so concerned, it carried water to try to put out the flames.
Many active conservation groups have as their goal the conservation of wild parrot populations.
Recent conservation measures to conserve the habitats of some of the high-profile charismatic parrot species has also protected many of the less charismatic species living in the ecosystem.
Many other species also consume nectar when it becomes available.
The order is subdivided into three superfamilies: the Psittacoidea ("true" parrots), the Cacatuoidea (cockatoos), and the Strigopoidea (New Zealand parrots).
Translocation of vulnerable kakapo, followed by intensive management and supplementary feeding, has increased the population from 50 individuals to 123.
They require several years to reach maturity, produce one or very few young per year, and do not necessarily breed every year.
The nests of cockatoos are often lined with sticks, wood chips, and other plant material.
Measures taken to conserve the habitats of some high-profile charismatic species have also protected many of the less charismatic species living in the same ecosystems.
Strong sexual dimorphism in plumage is not typical among parrots, with some notable exceptions, the most striking being the eclectus parrot.
However, other studies suggest that this fossil is not from a bird, but from a caenagnathid oviraptorosaur (a non-avian dinosaur with a birdlike beak), as several details of the fossil used to support its identity as a parrot are not actually exclusive to parrots, and it is dissimilar to the earliest-known unequivocal parrot fossils.
The brain-to body size ratio of psittacines and corvines is comparable to that of higher primates.
Golden-winged parakeets prey on water snails, the kea of New Zealand hunts adult sheep (though uncommon), and the Antipodes parakeet, another New Zealand parrot, enters the burrows of nesting grey-backed storm petrels and kills the incubating adults.
The climate there and then was tropical, consistent with the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum.
The scarcity of parrots in the fossil record, however, presents difficulties in confirming the hypothesis.
Parrots that are bred for pets may be hand fed or otherwise accustomed to interacting with people from a young age to help ensure they become tame and trusting.
Recent books about parrots in human culture include ''Parrot Culture''.
The subfamily Arinae encompasses all the neotropical parrots, including the amazons, macaws, and conures, and ranges from northern Mexico and the Bahamas to Tierra del Fuego in the southern tip of South America.
** ''Pseudasturides''
), parrots are considered the most intelligent of birds.
Some Caribbean and Pacific islands are home to endemic species.
Due to an increasing number of homeless parrots, they are being euthanised like dogs and cats, and parrot adoption centres and sanctuaries are becoming more common.
In most cases, both parents participate in the nest excavation.
With few exceptions, parrots are monogamous breeders who nest in cavities and hold no territories other than their nesting sites.
The three major clades of Neotropical parrots originated about 50&nbsp;Mya (range 57–41&nbsp;Mya).
In 1992, the newspaper ''USA Today'' published that 11 million pet birds were in the United States alone, many of them parrots.
Some parrots have a strong, direct flight.
A large macaw, for example, has a bite force of , close to that of a large dog.
From Aesop's fable "The parrot and the cat" and the Roman poet Ovid's "The Dead Parrot" to Monty Python's "Dead Parrot sketch", parrots have existed in the consciousness of many cultures.
Few parrots are wholly sedentary or fully migratory.
Fossils assignable to Psittaciformes (though not yet the present-day parrots) date from slightly later in the Eocene, starting around 50&nbsp;Mya.
The question of why birds imitate remains open, but those that do often score very high on tests designed to measure problem-solving ability.
Wild African grey parrots have been observed imitating other birds.
Prior to an earlier temporary ban started in late October 2005, the European Union (EU) was importing about two million live birds a year, about 90% of the international market: hundreds of thousands of these were parrots.
Social interactions are often practised with siblings, and in several species, creches are formed with several broods, and these, too, are important for learning social skills.
Many parrots have been introduced to areas with temperate climates, and have established stable populations in parts of the United States (including New York City), the United Kingdom, Belgium and Spain, as well as in Greece.
Parrots have also been considered sacred.
Fictional films include ''Home Alone 3''  and ''Rio'', and documentaries include ''The Wild Parrots of Telegraph Hill''.
The centre of cockatoo biodiversity is Australia and New Guinea, although some species reach the Solomon Islands (and one formerly occurred in New Caledonia), Wallacea and the Philippines.
The most important components of most parrots' diets are seeds, nuts, fruit, buds, and other plant material.
Several parrots inhabit the cool, temperate regions of South America and New Zealand.
Many species use termite nests, possibly to reduce the conspicuousness of the nesting site or to create a favourable microclimate.
The parrots' ability to mimic human words and their bright colours and beauty prompt impulse buying from unsuspecting consumers.
This ability has made them prized as pets from ancient times to the present.
In New Caledonia, the Ouvea parakeet was threatened by trapping for the pet trade and loss of habitat.
In ancient times and current, parrot feathers have been used in ceremonies and for decoration.
The broad-tailed parrots, subfamily Platycercinae, are restricted to Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific islands as far eastwards as Fiji.
Different nations have different methods of handling internal and international trade.
Sayings about parrots colour the modern English language.
Insular species, such as the Puerto Rican amazon, which have small populations in restricted habitats, are also vulnerable to (unpredictable) natural events such as hurricanes.
Most captive-born birds do not possess the necessary survival skills to find food or avoid predators and often do not survive long without human caretakers.
Zoo and wildlife centres usually provide public education, to change habits that cause damage to wild populations.
Many parrots can imitate human speech or other sounds.
However, even when hand fed, parrots revert to biting and aggression during hormonal surges and if mishandled or neglected.
The first occurrence of a related expression is in Aphra Behn's 1681 play ''The False Count''.
Parrots do not have vocal cords, so sound is accomplished by expelling air across the mouth of the bifurcated trachea, in the organ called the syrinx.
The Psittaciformes comprise three main lineages: Strigopoidea, Psittacoidea and Cacatuoidea.
'''Parrots''', also known as '''psittacines''' , are birds of the roughly 393 species in 92 genera that make up the order '''Psittaciformes''', found in most tropical and subtropical regions.
With two parrots, they know the order of tasks or when they should do something together at once, but they have trouble exchanging roles.
The most common era or years that feral parrots were released to non-native environments was from the 1890s to the 1940s, during the wild-caught parrot era.
Numerous challenges are found in studying wild parrots, as they are difficult to catch and once caught, they are difficult to mark.
Allopreening is used by the pair to help maintain the bond.
Almost all parrots nest in tree hollows (or nest boxes in captivity), and lay white eggs from which hatch altricial (helpless) young.
The Strigopoidea were considered part of the Psittacoidea, but recent studies place this group of New Zealand species at the base of the parrot tree next to the remaining members of the Psittacoidea, as well as all members of the Cacatuoidea.
The use of holes in cliffs is more common in the Americas.
The length of the burrow varies with species, but is usually between  in length.
By far the greatest number of parrot species come from Australasia and South America.
Several fairly complete skeletons of parrot-like birds have been found in England and Germany.
Capture for the pet trade is a threat to many of the rarer or slower-to-breed parrots.
On the voyage, 100 of his 140 rowers died of hunger on their way, but the survivors reached Aotona and captured enough parrots to fill 140 bags with their feathers.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped birds and often depicted parrots in their art.
Among the earliest instances were pet red shining-parrots from Fiji, which established a population on the islands of southern Tonga.
No national laws protect feral parrot populations in the U.S. Mexico has a licensing system for capturing and selling native birds.
At this point, however, is found the first unambiguous parrot fossil (as opposed to a parrot-like one), an upper jaw that is indistinguishable from that of modern cockatoos.
Habitat loss or degradation, most often for agriculture, is a threat to many species.
Several reasons are given for the decline of so many species, the principal threats being habitat loss and degradation, hunting, and for certain species, the wild-bird trade.
On a smaller scale, local parrot clubs raise money to donate to a conservation cause.
One argument against the supposed intelligent capabilities of bird species is that birds have a relatively small cerebral cortex, which is the part of the brain considered the main area of intelligence in other animals.
* '''Pseudasturidae'''
Trapping wild parrots for the pet trade, as well as hunting, habitat loss, and competition from invasive species, has diminished wild populations, with parrots  being subjected to more exploitation than any other group of birds.
Most wild bird studies rely on banding or wing tagging, but parrots chew off such attachments.
A common problem is that large parrots that are cuddly and gentle as juveniles mature into intelligent, complex, often demanding adults who can outlive their owners, and can also become aggressive or even dangerous.
The pair bonds of the parrots and cockatoos are strong and a pair remains close during the nonbreeding season, even if they join larger flocks.
The domesticated budgerigar, a small parrot, is the most popular of all pet bird species.
All true parrots except the Pesquet's parrot employ the same method to obtain the seed from the husk; the seed is held between the mandibles and the lower mandible crushes the husk, whereupon the seed is rotated in the bill and the remaining husk is removed.
Not only have parrots demonstrated intelligence through scientific testing of their language-using ability, but also some species of parrots such as the kea are also highly skilled at using tools and solving puzzles.
Parrots, being cavity nesters, are vulnerable to the loss of nesting sites and to competition with introduced species for those sites.
Psittaciform diversity in South America and Australasia suggests that the order may have evolved in Gondwana, centred in Australasia.
Most fall somewhere between the two extremes, making poorly understood regional movements, with some adopting an entirely nomadic lifestyle.
A study by Irene Pepperberg suggested a high learning ability in an African grey parrot named Alex.
Characteristic features of parrots include a strong, curved bill, an upright stance, strong legs, and clawed zygodactyl feet.
The young spend three weeks to four months in the nest, depending on species, and may receive parental care for several months thereafter.
In addition to feeding on seeds and flowers, some parrot species prey on animals, especially invertebrate larvae.
Cooperative breeding, where birds other than the breeding pair help raise the young and is common in some bird families, is extremely rare in parrots, and has only unambiguously been demonstrated in the El Oro parakeet and the golden parakeet (which may also exhibit polygamous, or group breeding, behaviour with multiple females contributing to the clutch).
The earliest records of modern parrots date to about 23–20&nbsp;Mya.
The verb "parrot" in the dictionary means "to repeat by rote".
They have proved surprisingly hardy in adapting to conditions in Europe and North America.
In the ''Masnavi'', written by Rumi of Persia in 1250, the author describes an ancient method for training parrots to speak.
The greatest diversity of parrots is in South America and Australasia.
Europeans kept birds matching the description of the rose-ringed parakeet (or called the ring-necked parrot), documented particularly in a first-century account by Pliny the Elder.
Nowadays, it is commonly accepted that the caffeine in coffee is toxic to birds.
Temperaments and personalities vary even within a species, just as with dog breeds.
Depending on locality, parrots may be either wild-caught or be captive-bred, though in most areas without native parrots, pet parrots are captive-bred.
Many parrot species are in decline and several are extinct.
Several projects aimed specifically at parrot conservation have met with success.
Some species are colonial, with the burrowing parrot nesting in colonies up to 70,000 strong.
The head is large, with eyes positioned high and laterally in the skull, so the visual field of parrots is unlike any other birds.
Escaped parrots of several species have become established in the wild outside their natural ranges and in some cases outside the natural range of parrots.
Most species spend much of their time perched or climbing in tree canopies.
All the other parrot species are protected on Appendix II of CITES.
Species may engage in play fights or wild flights to practice predator evasion.
Seed-eating parrots have a strong tongue (containing similar touch receptors to those in the bill tip organ), which helps to manipulate seeds or position nuts in the bill so that the mandibles can apply an appropriate cracking force.
* '''Quercypsittidae'''
Some large parrot species, including large cockatoos, amazons, and macaws, have very long lifespans, with 80 years being reported, and record ages of over 100.
It is now generally assumed that the Psittaciformes, or their common ancestors with several related bird orders, were present somewhere in the world around the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event (K-Pg extinction), some 66&nbsp;Mya.
Colourful feathers with high levels of psittacofulvin resist the feather-degrading bacterium ''Bacillus licheniformis'' better than white ones.
Escapees first began breeding in cities in California, Texas, and Florida in the 1950s (with unproven earlier claims dating back to the 1920s in Texas and Florida).
Play forms a large part of learning in parrots; it can be solitary, and related to motor skills, or social.
Parrots are persecuted because, in some areas, they are (or have been) hunted for food and feathers, and as agricultural pests.
Incubation varies from 17 to 35 days, with larger species having longer incubation periods.
A small percentage of this capture, 4% to 14%, is smuggled into the USA."
These species tend to have the largest hyperstriata, and Harvey J. Karten, a neuroscientist at the University of California, San Diego, who studied bird physiology, has discovered that the lower part of the avian brain is functionally similar to that in humans.
Many parrots occur only on islands and are vulnerable to introduced species such as rats and cats, as they lack the appropriate antipredator behaviours needed to deal with mammalian predators.
In the larger species of parrots and cockatoos, the availability of nesting hollows may be limited, leading to intense competition for them both within the species and between species, as well as with other bird families.
The case led to calls for greater protection and control over trade in the birds.
The pygmy parrots, tribe Micropsittini, form a small genus restricted to New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.
Most parrots exhibit little or no sexual dimorphism in the visual spectrum.
Suprageneralists and specialists generally become independent of their parents much quicker than partly specialised species who may have to learn skills over long periods as various resources become seasonally available.
The fossil record—mainly from Europe—consists of bones clearly recognisable as belonging to parrots of modern type.
In 1975, 24 parrot species were included on Appendix I of CITES, thus prohibiting commercial international trade in these birds.
The ruler of heaven was so moved upon seeing the parrot's act, he sent rain to put out the fire.
Small parrots, such as lovebirds, hanging parrots, and budgies, have shorter lifespans up to 15–20 years.
Following years of campaigning by hundreds of NGOs and outbreaks of avian flu, in July 2007, the European Union halted the importation of all wild birds with a permanent ban on their import.
However, the rather nondescript bone is not unequivocally psittaciform, and more recently it was pointed out that it may rather belong to a newly discovered ibis of the genus ''Rhynchaeites'', whose fossil legs were found in the same deposits.
A parrot is found on the flag of Dominica and two parrots on their coat of arms.
For example, author Wolfgang de Grahl says in his 1987 book ''The Grey Parrot'' that some importers had parrots drink only coffee while they were shipped by boat, believing that pure water was detrimental and that their actions would increase survival rates during shipping.
Foraging behaviour is generally learnt from parents, and can be a very protracted affair.
Some uncertainty remains, but on the whole it seems more likely that these are not direct ancestors of the modern parrots, but related lineages that evolved in the Northern Hemisphere and have since died out.
The trade continues unabated in some countries.
Some cockatoos and the kākā excavate branches and wood to obtain grubs; the bulk of the yellow-tailed black cockatoo's diet is made up of insects.
with over 80% accuracy.
Community-based conservation, which eliminated the threat of poaching, has allowed the population to increase from around 600 birds in 1993 to over 2000 birds in 2009.
They sometimes even multiply to the point of becoming a nuisance or pest, and a threat to local ecosystems, and control measures have been used on some feral populations.
A combination of trapping of wild birds and damage to parrot habitats makes survival difficult or even impossible for some species of parrot.
Parrots invariably require an enormous amount of attention, care, and intellectual stimulation to thrive, akin to that required by a three-year-old child, which many people find themselves unable to provide in the long term.
Noise level, talking ability, cuddliness with people, and care needs can sometimes depend on how the bird is cared for and the attention he/she regularly receives.
The lories and lorikeets range from Sulawesi and the Philippines in the north to Australia and across the Pacific as far as French Polynesia, with the greatest diversity being found in and around New Guinea.
Parrots are not low-maintenance pets; they require feeding, grooming, veterinary care, training, environmental enrichment through the provision of toys, exercise, and social interaction (with other parrots or humans) for good health.
It is not fused to the skull, which allows it to move independently, and contributes to the tremendous biting pressure the birds are able to exert.
The most obvious physical characteristic is the strong, curved, broad bill.
Although parrots can be very affectionate and cute when immature, they often become aggressive when mature (partly due to mishandling and poor training) and may bite, causing serious injury.
The Psittacoidea parrots are far more variable, ranging the full spectrum of sizes shown by the family.
Although most parrot species are able to imitate, some of the amazon parrots are generally regarded as the next-best imitators and speakers of the parrot world.
Cockatoo species have a mobile crest of feathers on the top of their heads, which they can raise for display, and retract.
A single  fragment from a large lower bill (UCMP 143274), found in deposits from the Lance Creek Formation in Niobrara County, Wyoming, had been thought to be the oldest parrot fossil and is presumed to have originated from the Late Cretaceous period, which makes it about 70&nbsp;million years old.
The Cacatuoidea are quite distinct, having a movable head crest, a different arrangement of the carotid arteries, a gall bladder, differences in the skull bones, and lack the Dyck texture feathers that—in the Psittacidae—scatter light to produce the vibrant colours of so many parrots.
As they have been prized for thousands of years for their beauty and ability to talk, they have also often been misunderstood.
Since that initial listing, continuing threats from international trade led CITES to add an additional 32 parrot varieties to Appendix I.
Of the 350 or so living species, 130 are listed as near threatened or worse by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and 16 of which are currently considered critically endangered.
This is usually done in association with educational signs and lectures.
Pet parrots may be kept in a cage or aviary; though generally, tame parrots should be allowed out regularly on a stand or gym.
In Chinese Buddhist iconography, a parrot is sometimes depicted hovering on the upper right side Guan Yin clasping a pearl or prayer beads in its beak.
The loss of old trees is a particular problem in some areas, particularly in Australia, where suitable nesting trees must be centuries old.
In Polynesian legend as current in the Marquesas Islands, the hero Laka/Aka is mentioned as having undertaken a long and dangerous voyage to Aotona in what are now the Cook Islands, to obtain the highly prized feathers of a red parrot as gifts for his son and daughter.
