The two are then supposed to throw rice to their partner symbolizing dominance.
Although it was the only calendar always in harmony with the seasons, most members of the Parsi community rejected it on the grounds that it was not in accord with the injunctions expressed in Zoroastrian tradition (''Dēnkard'' 3.419).
However, scholars of Avestan language and linguistics attribute the difference in pronunciation to a vowel-shift that occurred only in Iran and that the Iranian pronunciation as adopted by the ''Kadmi''s is actually more recent than the pronunciation used by the non-''Kadmi'' Parsis.
One-fifth of the decrease in population is attributed to migration ().
Particularly notable Parsis in other areas of achievement include cricketers Farokh Engineer and Polly Umrigar, rock star Freddie Mercury, composer Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji and conductor Zubin Mehta; cultural studies theorist Homi K. Bhabha; screenwriter and photographer Sooni Taraporevala; authors Rohinton Mistry, Firdaus Kanga, Bapsi Sidhwa, Ardashir Vakil and Pakistani investigative journalist Ardeshir Cowasjee; actors John Farhan Abraham and Boman Irani; radio jockey Fali R Singara; educator Jamshed Bharucha and India's first woman photo-journalist Homai Vyarawalla.
The typically Parsi cultural symbols of the 17th and 18th centuries such as language (a Parsi variant of Gujarati), arts, crafts, and sartorial habits developed into Parsi theatre, literature, newspapers, magazines, and schools.
In order to adhere to purity it is the duty of Parsis to continue to preserve purity within their body as God created them.
It has been traditional, in Mumbai and Karachi at least, for dead Parsis to be taken to the Towers of Silence where the corpses are quickly eaten by the city's vultures.
In 1702, Maneck, who had probably already amassed a fortune under the Dutch and Portuguese, was appointed the first broker to the East India Company (acquiring the name "Seth" in the process), and in the following years "he and his Parsi associates widened the occupational and financial horizons of the larger Parsi community".
In Peshawar a Parsi graveyard was established in the late 19th century, which still exists and this cemetery is unique as there is no Tower of Silence and the community preferred to bury their dead.
The Sanjan Zoroastrians were certainly not the first Zoroastrians on the subcontinent.
These  capabilities were enormously useful to Parsis since they allowed them to "represent themselves as being like the British," which they did "more diligently and effectively than perhaps any other South Asian community".
This in turn has given the Parsi community a rather peculiar standing: they are Indians in terms of national affiliation, language and history, but not typically Indian in terms of consanguinity or cultural, behavioural and religious practices.
However, the Parsi community had to abide by three rules: they had to speak the local language, follow local marriage customs, and not carry any weapons.
Since that calendar did not compensate for the fractional days that go to make up a full solar year, with time it was no longer accordant with the seasons.
In 1689, Anglican chaplain John Ovington reported that in Surat the family "assist the poor and are ready to provide for the sustenance and comfort of such as want it.
A slower birthrate than deathrate accounts for the rest: as of 2001, Parsis over the age of 60 make up for 31% of the community.
The priests from both families facilitate the wedding.
Zoroastrianism festivals were originally held outside in the open air; temples were not common until later.
Taking the 2002 study into account, the authors of the 2004 study suggested "a male-mediated migration of the ancestors of the present-day Parsi population, where they admixed with local females ... leading ultimately to the loss of mtDNA of Iranian origin"
In addition to these ''Khorasani''s or ''Kohistani''s "mountain folk", as the two initial groups are said to have been initially called, at least one other group is said to have come overland from Sari, Iran.
Fali Homi Major served as the 18th Chief of Air Staff (India).
The exact date of the Parsi migration is unknown.
The word , pronounced "Parsian", i.e.
Wool is passed over the two seven times to bind them together.
Air Marshal  Minoo Jehangir Dotiwalla was another notable Parsi who contributed to the Indian Air Force; he was  awarded the Param Vishisht Seva Medal.
"Active, robust, prudent and persevering, they now form a very valuable part of the Company's subjects on the western shores of Hindustan where they are highly esteemed".
), many of which would be noted for their participation in the public life of the city, and for their various educational, industrial, and charitable enterprises.
Parsis prominent in the Indian independence movement include Pherozeshah Mehta, Dadabhai Naoroji, and Bhikaiji Cama.
Marriage is very important to the members of the Parsi community, believing that, in order to continue the expansion of God’s kingdom, they must procreate.
Consequently, when social reform started happening in India, the Parsi community discontinued the practice.
For example, Portuguese physician Garcia de Orta observed in 1563 that "there are merchants ... in the kingdom of Cambaia ... known as Esparcis.
The main components of Zoroastrianism and the Parsi community is the concept of purity and pollution, initiation, daily prayers, temple worship, marriage, funerals, and general worship.
Once the priest finishes with the prayers, the child’s initiation is finished and he or she is now a part of the community and religion.
The child then faces the main priest and fire is brought in to represent God.
Our country is India; our nationality is Indian".
The calendars still had the same name, ''Shahenshahi'' (imperial), presumably because none were aware that the calendars were no longer the same.
"Parsi" in the Persian language literally means ''Persian''.
Only 4.7% of the Parsi community are under 6 years of age, which translates to 7 births per year per 1000 individuals ().
), the Parsis inserted an embolismic month to level out the accumulating fractional days.
Naxalite leader and intellectual Kobad Ghandy is a Parsi.
The importance of the ''Qissa'' lies in any case not so much in its reconstruction of events than in its depiction of the Parsis – in the way they have come to view themselves – and in their relationship to the dominant culture.
The two paths are of ''asha'' or righteousness and of ''druj'', the lie.
Although they are not, strictly speaking, a caste, since they are not Hindus, they form a well-defined community.
Concerns have been raised in recent years over the rapidly declining population of the Parsi community in India.
Inscriptions at the Kanheri Caves near Mumbai suggest that at least until the early 11th century Middle Persian was still the literary language of the hereditary Zoroastrian priesthood.
In 1728 Rustom's eldest son Naoroz (later Naorojee) founded the ''Bombay Parsi Panchayat'' (in the sense of an instrument for self-governance and not in the sense of the trust it is today) to assist newly arriving Parsis in religious, social, legal and financial matters.
Nonetheless, aside from the ''Qissa'' and the Kanheri inscriptions, there is little evidence of the Parsis until the 12th and 13th century, when "masterly"  Sanskrit translations and transcriptions of the Avesta and its commentaries began to be prepared.
There is a smaller concentration of adherents in Surat, where the sect was founded in the last decades of the 19th century.
Parsis are now given an option of burial versus the Tower of Silence death ritual.
According to the Encyclopædia Britannica,Parsi, also spelled Parsee, member of a group of followers in India of the Iranian prophet Zoroaster.
For a list of Parsis with Wikipedia articles, see :Category:Parsi people.
The body is washed and placed in clean in a sudre and kusti.
The religious element comes in next when the two sit side by side to face the priest.
The Tower of Silence in Mumbai is located at Malabar Hill.
However, the Parsis would be the only Zoroastrians to do so (and would do it only once), with the result that – from then on – the calendar in use by the Parsis and the calendar in use by Zoroastrians elsewhere diverged by a matter of thirty days.
According to the National Commission for Minorities, there are a "variety of causes that are responsible for this steady decline in the population of the community", the most significant of which were childlessness and migration ().
The remaining estates – the ''(r)atheshtarih'' (nobility, soldiers, and civil servants), ''vastaryoshih'' (farmers and herdsmen), ''hutokshih'' (artisans and labourers) – were folded into an all-comprehensive class today known as the ''behdini'' ("followers of ''daena''", for which "good religion" is one translation).
Most of the temples were built by wealthy Parsis who needed centers that housed purity.
Persian is the official language of modern Iran, which was formerly known as Persia, and the Persian language's endonym is ''Farsi'', an arabization of the word ''Parsi''.
In 1849 the Parsis established their first school (co-educational, which was a novelty at the time, but would soon be split into separate schools for boys and girls) and the education movement quickened.
The term "Parseeism" or "Parsiism" is attributed to Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron, who in the 1750s, when the word "Zoroastrianism" had yet to be coined, made the first detailed report of the Parsis and of Zoroastrianism, therein mistakenly assuming that the Parsis were the only remaining followers of the religion.
As James Forbes, the Collector of Broach (now Bharuch), would note in his ''Oriental Memoirs'' (1770): "many of the principal merchants and owners of ships at Bombay and Surat are Parsees."
Maneck's generosity is incidentally also the first documented instance of Parsi philanthropy.
The initiation begins with a ritual bath, then a spiritual cleansing prayer; the child changes into white pajama pants, a shawl, and a small cap.
In 1745 the Parsis in and around Surat switched to the ''Kadmi'' or ''Kadimi'' calendar on the recommendation of their priests who were convinced that the calendar in use in the ancient 'homeland' must be correct.
Although the Sanjan group are believed to have been the first permanent settlers, the precise date of their arrival is a matter of conjecture.
The body is taken to the tower of death where the vultures take care of it.
Following the commercial treaty in the early 17th century between Mughal emperor Jahangir and James I of England, the East India Company obtained the exclusive rights to reside and build factories in Surat and other areas.
In the 1780s, emotions over the controversy ran so high that violence would occasionally erupt.
Actress Persis Khambatta was a Parsi who appeared in Bollywood.
For one, it opened the gene pool to some extent since until that time inter-class marriages were exceedingly rare (this would continue to be a problem for the priesthood until the 20th century).
The first type of temple is the Atash Behram, which is the highest level of fire.
The second clause was contested and overturned in 1948.
It says they fled for reasons of religious freedom and they were allowed to settle in India thanks to the goodwill of a local Hindu prince.
The husband of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and son-in-law of Jawaharlal Nehru, Feroze Gandhi, was a Parsi with ancestral roots in Bharuch, while Muhammad Ali Jinnah's wife, Rattanbai Petit, came from the prosperous Petit family of Parsis.
As stated before, fire is considered to represent the presence of Ahura Mazda, and there are two distinct differences for the types of fire for the different temples.
This first group was followed by a second group from Greater Khorasan within five years of the first, and this time having religious implements with them (the ''alat'').
The instinctive fear of disintegration and absorption in the vast multitudes among whom they lived created in them a spirit of exclusiveness and a strong desire to preserve the racial characteristics and distinctive features of their community.
The 9th-century Arab historiographer Al-Masudi briefly notes Zoroastrians with fire temples in al-Hind and in al-Sindh, Moreover, for the Iranians, the harbors of Gujarat lay on the maritime routes that complemented the overland Silk Road and there were extensive trade relations between the two regions.
In the February 21, 2006, editorial of the ''Parsiana'', the fortnightly of the Parsi Zoroastrian community, the editor noted that several adult children born of a Parsi mother and non-Parsi father had been inducted into the faith and that their choice "to embrace their mother's faith speaks volumes for their commitment to the religion."
On appeal in 1950, the 1948 ruling was upheld and the entire 1909 definition was deemed an obiter dictum – a collateral opinion and not legally binding (re-affirmed in 1966).
Until about the 12th century, all Zoroastrians followed the same 365-day religious calendar, which had remained largely unmodified since the calendar reforms of Ardashir I (''r.''
Consequently, three possible dates – 936, 765 and 716 – have been proposed as the year of landing, and the disagreement has been the cause of "many an intense battle ... amongst Parsis".
By the mid-19th century, the Parsis were keenly aware that their numbers were declining and saw education as a possible solution to the problem.
The fund succeeded in convincing a number of Iranian Zoroastrians to emigrate to India (where they are known today as Iranis) and may have been instrumental in obtaining a remission of the jizya for their co-religionists in 1882.
Although their ''Kusti'' prayers are very similar to those used by the ''Fassali''s, like the rest of the Parsi community the followers of Kshnoom are divided with respect to which calendar they observe.
Particularly notable Parsis in the fields of science and industry include physicist Homi J. Bhabha, Homi N. Sethna, J. R. D. Tata, Jamsetji Tata, regarded as the "Father of Indian Industry", Ratan Tata and members of the Tata, Godrej, and Wadia industrial families, including Neville Wadia, son-in law of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, and Rattanbai Petit and his descendents.
Through his largesse, Maneck helped establish the infrastructure that was necessary for the Parsis to set themselves up in Bombay and in doing so "established Bombay as the primary centre of Parsi habitation and work in the 1720s".
Therefore, burial and cremation have always been prohibited in Parsi culture.
The residents of Malabar Hill and surrounding areas have also complained against this practice.
As the maxim "Parsi, thy name is charity" reveals, their greatest contribution, literally and figuratively, is their philanthropy.
At the time of the Muslim conquest of Persia, the dominant religion of the region (which was ruled by the Sasanian Empire) was Zoroastrianism.
By the close of the 19th century, the total number of Parsis in colonial India was 85,397, of which 48,507 lived in Bombay, constituting 6% of the total population of the city (Census, 1881).
"Parsi legends regarding their ancestors' migration to India depict a beleaguered band of religious refugees escaping the new rule post the Muslim conquests in order to preserve their ancient faith.
The long presence of the Parsis in the Gujarat and Sindh areas of India distinguishes them from the smaller Zoroastrian Indian community of Iranis, who are much more recent arrivals, mostly descended from Zoroastrians fleeing the repression of the Qajar dynasty and the general social and political tumult of late 19th- and early 20th-century Iran.
From the 13th century to the late 16th century, the Zoroastrian priests of Gujarat sent (in all) twenty-two requests for religious guidance to their co-religionists in Iran, presumably because they considered the Iranian Zoroastrians "better informed on religious matters than themselves, and must have preserved the old-time tradition more faithfully than they themselves did" .
The Parsis, whose name means "Persians", are descended from Persian Zoroastrians who emigrated to India to avoid religious persecution by the Muslims.
In Zoroastrianism a person is not initiated as an infant like christening.
To further complicate matters, in the late 18th century (or early 19th century) a highly influential head-priest and staunch proponent of the ''Kadmi'' calendar – Phiroze Kaus Dastur of the Dadyseth Atash-Behram in Bombay – became convinced that the pronunciation of prayers as recited by visitors from Iran was correct, while the pronunciation as used by the Parsis was not.
They settled first at Diu in Kathiawar but soon moved to south Gujarāt, where they remained for about 800 years as a small agricultural community.
After showing the many similarities between their faith and local beliefs, the early community was granted a plot of land on which to build a fire temple.
There are also other minor differences in their recitation of the liturgy, such as repetition of some sections of the longer prayers.
He accordingly went on to alter some (but not all) of the prayers, which in due course came to be accepted by all adherents of the ''Kadmi'' calendar as the more ancient (and thus presumably correct).
In an early 20th-century legal ruling (see self-perceptions, below), Justices Davar and Beaman asserted (1909:540) that "Parsi" was also a term used in Iran to refer to Zoroastrians.
Following introductory prayers, the child is given the sacred items that are associated with Zoroastrianism: a sacred shirt and cord, sudre, and kusti.
There are few obvious indications that a Parsi might be a follower of the Kshnoom.
Using their vast resources, the Maneck Seth family gave their time, energy and not inconsiderable financial resources to the Parsi community, with the result that by the mid-18th century, the Panchayat was the accepted means for Parsis to cope with the exigencies of urban life and the recognized instrument for regulating the affairs of the community.
The Parsi community have given India several distinguished military officers.
Mahatma Gandhi would note in a much misquoted statement "I am proud of my country, India, for having produced the splendid Zoroastrian stock, in numbers beneath contempt, but in charity and philanthropy perhaps unequalled and certainly unsurpassed" .
The equality principles of the Indian Constitution void the patrilineal restrictions expressed in the third clause.
In recalling the ruling, the editor noted that although "they are legally and religiously full-fledged Zoroastrians, they are not considered Parsi Zoroastrians in the eyes of the law" and hence "legally they may not avail of fire temples specified for Parsi Zoroastrians."
In the Greater Mumbai area, where the density of Parsis is highest, about 10% of Parsi females and about 20% of Parsi males do not marry ().
Central Asia) and had previously been dependent on Silk Road trade .
Purity is held to be of the very essence of godliness.
Iranians rebelled against Arab invaders for almost 200 years; in Iran this period is now known as the "Two Centuries of Silence" or "Period of Silence".
As they proceed to the cemetery they walk in pairs and are connected by white fabric.
But, "even if one comes to the conclusion that the chronicle based on verbal transmission is not more than a legend, it still remains without doubt an extremely informative document for Parsee historiography."
Accompanied by better education and social cohesiveness, the community's sense of distinctiveness grew, and in 1854 Dinshaw Maneckji Petit founded the Persian Zoroastrian Amelioration Fund with the aim of improving conditions for his less fortunate co-religionists in Iran.
One study supports the Parsi contention  that they have maintained their Persian roots by avoiding intermarriage with local populations.
From a superficial 21st century point of view, some of these ''ithoter'' ("questions") are remarkably trivial – for instance, ''Rivayat'' 376: whether ink prepared by a non-Zoroastrian is suitable for copying Avestan language texts – but they provide a discerning insight into the fears and anxieties of the early modern Zoroastrians.
The second type of fire temple is called a Dar-i Mihr, and the preparation process is not as intense.
In Karachi, the Tower of Silence is located in Parsi Colony, near the Chanesar Goth and Mehmoodabad localities.
The migration may in fact have taken place as late as the 10th century, or in both.
However, after over a thousand years of admixture with the local population, they have been shown to be genetically closer to their locals than their Iranian ancestors.
Dorab Patel was Pakistan's first Parsi Supreme Court Justice.
Sindh touching Balochistan, the easternmost periphery of the Iranian world, too had once been under coastal administration of the Sasanian Empire (226-651), which consequently maintained outposts there.
Although the Panchayat would eventually be reestablished as the administrator of community property, it ultimately ceased to be an instrument for self-governance.
Normally, a child is initiated into the faith when he or she is old enough to choose to enter into the faith.
Even following the loss of Sindh, the Iranians continued to play a major role in the trade links between the east and west.
Their universal kindness, either employing such as are ready and able to work, or bestowing a seasonable bounteous charity to such as are infirm and miserable, leave no man destitute of relief, nor suffer a beggar in all their tribe".
In 1855 the ''Bombay Times'' noted that the Panchayat was utterly without the moral or legal authority to enforce its statutes (the ''Bundobusts'' or codes of conduct) and the council soon ceased to be considered representative of the community.
While in 1700 "fewer than a handful of individuals appear as merchants in any records; by mid-century, Parsis engaged in commerce constituted one of important commercial groups in Bombay".
More and more women in the Parsi community are becoming well educated and are therefore either delaying marriage or not partaking at all.
Living in an atmosphere surcharged with the Hindu caste system, they felt that their own safety lay in encircling their fold by rigid caste barriers" .
A dog is essential in the funeral process because it is able to see death.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, the Parsis had emerged as "the foremost people in India in matters educational, industrial, and social.
Nonetheless, "the precarious condition in which they lived for a considerable period made it impracticable for them to keep up their former proselytizing zeal.
That the Arabs charged non-Muslims higher duties when trading from Muslim-held ports may be interpreted to be a form of religious persecution, but that this was the only reason to migrate appears unlikely.
The 12th-century ''Sixteen Shlokas'', a Sanskrit text in praise of the Parsis, is the earliest attested use of the term as an identifier for Indian Zoroastrians.
The couple begins by facing one another with a sheet to block their view of one another.
The mourning process is four days long, and rather than creating graves for the dead, charities are established in honor of the person.
The Parsis followed and soon began to occupy posts of trust in connection with government and public works.
In that 2002 study of the Y-chromosome (patrilineal) DNA of the Parsis of Pakistan, it was determined that Parsis are genetically closer to Iranians than to their neighbours .
Where literacy had previously been the exclusive domain of the priesthood, in the era of the British Raj the British schools in India provided the new Parsi youth with the means not only to learn to read and write but also to be educated in the greater sense of the term and become familiar with the quirks of the British establishment.
During this time many Iranians who are now called Parsi chose to preserve their religious identity by fleeing from Iran to India.
The first reference to the Parsis in a European language is from 1322, when a French monk, Jordanus, briefly refers to their presence in Thane and Bharuch.
As such, the text plays a crucial role in shaping Parsi identity.
All estimates are based on the ''Qissa'', which is vague or contradictory with respect to some elapsed periods.
One of these was an enterprising agent named Rustom Maneck.
Genealogical DNA tests to determine purity of lineage have brought mixed results.
The largest community of followers of the Kshnoom lives in Jogeshwari, a suburb of Bombay, where they have their own fire temple (Behramshah Nowroji Shroff Daremeher), their own housing colony (Behram Baug) and their own newspaper (''Parsi Pukar'').
There is a debate raging in the Parsi community as to whether or not the prohibition on burials and cremations should be lifted.
The problem today, though, is that in Mumbai and Karachi the population of vultures has been drastically reduced due to extensive urbanization and the unintended consequence of treating humans and livestock with antibiotics, and the anti-inflammatory diclofenac, both of which harm vultures.
The Parsis now ran community medical centres, ambulance corps, Scouting troops, clubs, and Masonic Lodges.
The Parsis will then cease to be called a community and will be labeled a 'tribe'.
Even so, at some point (possibly shortly after their arrival in India), the Zoroastrians – perhaps determining that the social stratification that they had brought with them was unsustainable in the small community – did away with all but the hereditary priesthood (called the ''asronih'' in Sassanid Iran).
A separate part of the home is designated to house the corpse for funeral proceedings before being taken away.
The reason given for this practice is that earth, fire, and water are considered sacred elements which should not be defiled by the dead.
The term ''Pārsi'', which in the Persian language is a demonym meaning "inhabitant of Pārs" and hence "ethnic Persian", is not attested in Indian Zoroastrian texts until the 17th century.
Thus, the question of the ink is symptomatic of the fear of assimilation and the loss of identity, a theme that dominates the questions posed and continues to be an issue into the 21st century.
The Zoroastrian holy book, called the ''Avesta'', was written in the Avestan language, which is closely related to Vedic Sanskrit.
As a result, the bodies of the deceased are taking much longer to decompose, and this has upset certain sectors of the community.
We Portuguese call them Jews, but they are not so.
At some point between 1125 and 1250 (''cf.''
According to tradition, the Parsis initially settled at Hormuz on the Persian Gulf, but finding themselves still persecuted they set sail for India, arriving in the 8th century.
From these translations Dhalla infers that "religious studies were prosecuted with great zeal at this period" and that the command of Middle Persian and Sanskrit among the clerics "was of a superior order"..
The calendar disputes were not always purely academic, either.
notes that in much the same way as the word "Hindu" was used by Iranians to refer to anyone from the Indian subcontinent, "Parsi" was used by the Indians to refer to anyone from Greater Iran, irrespective of whether they were actually ethnic Persian people.
There are about 160 of these located throughout India.
The ''Fasli'' calendar does not have a significant following among Parsis, but, by virtue of being compatible with the ''Bastani'' calendar (an Iranian development with the same salient features as the ''Fasli'' calendar), it is predominant among the Zoroastrians of Iran.
They were no longer weavers and petty merchants, but now were established and ran banks, mills, heavy industry, shipyards, and shipping companies.
While the British saw the other Indians "as passive, ignorant, irrational, outwardly submissive but inwardly guileful", the Parsis were seen to have the traits that the colonial authorities tended to ascribe to themselves.
", ) However, while Parsi settlements definitely arose along the western coast of the Indian subcontinent following the Arab conquest of Iran, it is not possible to state with certainty that these migrations occurred as a result of religious persecution against Zoroastrians.
Similar observations would be made by James Mackintosh, Recorder of Bombay from 1804 to 1811, who noted that "the Parsees are a small remnant of one of the mightiest nations of the ancient world, who, flying from persecution into India, were for many ages lost in obscurity and poverty, till at length they met a just government under which they speedily rose to be one of the most popular mercantile bodies in Asia".
At about the same time as the role of the Panchayat was declining, a number of other institutions arose that would replace the Panchayat's role in contributing to the sense of social cohesiveness that the community desperately sought.
The balance between good and evil is correlated to the idea of purity and pollution.
This would be the last time that the Parsis would be considered a numerically significant minority in the city.
This definition was overturned several times.
Nonetheless, the opinion that the 1909 ruling is legally binding continues to persist, even among the better-read and moderate Parsis.
Until that time, such texts consistently use the Persian-origin terms ''Zartoshti'' "Zoroastrian" or ''Vehdin'' "of the good religion".
Two centuries after their landing, the Parsis began to settle in other parts of Gujarat, which led to "difficulties in defining the limits of priestly jurisdiction."
Thus, by the mid-18th century, the brokerage houses of the Bombay Presidency were almost all in Parsi hands.
The Parsis have made considerable contributions to the history and development of India, all the more remarkable considering their small numbers.
These problems were resolved by 1290 through the division of Gujarat into five ''panthak''s (districts), each under the jurisdiction of one priestly family and their descendants.
This change would have far reaching consequences.
In the wake of a July 1856 ruling by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that it had no jurisdiction over the Parsis in matters of marriage and divorce, the Panchayat was reduced to little more than a Government-recognized "Parsi Matrimonial Court".
Women within the Parsi community in India are ninety-seven percent literate; forty-two percent have completed high school or college and twenty-nine percent have an occupation in which they earn a substantial amount of money.
Several landmarks in Mumbai are named after Parsis, including Nariman Point.
Since dates are not specifically mentioned in Parsi texts prior to the 18th century, any date of arrival is perforce a matter of speculation.
Fire is brought to the room and prayers are begun.
The ''Fassali''s do not have their own Atash-Behram.
Moreover, if heredity were the only factor in a determination of ethnicity, the Parsis would count as Parthians according to the ''Qissa-i Sanjan''.
The bride and groom then travel to the wedding in florally decorated cars.
There are only eight such temples located within India.
These transmissions and their replies – assiduously preserved by the community as the ''rivayat''s (epistles) – span the years 1478–1766 and deal with both religious and social subjects.
They came in the vanguard of progress, amassed vast fortunes, and munificently gave away large sums in charity".
Vice Admiral RF Contractor served as the 17th Chief of the Indian Coast Guard.
Air Marshal Aspy Engineer served as the 2nd Chief of Air Staff (India), post independence, and Air Chief Marshal.
Following the political and economic isolation of Surat in the 1720s and 1730s that resulted from troubles between the (remnant) Mughal authorities and the increasingly dominant Marathas, a number of Parsi families from Surat migrated to the new city.
