It has been suggested  that defects in placental folding or interdigitation are one cause of swine parthenote abortive development.
This is called '''apomictic parthenogenesis'''.
Other, usually sexual, species may occasionally reproduce parthenogenetically and Komodo dragons; the hammerhead and blacktip sharks are recent additions to the known list of spontaneous parthenogenetic vertebrates.
Among vertebrates, strict parthenogenesis is only known to occur in lizards, snakes, birds and sharks, with fish, amphibians and reptiles exhibiting various forms of gynogenesis and hybridogenesis (an incomplete form of parthenogenesis).
Recently, a hybrid parthenogenetic whiptail lizard was bred in the laboratory from a cross between an asexual and a sexual whiptail Because multiple hybridization events can occur, individual parthenogenetic whiptail species can consist of multiple independent asexual lineages.
If meiosis occurs, the offspring will get only a fraction of the mother's alleles.
The Journal of Fish Biology reported a study in which scientists said DNA testing proved that a pup carried by a female Atlantic blacktip shark in the Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center contained no genetic material from a male.
The swine parthenote placentae often appears hypo-vascular: see free image (Figure 1) in linked reference.
This means that females (workers and queens) are always diploid, while males (drones) are always haploid, and produced parthenogenetically.
Parthenogenesis is different, in that it originates from the genetic material contained within an egg cell and the new organism is not necessarily genetically identical to the parent.
In addition, sexual reproduction provides the benefit of meiotic recombination between non-sister chromosomes, a process associated with repair of DNA double-strand breaks and other DNA damages that may be induced by stressful conditions.
In these species asexual reproduction occurs either in summer (aphids) or as long as conditions are favourable.
In December 2007, Dr. Revazova and ISCC published an article illustrating a breakthrough in the use of parthenogenesis to produce human stem cells that are homozygous in the HLA region of DNA.
In some of the eggs fertilized by males, however, the fertilization can cause the female genetic material to be ablated from the zygote.
They hatched 15 weeks after being laid.
First genome (A) is restored by fertilization of these gametes with gametes from the first species (AA, sexual host, usually male).
In some cases, the offspring are haploid (e.g., male ants).
An interesting aspect to reproduction in these asexual lizards is that mating behaviors are still seen, although the populations are all female.
So, although the populations lack males, they still require sexual behavioral stimuli for ''maximum'' reproductive success.
As a consequence, the males will only have fathers and the queens only mothers, while the sterile workers are the only ones with both parents of both genders.
This type of reproduction had been seen before in bony fish, but never in cartilaginous fish such as sharks, until this documentation.
This is not unexpected, as many animals will lay eggs even if there is not a male to fertilize them.
Within lineages, there is very little genetic diversity, but different lineages may have quite different genotypes.
Since gynogenetic species are all female, activation of their eggs requires mating with males of a closely related species for the needed stimulus.
This type of parthenogenesis requires mating, but the sperm does not contribute to the genetics of the offspring (the parthenogenesis is pseudogamous, alternatively referred to as gynogenetic).
Parthenogenetic reproduction has been demonstrated in the laboratory for ''T.&nbsp;stenaspis''.
aphids and some hymenopterans) or only male (arrhenotoky, e.g.
Here, offspring are produced by the same mechanism as in parthenogenesis, but with the requirement that the egg merely be stimulated by the ''presence'' of sperm in order to develop.
A related phenomenon, polyembryony is a process that produces multiple clonal offspring from a single egg cell.
In 2002, two white-spotted bamboo sharks were born at the Belle Isle Aquarium in Detroit.
The pup was thought to have been conceived through parthenogenic means.
In ''Cataglyphis cursor'', a European formicine ant, the queens and workers can produce new queens by parthenogenesis.
The offspring produced by apomictic parthenogenesis are ''full clones'' of their mother.
Depending on the mechanism involved in restoring the diploid number of chromosomes, parthenogenetic offspring may have anywhere between all and half of the mother's alleles.
This can result in parthenogenetic offspring being unique from each other and from their mother.
Many others classify the endomitotic variants as asexual, and consider the resulting embryos parthenogenetic.
Some salamanders of the genus ''Ambystoma'' are gynogenetic and appear to have been so for over a million years.
In cloning, the nucleus of a diploid cell from a donor organism is inserted into an enucleated egg cell and the cell is then stimulated to undergo continued mitosis, resulting in an organism that is genetically identical to the donor.
The births baffled experts as the mother shared an aquarium with only one other shark, which was female.
parthenogenesis in which the eggs did not undergo meiosis.
To initiate parthenogenesis of swine oocytes, various methods exist to induce an artificial activation that mimics sperm entry, such as calcium ionophore treatment, microinjection of calcium ions, or electrical stimulation.
The switch between sexuality and parthenogenesis in such species may be triggered by the season (aphid, some gall wasps), or by a lack of males or by conditions that favour rapid population growth (rotifers and cladocerans like daphnia).
As meiosis proceeds, extrusion of the second polar is blocked by exposure to cytochalasin B.
The occurrence of such asexually produced eggs in sexual animals can be explained by a meiotic error, leading to eggs produced via automixis.
The repercussions of parthenogenesis in sharks, which fails to increase the genetic diversity of the offspring, is a matter of concern for shark experts, taking into consideration conservation management strategies for this species, particularly in areas where there may be a shortage of males due to fishing or environmental pressures.
A form of asexual reproduction related to parthenogenesis is gynogenesis.
The Komodo dragon, which normally reproduces sexually, has also been found able to reproduce asexually by parthenogenesis.
These include a honey bee subspecies from South Africa, ''Apis mellifera capensis'', where  workers are capable of producing diploid eggs parthenogenetically, and replacing the queen if she dies; other examples include some species of small carpenter bee, (genus ''Ceratina'').
Heterozygosity is not completely preserved when crossing over occurs in central fusion.
As meiosis proceeds, extrusion of the second polar is blocked by exposure to cytochalasin B.
* ''Bacillus'' stick insects B. rossius × Bacillus grandii benazzii
Parthenogenesis involving meiosis is more complicated.
The workers are produced sexually.
Fusion is seen in the Phasmatodea, Hemiptera (Aleurodids and Coccidae), Diptera, and some Hymenoptera.
In other cases, collectively called '''automictic parthenogenesis''', the ploidy is restored to diploidy by various means.
The genetic composition of the offspring depends on what type of apomixis takes place.
On August 2, 2007, after much independent investigation, it was revealed that discredited South Korean scientist Hwang Woo-Suk unknowingly produced the first human embryos resulting from parthenogenesis.
The offspring produced by parthenogenesis may be of both sexes, only female (thelytoky, e.g.
This behaviour is due to the hormonal cycles of the females, which cause them to behave like males shortly after laying eggs, when levels of progesterone are high, and to take the female role in mating before laying eggs, when estrogen dominates.
This is because in anaphase I the homologous chromosomes are separated.
Other examples of insect parthenogenesis can be found in gall-forming aphids (e.g., ''Pemphigus betae''), where females reproduce parthenogenetically during the gall-forming phase of their life cycle and in grass thrips.
As such, there are over 80 species of unisex reptiles (mostly lizards but including a single snake species), amphibians and fishes in nature for which males are no longer a part of the reproductive process.
ZW offspring are produced by endoreplication before meiosis or by central fusion.
Use of an electrical or chemical stimulus can produce the beginning of the process of parthenogenesis in the asexual development of viable offspring.
Among species with the haplo-diploid sex-determination system, such as hymenopterans (ants, bees and wasps) and thysanopterans (thrips), haploid males  are produced from unfertilized eggs.
In species that use the ZW sex-determination system the offspring genotype may be one of ZW (female), ZZ (male), or WW (non-viable in most species but a fertile, viable female in a few (e.g., boas)).
Offspring are genetically identical to the parent, indicating it reproduces by apomixis, i.e.
These transitions often occur as a result of inbreeding or mutation within large populations.
Among these authors the threshold for classifying automixis as a sexual process depends on when the products of anaphase I or of anaphase II are joined together.
"Marmorkrebs" are parthenogenetic crayfish that were discovered in the pet trade in the 1990s.
For example, many cases of accidental parthenogenesis in sharks, some snakes, Komodo dragons and a variety of domesticated birds were widely perpetuated as facultative parthenogenesis.
At least two species of spiders in the family Oonopidae (goblin spiders), ''Heteroonops spinimanus'' and ''Triaeris stenaspis'', are thought to be parthenogenetic, as no males have ever been collected.
The shark pup was apparently killed by a stingray within days of birth.
There are a number of documented species, specifically salamanders and geckos, that rely on obligate parthenogenesis as their major method of reproduction.
As with all types of asexual reproduction, there are both costs (low genetic diversity and therefore susceptibility to adverse mutations that might occur) and benefits (reproduction without the need for a male) associated with parthenogenesis.
Many species have been shown to transition to obligate parthenogenesis over evolutionary time.
hispanicus'' (Italian edible frog) – unknown origin: ''P.
On June 26, 2007, International Stem Cell Corporation (ISCC), a California-based stem cell research company, announced that their lead scientist, Dr. Elena Revazova, and her research team were the first to intentionally create human stem cells from unfertilized human eggs using parthenogenesis.
In the same year, a female Atlantic blacktip shark in Virginia reproduced via parthenogenesis.
They are called ''half clones'' of their mother.
Many taxa with heterogony have within them species that have lost the sexual phase and are now completely asexual.
Other possibilities had been considered for the birth of the Detroit bamboo sharks including thoughts that the sharks had been fertilized by a male and stored the sperm for a period of time, as well as the possibility that the Belle Isle bamboo shark is a hermaphrodite, harboring both male and female sex organs, and capable of fertilizing its own eggs, but that is not confirmed.
Diploids are produced by doubling or fusion of gametes after meiosis.
In times of stress, offspring produced by sexual reproduction may be fitter as they have new, possibly beneficial gene combinations.
The truth was discovered in 2007, long after the embryos were created by him and his team in February 2004.
This form of reproduction is seen in some live-bearing fish of the genus ''Poeciliopsis'' as well as in some of the ''Pelophylax'' spp.
In 2012, facultative parthenogenesis was reported in wild vertebrates for the first time by US researchers amongst captured pregnant copperhead and cottonmouth female pit-vipers.
Hybridogenetic hybrids (for example AB genome), usually females, during gametogenesis exclude one of parental genomes (A) and produce gametes with unrecombined genome of second parental species (B), instead of containing mixed recombined parental genomes.
In flowering plants, cells  of the gametophyte can undergo this process.
They also cause gamete duplication in unfertilized eggs causing them to develop into female offspring.
Further examination of the chromosomes of these cells show indicators of parthenogenesis in those extracted stem cells, similar to those found in the mice created by Tokyo scientists in 2004.
One of the best known examples of taxa exhibiting facultative parthenogenesis are mayflies; presumably this is the default reproductive mode of all species in this insect order.
The water flea ''Daphnia pulex'' alternates between sexual and parthenogenetic reproduction.
and perhaps in ''P.
The female bamboo sharks had laid eggs in the past.
The criterion for "sexuality" varies from all cases of restitutional meiosis, to those where the nuclei fuse or to only those where gametes are mature at the time of fusion.
Facultative parthenogenesis is often incorrectly used to describe cases of accidental or spontaneous parthenogenesis in normally sexual animals.
Both true parthenogenesis and pseudogamy ('''gynogenesis''' or '''sperm-dependent parthenogenesis''') are known to occur.
On 10 October 2008 scientists confirmed the second case of a virgin birth in a shark.
In April 2004, scientists at Tokyo University of Agriculture used parthenogenesis successfully to create a fatherless mouse.
This treatment results in a diploid (2 maternal genomes) parthenote Parthenotes can be surgically transferred to a recipient oviduct for further development, but will succumb to developmental failure after ≈30 days of gestation.
In the grass thrips genus ''Aptinothrips'' there have been, despite the very limited number of species in the genus, several transitions to asexuality.
In bdelloid rotifers, females reproduce exclusively by parthenogenesis (obligate parthenogenesis),  while in monogonont rotifers, females can alternate between sexual and asexual reproduction (cyclical parthenogenesis).
This treatment results in a diploid (2 maternal genomes) parthenote.
This may also happen by the fusion of the first two blastomeres.
One female plays the role played by the male in closely related species, and mounts the female that is about to lay eggs.
So hybridogenesis is not completely asexual, but instead hemiclonal: half of genome is passed to the next generation clonally, unrecombined, intact (B), other half sexually, recombined (A).
Crustacean reproduction varies both across and within species.
Usually eggs are laid only by the queen, but the unmated workers may also lay haploid, male eggs either regularly (e.g.
In automictic parthenogenesis the offspring differ from one another and from their mother.
To initiate parthenogenesis of swine oocytes, various methods exist to induce an artificial activation that mimics sperm entry, such as calcium ionophore treatment, microinjection of calcium ions, or electrical stimulation.
Induced parthenogenesis in mice and monkeys often results in abnormal development.
When endomitosis occurs before meiosis or when ''central fusion'' occurs (restitutional meiosis of anaphase I or the fusion of its products), the offspring get all to more than half of the mother's genetic material and heterozygosity is mostly preserved (if the mother has two alleles for a locus, it is likely that the offspring will get both).
Normal egg cells form after meiosis and are haploid, with half as many chromosomes as their mother's body cells.
However, the sperm cell does not contribute any genetic material to the offspring.
Some species reproduce exclusively by parthenogenesis (such as the Bdelloid rotifers), while others can switch between sexual reproduction and parthenogenesis.
Among these species, one of the most well documented transitions to obligate parthenogenesis was found in almost all metazoan taxa, albeit through highly diverse mechanisms.
The queen bee is the only fertile female in the hive; if she dies without the possibility for a viable replacement queen, it is not uncommon for the worker bees to lay eggs.
Treatment with cycloheximide, a non-specific protein synthesis inhibitor, enhances parthenote development in swine presumably by continual inhibition of MPF/cyclin B.
In many hymenopteran insects such as honeybees, female eggs are produced sexually, using sperm from a drone father, while the production of further drones (males) depends on the queen (and occasionally workers) producing unfertilised eggs.
These cases are, however, examples of accidental parthenogenesis, given the frequency of asexually produced eggs and their hatching rates are extremely low, in contrast to true facultative parthenogenesis where the majority of asexually produced eggs hatch.
Parthenogenetic development of swine oocytes.
As a consequence, research on human parthenogenesis is focused on the production of embryonic stem cells for use in medical treatment, not as a reproductive strategy.
Facultative parthenogenesis is extremely rare in nature, with only a few examples of animal taxa capable of facultative parthenogenesis.
Facultative parthenogenesis is believed to be a response to a lack of a viable male.
Parthenogenesis is distinct from artificial animal cloning, a process where the new organism is necessarily genetically identical to the cell donor.
The mechanism by which the mixing of chromosomes from two or three species can lead to parthenogenetic reproduction is unknown.
Although parthenogenesis may help females who cannot find mates, it does reduce genetic diversity.
Since then at least 50 species of unisexual vertebrate have been described, including at least 20 fish, 25 lizards, a single snake species, frogs, and salamanders.
Although Hwang deceived the world about being the first to create artificially cloned human embryos, he did contribute a major breakthrough to stem cell research by creating human embryos using parthenogenesis.
Normally, the eggs are assumed to be inviable and are discarded.
This is the first recognized example of an animal species where both females and males can reproduce clonally resulting in a complete separation of male and female gene pools.
This is because mammals have imprinted genetic regions, where either the maternal or the paternal chromosome is inactivated in the offspring in order for development to proceed normally.
If ''terminal fusion'' (restitutional meiosis of anaphase II or the fusion of its products) occurs, a little over half the mother's genetic material is present in the offspring and the offspring are mostly homozygous.
Parthenogenesis in birds is known mainly from studies of domesticated turkeys and chickens, although it has also been noted in the domestic pigeon.
In 2008, a Hungarian aquarium had another case of parthenogenesis after its lone female shark produced a pup without ever having come into contact with a male shark.
Several species of parthenogenetic gastropods have been studied, especially with respect to their status as invasive species.
A female may undergo facultative parthenogenesis if a male is absent from the habitat or if it is unable to produce viable offspring.
In species that use the XY sex-determination system, parthenogenetic offspring will have two X chromosomes and are female.
Many other cases of obligate parthenogenesis (or gynogenesis) are found among polyploids and hybrids where the chromosomes cannot pair for meiosis.
It is believed that the success of those salamanders may be due to rare fertilization of eggs by males, introducing new material to the gene pool, which may result from perhaps only one mating out of a million.
High metaphase promoting factor (MPF) activity causes mammalian oocytes to arrest at the metaphase II stage until fertilization by a sperm.
This is because in asexual reproduction a successful genotype can spread quickly without being modified by sex or wasting resources on male offspring who won't give birth.
This made Hwang the first, unknowingly, to successfully perform the process of parthenogenesis to create a human embryon and, ultimately, a human parthenogenetic stem cell line.
This is because haploid individuals are not viable in most species.
Those cases of automixis that are classified as sexual reproduction are compared to self-fertilization in their mechanism and consequences.
At least two species in the genus ''Dugesia'', flatworms in the Turbellaria sub-division of the phylum Platyhelminthes, include polyploid individuals that reproduce by parthenogenesis.
Haploid individuals, however, are usually non-viable, and parthenogenetic offspring usually have the diploid chromosome number.
The swine parthenote placentae often appears hypo-vascular and is approximately 50% smaller than biparental offspring placentae: see free image (Figure 1) in linked reference.
In Caucasian rock lizards of genus ''Darevskia'', which have six parthenogenetic forms of hybrid origin hybrid parthenogenetic form ''D.
A few ants and bees are capable of producing diploid female offspring parthenogenetically.
Oospores derived after an experimental cross were germinated, and some of the progeny were genetically identical to one or other parent, which would imply that meiosis did not occur and the oospores developed by parthenogenesis.
Hybridogenesis is a mode of reproduction of hybrids.
Other species restore their ploidy by the fusion of the meiotic products.
The testing showed the female pup's DNA matched only one female who lived in the tank, and that no male DNA was present in the pup.
(See also Meiosis section: Origin and function of meiosis.)
Initially, Hwang claimed he and his team had extracted stem cells from cloned human embryos, a result later found to be fabricated.
Worker bees are unable to mate, and the unfertilized eggs produce only drones (males), which can mate only with a queen.
In species that use the ZW sex-determination system, they have either two Z chromosomes (male) or two W chromosomes (mostly non-viable but rarely a female), or they could have one Z and one W chromosome (female).
When meiosis is involved, the sex of the offspring will depend on the type of sex determination system and the type of apomixis.
Thus, in a relatively short period, all the worker bees die off, and the new drones follow if they have not been able to mate before the collapse of the colony.
ridibundus'' or ''P.
The process may offer a way for creating stem cells that are genetically matched to a particular woman for the treatment of degenerative diseases that might affect her.
Diploidy might be restored by the doubling of the chromosomes without cell division before meiosis begins or after meiosis is completed.
Parthenogenesis in turkeys appears to result from a conversion of haploid cells to diploid; most embryos produced in this way die early in development.
Some of these like the mourning gecko ''Lepidodactylus lugubris'', Indo-Pacific house gecko ''Hemidactylus garnotii'', the hybrid whiptails ''Cnemidophorus'', Caucasian rock lizards ''Darevskia'', and the brahminy blindsnake, ''Indotyphlops braminus'' are unisexual and obligately parthenogenetic.
This behaviour is believed to have evolved to allow a doomed colony to produce drones which may mate with a virgin queen and thus preserve the colony's genetic progeny.
The egg cells, depending on the species may be produced without meiosis (apomictically) or by one of the several automictic mechanisms.
These lizards live in the dry and sometimes harsh climate of the southwestern United States and northern Mexico.
This is a result of the lack of the queen's pheromones and the pheromones secreted by uncapped brood, which normally suppress ovarian development in workers.
This process continues, so that each generation is half (or hemi-) clonal on the mother's side and has half new genetic material from the father's side.
The first all-female (unisexual) reproduction in vertebrates was described in the fish ''Poecilia formosa'' in 1932.
These ants get both the benefits of both asexual and sexual reproduction—the daughters who can reproduce (the queens) have all of the mother's genes, while the sterile workers whose physical strength and disease resistance are important are produced sexually.
In most cases the egg fails to develop normally or completely to hatching.
esculentus'' (edible frog): ''P.
* spined loaches ''Cobitis hankugensis'' × ''C.
stingless bees) or under special circumstances.
Mature egg cells are produced by mitotic divisions, and these cells directly develop into embryos.
In 1936, Gregory Goodwin Pincus reported successfully inducing parthenogenesis in a rabbit.
Among the better-known large decapod crustaceans, some crayfish reproduce by parthenogensis.
These stem cells are called HLA homozygous parthenogenetic human stem cells (hpSC-Hhom) and have unique characteristics that would allow derivatives of these cells to be implanted into millions of people without immune rejection.
Apomixis can apparently occur in ''Phytophthora'', an Oomycete.
The offspring having all of the mother's genetic material are  called  full clones and those having only half are called half clones.
most hymenopterans).
In this way, males pass on only their genes to become fertile male offspring.
Such species include the New Zealand mud snail (''Potamopyrgus antipodarum''), the red-rimmed melania (''Melanoides tuberculata''), and the Quilted melania (''Tarebia granifera'').
* Iberian minnow ''Tropidophoxinellus alburnoides'' (''Squalius pyrenaicus'' × hypothetical ancestor related with Anaecypris hispanica)
The fertilization event causes intracellular calcium oscillations, and targeted degradation of cyclin B, a regulatory subunit of MPF, thus permitting the MII-arrested oocyte to proceed through meiosis.
Parthenotes can be surgically transferred to a recipient oviduct for further development, but will succumb by developmental failure after ≈30 days of gestation.
The Louisiana red swamp crayfish (''Procambarus clarkii''), which normally reproduces sexually, has also been suggested to reproduce by parthenogenesis, although no individuals of this species have been reared this way in the lab.
Other examples where hybridogenesis is at least one of modes of reproduction include i.e.
This batch of eggs was left undisturbed by the curator as he had heard about the previous birth in 2001 in Nebraska and wanted to observe whether they would hatch.
The pup was not a twin or clone of her mother, but rather, contained only half of her mother's DNA ("automictic parthenogenesis").
This is called facultative parthenogenesis (other terms are cyclical parthenogenesis, heterogamy or heterogony).
In the case of pre-meiotic doubling, recombination -if it happens- occurs between identical sister chromatids.
In the case of endomitosis after meiosis the offspring is completely homozygous and has only half the mother's genetic material.
Using gene targeting, they were able to manipulate two imprinted loci H19/IGF2 and DLK1/MEG3 to produce bi-maternal mice at high frequency  and subsequently show that fatherless mice have enhanced longevity.
A female will produce an ovum with a full set (two sets of genes) provided solely by the mother.
At least in one normally cyclical parthenogenetic species obligate parthenogenesis can be inherited: a recessive allele leads to loss of sexual reproduction in homozygous offspring.
Some lizard parthenogens show a pattern of geographic parthenogenesis, occupying high mountain areas where their ancestral forms have an inferior competition ability.
