Some locations (''Pithas'' or ''Shaktipeeths'') are considered special because of their historical importance and legends about their origins in the ancient texts of Hinduism.
A parrot is found with Parvati's form as Kamakshi - the goddess of love, as well as Kama - the cupid god of desire who shoots arrows to trigger infatuation.
Shiva dedicates the following hymn in Parvati's honor,
Sculpture and iconography of Parvati, in one of her many manifestations, have been found in temples and literature of southeast Asia.
This concept is represented as an androgynous image that is half man and half woman, Siva and Parvati respectively.
This shocks Shiva, who is so grief-stricken that he loses interest in worldly affairs, retires and isolates himself in the mountains, in meditation and austerity.
Parvati does not lose her hope or her resolve to win over Shiva.
These images that combine the masculine and feminine energies, Shiva and Parvati, yield a vision of reconciliation, interdependence and harmony between the way of the ascetic and that of a householder.
On coins issued by king Harsha, Parvati and Shiva are seated on a bull, and the reverse of the coin has Brahmi script.
Her rage at Shiva's attempt to walk out, manifests in the form of ten terrifying goddesses who block Shiva's every exit.
You are Prakṛti, and I Purusha.– Translated by Stella Kramrisch
In some depictions, Parvati and Shiva are shown in various forms of sexual union.
In some manifestations, particularly as angry, ferocious aspects of Shakti such as Durga or Kali, she has eight or ten arms, and is astride on a tiger or lion.
When Shiva does his violent, destructive Tandava dance, Parvati is described as calming him or complementing his violence by slow, creative steps of her own Lasya dance.
Her manifestation as Durga has also been found in southeast Asia.
This festival is popular in Maharashtra and Karnataka, less observed in North India and unknown in Bengal.
The festival is popular in Maharashtra and Karnataka.
The stories go through many ups and downs, until Parvati and Shiva are finally married.
Parvati is the wife of the Hindu god Shiva - the protector and regenerator of universe and all life.
After the marriage, Parvati moves to Mount Kailash, the residence of Shiva.
At night, prayers are held by singing and dancing.
;Symbolism of many aspects for the same goddess
She is expressed in nurturing and benevolent aspects, as well as destructive and ferocious aspects.
Parvati and Shiva are often symbolized by a yoni and a linga respectively.
Her connection with motherhood and female sexuality does not confine the feminine or exhaust their significance and activities in Hindu literature.
At Ephesus, Cybele is shown with lions, just like iconography of Parvati is sometimes shown with a lion.
When depicted alongside Shiva, she generally appears with two arms, but when alone, she may be depicted having four.
According to Devi Bhagawata Purana and Shiva Purana mount Himalaya and his wife Mena appease goddess Adi Shakti.
In other words, the symbolism, legends and characteristics of Parvati evolved over time fusing Uma, Haimavati, Ambika in one aspect and the more ferocious, destructive Kali, Gauri, Nirriti in another aspect.
Some communities also believe her to be the sister of the god Vishnu and the river-goddess Ganga.
One interpretation of the (Khajuraho) temples is that they were built to celebrate the mythic marriage of Shiva and his consort.
'''Parvati''' (IAST: Pārvatī) is the Hindu goddess of fertility, love and devotion; as well as of divine strength and power.
In the Harivamsa, Parvati is referred to as Aparna ('One who took no sustenance') and then addressed as Uma, who was dissuaded by her mother from severe austerity by saying u mā ('oh, don't').
* 52 Shakti Peethas suggests all goddesses are expansions of the goddess Parvati.
Boisselier has identified Uma in a Champa era temple in Vietnam.
Sayana's commentary in ''Anuvaka'', however, identifies Parvati in the ''Kena Upanishad'', suggesting her to be the same as Uma and Ambika in the Upanishad, referring to Parvati is thus an embodiment of divine knowledge and the mother of the world.
The conflict between Daksha and Shiva gets to a point where Daksha does not invite Shiva to his yagna (fire-sacrifice).
The temple’s origin in Khajuraho has been traced to the Hindu mythology in which Khajuraho is the place where Parvati and Shiva got married.
Parvati's union with Shiva symbolises the union of a male and female in "ecstasy and sexual bliss".
Parvati tames Shiva with her presence.
Parvati, the gentle aspect of Devi Shakti, is usually represented as fair, beautiful, and benevolent.
Parvati is portrayed as the ideal wife, mother and householder in Indian legends.
In Rajasthan the worship of Gauri happens during the Gangaur festival.
In Hindu belief, she is the recreative energy and power of Shiva, and she is the cause of a bond that connects all beings and a means of their spiritual release.
* Navadurga nine forms of the goddess Parvati
* Annapurna is the representation of all that is complete and of food.
Some scholars hold that Parvati does not explicitly appear in Vedic literature, though the ''Kena Upanishad'' (3.12) contains a goddess called Uma-Haimavati.
But Kinsley notes: "it is little more than conjecture to identify her with the later goddess Satī-Pārvatī, although .. later texts that extol Śiva and Pārvatī retell the episode in such a way to leave no doubt that it was Śiva's spouse.." IAST original
In Skanda Purana, Parvati assumes the form of a warrior-goddess and defeats a demon called ''Durg'' who assumes the form of a buffalo.
Shaiva approaches tend to look upon Parvati as the Shiva's submissive and obedient wife.
For example, early Saivite inscriptions of the Khmer in Cambodia, dated as early as the fifth century AD, mention Parvati (Uma) and Siva.
They are also depicted as quarreling.
Other locations celebrate major events in Parvati's life.
Two seeds of this tree sometimes naturally grow as fused, and considered to symbolic of Parvati and Shiva.
Her primary role is as a mediator who reveals the knowledge of Brahman to the Vedic trinity of Agni, Vayu, and Indra, who were boasting about their recent defeat of a group of demons.
(...) The erotic sculptures are a metaphor of the union of Shiva and Parvati, the marriage of two cosmic forces, of light and darkness, sky and earth, spirit and matter.
In Hindu Epic the Mahabharata, she as Umā suggests that the duties of wife and mother are as follows - being of a good disposition, endued with sweet speech, sweet conduct, and sweet features.
Although Parvati is considered another aspect of Sakti, just like Kali, Durga, Kamakshi, Meenakshi, Gauri and many others in modern-day Hinduism, many of these “forms” or aspects originated from regional legends and traditions, and the distinctions from Parvati are pertinent.
He meets her in disguised form, tries to discourage her, telling her Shiva's weaknesses and personality problems.
Derived from Parvati's form as Mahakali, her nipponized form is Daikokutennyo (大黒天女).
One of her arms in front may be in the Abhaya mudra (hand gesture for 'fear not'), one of her children, typically Ganesha, is on her knee, while her elder son Skanda may be playing near her in her watch.
Shiva is portrayed in Hindu legends as the ideal ascetic withdrawn in his personal pursuit in the mountains with no interest in social life, while Parvati is portrayed as the ideal householder keen about the nurturing worldly life and society.
The Gowri Habba, or Gauri Festival, is celebrated on the seventh, eighth, and ninth of Bhadrapada (Shukla paksha).
In this aspect, she is known by the name Durga.
* Meenakshi, goddess with eyes shaped like a fish.
Edmund Leach equates Parvati in her relationship with Shiva, with that of Greek goddess Aphrodite - a symbol of sexual love.
Uma or Parwati is considered as the mother goddess that nurtures, nourishes, grants fertility to crop and all life.
Her festival, chiefly observed by women, is closely associated with the festival of her son Ganesha (Ganesh Chaturthi).
Parvati's legends are intrinsically related to Shiva.
She is found extensively in ancient Indian literature, and her statues and iconography grace Hindu temples all over South Asia and Southeast Asia.
Kinsley adds that Parvati may have emerged from legends of non-aryan goddesses that lived in mountains.
On her coin is also shown Shiva, who is sometimes shown in ithyphallic state holding a trident and standing near Nandi (his ''vahana'').
She is cheerful and humble before family, friends, and relatives; helps them if she can.
After a while Shiva returned and tried to enter the house, Ganesha stopped him.
In Indian dance, ''Parvatimudra'' is dedicated to her, symbolizing divine mother.
Shakti is pure energy, untamed, unchecked and chaotic.
She is the goddess of mountain Gunung Agung.
In ancient literature, yoni means womb and place of gestation, the yoni-linga metaphor represents "origin, source or regenerative power".
Parvati is the mother of Hindu deities Ganesha and Kartikeya.
She begins to live in mountains like Shiva, engage in the same activities as Shiva, one of asceticism, yogin and tapas.
The hands mimic motherly gesture, and when included in a dance, the dancer symbolically expresses Parvati.
Her family life and her home is her heaven, Parvati declares in Book 13 of the Mahabharata.
* Kali is another ferocious form of Parvati, as goddess of time and change, with mythological origins in the deity Nirriti.
She immolates herself at the ceremony.
For example, Kataka — representing fascination and enchantment, Hirana — representing the antelope, the symbolism for nature and the elusive, Tarjani by the left hand — representing gesture of menace, and Chandrakal — representing the moon, a symbol of intelligence.
She is the gentle and nurturing aspect of the Hindu goddess Shakti and one of the central deities of the Goddess-oriented Shakta sect.
Sati-Parvati appears in the epic period (400 BC–400 AD), as both the ''Ramayana'' and the ''Mahabharata'' present Parvati as Shiva's wife.
Shailaputri, Brahmacharini, Chandraghanta, Kushmanda, Skandamata, Katyayini, Kaalratri, Mahagauri, Siddhidatri.
Her ferocious form in Bali is ''Dewi Durga''.
Parvati, along with other goddesses, are involved with the broad range of culturally valued goals and activities.
Shiva finally accepts her and they get married.
Sati is then reborn as Parvati, the daughter of Himavat and Minavati, and is named Parvati, or "she from the mountains", after her father Himavant who is also called king ''Parvat''.
In her manifestation as ''Durga'', Parvati parallels Mater Montana.
However, Shaktas focus on Parvati's equality or even superiority to her consort.
In south Indian states such as Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, the Kethara Gauri Vritham festival is celebrated on the new moon day of Diwali and married women fast for the day, prepare sweets and worship Parvati for the well-being of the family.
As ''Rangda'', she is wrathful and presides cemeteries.
She takes interest in worldly affairs, beyond her husband and family.
Indra sends the god Kama - the Hindu god of desire, erotic love, attraction and affection, to awake Shiva from meditation.
In Nepal, Teej is a three-day festival marked with visits to Shiva-Parvati temples and offerings to linga.
:Once, while Parvati wanted to take a bath, there were no attendants around to guard her and stop anyone from accidentally entering the house.
She is the voice of encouragement, reason, freedom and strength, as well as of resistance, power, action and retributive justice.
Shiva was infuriated, lost his temper and severed the boy's head with his trident.
To lower Kali's rage, Shiva appeared as a crying baby.
Pleased, Adi Shakti herself is born as their daughter Parvati.
She welcomes guests, feeds them and encourages righteous social life.
Durga icons and worship have been dated to be from the 10th- to 13th-century.
Her form or incarnation depends on her mood.
* Kamakshi, goddess of love and devotion.
The apparent contradiction that Parvati is addressed as the fair one, Gauri, as well as the dark one, Kali or Shyama, as a calm and placid wife Parvati mentioned as Gauri and as a goddess who destroys evil she is Kali.
She is also Ambika ('dear mother'), Shakti (power), Mataji ('revered mother'), Maheshwari ('great goddess'), Durga (invincible), Bhairavi ('ferocious'), Bhavani ('fertility and birthing'), Shivaradni ('Queen of Shiva'), and many hundreds of others.
According to different versions of her myths, the maiden Parvati resolves to marry Shiva.
The sculpture of Parvati found at this excavation site reflect the South Indian style.
Renunciation and asceticism is highly valued in Hinduism, as is householder's life - both feature as Ashramas of an ethical and proper life.
Kama reaches Shiva and shoots an arrow of desire.
It is a joint hand gesture, and is one of sixteen ''Deva Hastas'', denoting most important deities described in ''Abhinaya Darpana''.
Each major story about Parvati's birth and marriage to Shiva has regional variations, suggesting creative local adaptations.
Ancient coins from Bactria (Central Asia) of Kushan Empire era, and those of king Harsha (North India) feature Uma.
She is the daughter of the mountain king Himavan and mother Mena.
Each major Parvati-Shiva temple is a pilgrimage site that has an ancient legend associated with it, which is typically a part of a larger story that links these Hindu temples across South Asia with each other.
In the goddess-oriented Shakta texts, that she is said to transcend even Shiva, and is identified as the Supreme Being.
She is positive and cheerful even when her husband or her children are angry, she's with them in adversity or sickness.
In Nakhorn Si Thammarat province of Thailand, excavations at Dev Sathan has yielded a Hindu Temple dedicated to Vishnu (Na Pra Narai), a lingam in yoni, a Shiva temple (San Pra Isuan).
Three images are central to the mythology, iconography and philosophy of Parvati: the image of Shiva-Shakti, the image of Shiva as Ardhanarishvara (the Lord who is half-woman), and the image of the linga and the yoni.
Each of her aspects is expressed with a different name, giving her over 100 names in regional Hindu stories of India.
* Durga is a demon-fighting form of Parvati, and some texts suggest Parvati took the form of Durga to kill the demon Durgamasur.
The festival is marked with swings hung from trees, girls playing on these swings typically in green dress (seasonal color of crop planting season), while singing regional songs.
Parvati ordered Ganesha not to allow anyone to enter the house, and Ganesha obediently followed his mother's orders.
Neighbours are invited and presented with turmeric, fruits, flowers etc.
In stories of the birth of Kartikeya, the couple is described as love-making; generating the seed of Shiva.
;Ideal wife, mother and more
Popular in eastern India, particularly in Bengal, Odisha, Jharkhand and Assam, as well as several other parts of India such as Gujarat, this is associated with Durga, with her nine forms i.e.
In Devi Bhagwata Purana, Parvati is the lineal progenitor of all other goddesses.
Teej is a significant festival for Hindu women, particularly in northern and western states of India.
For example, the World Heritage Site at Khajuraho is one such site where Parvati temple is found.
She identifies and destroys evil to protect (Durga), as well as creates food and abundance to nourish (Annapurna).
In Linga Purana, Parvati metamorphoses into Kali, on the request of Shiva, to destroy a female asura (demoness) Daruka.
She flies off and takes refuge in the mountain ranges of south India, appearing as Meenakshi (also spelled Minakshi).
Gauri-Shankar is a particular ''rudraksha'' (bead) formed naturally from the seed of a tree found in India.
In art, Parvati is depicted seated on Shiva's knee or standing beside him (together the couple is referred to as ''Uma-Maheshvara'' or ''Hara-Gauri'') or as ''Annapurna'' (the goddess of grain) giving alms to Shiva.
She is more often called ''Uma'', and sometimes referred to as ''Giriputri'' (daughter of the mountains).
Parwati's small pillar temples in rice fields is to seek her blessings of abundance and a good crop.
With Shiva, Parvati is a central deity in the Shaiva sect.
The Puranas tell the tale of Sati's marriage to Shiva against her father Daksha's wishes.
The legends about various manifestations of Parwati, and how she changes from one form to another, are in Balinese literature, such as the palm-leaf (''lontar'') manuscript ''Andabhuana''.
Numerous chapters, stories and legends revolve around their mutual devotion as well as disagreements, their debates on Hindu philosophy as well as the proper life.
Hindu literature, including the Matsya Purana, Shiva Purana, and Skanda Purana, dedicates many stories to Parvati and Shiva and their children.
She manifests in every activity, from water to mountains, from arts to inspiring warriors, from agriculture to dance.
As ''Dewi Danu'', she presides over waters, lake Batur and Gunung Batur, a major volcano in Bali.
Parvati is the primary deity of the festival, and it ritually celebrates married life and family ties.
In benevolent manifestation such as Kamakshi or Meenakshi, a parrot sits near her right shoulder symbolizing cheerful love talk, seeds and fertility.
As ''Bhawani'' and goddess of fertility and birthing, she is the symbolic equivalent of Ephesian ''Diana''.
Following an argument, he attempts to walk out on her.
Parvati thus symbolises many different virtues esteemed by Hindu tradition: fertility, marital felicity, devotion to the spouse, asceticism, and power.
* Lalita, the playful Goddess of the Universe, she is a form of the Devi Parvati.
Even after destroying the demoness, Kali's wrath could not be controlled.
The Gauri-Shankar bead is a part of religious adornment rooted in the belief of Parvati and Shiva as the ideal equal complementing halves of the other.
I am the sea and you the wave,
The cries of the baby raised the maternal instinct of Kali who resorts back to her benign form as Parvati.
Kalidasa's epic ''Kumarasambhavam'' ("Birth of Kumara") describes the story of the maiden Parvati who has made up her mind to marry Shiva and get him out of his recluse, intellectual, austere world of aloofness.
It is one of the four major sites associated with Parvati, along with Kedarnath, Kashi and Gaya.
Tara too appears in many manifestations.
Shiva did so by attaching an elephant's head to Ganesha's body, thus giving rise to the elephant headed deity.
In Hindu mythology, she is an active agent of the universe, the power of Shiva.
She demanded that Shiva restore Ganesha's life at once.
She is the mother goddess in Hinduism, and has many attributes and aspects.
Along with Lakshmi (goddess of wealth and prosperity) and Saraswati (goddess of knowledge and learning), she forms the trinity of Hindu goddesses (Tridevi).
Historically, unmarried maidens prayed to Parvati for a good mate, while married women prayed for the well-being of their husbands and visited their relatives.
Her parents learn of her desire, discourage her, but she pursues what she wants.
Teej is celebrated as Teeyan in Punjab.
Carl Jung, in ''Mysterium Coniunctionis'', states that aspects of Parvati belong to the same category of black goddesses as Artemis, Isis and Mary.
If Parvati is depicted with two hands, Kataka mudra — also called Katyavalambita or Katisamsthita hasta — is common, as well as Abhaya (fearlessness, fear not) and Varada (beneficence) are representational in Parvati's iconography.
Images of Issar and Gauri are made from Clay for the festival.
* Ten Mahavidyas are the ten aspects of Shakti.
Rita Gross states, that the view of Parvati only as ideal wife and mother is incomplete symbolism of the power of the feminine in mythology of India.
These hands may hold a conch, crown, mirror, rosary, bell, dish, farming tool such as goad, sugarcane stalk, or flowers such as lotus.
This event occurs while Shiva is living with Parvati in her father's house.
* Akhilandeshwari, found in coastal regions of India, is the goddess associated with water.
Their happiness is her happiness.
This draws the attention of Shiva and awakens his interest.
The story of the birth of the ten Mahavidyas (Wisdom Goddesses) of Shakta Tantrism.
In tantric sects of Buddhism, as well as Hinduism, intricate symmetrical art forms of yantra or mandala are dedicated to different aspects of Tara and Parvati.
Parvati is expressed in many roles, moods, epithets and aspects.
Unlike India where Sri refers to Lakshmi, Sri is another name of Uma in Bali; her icons and pillar temples grace terraced rice fields (''sawahs'').
Parvati's numerous aspects, states Gross, reflects the Hindu belief that the feminine has universal range of activities, and her gender is not a limiting condition.
She appears as the ''shakti'', or essential power, of the Supreme Brahman.
There are many alternate Hindu legends about the birth of Parvati and how she got married with Shiva.
In Bactria, Uma is spelled ''Ommo'', and she appears on coins holding a flower.
Hence she created an image of a boy out of turmeric paste which she prepared to cleanse her body, and infused life into it, and thus Ganesha was born.
At Maha-shivratri in Khajuraho, they celebrate the marriage of Shiva and Parvati.
She is balanced by Durga, who is strong and capable without compromising her femaleness.
In Indian art, this vision of ideal couple is derived from Shiva and Parvati as being half of the other, represented as ''Ardhanarisvara''.
Parvati refuses to listen and insists in her resolve.
She is the wife of deity ''Siwa''.
The unwidowed women of the household erect a series of platforms in a pyramidal shape with the image of the goddess at the top and a collection of ornaments, images of other Hindu deities, pictures, shells etc.
Daksha insults Shiva, when Sati comes on her own.
Dozens of ancient temples dedicated to Parvati as Uma, with Siva, have been found in the islands of Indonesia and Malaysia.
Parvati represents the householder ideal in the perennial tension in Hinduism in the household ideal and the ascetic ideal, the later represented by Shiva.
In another version of Shiva Purana, Chapters 17 through 52, cupid Kama is not involved, and instead Shiva appears as a badly behaved, snake wearing, dancing, disheveled beggar who Parvati gets attracted to, but who her parents disapprove of.
In many myths, Parvati is not as much his complement as his rival, tricking, seducing, or luring him away from his ascetic practices.
The festival starts on the first day of Chaitra the day after Holi and continues for 18 days.
