Amir Kror Suri, son of ''Amir Polad Suri'', was an 8th-century folk hero and king from the Ghor region in Afghanistan.
Translations, especially in English, are scarcely far and in between understood or distributed.
In the meantime, millions of Pashtuns fled their native land to live among other Afghan diaspora in Pakistan and Iran, and from there tens of thousands proceeded to North America, the European Union, the Middle East, Australia and other parts of the world.
Her duties may include witnessing women's ceremonies, mobilising women to practice religious festivals, preparing the female dead for burial, and performing services for deceased women.
The origin of Pashtuns is unclear but historians have come across references to various ancient peoples called ''Pakthas'' (''Pactyans'') between the 2nd and the 1st millennium BC, who may be their early ancestors.
Another one million or more Afghans live in Iran.
They are the world's largest (patriarchal) segmentary lineage ethnic group.
Their descendants mostly speak English and other local languages.
Modern Pashto music is centred on the city of Peshawar, and tends to combine indigenous techniques and instruments with Iranian-inspired Persian music and Indian Filmi music prominent in Bollywood.
According to Ethnologue, the total population of the group is estimated to be around 50&nbsp;million but an accurate count remains elusive due to the lack of an official census in Afghanistan since 1979.
The advent of poetry helped transition Pashto to the modern period.
In order to counter radicalisation and fundamentalism, the United States began spreading its influence in Pashtun areas.
A variety of ancient groups with eponyms similar to ''Pakhtun'' have been hypothesized as possible ancestors of modern Pashtuns.
Other prominent Pashtuns include the 17th-century poets Khushal Khan Khattak and Rahman Baba, and in contemporary era Afghan Astronaut Abdul Ahad Mohmand, former U.S.
Pashto is classified under the Eastern Iranian sub-branch of the Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family.
Generally, this most common view holds that Pashtuns are defined within the parameters of having mainly eastern Iranian ethnic origins, sharing a common language, culture and history, living in relatively close geographic proximity to each other, and acknowledging each other as kinsmen.
There are a number of smaller Pashtun-dominated towns such as Swat, Kohat, Hangu, Khost, Mardan, Asadabad, Gardēz, Farah, Pul-i-Alam, Mingora, Bannu, Parachinar, Swabi, Maidan Shar, Tarinkot, Battagram, Mansehra, Attock, zhob, and others.
Among them were Abdullah Abdullah, Abdul Qadir and his brother Abdul Haq, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, Asadullah Khalid, Hamid Karzai and Gul Agha Sherzai.
This led to bad relations between the two nations.
A sub-type of the ''Khattak Wal Atanrh'' known as the ''Braghoni'' involves the use of up to three swords and requires great skill.
Khatol Mohammadzai serves as Brigadier general in the military of Afghanistan, another Pashtun female became a fighter pilot in the Pakistan Air Force.
Its closest modern relatives may include Pamir languages, such as Shughni and Wakhi, and Ossetic.
Popular forms include the ghazal (sung poetry) and Sufi qawwali music.
Numerous intricate tenets of Pashtunwali influence Pashtun social behaviour.
Furthermore, the Rigveda (1700–1100&nbsp;BC) mentions a tribe called ''Paktha'' inhabiting eastern Afghanistan and academics have proposed their connection with today's Pakhtun people.
In Pashtun society there are three levels of women's leadership and legislative authority: the national level, the village level, and the family level.
In 1942, Madhubala (Mumtaz Jehan), the Marilyn Monroe of India, entered the Bollywood film industry.
This is due to cultural similarities and the fact that many of the Bollywood film stars in India have roots to Pashtuns, some of the most notable ones are Sharukh Khan, Salman Khan, Feroz Khan, Saif Ali Khan, Madhubala, Kader Khan, and Zarine Khan.
Jahangir Khan and Jansher Khan became greatest professional squash players.
Recently, Pashto literature has received increased patronage, but many Pashtuns continue to rely on oral tradition due to relatively low literacy rates and education.
Since the 2nd millennium BC, cities in the region now inhabited by Pashtuns have seen invasions and migrations, including by Ancient Iranian peoples, the Medes, Persians and Ancient Macedonians in antiquity, Kushans, Hephthalites, Arabs, Turks, Mongols, and others.
According to a 2012 study:
Muhammad of Ghor, ruler of the Ghorids, also had Afghans in his army along with others.
The village of Saul was probably located near Gardez in Afghanistan.
Hudud ul-'alam also speaks of a king in Ninhar (Nangarhar), who had Muslim, ''Afghan'' and Hindu wives.
She used the Pashtunwali law to unite the Pashtun tribes against their Persian enemies.
Pashtuns are intimately tied to the history of modern Afghanistan, Pakistan and northern India.
Pashtun women often have their legal rights curtailed in favour of their husbands or male relatives.
The cities of Kabul and Ghazni in Afghanistan are home to around 25% Pashtun population while Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif each has at least 10%.
Another prominent Pashtun institution is the ''loya jirga'' or 'grand council' of elected elders.
This paradox has contributed to the spread of different versions of religious practices and Wahabism, as well as political Islamism (including movements such as the Taliban) having a key presence in Pashtun society.
These include Ayub Khan, Yahya Khan, and Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who attained the Presidency.
In the late 1990s, Pashtuns became known for being the primary ethnic group comprised by the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (Taliban regime).
Some other notable Pashtun women include Suhaila Seddiqi, Zeenat Karzai, Shukria Barakzai, Fauzia Gailani, Naghma, Najiba Faiz, Tabassum Adnan, Sana Safi, Malalai Kakar, Malala Yousafzai, and the late Ghazala Javed.
Although his ethnicity is disputed by some, he is widely accepted in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region as well as in the Arab world, as a Pashtun from the Kunar Province of Afghanistan.
Many high-ranking government officials in Afghanistan are Pashtuns, including: Zalmay Rasoul, Abdul Rahim Wardak, Omar Zakhilwal, Ghulam Farooq Wardak, Anwar ul-Haq Ahady, Yousef Pashtun and Amirzai Sangin.
After the Iranian Revolution, deaths of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Nur Muhammad Taraki, the Soviet Union invaded its southern neighbor Afghanistan in order to defeat a rising insurgency.
Pashtuns around the world, particularly those in Arab countries, watch these for entertainment purposes and to get latest news about their native areas.
This inconsistency can be explained by the fact that Persia acquired the lands of the ancient Assyrian Empire when it conquered the Empire of the Medes and Chaldean Babylonia, which had conquered Assyria decades earlier.
V. Gankovsky, the Pashtuns probably began as a "union of largely East-Iranian tribes which became the initial ethnic stratum of the Pashtun ethnogenesis, dates from the middle of the first millennium CE and is connected with the dissolution of the Epthalites (White Huns) confederacy."
It is written in the Pashto-Arabic script and is divided into two main dialects, the southern "Pashto" and the northern "Pukhto".
With a rapid circular motion, dancers perform until no one is left dancing, similar to Sufi whirling dervishes.
Their modern past stretches back to the Delhi Sultanate, particularly the Hotak dynasty and the Durrani Empire.
Modern borrowings come primarily from the English language.
Pashtun society is not homogenous by religion: the overwhelming majority of them are Sunni, with a tiny Shia community (the Turi and partially the Bangash tribe) in the Kurram and Orakzai agencies of FATA, Pakistan.
They are believed to have been bilingual in Pashto and Urdu until the mid-19th century.
Although now retired, they are engaged in promoting the sport through the ''Pakistan Squash Federation''.
In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), they mostly operate car dealerships as well as limo and taxi companies.
The Niazi is one of these group.
This was followed by the conquests of Ahmad Shah Durrani who was a former high-ranking military commander under Nader Shah.
The haplogroup R1a (Y-DNA) is found at a frequency of 51.02% among the Pashtun people.
The Barakzai dynasty played a vital role during the Great Game from the 19th century to the 20th century as they were caught between the imperialist designs of the British and Russian empires.
Pashtun tribes are divided into four 'greater' tribal groups: the Sarbani, the Bettani, the Gharghashti, and the Karlani.
The legend says that after Qais heard of the new religion of Islam, he travelled to meet Muhammad in Medina and returned to Afghanistan as a Muslim.
In addition, there may be small number of Ahmadis in Pakistan.
The overwhelming majority of Pashtuns follow Sunni Islam, belonging to the Hanafi school of thought.
These native people compose the core of ethnic Pashtuns who are found in southeastern Afghanistan and western Pakistan.
The Shias belong to the Turi tribe while the Bangash tribe is approximately 50% Shia and the rest Sunni, who are mainly found in and around the Parachinar, Kurram, and Orakzai areas in Pakistan.
The national level includes women such as Nazo Tokhi (Nazo Anaa), Zarghona Anaa, and Malalai of Maiwand.
The religious and cultural definition requires Pashtuns to be Muslim and adhere to Pashtunwali codes.
For example, though women are officially allowed to vote in Afghanistan and Pakistan, some have been kept away from ballot boxes by males.
In Afghanistan, following recent elections, the proportion of female political representatives is one of the highest in the world.
These communities are often considered overlapping groups or are simply assigned to the ethno-linguistic group that corresponds to their geographic location and mother tongue.
According to a 2012 study:  The abstract states:"our results that all current Afghans largely share a heritage derived from a common unstructured ancestral population that could have emerged during the Neolithic revolution and the formation of the first farming communities.
Throughout the Indian subcontinent, they are often referred to as ''Pathans''.
The exact figure remains uncertain in Afghanistan, which is also affected by the 1.5&nbsp;million or more Afghan refugees that remain in Pakistan, a majority of which are Pashtuns.
The majority of Pashtuns use Pashto as their native tongue, believed to belong to the Indo-Iranian language family, and is spoken by up to 60&nbsp;million people.
The language has ancient origins and bears similarities to extinct languages such as Avestan and Bactrian.
Smaller number of Pashtuns living in Pakistan are also fluent in Hindko, Seraiki and Balochi.
Following Alexander's brief occupation, the successor state of the Seleucid Empire expanded influence on the Pashtuns until 305&nbsp;BCE when they gave up dominating power to the Indian Maurya Empire as part of an alliance treaty.
Fluency in Pashto is often the main determinant of group acceptance as to who is considered a Pashtun.
Despite this trend of urbanisation, many people still identify themselves with various clans.
Other Pashtuns fought the Safavids and Mughals before obtaining an independent state in the early-18th century, which began with a successful revolution by Mirwais Hotak followed by conquests of Ahmad Shah Durrani.
These communities are usually partial Pashtun, to varying degrees, and often trace their Pashtun ancestry through a paternal lineage.
Abuse against women is present and increasingly being challenged by women's rights organisations which find themselves struggling with conservative religious groups as well as government officials in both Pakistan and Afghanistan.
One guide on Pakistan claims that the famous phrase ''Revenge is a dish best served cold'' is of Pashtun origin, borrowed by the British and popularised in the West, Males are expected to protect ''Zan, Zar, Zmaka'' (females, gold and land).
Many of the non-Pashtun groups in Afghanistan have adopted the Pashtun culture and use Pashto as a second language.
Pashtun culture is a unique blend of native customs with some influences from South and Western Asia.
Several prominent international recognised snooker players are from the Pashtun area, including Saleh Mohammed.
Pashtun males continue to meet at Hujras, to listen and relate various oral tales of valor and history.
She also arranges marriages for her own family and arbitrates conflicts for men and women.
The Pathans in India have lost both the language and presumably many of the ways of their ancestors, but trace their fathers' ethnic heritage to the Pashtun tribes.
Although traditionally very less involved in sports than boys, Pashtun girls sometimes play volleyball, basketball, football, and cricket, especially in urban areas.
Lineage is considered very important and is a vital consideration in marital business.
Pashtunwali (or ''Pakhtunwali'') refers to an ancient self-governing tribal system that regulates nearly all aspects of Pashtun life ranging from community to personal level.
These references to Bani Israel agree with the commonly held view by Pashtuns that when the twelve tribes of Israel were dispersed, the tribe of Joseph, among other Hebrew tribes, settled in the Afghanistan region.
The Taliban regime was ousted in late 2001 during the US-led Operation Enduring Freedom and replaced with the Karzai administration.
These criteria tend to be used by most Pashtuns in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
The Afghan royal family, which was represented by King Zahir Shah, belongs to the Mohammadzai tribe of Pashtuns.
Perhaps the most common form of artistic expression can be seen in the various forms of Pashtun dances.
Snooker and billiards are played by young Pashtun men, mainly in urban areas where snooker clubs are found.
Due to recent reforms in the higher education commission (HEC) of Pakistan, a number of competent Pashtun female scholars have been able to earn Master's and PhD scholarships.
In addition to their native tongue, many Pashtuns are fluent in Urdu, Dari, and English.
The vast majority of Pashtuns are found in the traditional Pashtun homeland, located in an area south of the Amu Darya in Afghanistan and west of the Indus River in Pakistan, which includes Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and part of Balochistan.
Pashtun nationalism emerged following the rise of Pashto poetry that linked language and ethnic identity.
Some groups from Peshawar and Kandahar believe to be descended from Greeks who arrived with Alexander the Great.
A rich oral tradition and resurgence of poetry has inspired many Pashtun women seeking to learn to read and write.
By the 1950s a popular call for Pashtunistan began to be heard in Afghanistan and the new state of Pakistan.
These languages are often found in areas such as Abbottabad, Mansehra, Haripur, Attock, Khanewal, Multan, Dera Ismail Khan and Balochistan.
Paragroup Q-M242 (xMEH2, xM378) (of Haplogroup Q-M242 (Y-DNA)) was found at 16.3% in Pashtuns.
But during the reign of Abdur Rahman Khan (1880–1901), Pashtun regions were politically divided by the Durand Line, and what is today western Pakistan was claimed by British in 1893.
Excavations of prehistoric sites suggest that early humans were living in what is now Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago.
A prominent institution of the Pashtun people is the intricate system of tribes.
Pashtun lifestyle and issues have been raised by Western and Pashtun expatriate film-makers in recent years.
He created the last Afghan empire that covered most of what is now Afghanistan, Pakistan, Kashmir, Indian Punjab, as well as the Kohistan and Khorasan provinces of Iran.
He proposes Kushan-o-Ephthalite origin for Pashtuns but others draw a different conclusion.
Football (soccer) is also one of the most popular sports among Pashtuns.
Some modern-day Pashtun tribes have also been identified living in ancient Ariana (e.g., Alexander's historians mentioned ''"Aspasii"'' in 330&nbsp;BC and that may refer to today's ''Afridis'' or to the ''Yusufzai'').
He previously played for the Afghan Football Club in Chaman.
Specifically, the Mohamedzai subclan held Afghanistan's monarchy from around 1826 to the end of Zahir Shah's reign in 1973.
Two of the popular ones are the Pakistan-based AVT Khyber and Pashto One.
Pashto may have ancient legacy of borrowing vocabulary from neighbouring languages including such as Persian and Vedic Sanskrit.
The tribal system has several levels of organisation: the tribe, ''tabar'', is divided into kinship groups called ''khels'', in turn divided into smaller groups (''pllarina'' or ''plarganey''), each consisting of several extended families called ''kahols''.
Some Pashtun women have attained political office in Pakistan.
There is a community of Pashtun Sikhs in Peshawar, Parachinar, and Orakzai Agency of FATA, Pakistan.
The Pashtuns have oral and written accounts of their family tree.
Many more held high government posts, such as Gul Hassan Khan and Abdul Waheed Kakar, Rahimuddin Khan and Ehsan ul Haq, and Aftab Ahmad Sherpao, Sardar Yaqoob Khan Nasar, Fazal-ur-Rehman (politician) and Naseerullah Babar.
Strabo, who lived between 64&nbsp;BC and 24 CE, claims that the tribes inhabiting the lands west of the Indus River were part of Ariana and to their east was India.
Pashtun culture is mostly based on Pashtunwali and the usage of the Pashto language.
Most historians acknowledge that the origin of the Pashtuns is somewhat unclear, although there are many conflicting theories, some modern and others archaic, both among historians and the Pashtuns themselves.
During the 19th century, when the British were accepting peasants from British India as indentured servants to work in the Caribbean, South Africa and other far away places, Rohillas who had lost their empire were unemployed and restless were sent to places as far as Trinidad, Surinam, Guyana, and Fiji, to work with other Indians on the sugarcane fields and perform manual labour.
Pakistani Jews and Afghan Jews, have largely relocated to Israel and the United States.
It was used to refer to a common legendary ancestor known as ''"Afghana"'', propagated to be grandson of King Saul of Israel.
Pashtun families are historically accustomed to watching Indian films and dramas.
Xuanzang, a Chinese Buddhist pilgrim, visiting the Afghanistan region several times between 630 and 644 CE also speaks about them.
Studies conducted among the Ghilji reveal strong links between tribal affiliation and membership in the larger ''ummah'' (Islamic community).
These Pashtuns assimilated into Bengali culture, and intermarried with native Bengalis.
Historical structures built by Pashtun descendants can still be found there.
The Afghan monarchy ended when President Daoud Khan seized control of Afghanistan from his cousin Zahir Shah in 1973, which opened doors for a proxy war by neighbors and the rise of Marxism.
In addition, one of India's former presidents, Zakir Hussain, belonged to the Afridi tribe.
Another book that corresponds with Pashtun historical records, ''Taaqati-Nasiri'', states that in the 7th century BCE, a people called the Bani Israel settled in the Ghor region of Afghanistan and from there began migrating southeast.
The Pashtuns of Afghanistan attained complete independence from British political intervention during the reign of Amanullah Khan, following the Third Anglo-Afghan War.
One historical account connects the native Pakhtuns of Pakistan to a possible Ancient Egyptian past but this lacks supporting evidence.
Many Pashtuns are prominent Ulema, Islamic scholars, such as Muhammad Muhsin Khan who has helped translate the Noble Quran, Sahih Al-Bukhari and many other books to the English language.
He purportedly had four children: Sarban, Batan, Ghourghusht and Karlan.
For example, the mosque of Musa Khan still remains intact in Bangladesh.
Others are Afghanistan-based Shamshad TV, Radio Television Afghanistan, and Lemar TV, which has a special children's show called ''Baghch-e-Simsim''.
Some of them assimilated with the other South Asian Muslim nationalities to form a common Indian Muslim community in tandem with the larger Indian community, losing their distinctive heritage.
Lastly, little information is available on non-Muslim as there is limited data regarding irreligious groups and minorities, especially since many of the Hindu and Sikh in Pashtun area migrated from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa after the partition of India and later, after the rise of the Taliban.
Abdul Ahad Mohmand journeyed into outer space in 1988, spending nine days aboard Mir space station, the first Afghan and 4th Muslim to do so.
Additional Pashtun communities are located in western and northern Afghanistan, the Gilgit–Baltistan and Kashmir regions and northwestern Punjab province of Pakistan.
These three definitions may be described as the ethno-linguistic definition, the religious-cultural definition, and the patrilineal definition, respectively.
Pakistan also produced other world champions of Pashtun origin: Hashim Khan, Roshan Khan, Azam Khan, Mo Khan and Qamar Zaman.
Perceived injustice calls for ''Badal'', swift revenge.
Some who immigrated to the United States are involved in running restaurants, including Kennedy Fried Chicken which are owned by Pashtuns from Afghanistan and Pakistan.
In Afghanistan, the decades of war and the rise of the Taliban caused considerable hardship among Pashtun women, as many of their rights were curtailed by a rigid interpretation of Islamic law.
The Afghanistan national football team consists of Pashtun players too, including the current captain Djelaludin Sharityar.
Our results also indicate that inter-Afghan differentiation started during the Bronze Age, probably driven by the formation of the first civilizations in the region."
These include Ahmad Shah Massoud, Ismail Khan, Mohammed Fahim, Bismillah Khan Mohammadi, Atta Muhammad Nur, Abdul Ali Mazari, Karim Khalili, Husn Banu Ghazanfar, Muhammad Yunus Nawandish, Abdul Karim Brahui, Jamaluddin Badr, and many others.
There are various communities who claim Pashtun origin but are largely found among other ethnic groups in the region who generally do not speak the Pashto language.
Ancestors of many of today's Turkic-speaking Afghans settled in the Hindu Kush area and began to assimilate much of the culture and language of the Pashtun tribes already present there.
Many Pashtuns have become prominent international cricketers in the Pakistan national cricket team, including Imran Khan, Shahid Afridi, Majid Khan, Misbah-ul-Haq, Umar Gul, Junaid Khan and Younis Khan.
Afghan historians believe that most Pashtuns are descendants of Qais Abdur Rashid, who is purported to have been an early convert to Islam and thus bequeathed the faith to the early Pashtun population.
Some also celebrate ''Nouruz'', which is the Persian new year dating to pre-Islamic period.
Others became famous in sports (e.g., Imran Khan, Shahid Afridi, Younis Khan, Jahangir Khan, and Jansher Khan) and literature (e.g., Ghani Khan, Ameer Hamza Shinwari, Munir Niazi, and Omer Tarin).
She was the only woman to appear on the list of rulers in Afghanistan.
The two Indian brothers Yusuf Pathan and Irfan Pathan have Pashtun ancestry.
However, there is no conclusive evidence to these theories other than the fact that these were the religions practiced by the people in this region before the arrival of Islam in the 7th century.
Like other Muslims, Pashtuns celebrate ''Ramadan'' and ''Eid al-Fitr''.
After the decline of the Durrani dynasty in the first half of the 19th century under Shuja Shah Durrani, the Barakzai dynasty took control of the empire.
Often characterised as a warrior and martial race, their history is mostly spread amongst various countries of South and Central Asia, centred on their traditional seat of power in medieval Afghanistan.
No specific population figures exist, as claimants of Pashtun descent are spread throughout the country.
Pre-Islamic traditions, dating back to Alexander's defeat of the Persian Empire in 330&nbsp;BC, possibly survived in the form of traditional dances, while literary styles and music reflect influence from the Persian tradition and regional musical instruments fused with localised variants and interpretation.
The Afghanistan national cricket team, which is dominated by Pashtun players, was formed in the early 2000s.
A cumulative population assessment suggests a total of around 49&nbsp;million individuals all across the world.
Some may have been Buddhists while others Zoroastians, worshippers of the sun, or worshippers of Nana, with some probably being animists, shamanists and Jews.
One of the most popular sports among Pashtuns is cricket, which was introduced to South Asia during the early 18th century with the arrival of the British.
The list of current governors of Afghanistan, as well as the parliamentarians in the House of the People and House of Elders, include large percentage of Pashtuns.
In Bangladesh an unknown number of ethnic Pashtuns settled among Bengalis from the 12th century to mid 18th century.
Bollywood blockbusters of 1970s and 1980s starred Parveen Babi, who hailed from the lineage of Gujarat's historical Pathan community: the royal Babi Dynasty.
Pashto has national status in Afghanistan and regional status in neighboring Pakistan.
In recent decades Hayatullah Khan Durrani, Pride of Performance caving legend from Quetta, has been promoting mountaineering, rock climbing and caving in Balochistan, Pakistan.
Other Pashtun tribes claim descent from Arabs, including some claiming to be Sayyids (descendants of Muhammad).
These and other basic precepts of Pashtunwali continue to be followed by many Pashtuns, especially in rural areas.
The mujahideen were funded by the United States, Saudi Arabia, Iran and others, and included some Pashtun commanders such as Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and Jalaluddin Haqqani, who are currently waging an insurgency against the Islamic republic of Afghanistan and the US-led Resolute Support Mission.
Those who speak a dialect of Pashto in the Kandahar region refer to themselves as Pashtuns, while those who speak a Peshawari dialect call themselves Pukhtuns.
Al-Biruni wrote about Afghans in the 11th century as various tribes living in the western mountains of India and extending to the region of Sind.
Some anthropologists lend credence to the oral traditions of the Pashtun tribes themselves.
It was reported that between 1039 and 1040 CE Mas'ud I of the Ghaznavid Empire sent his son to subdue a group of rebel Afghans near Ghazni.
Estimates of the number of Pashtun tribes and clans range from about 350 to over 400.
The Pashtuns in Afghanistan resisted British designs upon their territory and kept the Russians at bay during the so-called Great Game.
This definition places less emphasis on what language one speaks, such as Pashto, Dari, Hindko, Urdu, Hindi or English.
Some Urdu-speaking Muhajir people of India claiming descent from Pashtuns began moving to Pakistan in 1947.
One conflicting issue in the belief that the Pashtuns descend from the Israelites is that the Ten Lost Tribes were exiled by the ruler of Assyria, while ''Maghzan-e-Afghani'' says they were permitted by the ruler to go east to Afghanistan.
Mohammad Yunus, India's former ambassador to Algeria and advisor to Indira Gandhi, is of Pashtun origin and related to the legendary Bacha Khan.
There have been many legends over the centuries of descent from the Ten Lost Tribes after groups converted to Christianity and Islam.
Others rose to high-ranking officials at the World Bank, the United Nations and other international organizations.
Henry Walter Bellew concluded in 1864 that the Yousefzai Pashtuns likely have Greek roots.
Among these were the Khalaj people who are known today as Ghilji.
During the Ayub Khan administration (1959–1969), the capital of Pakistan was shifted from Karachi  to the new city of Islamabad, which is a separate administrative unit that sits next to Pakhtunkhwa (Pashtun area).
