The noise produced by flocks of passenger pigeons was described as deafening, audible for miles away, and the bird's voice as loud, harsh, and unmusical.
The pigeon was considered so numerous that 30,000 birds had to be killed to claim the prize in one competition.
The bird fed mainly on mast, and also fruits and invertebrates.
The passenger pigeon had no known subspecies.
There were also records of stragglers in Scotland, Ireland, and France, although these birds may have been escaped captives, or the records simply incorrect.
A whole colony was known to re-nest after a snowstorm forced them to abandon their original colony.
The male then went in search of more nesting material while the female constructed the nest beneath herself.
Another call was a more frequent and variable scolding.
The juvenile was similar to the female, but without iridescence.
While many predators were drawn to the flocks, individual pigeons were largely protected due to the sheer size of the flock, and overall little damage could be inflicted on the flock by predation.
Some roosting areas would be reused for subsequent years, others would only be used once.
This clade is also related to the ''Columba'' and ''Streptopelia'' doves of the Old World (collectively termed the "typical pigeons and doves").
A newspaper inquiry was published that requested "fresh blood" to the flock which had now ceased breeding.
A nesting passenger pigeon would also give off a stream of at least eight mixed notes that were both high and low in tone and ended with "keeho".
In 1897, a bill was introduced in the Michigan legislature asking for a 10-year closed season on passenger pigeons.
Another method of capture was to hunt at a nesting colony, particularly during the period of a few days after the adult pigeons abandoned their nestlings, but before the nestlings could fly.
Mark Catesby's 1731 illustration, the first published depiction of this bird, is somewhat crude, according to some later commentators.
The sheer number of juveniles on the ground meant that only a small percentage of them were killed; predator satiation may therefore be one of the reasons for the extremely social habits and communal breeding of the species.
The flavor of the flesh of passenger pigeons varied depending on how they were prepared.
This sound was described as "kee-kee-kee-kee" or "tete!
The nests were placed on strong branches close to the tree trunks.
A very fast flyer, it could reach 100&nbsp;km/h (62&nbsp;mph).
Pigeon meat was commercialized as cheap food, resulting in hunting on a massive scale for many decades.
It was of particular value on the frontier, and some settlements counted on the pigeon to support their population.
The primaries were also edged with a rufous-brown color.
After feeding, the pigeons perched on branches and digested the food stored in their crop overnight.
The egg was white and oval shaped and averaged  by  in size.
A communally roosting species, the passenger pigeon chose roosting sites that could provide shelter and enough food to sustain their large numbers for an indefinite period.
Trenches were sometimes dug and filled with grain so that a hunter could shoot the pigeons along this trench.
The passenger pigeon wintered from Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina south to Texas, the Gulf Coast, and northern Florida, though flocks occasionally wintered as far north as southern Pennsylvania and Connecticut.
Overall, female passenger pigeons were quieter and called infrequently.
The pigeon was awkward when on the ground, and moved around with jerky, alert steps.
These nets were used by many farmers on their own property as well as by professional trappers.
US President Theodore Roosevelt claimed to have seen a bird in Michigan in 1907.
When the pigeons wintered outside of their normal range, some believed that they would have "a sickly summer and autumn."
Many late sightings are thought to be false or due to confusion with mourning doves.
Other sources argue that Martha was hatched at the Cincinnati Zoo, had lived there for 25 years, and was the descendant of three pairs of passenger pigeons purchased by the zoo in 1877.
Martha was on display for many years, but after a period in the museum vaults, she was put back on display at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History in 2015.
A single hunter is reported to have sent three million birds to eastern cities during his career.
In 1918 Harry C. Oberholser suggested that ''C.&nbsp;canadensis'' should take precedence over ''C.&nbsp;migratoria'' (as ''E.&nbsp;canadensis''), as it appeared on an earlier page in Linnaeus' book.
This was proven inaccurate in 1999 when ''C.&nbsp;extinctus'' was rediscovered living on band-tailed pigeons.
Furthermore, the parent pigeons that would raise the cloned passenger pigeons would belong to a different species, with a different way of rearing young.
Catesby's description was combined with the 1743 description of the mourning dove by George Edwards, who used the name ''C.&nbsp;macroura'' for that bird.
Dead pigeons were commonly stored by salting or pickling the bodies; other times, only the breasts of the pigeons were kept, in which case they were typically smoked.
The tail was shorter than that of the male, and the legs and feet were a paler red.
The Milwaukee group was kept by David Whittaker, who began his collection in 1888, and possessed fifteen birds some years later, all descended from a single pair.
The greater and median wing-covert feathers were pale gray, with a small number of irregular black spots near the end.
There are claims of a few further individuals having been kept in various places, but these accounts are not considered reliable today.
Hunting of passenger pigeons was documented and depicted in contemporaneous newspapers, wherein various trapping methods and uses were featured.
Collectively, a foraging flock was capable of removing nearly all fruits and nuts from their path.
Once pigeon meat became popular, commercial hunting started on a prodigious scale.
It was also described by some as clucks, twittering and cooing, and as a series of low notes instead of actual song.
At the historic population of three billion passenger pigeons, this amounted to  of food a day.
Yet it has also been suggested that the species was rare prior to 1492, and that the subsequent increase in their numbers may be due to the decrease in the Native American population (who, as well as hunting the birds, competed with them for mast) caused by European immigration, and the supplementary food (agricultural crops) the immigrants provided.
The nesting period lasted around four to six weeks.
The two central tail feathers were brownish gray, and the rest were white.
Nests were built between  above the ground, though typically above , and were made of 70 to 110 twigs woven together to create a loose, shallow bowl through which the egg could easily be seen.
According to Craig, one call was a simple harsh "keck" that could be given twice in succession with a pause in between.
Another louse, ''Campanulotes defectus'', was thought to have been unique to the passenger pigeon, but is now believed to have been a case of a contaminated specimen, as the species is considered to be the still-extant ''Campanulotes flavus'' of Australia.
In contrast to the 2010 study, these authors suggested that their results could indicate that the ancestors of the passenger pigeon and its Old World relatives may have originated in the Neotropical region of the New World.
The original watercolor that the engraving is based on was bought by the British royal family in 1768, along with the rest of Catesby's watercolors.
The last captive birds were divided in three groups around the turn of the 20th century, some of which were photographed alive.
The body was slender and narrow, and the head and neck were small.
This species germinated in the fall, therefore producing acorns during the spring to be devoured and spread by the pigeons.
There is nothing to suggest Linnaeus ever saw specimens of these birds himself, and his description is thought to be fully derivative of these earlier accounts and their illustrations.
Archaeological evidence supports the idea that Native Americans ate the pigeons frequently prior to colonization.
The most often reproduced of these illustrations was captioned "Winter sports in northern Louisiana: shooting wild pigeons", and published in 1875.
DNA in old museum specimens is often degraded and fragmentary, and passenger pigeon specimens have been used in various studies to discover improved methods of analyzing and assembling genomes from such material.
This composite description cited accounts of these birds in two pre-Linnean books.
The legs and feet were dull red, and the iris was brownish, and surrounded by a narrow carmine ring.
Pigeons were seen perching on top of each other to access water, and if necessary, the species could alight on open water to drink.
At roosting sites, few plants grew for years after the pigeons left.
The passenger pigeon changed its diet depending on the season.
Roosts ranged in size and extent, from a few acres to  or greater.
The passenger pigeon sexually matured during its first year and bred the following spring.
The 2014 study that demonstrated natural fluctuations in population numbers prior to human arrival also showed that the species routinely recovered from lows in the population, and suggested that one of these lows may have coincided with the intensified exploitation by humans in the 1800s, a combination which would have led to the rapid extinction of the species.
It mainly inhabited the deciduous forests of eastern North America and was also recorded elsewhere, but bred primarily around the Great Lakes.
In the same edition, Linnaeus also named ''C.&nbsp;canadensis'', based on ''Turtur canadensis'', as used by Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760.
Though this is the most often cited last wild specimen, in 2014, writer Joel Greenberg pointed out two later records, one of which involves a male shot in 1902 in Indiana, that was stuffed but later destroyed.
The full binomial can thus be translated as "migratory wanderer".
The genus name, ''Ectopistes'', translates as "moving about" or "wandering", while the specific name, ''migratorius'', indicates its migratory habits.
By the 1870s, the decrease in birds was noticeable, especially after the last large scale nestings and subsequent slaughters of millions of birds in 1874 and 1878.
More than 130 passenger pigeon fossils have been found scattered across 25 states and provinces of the United States, including in the La Brea Tar Pits of California.
The bird is believed to have played a significant ecological role in the composition of presettlement forests of eastern North America.
The Chicago group was kept by Charles Otis Whitman, whose collection began with passenger pigeons bought from Whittaker beginning in 1896.
It was another three or four days before it fledged.
Low-flying pigeons could be killed by throwing sticks or stones.
The morphologically similar mourning dove (''Zenaida macroura'') was long thought to be its closest relative, and the two were at times confused, but genetic analysis has shown that the genus ''Patagioenas'' is more closely related to it than the ''Zenaida'' doves.
In 2003, the Pyrenean ibex (''Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica'', a subspecies of the Spanish ibex) was the first extinct animal to be cloned back to life; the clone lived for only seven minutes before dying of lung defects.
Brisson's description was later shown to have been based on a female passenger pigeon.
Public protests against trap-shooting erupted in the 1870s, as the birds were badly treated before and after such contests.
Such a number would likely represent a large fraction of the entire population at the time, or perhaps all of it.
Additionally, the passenger pigeon took advantage of cultivated grains, particularly buckwheat, when it found them.
In 1906 Outram Bangs suggested that because Linnaeus had wholly copied Catesby's text when coining ''C.&nbsp;macroura'', this name should apply to the passenger pigeon, as ''E.&nbsp;macroura''.
Each female laid its egg immediately or almost immediately after the nest was completed; sometimes the pigeon was forced to lay it on the ground if the nest was not complete.
The sternum was very large and robust compared to that of other pigeons; its keel was  deep.
Small flocks are known to have existed at this point, since large numbers of birds were still being sold at markets.
The male then scrambled onto the female's back and copulated, which was then followed by soft clucking and occasionally more preening.
When ready to mate, the pair preened each other.
When the male was close to the female, he then pressed against her on the perch with his head held high and pointing at her.
There were a wide variety of other methods used to capture and kill passenger pigeons.
About 728,000 km2 (180 million acres) were cleared for farming between 1850 and 1910.
The wings were very long and pointed, and measured  from the wing-chord to the primary feathers, and  to the secondaries.
It originally bred from the southern parts of eastern and central Canada south to eastern Kansas, Oklahoma, Mississippi, and Georgia in the United States, but the primary breeding range was in southern Ontario and the Great Lakes states south through states north of the Appalachian Mountains.
Martha died of old age on September 1, 1914, and was found lifeless on the floor of her cage.
The passenger pigeon had a very elastic mouth and throat, allowing for increased capacity, and a joint in the lower bill enabled it to swallow acorns whole.
Beeches and oaks produced the mast needed to support nesting and roosting flocks.
Due to these influences, some ecologists have considered the passenger pigeon a keystone species.
Occasionally, a second female laid its egg in another female's nest, resulting in two eggs being present.
The brown mutation is a result of a reduction in eumelanin, due to incomplete synthesis (oxidation) of this pigment.
It has been suggested that the passenger pigeon should be revived when available technology allows it (a concept which has been termed "de-extinction"), using genetic material from such specimens.
The normal clutch size appears to have been a single egg, but there is some uncertainty about this, as two have also been reported from the same nests.
The early colonists thought that large flights of pigeons would be followed by ill fortune or sickness.
The wing of the female was , the tail , the bill , and the tarsus was .
In 1902, Whitman gave a female passenger pigeon to the zoo; this was possibly the individual later known as Martha, which would become the last living member of the species.
The iris was orange red, with a grayish blue, naked orbital ring.
When nuts on a tree loosened from their caps, a pigeon would land on a branch and, while flapping vigorously to stay balanced, grab the nut, pull it loose from its cap, and swallow it whole.
A slow decline between about 1800 and 1870 was followed by a rapid decline between 1870 and 1890.
The passenger pigeon's historic population is roughly the equivalent of the number of birds that overwinter in the United States every year in the early 21st century.
In a 2002 study by American geneticist Beth Shapiro et al., museum specimens of the passenger pigeon were included in an ancient DNA analysis for the first time (in a paper focusing mainly on the dodo), and it was found to be the sister taxon of the cuckoo-dove genus ''Macropygia''.
This was said to be used to attract the attention of another pigeon.
The birds were frequently shot either in flight during migration or immediately after, when they commonly perched in dead, exposed trees.
Adult food was gradually introduced after three to six days.
Many Native Americans were careful not to disturb the adult pigeons, and instead ate only the juveniles as they were afraid that the adults might desert their nesting grounds; in some tribes, disturbing the adult pigeons was considered a crime.
Its closest living relatives were long thought to be the ''Zenaida'' doves, based on morphological grounds, particularly the physically similar mourning dove (now ''Z.&nbsp;macroura'').
Hawks of the genus ''Accipiter'' and falcons pursued and preyed upon pigeons in flight, which in turn executed complex aerial maneuvers to avoid them; Cooper's hawk was known as the "great pigeon hawk" due to its successes, and these hawks allegedly followed migrating passenger pigeons.
Chief Simon Pokagon of the Potawatomi stated that his people called the pigeon ''O-me-me-wog'', and that the Europeans did not adopt native names for the bird, as it reminded them of their domesticated pigeons, instead calling them "wild" pigeons, as they called the native peoples "wild" men.
Food would be placed on the ground near the nets to attract the pigeons.
The leg bones were similar to those of other pigeons.
By 1902, Whitman owned sixteen birds.
The extinction of the passenger pigeon aroused public interest in the conservation movement, and resulted in new laws and practices which prevented many other species from becoming extinct.
Passenger pigeons were also seen as agricultural pests, since entire crops could be destroyed by feeding flocks.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, various parts of the pigeon were thought to have medicinal properties.
As Wallace Craig and R.&nbsp;W. Shufeldt (among others) pointed out, the birds are shown perched and billing one above the other, whereas they would instead have done this side by side, the male would be the one passing food to the female, and the male's tail would not be spread.
The last large nesting was in Petoskey, Michigan, in 1878 (following one in Pennsylvania a few days earlier), where 50,000 birds were killed each day for nearly five months.
On the sides of the neck and the upper mantle were iridescent display feathers that have variously been described as being a bright bronze, violet or golden-green, depending on the angle of the light.
The adult female passenger pigeon was slightly smaller than the male at  in length.
After observing captive birds, Wallace Craig found that this species did less charging and strutting than other pigeons (as it was awkward on the ground), and thought it probable that no food was transferred during their brief billing (unlike in other pigeons), and he therefore considered Audubon's description partially based on analogy with other pigeons as well as imagination.
There were also sightings of passenger pigeons outside of its normal range, including in several Western states, Bermuda, Cuba, and Mexico, particularly during severe winters.
Martha soon became a celebrity due to her status as an endling, and offers of a $1,000 reward for finding a mate for her brought even more visitors to see her.
A bill was passed in the Michigan legislature making it illegal to net pigeons within 3&nbsp;km (2 miles) of a nesting area.
Recognizing the decline of the wild populations, Whitman and the Cincinnati Zoo consistently strove to breed the surviving birds, including attempts at making a rock dove foster passenger pigeon eggs.
There were several other factors contributing to the decline and subsequent extinction of the species, including shrinking of the large breeding populations necessary for preservation of the species and widespread deforestation, which destroyed its habitat.
When landing, the pigeon flapped its wings repeatedly before raising them at the moment of landing.
It had a carmine-red iris surrounded by a narrow purplish-red eye-ring.
These records date as far back as 100,000 years ago in the Pleistocene era, during which the pigeon's range extended to several western states that were not a part of its modern range.
A skilled flyer, the passenger pigeon is estimated to have averaged  during migration.
In captivity, a passenger pigeon was capable of living at least 15 years; Martha, the last known living passenger pigeon, was at least 17 and possibly as old as 29 when she died.
He did so on at least two occasions; in 1903 he drew a bird possibly in one of the three aviaries with surviving birds, and some time before 1914, he drew Martha, the last individual, in the Cincinnati Zoo.
American geneticist George M. Church has proposed that the passenger pigeon genome can be reconstructed by piecing together DNA fragments from different specimens.
In 1856 Bénédict Henry Révoil may have been one of the first writers to voice concern about the fate of the passenger pigeon, after witnessing a hunt in 1847:
The next step would be to splice these genes into the stem cells of rock pigeons (or band-tailed pigeons), which would then be transformed into egg and sperm cells, and placed into the eggs of rock pigeons, resulting in rock pigeons bearing passenger pigeon sperm and eggs.
While the pigeon was extant, the name passenger pigeon was used interchangeably with "wild pigeon".
A similar scenario may also explain the rapid extinction of the Rocky Mountain locust (''Melanoplus spretus'') during the same period.
They slept with their bills concealed by the feathers in the middle of the breast while holding their tail at a 45-degree angle.
Whitman brought his pigeons with him from Chicago to Massachusetts by railcar each summer.
The nestling begged in the nest for a day or two, before climbing from the nest and fluttering to the ground, whereafter it moved around, avoided obstacles, and begged for food from nearby adults.
American writer Christopher Cokinos has suggested that if the birds flew single file, they would have stretched around the earth 22 times.
Competitions could also consist of people standing regularly spaced while trying to shoot down as many birds as possible in a passing flock.
Conservationists were ineffective in stopping the slaughter.
At one site in Oklahoma, the pigeons leaving their roost every morning flew low enough that the Cherokee could throw clubs into their midst, which caused the lead pigeons to try to turn aside and in the process created a blockade that resulted in a large mass of flying, easily hit pigeons.
This was accepted by the ICZN, which used its plenary powers to designate the species for the respective names in 1955.
Unlike other pigeons, courtship took place on a branch or perch.
Other names in indigenous American languages include ''ori'te'' in Mohawk, and ''putchee nashoba'', or "lost dove", in Choctaw.
Most early accounts dwell on the vast number of pigeons, the resulting darkened skies, and the enormous amount of hunted birds (50,000 birds were reportedly sold at a Boston market in 1771).
The Seneca people called the pigeon ''jahgowa'', meaning "big bread", as it was a source of food for their tribes.
It is unknown how they located this fluctuating food source, but their eyesight and flight powers aided them in surveying large areas for places that could provide food enough for a temporary stay.
The passenger pigeon was an important source of food for the people of North America.
Some early accounts also suggest that the appearance of flocks in great numbers was an irregular occurrence.
A severe method was to set fire to the base of a tree nested with pigeons; the adults would flee and the juveniles would fall to the ground.
The passenger pigeon was one of the most social of all land birds.
In modern French, the bird is known as ''tourte voyageuse'' or ''pigeon migrateur'', among other names.
The passenger pigeon was physically adapted for speed, endurance, and maneuverability in flight, and has been described as having a streamlined version of the typical pigeon shape, such as that of the generalized rock dove (''Columba livia'').
The scientific name also refers to its migratory characteristics.
A 2014 genetic study (based on coalescent theory) suggested that the passenger pigeon population fluctuated rapidly across the last million years, due to their dependence on availability of mast (which itself fluctuates).
Today, more than 1,532 passenger pigeon skins (along with 16 skeletons) are in existence, spread across many institutions all over the world.
The passenger pigeon was featured in the writings of many significant early naturalists, as well as accompanying illustrations.
The population must have been decreasing in numbers for many years, though this went unnoticed due to the apparent vast number of birds, which clouded their decline.
In one case, 6 km2 (1,500 acres) of large trees were speedily cut down to get birds, and such methods were common.
In contrast, very small populations of nearly extinct birds, such as the kakapo (''Strigops habroptilus'') and the takahē (''Porphyrio hochstetteri''), have been enough to keep those species extant to the present.
The wings, back, and tail were similar in appearance to those of the male except that the outer edges of the primary feathers were edged in buff or rufous buff.
In 1874, at least 600 people were employed as pigeon trappers, a number which grew to 1,200 by 1881.
One observer described the motion of such a flock in search of mast as having a rolling appearance, as birds in the back of the flock flew overhead to the front of the flock, dropping leaves and grass in flight.
The lower back and rump were a dark blue-gray that became grayish-brown on the upper tail-covert feathers.
H.&nbsp;B. Roney, who had witnessed the Petoskey slaughter, led campaigns to protect the pigeon, but was met with resistance, and accusations that he was exaggerating the severity of the situation.
It was not always as abundant, and the population size fluctuated rapidly over time.
The last fully authenticated record of a wild passenger pigeon was near Sargents, Pike County, Ohio, on March 22 or 24, 1900, when a female bird was killed by a boy named Press Clay Southworth with a BB gun.
The pigeon bathed in shallow water, and afterwards lay on each side in turn and raised the opposite wing to dry it.
They rested in a slumped position that hid their feet.
Scattered nestings are reported into the 1880s, but the birds were now wary, and commonly abandoned their nests if persecuted.
With the large numbers in the flocks, the excrement they produced was enough to destroy surface-level vegetation, and along with the breaking of treelimbs under their collective weight, the passenger pigeons could do significant damage to forests.
Two parasites have been recorded on passenger pigeons.
It is unknown whether the remains of George were preserved.
In the latter half of the 19th century, thousands of passenger pigeons were captured for use in the sports shooting industry.
It is unknown whether colonies re-nested after a successful nesting.
The bill was black, while the feet and legs were a bright coral red.
The overlapping uncinate processes, which stiffen the ribcage, were very well developed.
If the pigeon became alert, it would often stretch out its head and neck in line with its body and tail, then nod its head in a circular pattern.
The zoo kept more than twenty individuals, in a ten-by-twelve-foot cage.
After being abandoned and leaving the nest, the very fat juveniles were vulnerable to predators until they were able to fly.
