Indians, particularly Tamils in Singapore, often continue the patronymic tradition; this entails having a single given name, followed by son / daughter of, followed by their father's name.
Most Greek surnames are patronymics by origin, albeit in various forms depending on ancestral locality.
Other cultures which formerly used patronyms have switched to the more widespread style of passing the father's ''last'' name to the children (and wife) as their own.
For example: Shahpoor (son of king) and Sinapoor (Ebne sina).
Patronymics were common in the Dutch United Provinces until the French invasion in 1795 and subsequent annexation in 1810.
In Georgian, patronymics, when used, come with the addition of ''s'' to the end of the father's name, followed by ''dze'' for a man and ''asuli'' for a woman.
Ethiopian and Eritreans have no concept of family name and surname.
"Mc" is also a frequent anglicisation in both Scotland and Ireland.
", as bint is often written as "bt.," in name formulas rendered from Arabic into Roman characters.
In Indonesia, there are a number of ethnic groups with different naming systems.
For example, Joseph Stalin's actual name was Ioseb Besarionis Dze Jugashvili.
Rasipuram, the first name, is a toponym and Krishnaswami Ayyar, the second name, is a patronym.
''Sardar Ilyas oğlu Aliyev'' ("Sardar Aliyev, son of Ilyas").
Following the above example, K. Saravanan would be rendered as Saravanan Krishnan.
While Jews now have permanent surnames for everyday life, the patronymic form is still used in religious life.
In Ireland, the forms "Mag" and "M'" are encountered.
Eventually, most Nordic countries replaced or complemented this system with the prevailing "international" standard of inherited family names.
The grandfather's name is usually only used in official documents.
Nowadays in Azerbaijan, patronymics sometimes replace surnames in unofficial use.
The father's name is not considered a middle name.
Although the practice is not universal, patronymic naming has been documented in the Zambezia province.
The word "Abu" ("Aba" or "Abi" in different grammatical cases) means "father of", so "Abu `Ali" is another name for "`Amr".
Somalis also have a naming pattern based on the Arab naming pattern, very similar to the Ethiopian naming pattern.
In Sunda a similar cultural rule is used to that of the Batak.
In informal situations, if a person is called by a diminutive (such as Misha for Mikhail or Nastya for Anastasia), the patronymic is not used.
If one is to refer to a person with a single name he/she will always use the person's given name.
''s'' in Georgian is a possessive, and ''dze'' and ''asuli'' mean male and female descendant.
In addition, the archaic French (more specifically, Norman) prefix ''fitz'' (cognate with the modern French ''fils'', meaning "son"), appears in England's aristocratic family lines dating from the Norman Conquest, and also among the Anglo-Irish.
In Western Europe patronyms were formerly widespread but later became confined to Scandinavia and Finland.
In the Bible, Peter is called Bar-Jonah in Matthew 16:17 and Nathanael is possibly called Bartholomew because he is the son of Tolmai (or son of Ptolemy, with "P" being reduced).
Many Sephardic Jews used the Arabic ''ibn'' instead of ''bat'' or ''ben'' when it was the norm.
Though not as common nowadays, it was customary for a long time for these children (particularly the sons) to change their last names to the name-in-religion of their father.
In Kerala and Tamil Nadu, the common practise now is to have the given name of the father after one's given name.
In written form, these endings were often abbreviated as ''-sz.''
In Ireland, this truncation resulted in surnames such as "Guinness" (son of Aonghus, cf.
A component of a name based on the name of one's mother or a female ancestor is a matronymic.
Likewise, a woman named Lyudmila with a father named Nikolay would be known as Lyudmila Nikolayevna or "Lyudmila, daughter of Nikolay" (''Nikolayevna'' being a patronymic).
Yi people's sons' given names are based on the last one or two syllables of father's name.
However unlike the former, Azeris in Iran do not generally use patronymics in ''oglu'' / ''qizi''.
However, rather than using the father's full name, only the first letter—the initial—is prefixed to the given name.
Traditionally Muslim and non-Arabic speaking African people, such as Hausa and Fulani people usually (with some exceptions) follow the Arab naming pattern.
For example, the Scottish Gaelic surname, ''Nic Dhòmhnaill'' meaning 'daughter of a son of Dòmhnall' (in English, Donald), as in ''Mairi Nic Dhòmhnaill'', or Mary MacDonald.
* Cricketer Sunil Gavaskar's full name is Sunil Manohar Gavaskar, where Manohar is his father's given name.
In the Old Hungarian period (10th−16th century, see History of Hungarian), when surnames were not in common use, the full genitive was represented as in ''Péter fia András'' (''Peter's son Andrew''); these forms are in frequent use in charters and legal documents dated back to that time.
Many Armenian surnames were once patronymics first used by distant ancestors or clan founders.
MacPhail) – usually beginning with "C", "K" or "Q".
These were later simplified to the modern Welsh ''ap'' and ''ab''.
For example, Tuomas Abrahaminpoika (to be read in English as "Tuomas, Abraham's son") and Martta Heikintytär (to be read in English as "Martta, Heikki's daughter").
Consequently, ibn is often written as "b.
Matronyms were used exceptionally if the child was born out of wedlock or if the mother was much more high-born or well known than the father, a historical example being Sweyn Estridsson.
In Russia, the patronymic is an official part of the name, used in all official documents, and when addressing somebody both formally and among friends.
Patronyms were sometimes employed within the English names as well by using the father's personal name as the sons' middle name.
In Classical Arabic, the word ''ibn'' is written as ''bn'' between two names, since the case ending of the first name then supplies a vowel.
* India's 15th Prime Minister Narendra Modi, famously took oath of office as the Prime Minister of India as Narendra Damodardas Modi, where in Damodardas is his father's given name.
The male patronymic always ends with -''ович'' ''(-ovych)'' or ''-йович'' ''(-yovych)''.
After surnames were commonly adopted in Azerbaijan in the 1920s, patronymics still remained parts of full names, i.e.
Patronymics were composed of the father's name plus an ending ''-zoon'' for sons, ''-dochter'' for daughters.
In East Slavic languages, the endings ''-ovich'', ''-evich'' and ''-ich'' are used to form patronymics for men.
Two common elements in Georgian last names, ''dze'' and ''shvili'' mean son of, and child, respectively.
Illia Illich Mechnikov), ''Sava (Сава)'' -> ''Savych (Савич)'', ''Iakiv (Яків)'' -> ''Iakovych (Якович)''
After the 'Surname revolution' on 1934, many people chose professions or habitat as surnames with or without the suffix ''-oğlu'', such as ''Elbeyioğlu'', ''Bakkaloğlu'' or ''Giritlioğlu'' and with ''-zade'' such as ''Beyzade'', ''Mehmedzade'', ''Yusufzade''.
In Arabic, the word "ibn" ('''ابن''') (or '''بن''': "bin", "ben" and sometimes "ibni" and "ibnu" to show the grammatical case of the noun) is the equivalent of the "-son" suffix discussed above (The prefix ben- is used similarly in Hebrew).
Diminutive suffixes which denote "''son of''", or more generally "''descendant of''", are produced as follows: starting with the given name Δημήτριος, ''Dēmétrios'', for example, the patronymic surnames Dēmētr''ópoulos'' (Peloponnese), Dēmētr''ákos'' (Laconia), Dēmētr''éas'' (Messenian Mani), Dēmētr''átos'' (Cephalonia), Dēmētr''ákēs'' (Crete), Dēmētr''iádēs''/Dēmētr''-ídēs'' (Pontus, Asia Minor), Dēmētr''éllēs'' (Lesbos), Dēmétr''oglou'' (Asia Minor) (identical to Turkish patronym ''-oğlu''), or simply ''Dēmētríou'' (esp.
The prefix "Mac" is used to form a patronym, such as "Mac Coinnich" – or the anglicized 'Mackenzie' – son of Coinneach/Kenneth.
Saravanan'' and is seldom expanded, even in official records.
He prefers to write his full name including his father's name as his middle name.
In Maharashtra and Gujarat, a very common convention among the Hindu communities is to have the patronymic as the middle name.
In France, the terms ''patronyme'' and ''nom patronymique'' had long been used interchangeably to designate the family name, meaning that it is inherited from the father.
This is a significant departure from the rest of the country where caste or family names are mostly employed as surnames.
Patronymic naming is very common in parts of Mozambique.
Instead, it is considered a last name.
if father's name is "Armen", the corresponding patronymic would be "Armeni" (of Armen).
This usage is contrary to the international meaning as described in the rest of this article, and a law enacted in 2002 mandated not using these terms for ''nom de famille'' (lit.
In the northern provinces, ''-s'', as genitive case, was almost universally used for both sons and daughters.
These are identical to the endings of ''family'' names in Bulgarian and some other Slavic family names (such as names in Russian and Czech).
For example, the name Ahmed Mohamed Ali Farah means "Ahmed son of Mohamed son of Ali son of Farah"; a father and son or daughter never share the same surname as the naming goes father after father.
A '''patronym''', or '''patronymic''', is a component of a personal name based on the given name of one's father, grandfather (i.e., an avonymic), or an even-earlier male ancestor.
These are appended to the given name, i.e.
Thus there are names such as Fitzgerald and Fitzhugh.
The prefix "ka" was attached to the father's name, for example Shaka kaSenzangakhona means Shaka son of Senzangakhona.
An Gof; An Gove, Helyer).
After Armenia re-gained its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 a massive decline in the use of Russified patronymics occurred; nowadays few Armenians use patronymics.
The use of patronymics was introduced in Armenia by Russians during the times of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union.
However, nowadays, the patronymic names in Serbia are mostly used on legal documents, and have the form of the father's name that says the child is 'of so and so'... example: Marija Dragoljuba Pavlovic, where Dragoljub is the father's name and 'Dragoljuba' literally means 'of Dragoljub'.
In Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia, the patronymic names do not change form between masculine and feminine.
At the north end of the Irish Sea, in Ulster, the Isle of Man and Galloway (indeed as far north as Argyll), "Mac" was frequently truncated in speech to /k/, leading to such anglicisations as "Qualtrough" (Son of Walter) & "Quayle" (son of Paul, cf.
The law does allow a person to retain a patronymic as a middle name in addition to the surname, as was common in Early Modern times; this is not a common practice, but does occur, a modern example being Audhild Gregoriusdotter Rotevatn.
There is a strong cultural pressure for immigrants to modern Israel to Hebraize their names.
Indians of the Muslim Isma'ili sect also have patronymic middle names which use the father's first name and the grandfather's first name plus a family name.
Each is a means of conveying lineage.
In Norway, for example, the parliament passed a family name act in 1923, citing the rising population and the need to avoid the confusion of new last names in every generation.
The same is true for females; they do not take their husband's last name.
The endings ''-s'', ''-se'' and ''-sen'' were also commonly used for sons and often for daughters too.
The family's name for Sunda is -Wijaya, but this isn't true for all Sundanese families.
Only in the 19th century did the use of patronymics gain any sort of popularity among the Finnish-speaking lower classes.
Kardash'''ian''', Asdvadzadour'''ian''', Hagop'''ian''', Khachadour'''ian''', Mardiros'''ian''', Bedros'''ian''', Sarkiss'''ian''', etc.
Vuk Karadžić himself used patronymic Stefanović (son of Steven), and sometimes Karadzić, old family name.
Russified version of the same patronymic would be "Armenovich" for males and "Armenovna" for females.
Patronymics are required and are used as middle names in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine.
The tradition of patronymic lineage is still used among some Canadian descendants of French colonists: in the oral tradition of many Acadians, for example, ''Marc à Pierre à Gérard'' (lit.
In Ukrainian, the female patronymic always ends with ''-івна'' ''(-ivna)'' or ''-ївна'' ''(-yivna)''.
Prior to the late 19th–early 20th century, patronymics were used as an essential part of a person's full name, i.e.
Sometimes the family's name is prefixed by Huta-, Batu-, etc., but most use Si-, such as Sitanggang, Sihombing, Sibutar-butar, Sinaga, or Sitohang.
Examples of such transformations include common English surnames such as Johnson (son of John).
''Angharad verch Owain'' would be "Angharad, daughter of Owain".
In contrast to male names, if a woman is called by her patronymic name without a given name, the patronymic is usually not contracted: "Ivanovna" but "Mar' Ivanna"; "Sergeevna"/"Sergevna" is one exception, where both forms are fine.
For example, if the father's name is Boggi Sinaga who married to Moetia Siregar then all children will be given family's name of Sinaga.
As in English, the new family names are sometimes based on what was formerly a patronymic.
''Sardar Ilyas oğlu'' ("Sardar, son of Ilyas") and ''Mina Nabi qızı'' ("Mina, daughter of Nabi"), since surnames were mostly non-existent before Sovietization (with the exception of the upper and some middle-class families).
''Ivan Marinov Yordanov'' would be the son of ''Marin Yordanov''.
For example, the children of a ''Giánnēs Papadópoulos'' are, say, ''María Ioánnou Papadopoúlou'' and ''Andréas Ioánnou Papadópoulos'' (''Ioánnou'' is the genitive case form of ''Ioánnēs'', which is the formal form of the father's name, ''Giánnēs'').
In addition, "bint" ('''بنت''') means "daughter of".
Historically, patronymics were composed in Swedish fashion: the father's name and the suffix -n for genitive plus the word ''poika'' for sons, ''tytär'' for daughters.
For example, if a father is named Khurram Suleman (a Muslim masculine name), he might name his son Taha Khurram, who in turn might name his son Ismail Taha.
In Aramaic, the prefix '''''bar-''''' means "son" and is used as a prefix meaning "son of".
In Persian, patronymics پَتوَند are formed by names ending with the suffix "Poor" "پور" for men and "Dokht" "دُخت" for women.
"Hurley" (descendant of Jarlath, cf.
For instance, Abel Jans'''zoon''' Tasman is "Abel son of Jan Tasman", and Kenau Simonsdochter Hasselaer: "Kenau, daughter of Simon Hasselaer".
In Iceland family names are unusual; Icelandic law favours the use of patronyms (and more recently, matronyms) over family names.
and ''-dr.'' respectively e.g.
The father's name (occasionally with a minor alteration) for genitive plus the word ''son'' for sons, ''dóttir'' for daughters.
Ua h-Iarfhlatha/O'Hurley)) for surnames prefixed with "O".
Family names became obligatory in Finland by law in 1920.
However, the pronunciation "bin" is dialectal and has nothing to do with either the spelling or pronunciation in Classical Arabic.
For example, if a person's given name is ''Saravanan'' and his father's ''Krishnan'', then the full name is ''K.
In colloquial, informal speech, it is also possible to contract the ending of a patronymic: thus Nikolayevich becomes Nikolaich, and Stepan Ivanovich becomes Stepan Ivanych or simply Ivanych as the given name may be omitted altogether.
Some Early Modern examples of the latter practice, where the patronymic was placed after the given name and was followed by the surname, are Norwegian Peder Claussøn Friis, the son of Nicolas Thorolfsen Friis (Claus in Claussøn being short for Nicolas) and Danish Thomas Hansen Kingo, the son of Hans Thomsen Kingo.
The practice disappeared from everyday use with the introduction of the modern European style surname system but still remains part of traditional cultural practices, particularly in the case of chieftains and royalty where reciting lineages forms a part of many ceremonial occasions.
Colloquial Scottish Gaelic also has other patronymics of a slightly different form for individuals, still in use (for more information please see: Scottish Gaelic personal naming system).
This came into common use during the 1950s and 1960s when the Dravidian movement illegalised using one's caste as part of the name.
The Assyrians for centuries have used the patronymic '''''bet''''' or '''''bit''''' literally meaning "house" in Assyrian Neo-Aramaic; however, in the context of the name it means "from the house of the father's name."
For example, Sara Yohannes Petros is Sara (given name) Yohannes (father's name) Petros (grandfather's name).
As the Netherlands were now a province of France, a registry of births, deaths and marriages was established in 1811, whereupon emperor Napoleon forced the Dutch to register and adopt a distinct surname.
Hani people also have patronymic customs.
In Turkish, the suffixes used to indicate paternal ancestry are ''-oğlu'' and ''-zade'', which indicate the ancestry as coming from a certain man.
In Sweden the practice of children keeping their father's and wives keeping their husband's patronymic as a surname occurred in the 1700s but was first prevalent in the late 1800s, still present yet uncommon in the 1900s and finally abolished in 1966.
In addition to these surnames, ''actual'' patronymics are used in official documents as "middle names" preceding the surname.
"Jeroen son of Cornelis", or Dirck Jacobsz.
In this case the contraction, if possible, is obligatory: Ivan Sergeyevich Sidorov may be called "Sergeich" or, more rarely, "Sergeyevich".
Among the Zulu patronymics were used in the pre-colonial era.
It is used in synagogue and in documents in Jewish law such as the ketubah (marriage contract).
Patronymics are usually formed by addition of "i" ("of", pronounced as ee) to the father's name, e.g.
In Azeri, patronymics are formed through ''-oğlu'' (sometimes transliterated as ''ogly'') for males and ''qızı'' (often transliterated as ''gizi'' or ''kizi'') for females.
The Spanish family Ibn Ezra is one example.
Rhodri ap Nest, "Rhodri son of Nest") to identify people.
Many Azeri surnames are also derived from Persian-style patronymics ending in ''-zadeh'' (''Kazimzadeh'', ''Mehdizadeh'', etc.).
The celebrated Indian English novelist R. K. Narayan's name at birth was Rasipuram Krishnaswami Ayyar Narayanaswami, which was shortened at the behest of his writer friend, Graham Greene.
The Danish government outlawed the practice in 1856 and eased the regulations in 1904 to deal with the limited number of patronymics.
Jeroen Corneli'''sz'''.
In Finland, the use of patronymics was a result of relatively recent Swedish influence and remained uncommon outside official documents.
For instance, Hayder Muhammed al-Tikriti is the son of Muhammed named Hayder, and he is from the town of Tikrit.
Exception: ''Illia (Ілля)'' -> ''Illich (Ілліч)'' (e.g.
Azeri patronymics are not to be confused with Turkish surnames in ''-oğlu'' and Greek surnames in -ογλού (''-oglou''), which do not have specific female versions and do not reflect names of fathers.
A daughter's family name is the same as the son's, but ''always'' declined in the Genitive, e.g.
This name was generally used as a last name although a third name, a so-called byname based on location or personal characteristic, was often added to differentiate people and could eventually develop into a kind of family name.
In Tamil Nadu and parts of Kerala and Karnataka, patronymy is predominant.
Tresillian, Trevithick, Nanskeval>Nankeville) and occupational surnames (e.g.
Before the 1536 Act of Union, the Welsh did not generally employ surnames, but instead used epithets (e.g.
* Cricketer Sachin Tendulkar's full name is Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, where Ramesh is his father's given name.
The word or phrase meaning "son of" is, however, omitted.
Another form widely used in the Arab world is the usage of both the patronymic and a family name, often using both the father's and paternal grandfathers given name in sequence after the own given name, and then the family name.
In such instances, a person is usually referred to by their given name, rather than their patronymic.
In the Qur'an,  Jesus (Isa in Arabic) is consistently termed "`Isa ibn Maryam" - a matronymic (in the Qur'an, Jesus has no father; see Islamic view of Jesus).
Others chose their profession or habitat as family names: ''Bakker'' (baker), ''Slachter'' (butcher), ''van Dijk'' (of dike) etc.
''Papanikoláou, Papanikolópoulos'', "the son of the priest Nikolaos".
Welsh, as a P-Celtic language, originally used ''map'' or ''mab'' instead of the Q-Celtic ''mac'' employed in Ireland and Scotland.
In medieval times, an illegitimate child of unknown parentage would sometimes be termed "ibn Abihi", "son of his father" (notably Ziyad ibn Abihi.)
''Eldar Mammadoğlu'', ''Sabina Yusifqızı'').
For example, Golda Meir was born "Golda Mabovitch", took the name "Golda Meyerson" after her marriage to American Morris Meyerson, and, upon making Aliyah and at the urging of Moshe Sharett, Hebraized her last name to Meir.
This system works for both boys and girls, except that after marriage, a woman takes her husband's given name as her middle name—her new middle name is no longer a patronymic.
"Marc of Pierre of Gérard"), means "Marc, son of Pierre, grandson of Gérard".
In many areas around the world, patronyms predate the use of family names.
Normally in such case, they are spelled as one word (i.e.
In Norse custom patronyms and matronyms were formed by using the ending -son (later -søn and -sen in Danish, Norwegian and German) to the genitive form of the father's name to indicate "son of", and -dóttir (Icelandic and Faroese -dóttir, Swedish and Norwegian -dotter, Danish and Norwegian -datter) for "daughter of".
Thus, for example, "Ali ibn `Amr" means "Ali son of `Amr".
This practice is especially common among Ashkenazic immigrants, because most of their names were taken during the period from the end of the 18th century to the middle of the 19th century.
Note that the suffix "-ian" was also appended to trades, as in Adakhtsakordz'''ian''' (issued from the carpenter), Chalian (issued from the candlemaker, using the Turkish word "chal", meaning candle).
This system is no longer in common use, though traces of it can still be found in some frequent present-day surnames such as ''Pálfi'' (son of Paul), ''Győrfi'', ''Bánfi'' or in the name of the famous poet Sándor Petőfi (who chose this Hungarian form instead of his Slavic birth name ''Petrovics'').
Amis people's son names are also followed by the father's name, while a daughter's name is followed by her mother's name.
Less commonly, matronymics formed with the genitive form (using the prefix ''a-'') were used, as in ''Amariei'', '(son/daughter) of Maria'.
* First Deputy Prime Minister and first Home Minister Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's full name is Vallabhbhai Jhaverbhai Patel, where Jhaverbhai is his father's given name.
In addition to these Anglicized baptismal and official names, patronyms continued to be commonly employed in Welsh until the Industrial Revolution, particularly in the north and west of Wales.
The Batak of North Sumatra (Sumatra Utara) give every child the family's name.
It is becoming more common for younger individuals (under 50) to drop the patronymic at work.
These are characterized by the suffix "-ian" in Western Armenian, often transliterated as "-yan" in Eastern Armenian (derived from Persian, "ian" means "issued from").
The examples of classical Russian literature: The Tales of the Late Ivan Petrovich Belkin, The Death of Ivan Ilyich, The Tale of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarreled with Ivan Nikiforovich.
MacAonghusa) beginning usually in "C" or "G" for patronymics prefixed with Mac, and in "H" (e.g.
As a result, unlike surnames, patronymics will not pass down through many generations.
Vuk Karadžić reported in the 19th century that Serbs sometimes used their old family names, and sometimes patronymics.
In Iraq for example, full names are formed by combining the given name of an individual with the given name of their father (sometimes the father is skipped and the paternal grandfather's given name is used instead, sometimes both father and paternal grandfather are used), along with the town, village, or clan name.
The titles can also be figurative, for example in Acts 4:36-37 a man named Joseph is called Barnabas meaning "son of consolation".
Of particular interest is the name "Fitzroy", meaning "son of the king", which was used by illegitimate royal children who were acknowledged as such by their fathers.
"name of family"), although "patronyme" was removed from most administrative documents decades before 2002.
After collapse of the USSR Patronymics in Georgia are disused as part of Russian tradition.
For masculine names ending in a vowel, such as Ilya or Foma, when they are used as a base for patronymic, the corresponding endings are ''-ich'' (for men) and ''-inichna'' (for women).
Georgian last names derive mostly from patronymics, nicknames and places of origin.
Selyf Sarffgadau, "Selyf the Battle-Serpent"), patronyms (e.g.
Typically, a patronymic name alone is a familiar form of addressing an older female.
Now, however, women in Greece can keep their own surname if they so choose.
Ethiopian and Eritreans use a naming pattern very similar to the Arab naming pattern, but with one exception: no suffix or prefix.
