Robeson became the first black actor cast as Othello in Britain since Ira Aldridge.
Despite negative reactions from the press, such as a ''New York Amsterdam News'' retort that Robeson had made a "jolly well ", he also announced that he would reject any offers to perform European opera, because the music had no connection to his heritage.
An appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States to reinstate his confiscated passport had been rejected, but over the telephone Robeson was able to sing to the 5,000 gathered there as he had earlier in the year to London.
Robeson, consequently, became enraged and demanded the Australian government provide the Aborigines citizenship and equal rights.
On December 17, 1951, Robeson presented to the United Nations an anti-lynching petition, "We Charge Genocide".
William found a stable parsonage at the St. Thomas A. M. E. Zion in 1910, where Robeson would fill in for his father during sermons when he was called away.
A stopover in Berlin enlightened Robeson to the racism in Nazi Germany and, on his arrival in the Soviet Union, he expounded on race and what he felt in Moscow, where he said, "Here I am not a Negro but a human being for the first time in my life&nbsp;..
He retired and he lived out the remaining years of his life privately in Philadelphia.
The two ad-libbed a set of spirituals, with Robeson as lead and Brown as accompanist.
Thereabouts, Robeson publicly stated "..the people of the lands of Socialism want peace dearly".
His father, who was the "glory of  boyhood years" soon died, and at Rutgers, Robeson expounded on the incongruity of African Americans fighting to protect America in World War I and, contemporaneously, being without the same opportunities in the United States as whites.
An FBI memo described Robeson's debilitated condition, remarking that his "death would be much publicized" and would be used for Communist propaganda, necessitating continued surveillance.
In the spring, Robeson postponed school to portray Jim in Mary Hoyt Wiborg's ''Taboo''.
Robeson believed that the struggle against fascism during the Spanish Civil War was a turning point in his life and transformed him into a political activist.
When asked why he had not remained in the Soviet Union because of his affinity with its political ideology, he replied that "because my father was a slave and my people died to build , I am going to stay here, and have a part of it just like you and no fascist-minded people will drive me from it!"
Subsequently, Robeson publicly called upon all Americans to demand that Congress pass civil rights legislation.
He visited the battlefront and provided a morale boost to the Republicans at a time when their victory was unlikely.
Paul Jr. believed that his father's health problems stemmed from attempts by CIA and MI5 to "neutralize" his father.
Eventually, William became financially incapable of providing a house for himself and his children still living at home, Ben and Paul, so they moved into the attic of a store in Westfield, New Jersey.
Robeson and Brown performed a series of concert tours in America from January 1926 until May 1927.
This version was selected by Ed Miliband.
Robeson stated the best way to diminish the oppression African Americans faced was for his artistic work to be an example of what "men of my colour" could accomplish rather than to "be a propagandist and make speeches and write articles about what they call the Colour Question."
Three days later, under Soviet medical care, he told his son that he felt extreme paranoia, thought that the walls of the room were moving and, overcome by a powerful sense of emptiness and depression, tried to take his own life.
Reluctant to lose Robeson as a propagandist for the Soviet Union, the Soviets brought Feffer from prison to him.
Postal Service issued a 37-cent stamp honoring Robeson.
Robeson won an academic scholarship to Rutgers College, where he was twice named a consensus All-American and was the class valedictorian.
His father, William, whose family traced their ancestry to the Igbo people of present-day Nigeria, escaped from a plantation in his teens and eventually became the minister of Princeton's Witherspoon Street Presbyterian Church in 1881.
He remembered that his father had had such fears prior to his prostate operation.
At Rutgers College, he was an outstanding American football player, and then had an international career in singing, with a distinctive, powerful, deep bass voice, as well as acting in theater and movies.
While on tour, he spoke at the World Peace Council, at which his speech was publicly reported as equating America with a Fascist state—a depiction that he flatly denied.
In early 1930, they both appeared in the experimental classic ''Borderline'', and then returned to the West End for his starring role in Shakespeare's ''Othello'', opposite Peggy Ashcroft as Desdemona.
He permanently modified his renditions of ''Ol' Man River'' from a tragic "song of resignation with a hint of protest implied" into a battle hymn of unwavering defiance.
Robinson testified that Robeson's statements, "'if accurately reported',  silly'".
His advocacy of anti-imperialism, affiliation with communism, and criticism of the United States government caused him to be blacklisted during the McCarthy era.
However, his history of supporting pro-Soviet policies brought scrutiny from the FBI.
Double pneumonia and a kidney blockage in 1965 nearly killed him.
To support a charity for single mothers, he headlined a concert singing spirituals.
He was internationally recognized as the 10th most popular star in British cinema.
Robeson stayed at the Barvikha Sanatorium until September 1961, when he left for London.
In October 1960, Robeson embarked on a two-month concert tour of Australia and New Zealand with Essie, primarily to generate money, at the behest of Australian politician Bill Morrow.
"Even without an organic predisposition and accumulated pressures of government harassment he might have been susceptible to a breakdown."
Robeson played "Joe" in the London production of the American musical ''Show Boat'', at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane.
The coach, Foster Sanford, decided he had overcome the provocation and announced that he had made the team.
Subsequently, he received the Spingarn medal from the NAACP.
However, when Robeson met with State and asked why he was denied a passport, he was told that "his frequent criticism of the treatment of blacks in the United States should not be aired in foreign countries".
The success of his acting placed him in elite social circles and his ascension to fame, which was forcefully aided by Essie, had occurred at a startling pace.
Numerous memos advised that Robeson should be denied a passport renewal which would ostensibly jeopardize his fragile health and his recovery process.
He took a summer job as a waiter in Narragansett Pier, Rhode Island, where he befriended Fritz Pollard, later to be the first African-American coach in the National Football League.
He must elect to fight for freedom or slavery.
''Chillun's'' delay led to a revival of ''The Emperor Jones'' with Robeson as Brutus, a role pioneered by Charles Sidney Gilpin.
Upon returning to England he publicly criticized African Americans' rejection of their own culture.
Contemporaneously, he addressed a meeting with Kenesaw Mountain Landis in a failed attempt to convince him to admit black players to Major League Baseball.
In Wales, he commemorated the Welsh killed while fighting for the Republicans, where he recorded a message which would become his epitaph: "The artist must take sides.
In 1993, the building was designated a New York City landmark as well.
Robeson left Australia as a respected, albeit controversial, figure and his support for Aboriginal rights had a profound effect in Australia over the next decade.
Academically, he was accepted into Phi Beta Kappa and Cap and Skull.
Robeson returned to perform a second concert at the Peace Arch in 1953, and over the next two years, two further concerts were scheduled.
He was blacklisted for saying this in the US mainstream press including many periodicals of the Negro press such as The Crisis.
Martin Duberman claimed that Robeson's health breakdown was probably brought on by a combination of factors including extreme emotional and physical stress, bipolar depression, exhaustion and the beginning of circulatory and heart problems.
His classmates recognized him by electing him class valedictorian.
Subsequently, he was summoned before the United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary, and when questioned about his affiliation with the Communist Party, he refused to answer, stating: "Some of the most brilliant and distinguished Americans are about to go to jail for the failure to answer that question, and I am going to join them, if necessary."
He then became active in the Council on African Affairs (CAA).
Nevertheless, the speech publicly attributed to him was a catalyst for his becoming an enemy of mainstream America.
Robeson refused to subjugate himself to public criticism when he advocated in favor of twelve defendants, including his long-time friend, Benjamin J. Davis, Jr. charged during the Smith Act trials of Communist Party leaders.
Back in London, he planned his return to the United States to participate in the Civil Rights Movement, stopping off in Africa, China and Cuba along the way.
The main campus library at Rutgers University Camden is named after Robeson, as is the campus center at Rutgers University Newark.
Nevertheless, two organizations with which Robeson was intimately involved, the Civil Rights Congress (CRC) and the CAA, were placed on the Attorney General's List of Subversive Organizations (AGLOSO).
Robeson traveled to Moscow in June, and was unable to find Itzik Feffer.
His "sudden interest" in African history and its impact on culture coincided with his essay "I Want to be African", wherein he wrote of his desire to embrace his ancestry.
Taking a stance against lynching, Robeson founded the American Crusade Against Lynching organization in 1946.
He was admitted to The Priory hospital, where he underwent electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and was given heavy doses of drugs for nearly two years, with no accompanying psychotherapy.
He deflected criticism of its plot by writing that fate had drawn him to the "untrodden path" of drama and the true measure of a culture is in its artistic contributions, and the only true American culture was African-American.
Essie completely recovered after a few months.
In early 1934 Robeson enrolled in the School of Oriental and African Studies in London, where he studied some 20 African dialects.
After the lynchings of four African Americans, Robeson met with President Truman and admonished Truman that if he did not enact legislation to end lynching, "the Negroes will defend themselves".
After an invitation from J.
In a symbolic act of defiance against the travel ban, labor unions in the United States and Canada organized a concert at the International Peace Arch on the border between Washington state and the Canadian province of British Columbia.
We reject any hysterical raving that urges us to make war on anyone.
His theatrical performances have been recognized as the first to display dignity for black actors and pride in African heritage, and he was among the first artists to refuse to play live to segregated audiences.
Robeson is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.
Robeson and Essie then flew to Yalta to rest and spend time with Nikita Khrushchev.
We wish peace with Franco's Spain despite her fascism.
In 1960, in what would prove to be his final concert performance in Great Britain, Robeson sang to raise money for the Movement for Colonial Freedom at the Royal Festival Hall.
His efforts to end Apartheid in South Africa were posthumously rewarded by the United Nations General Assembly.
He also joined the other collegiate athletic teams.
Back in England, he hosted Jawaharlal Nehru to support Indian independence, whereat Nehru expounded on imperialism's affiliation with Fascism.
Versions of "Joe Hill" are the third most popular selection on the BBC radio programme ''Desert Island Discs'' for British Labour Party politicians, and the fourth most popular selection for all British politicians.
In August 1963, disturbed about his treatment, friends had him transferred to the Buch Clinic in East Berlin.
He became increasingly attuned towards the sufferings of other cultures and peoples.
About this time, Robeson's belief that trade unionism was crucial to civil rights became a mainstay of his political beliefs as he became proponent of the union activist Revels Cayton.
We shall not make war on the Soviet Union.
Essie financially supported them and they frequented the social functions at the future Schomburg Center.
During a hiatus in New York, Robeson learned that Essie was several months pregnant.
Because of Rustin's past anti-Communist stances, Robeson declined to meet with him.
While in Sydney, he became the first major artist to perform at the construction site of the future Sydney Opera House.
Campaigns were launched to protest the passport ban and the restriction of his right to travel over the next four years, but it was to no avail.
Robeson's opinion on the Soviet Union kept his passport out of reach and stopped his return to the entertainment industry and the civil rights movement.
Acting against advice, which warned of his economic ruin if he became politically active, he set aside his theatrical career to advocate the cause of the Republican forces of the Spanish Civil War.
Essie experienced complications from the birth, and by mid-December, her health had deteriorated dramatically.
Days later, the announcement of a concert headlined by Robeson in New York provoked the local press to decry the use of their community to support ''subversives'' and the Peekskill Riots ensued.
Robeson returned to Broadway as Joe in the 1932 revival of ''Show Boat'', to critical and popular acclaim.
He's with me and lets me fight my own battles and hopes I'll win."
In 1937, he used his concert performances to advocate the Republican cause and the war's refugees.
Robeson worked briefly as a lawyer, but he renounced a career in law due to extant racism.
During his treatment at the Priory, Robeson was being monitored by the British MI5.
Robeson received support from W. E. B.
Ashcroft and Robeson's relationship ended in 1932, following which Robeson and Essie reconciled, although their relationship was permanently scarred.
Robeson archives exist at the Academy of Arts; Howard University, and the Schomburg Center.
During the height of the Cold War, it became increasingly difficult in the United States to hear Robeson sing on commercial radio, buy his music or see his films.
His athletic dominance elicited racial taunts which he ignored.
In the ensuing year, Robeson was forced to go overseas to work because his concert performances were canceled at the FBI's behest.
On the film set he rejected any slight to his dignity, despite the widespread Jim Crow atmosphere in the United States.
and subsequently he appeared in the pro-labor play ''Plant in the Sun'' by Herbert Marshall.
Robeson reevaluated the direction of his career and decided to focus his attention on utilizing his talents to bring attention to the ordeals of "common people".
He reflected on his life in his diary and wrote that it was all part of a "higher plan" and "God watches over me and guides me.
Robeson eventually met with Farmer, but because he was asked to denounce Communism and the Soviet Union in order to assume a place in the mainstream, Robeson adamantly declined.
The role terrified and galvanized Robeson, as it was practically a 90-minute soliloquy.
His rendition of "Ol' Man River" became the benchmark for all future performers of the song.
Given psychotherapy and less medication, his physicians found him still "completely without initiative" and they expressed "doubt and anger" about the "high level of barbiturates and ECT" that had been administered in London.
His Othello was characterised by Michael A. Morrison in 2011 as a high point in Shakespearean theatre in the 20th century.
On January 23, 1976, following complications of a stroke, Robeson died in Philadelphia at the age of 77.
In 2007, the Criterion Collection, a company that specializes in releasing special edition versions of classic and contemporary films, released a DVD boxed set of Robeson films.
The loss of his position forced him to work menial jobs.
He was interred in the Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York.
His right to travel was eventually restored by the 1958 United States Supreme Court decision, ''Kent v. Dulles'', but his health broke down.
from Columbia Law School, while playing in the National Football League (NFL).
There his depression reemerged, and after another period of recuperation in Moscow, he returned to London.
At a Carnegie Hall tribute to mark his 75th birthday in 1973, he was unable to attend, but a taped message from him was played that said: "Though I have not been able to be active for several years, I want you to know that I am the same Paul, dedicated as ever to the worldwide cause of humanity for freedom, peace and brotherhood."
He ended his football career after 1922, and months later, he graduated from law school.
Our will to fight for peace is strong.
Robeson began dating Eslanda "Essie" Goode and after her coaxing, he gave his theatrical debut as ''Simon'' in Ridgely Torrence's ''Simon of Cyrene''.
The Robesons went to London for a revival of ''Jones'', before spending the rest of the fall on holiday on the French Riviera, socializing with Gertrude Stein and Claude McKay.
His passport was restored in June 1958 via Kent v. Dulles, and he embarked on a world tour using London as his base.
He rapidly improved, though his doctor stressed that "what little is left of Paul's health must be quietly conserved."
To protect the Soviet Union's reputation, and to keep the right wing of the United States from gaining the moral high ground, Robeson denied that any persecution existed in the Soviet Union, and kept the meeting secret for the rest of his life, except from his son.
Paul Robeson was born in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1898, to Reverend William Drew Robeson and Maria Louisa Bustill.
In 1968, he settled at his sister's home in Philadelphia.
The Commissioner of Nigeria to London protested the film as slanderous to his country, and Robeson thereafter became more politically conscious of his roles.
After McCarthyism,  on anti-colonialism in the 1940s would never again have a voice in American politics, but the  of the late 1950s and 1960s would vindicate  anti-colonial
Robeson joined the debate team and sang off-campus for spending money, and on-campus with the Glee Club informally, as membership required attending all-white mixers.
William, who had the support of his entirely black congregation, resigned in 1901.
He was introduced to Faith Bandler who enlightened the Robesons to the deprivation of the Australian Aborigines.
He let Soviet authorities know that he wanted to see him.
In 1995, he was named to the College Football Hall of Fame.
In early 1936, he decided to send his son to school in the Soviet Union to shield him from racist attitudes.
Months later, NBC canceled Robeson's appearance on Eleanor Roosevelt's television program.
On October 11, 1959, Robeson took part in a service at St. Paul's Cathedral, the first black performer to sing there.
In 1956, after public pressure brought a one-time exemption to the travel ban, Robeson performed concerts in Canada in March.
He then sang in a chorus in an Off-Broadway production of ''Shuffle Along'' before he joined ''Taboo'' in Britain.
He performed his repertoire of spirituals on the radio.
He moved to Harlem and published a periodical critical of United States policies.
Robeson was contacted by both Bayard Rustin and James L. Farmer, Jr. about the possibility of becoming involved with the mainstream of the Civil Rights movement.
Reviews declared him an unequivocal success.
In 1956 in the United Kingdom, Topic Records, at that time part of the Workers Music Association, released a single of "Joe Hill" backed with "John Brown's Body".
Thereabout, his former football coach, Foster Sanford, advised him that divorcing Essie and marrying Ashcroft would do irreparable damage to his reputation.
He was later inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame.
His achievements in sport and culture were all the more incredible given the barriers of racism he had to surmount.
On a trip to Moscow, Robeson experienced bouts of dizziness and heart problems and was hospitalized for two months while Essie was diagnosed with operable cancer.
''Sanders of the River'', released in 1935, made Robeson an international movie star; but the stereotypical portrayal of a colonial African was seen as embarrassing to his stature as an artist and damaging to his reputation.
''Paul Robeson: Tribute to an Artist'' won an Academy Award for best short documentary in 1980.
He was rarely seen strolling near his Harlem apartment on Jumal Place (sic.
B. S. Haldane, he traveled to Spain in 1938 because he believed in the International Brigades's cause.
After the play ended, he befriended Lawrence Brown, a classically trained musician, before returning to Columbia while playing for the NFL's Milwaukee Badgers.
This organization was thought to be a threat to the NAACP antiviolence movement.
Early in his life, Robeson was one of the most influential participants in the Harlem Renaissance.
Due to his decision not to recant his public advocacy of pro-Soviet policies, he was denied a passport by the U.S. State Department, and his income, consequently, plummeted.
He toured North America with ''Othello'' until 1945, and subsequently, his political efforts with the CAA to get colonial powers to discontinue their exploitation of Africa were short-circuited by the United Nations.
Three days after arriving back, he became suicidal and suffered a panic attack while passing the Soviet Embassy.
Robeson next appeared as Othello at the Savoy Theatre before becoming an international cinema star through roles in ''Show Boat'' and ''Sanders of the River''.
In 1978, TASS announced that the Latvian Shipping Company had named one of its new 40,000-ton tankers ''Paul Robeson'' in honor of the singer.
In late 1915, Robeson became the third African-American student ever enrolled at Rutgers, and the only one at the time.
Numerous celebrations were held in honor of Robeson over the next several years, including at public arenas that had previously shunned him, but he saw few visitors aside from close friends and gave few statements apart from messages to support current civil rights and international movements, feeling that his record "spoke for itself".
And we are resolved to share it equally.
Subsequently, he received, with immense pride, an honorary master's degree from Rutgers.
However, an incident at the Savoy Grill, in which he was refused seating, sparked him to issue a press release portraying the insult which subsequently became a matter of public debate.
The song is about the life of Paul Robeson.
In Moscow in August 1959, he received a tumultuous reception at the Lenin Stadium (Khabarovsk) where he sang classic Russian songs along with American standards.
Robeson entered New York University School of Law in fall 1919.
1958 saw the publication of Robeson's "manifesto-autobiography", ''Here I Stand''.
He then played the role of Toussaint Louverture in the eponymous play by C. L. R. James at the Westminster Theatre, and appeared in the films ''Song of Freedom'', ''Show Boat'', ''Big Fella'', ''My Song Goes Forth'', and ''King Solomon's Mines''.
After a year of courtship, they were married in August 1921.
In 1956, Robeson was called before HUAC after he refused to sign an affidavit affirming that he was not a Communist.
He became politically involved in response to the Spanish Civil War, fascism, and social injustices.
Robeson, Essie, and Marie Seton traveled to the Soviet Union on an invitation from Sergei Eisenstein in December 1934.
Due to the reaction to the promulgation of Robeson's political views, his recordings and films were removed from public distribution, and he was universally condemned in the U.S press.
In 1957, unable to accept invitations to perform abroad, Paul Robeson sang for audiences in London, where 1,000 concert tickets for his telephone concert at St Pancras Town Hall sold out within an hour, and Wales via the transatlantic telephone cable TAT-1: "We have to learn the hard way that there is another way to sing".
The pair's rendition of African-American folk songs and spirituals was captivating, and Victor Records signed Robeson to a contract.
Waldemar ("Wally") Hille, who subsequently went on to do arrangements on the People's Songs Bulletin with Pete Seeger and others, got his start as an early touring pianist for Robeson.
Robeson had three brothers: William Drew, Jr. (born 1881), Reeve (born c. 1887), and Ben (born c. 1893); and one sister, Marian (born c. 1895).
In November 2014 it was reported that film director Steve McQueen's next film would be a biopic about Paul Robeson.
Du Bois regarding this matter and officially launched this organization on the anniversary day of the Emancipation Proclamation, September 23.
She quit her job, became his agent, and negotiated his first movie role in a silent race film directed by Oscar Micheaux, ''Body and Soul''.
In 1933 Robeson played the role of Jim in the London production of ''Chillun'', virtually gratis; then returned to the United States to star as Brutus in the film ''The Emperor Jones'', "a feat not repeated for more than two decades in the U.S." His acting in "Jones"—the first film to feature an African American in a starring role—was well received.
Lawrence Brown, who had become renowned while touring as a pianist with gospel singer Roland Hayes, stumbled upon Robeson in Harlem.
Essie argued to stay in London, fearing that he'd be "killed" if he returned and would be "unable to make any money" due to harassment by the United States government.
In 2001, the Welsh rock band Manic Street Preachers released the single ''Let Robeson Sing'' from their album ''Know Your Enemy''.
Edgecombe Avenue itself was later co-named Paul Robeson Boulevard.
His play at end won him first-team All-American selection, in both his junior and senior years.
Unable to travel to Moscow, he accepted the award in New York.
As a sophomore, amidst Rutgers' sesquicentennial celebration, he was benched when a Southern team refused to take the field, because the Scarlet Knights had fielded a Negro, Robeson.
