* Article 25 allowed the President to dissolve the Reichstag.
Schleicher and Papen both believed that the Nazis would win the majority of the seats and would support Papen's government.
The Field Marshal had a high opinion of himself, and he doubtless sincerely believed that he personified a Prussian ‘tradition” of selfless service.
During the summer of 1934, Hindenburg grew increasingly alarmed at Nazi excesses.
Almost from the moment that the emperor abdicated, Hindenburg insisted that he had played no role in it.
Schleicher's idea was to have Hindenburg appoint as chancellor a man of Schleicher's choosing, who would rule under the provisions of Article 48.
He was surrounded by a coterie of advisers antipathetic to the Weimar constitution.
Hindenburg took office on 12 May 1925.
Under a "Presidential" government, the head of government (in this case, the chancellor) is responsible to the head of state, and not a legislative body.
Ultimately, Papen came to believe that he could control Hitler from behind the scenes and decided to support him as the new chancellor.
The "25/48/53 formula" referred to the three articles of the Constitution that could make a "Presidential government" possible:
The only Nazi ministers were Hitler himself, Hermann Göring and Wilhelm Frick.
Hindenburg simply walked out of the hearings after reading his statement, despite being threatened with a contempt citation for refusing to respond to questions.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff felt that more effort should be made on the Eastern Front to relieve the forces of Germany's ally, the Ottoman Empire, in order to defeat Russia.
Now let's have a look at which way, with God's help, the cat will keep on jumping."
During these appearances, Hitler always made a point of showing him the utmost respect and deference.
Hitler, for his part, remained adamant that Hindenburg give him the chancellorship and nothing else.
Hindenburg remained in office until his death at the age of 86 from lung cancer at his home in ''Neudeck'', East Prussia, on 2 August 1934.
He then had the cabinet pass the "Law Concerning the Highest State Office of the Reich," which stipulated that upon Hindenburg's death, the offices of president and chancellor would be merged under the title of Leader and chancellor (''Führer und Reichskanzler'').
Hindenburg was selected for prestigious duties as a young officer.
Two hours after Hindenburg's death, it was announced that as a result of this law, Hitler was now both Germany's head of state and head of government, thereby completing the progress of ''Gleichschaltung'' ("Co-ordination").
He had known as early as the spring of 1934 that Hindenburg would likely not survive the year and had been working feverishly to get the armed forces—the only group in Germany that was nearly powerful enough to remove him with Hindenburg gone—to support his bid to become Hindenburg's successor.
The Hindenburg Range in New Guinea, which includes perhaps one of the world's largest cliff, the Hindenburg Wall, also bears his name.
Hindenburg was also an advocate of the so-called Polish Border Strip plan, which postulated mass expulsion of Poles and Jews from territories that would be annexed by the German Empire, a foreshadow of the ethnic cleansing carried out decades later.
By this time, Schleicher had decided that Brüning had become an obstacle to his plans and was already plotting Brüning's downfall.
During the war, Hindenburg was the subject of an enormous personality cult.
However, the truth of this story cannot be established because Oskar von Hindenburg destroyed the portions of his father's will relating to politics.
Until January 1933, Hindenburg often stated that he would never appoint Hitler as chancellor under any circumstances.
Ludendorff was succeeded by Wilhelm Groener.
Hindenburg initially demurred but, under strong pressure from Tirpitz applied over several meetings, he broke down and agreed to run.
At the same time, Schleicher, with Hindenburg's complicit consent, set about undermining Brüning's government.
Ludendorff wrote a letter to Hindenburg to inform him that he was writing his memoirs and was prepared to expose the fact that Hindenburg did not deserve the credit that he had received for his victories.
Hitler threatened Hindenburg to make him chancellor or to make him leader of the ''Reichstag''.
When the Reichstag voted to repeal the budget, Brüning had Hindenburg dissolve the Reichstag, just two years into its mandate, and reapprove the budget through the Article 48 mechanism.
The appeal of the Hindenburg cult cut across ideological, religious, class, and regional lines, but the group that idolized Hindenburg the most was the German right, who saw him as an ideal representative of the Prussian ethos and of Lutheran, Junker values.
Brüning's first official act was to introduce a budget calling for steep spending cuts and steep tax increases.
* Article 48 allowed the president to sign emergency bills into law without the consent of the Reichstag.
Social Democratic candidate Otto Braun, the Prime Minister of Prussia, had agreed to drop out of the race and had endorsed the Catholic Centre Party's candidate Wilhelm Marx.
And then, having publicly declared that he would never consent to appoint Hitler to any post…levered the Nazi leader into the German Chancellery in January 1933.
Moreover, Hindenburg's favorite politician, Papen, was Vice Chancellor of the Reich and Minister-President of Prussia, and Hindenburg agreed not to hold any meetings with Hitler unless Papen was present as well.
Hindenburg's campaign appearances usually consisted simply of him appearing before crowds and waving to them without speaking.
The U.S. Army, in a secret project dubbed "Operation Bodysnatch", had many difficulties in determining the final resting places for the four famous Germans.
Indeed, he had agreed to suppress the SA in return for the Army's support.
For his part, Hitler often disparagingly referred to Hindenburg in private as "that old fool" or "that old reactionary".
He recognized the strategic value of controlling its territories in the event of another war with Russia, and he also wished to see it colonized by ethnic Germans.
Ludendorff made use of the reviews to convince Hindenburg.
It was he who came up with the idea of ''Presidential government'' based on the so-called "25/48/53 formula".
Specifically, he declared that Germany entered the war as "the means of self-assertion against a world full of enemies.
Brüning met with Hitler in January 1932 to ask if he would agree to President Hindenburg's demand to forgo the presidential election.
He carped that politics was full of issues such as economics that he did not understand, and did not want to.
After refusing Hitler's demands for the chancellorship, Hindenburg had a press release issued about his meeting with Hitler that implied that Hitler had demanded absolute power and had his knuckles rapped by the president for making such a demand.
Hindenburg found the detailed notes that Brüning submitted explaining the economic necessity of each of his bills to be incomprehensible.
Moreover, Hitler repudiated the "gentleman's agreement" and declared that he wanted the Chancellorship for himself.
Much to Schleicher's annoyance, Papen quickly replaced him as Hindenburg's favorite advisor.
Most of the other ministers were survivors from the Papen and Schleicher governments, and the ones who were not, such as Alfred Hugenberg of the German National People's Party (DNVP), were not Nazis.
After the 1930 elections, Brüning continued to govern largely through Article 48; his government was kept afloat by the support of the Social Democrats who voted not to cancel his Article 48 bills in order not to have another election that could only benefit the Nazis and the Communists.
Hindenburg's apparent stamp of approval had the effect of reassuring many Germans, especially conservative Germans, that life would be fine under the new regime.
''Ober-Ost'' eventually consisted of the German Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Armies, plus other assorted corps.
Hitler ordered his architect, Albert Speer, to take care of the background for the funeral ceremony at the Tannenberg Memorial in East Prussia.
He was seen as the perfect embodiment of German manly honour, rectitude, decency, and strength.
Hindenburg's status as a war hero provided him with a political shield; he was never prosecuted.
Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, one of the leaders of the DNVP, visited Hindenburg and urged him to run.
Three weeks later, on 27 April 1945, the coffins were discovered by U.S. Army Ordnance troops after tunneling through the wall.
After a series of secret meetings attended by Meißner, Schleicher, and Heinrich Brüning, the parliamentary leader of the Catholic Center Party (''Zentrum''), Schleicher and Meißner were able to persuade Brüning to go along with a scheme for "presidential government".
By contrast, Erich von Falkenhayn, the Chief of the General Staff, felt that it was impossible for Germany to win a decisive victory in this way.
Ludendorff had expected Hindenburg to follow him by also resigning, but Hindenburg refused on the grounds that, in this hour of crisis, he could not desert the men under his command.
Hitler was enraged by this press release.
Following the Nazi electoral triumph in the Reichstag elections held on 31 July 1932, there were widespread expectations that Hitler would soon be appointed Chancellor.
These demands were incompatible and unacceptable to both sides and the political stalemate continued.
In March 1918, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed between Germany and the new Bolshevik government of Russia.
Schleicher convinced Hindenburg that the reason why Hitler had rejected Brüning's offer was because Brüning had deliberately sabotaged the talks to force the elderly president into a grueling re-election battle.
If the Reichstag should threaten to annul any laws so passed, Hindenburg could counter with the threat of dissolution.
He was often referred to as the ''Ersatzkaiser'' (substitute Emperor), yet he made no effort to restore the monarchy and took seriously his oath to the Weimar Constitution.
To break the stalemate, Papen proposed that Hindenburg declare martial law and do away with democracy, effecting a presidential coup.
Hindenburg was unenthusiastic about these plans, but was pressured into going along with them by his son, along with Meißner and Schleicher.
Since the Nazi Party was the second-largest political party, their co-operation was vital if this was to be done.
Hindenburg played the key role in the Nazi ''Machtergreifung'' (Seizure of Power) in 1933 by appointing Hitler chancellor of a "Government of National Concentration", even though the Nazis were in the minority in cabinet.
On 26 January 1933, Hindenburg privately told a group of his friends: "Gentlemen, I hope you will not hold me capable of appointing this Austrian corporal to be Reich Chancellor".
However, given Hitler's determination to take power lawfully, Hindenburg's refusal to appoint him as chancellor was a quandary for Hitler.
Indeed, he hoped that Russia might be encouraged to drop out of the war if not pressed too hard.
The results of the war games forced Papen to resign in December 1932 in favor of Schleicher.
Moreover, the Weimar Constitution had been amended in 1932 to make the president of the High Court of Justice, not the chancellor, acting president pending a new election.
Whether this was the honest result of a war games exercise or just a fabrication by Schleicher to force Papen out of office is a matter of some historical debate.
However, in private, Hitler continued to detest Hindenburg, and expressed his hope that "the old reactionary" would hurry up and die as soon as possible.
In November 1918, Hindenburg and Groener played a decisive role in persuading Emperor Wilhelm II to abdicate for the greater good of Germany.
When Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels got wind of it, he not only barred its broadcast, but ordered the seizure of newspapers in which part of the text was printed.
Hindenburg for his part grew increasingly annoyed at Brüning, complaining that he was growing tired of using Article 48 all the time to pass bills.
Papen then persuaded Meissner and the younger Hindenburg of the merits of his plan, and the three then spent the second half of January pressuring Hindenburg into naming Hitler as chancellor.
The second ''Reichstag'' elections saw the Nazi vote drop from 37 percent to 33 percent, though the Nazis once again remained the largest party in the ''Reichstag''.
The SPD regarded Hindenburg as the only man who could defeat Hitler and keep the Nazi Party from winning the elections (and they said so throughout the campaign); they also expected him to keep Brüning in office.
In line with Lebensraum ideology, he advocated  sweeping annexations of territory in Poland, Ukraine, and Russia in order to resettle Germans there.
However, Hitler had become law unto himself by this time, and no one dared object.
Afterwards, Hindenburg often disparagingly referred to Hitler in private as "that Austrian corporal", or "that Bohemian corporal" or sometimes just simply as "the corporal".
How much Brüning knew of Schleicher's ultimate objective of dispensing with democratic governance is unclear.
Hindenburg's own military ability is disputed, but he had a team of talented and able subordinates who won him a series of great victories on the Eastern Front between 1914 and 1916.
Though he hoped one of the Prussian princes would be appointed to succeed him as head of state, he did not attempt to use his powers in favour of such a restoration, as he considered himself bound by the oath he had sworn on the Weimar Constitution.
The previously Upper Silesian town of Zabrze () was also renamed after him in 1915, as well as the SMS ''Hindenburg'', a battlecruiser commissioned in the Imperial German Navy in 1917 and the last capital ship to enter service in the Imperial Navy.
He won the election in the second round of voting held on 26 April 1925, largely because of his status as Germany's greatest war hero.
The concept was enhanced after the war by the Nazis and finally put into effect during World War II.
Hindenburg eventually commanded a corps and was promoted to the rank of General of the Infantry in 1903.
He first came to national attention at the age of 66 as the victor of the decisive Battle of Tannenberg in August 1914.
Afterwards, Hindenburg had his memoirs ghost-written in 1919–20.
Hitler had a plebiscite held on 19 August 1934, in which the German people were asked if they approved of Hitler merging the two offices.
He was aided by the support of the Bavarian People's Party (BVP), which switched from supporting Marx, and by the refusal of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) to withdraw their candidate Ernst Thälmann.
Hindenburg's younger brothers and sister were Otto (born 24 August 1849), Ida (born 19 December 1851) and Bernhard (born 17 January 1859).
Schleicher, who had come to see Papen as a threat, blocked the martial law move by unveiling the results of a war games exercise that showed if martial law was declared, the Nazi ''Sturmabteilung'' and the Communist Red Front Fighters would rise up, the Poles would invade, and the ''Reichswehr'' would be unable to cope.
He was regarded as too dull, and it seemed likely that Marx would win.
As Germany's Chief of the General Staff from August 1916, Hindenburg's reputation rose greatly in German public esteem.
(If either party had supported Marx, Marx would have won.)
Hindenburg was embarrassed by his mother's non-aristocratic background and hardly mentioned her at all in his memoirs.
During the winter of 1929–30, however, Schleicher had more success.
In early February 1933, Papen asked for and received an Article 48 bill signed into law that sharply limited freedom of the press.
All were subsequently moved to the basement of the heavily guarded Marburg Castle in Marburg an der Lahn, Germany, a collection point for recovered Nazi plunder.
Hitler had made plans almost as soon as he took complete power to seize the powers of the president for himself as soon as Hindenburg died.
He was not the man of dogged, faithful service, but the man of image, manipulation and betrayal.″
The opinion of most leans towards the latter, for in January 1933 Schleicher would tell Hindenburg that new war games had shown the ''Reichswehr'' would crush both the Sturmabteilung and the Red Front Fighters and defend the eastern borders of Germany from a Polish invasion.
During the election campaign of 1932, Brüning campaigned hard for Hindenburg's re-election.
While the Enabling Act allowed Hitler to pass laws that contravened the Weimar Constitution, it specifically forbade him from interfering with the powers of the president.
It awarded Germany with large areas of land in Poland, Ukraine, and Russia.
However, the pressure from Meissner, Papen, and the younger Hindenburg was relentless, and by the end of January, the president decided to appoint Hitler chancellor.
Pure in heart we set off to the defence of the fatherland and with clean hands the German army carried the sword."
They were first moved to a bunker just outside Berlin, then to a salt mine at the village of Bernterode, Germany, along with the remains of both Frederick Wilhelm I of Prussia and Frederick II of Prussia (Frederick the Great).
When the budget was defeated in July 1930, Brüning arranged for Hindenburg to sign the budget into law by invoking Article 48.
Both of these spending increases reflected Hindenburg's concerns.
With his support, Papen gave a speech at the University of Marburg on 17 June calling for an end to state terror and the restoration of some freedoms.
Ludendorff had fallen out with Hindenburg over the decision to continue seeking the armistice in October 1918, and he was concerned that Hindenburg might reveal that it was he who had advised seeking an armistice the previous month.
Hindenburg was born in Posen, Prussia (Polish: Poznań; until 1793 and since 1919 part of Poland), the son of Prussian aristocrat Robert von Beneckendorff und von Hindenburg (1816–1902) and his wife Luise Schwickart (1825–1893), the daughter of medical doctor Karl Ludwig Schwickart and his wife Julie Moennich.
In private, Hindenburg often complained to his associates that he missed the quiet of his retirement and bemoaned that he had allowed himself to be pressured into running for president.
Karl Jarres was the joint candidate of the two conservative parties: the German People's Party (DVP) and the German National People's Party (DNVP).
Hindenburg was re-elected in a runoff.
At the start of November 1914, Hindenburg was given the position of Supreme Commander East (''Ober-Ost''), although at this stage his authority only extended over the German portion of the front, not the Austro-Hungarian, and units were transferred from East Prussia to form a new Ninth Army in southwestern Poland.
Nonetheless, he was persuaded to run for re-election in the 1932 presidential election by the ''Kamarilla'' as well as by the Centre Party, the DVP and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).
By the summer of 1916, Erich von Falkenhayn had been discredited by the disappointing progress of the Verdun Offensive and the near collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Army caused by the Brusilov Offensive and the entry of Romania into the war on the Allied side.
Like Brüning's government, Papen's government was a "presidential government" that governed through the use of Article 48.
Not long afterward, Hitler carried out the Night of the Long Knives, for which he received the personal thanks of Hindenburg.
Hindenburg died the following year, after which Hitler declared the office of President vacant and made himself head of state.
He was opposed to Hitler and was a major player in the increasing political instability in the Weimar Republic that ended with Hitler's rise to power.
At the Nuremberg trials, it was alleged by Franz von Papen in 1945 and Baron Gunther von Tschirschky that Hindenburg's "political testament" asked for Hitler to restore the monarchy.
Decorations  were limited to banners of black crepe hung from the high towers that framed the inner courtyard...On the eve of the funeral the coffin was brought on a gun carriage  from Neudeck, Hindenburg's East Prussian estate, to one of the towers  of the monument.
Hindenburg ran during the second round of the elections as a non-party independent, though he was generally regarded as the conservative candidate.
In August, Hindenburg succeeded him as Chief of the General Staff, although real power was exercised by his deputy Erich Ludendorff.
Given that Hindenburg was still a popular war hero and a revered figure in the ("Reichswehr"), there was little doubt that the ''Reichswehr'' would side with Hindenburg if he ever decided to sack Hitler.
Groener, for his part, went along in order to protect Hindenburg's reputation.
These advisers included his son Oskar, Otto Meißner, and General Kurt von Schleicher.
After the November elections, there ensued another round of fruitless talks between Hindenburg, Papen, Schleicher on the one hand, and Hitler and the other Nazi leaders on the other.
He dissolved the Reichstag (parliament) twice in 1932 and finally, under pressure, agreed to appoint Hitler Chancellor of Germany in January 1933.
The first blow occurred in May 1932, when Schleicher had Hindenburg dismiss Groener as Defense Minister in a way that was designed to humiliate both Groener and Brüning.
A colossal statue of Hindenburg, erected at Hohenstein (now Olsztynek, Poland) in honor of his defeat of the Russians was demolished by the Germans in 1944 to prevent its desecration by the advancing Soviet Army.
Hindenburg reluctantly agreed to stay in office, but wanted to avoid an election.
On 24 November 1932, during the course of another Hitler-Hindenburg meeting, Hindenburg stated his fears that "a presidential cabinet led by Hitler would necessarily develop into a party dictatorship with all its consequences for an extreme aggravation of the conflicts within the German people".
The president and chancellor wanted Nazi support for the "Government of the President's Friends"; at most, they were prepared to offer Hitler the meaningless office of vice-chancellor.
Finally, the 85-year-old Hindenburg agreed to make Hitler chancellor, and on the morning of 30 January 1933, Hindenburg swore him in as chancellor at the presidential palace.
In 1932, Hindenburg was persuaded to run for re-election as German President, although 84 years old and in poor health, as he was considered the only candidate who could defeat Adolf Hitler.
As Speer later recalled: "I had a high wooden stand built in the inner courtyard.
Surprisingly, Hitler supported the measure, but with one major condition: dissolve the Reichstag and hold new parliamentary elections.
Torchbearers and the traditional flags of German regiments of the First World War accompanied it; not a single word was  spoken, not a command given.
Hindenburg was most upset at losing his favorite chancellor.
After the presidential elections had ended, Schleicher held a series of secret meetings with Hitler in May 1932 and thought that he had obtained a "gentleman's agreement" in which Hitler had agreed to support the new "presidential government" that Schleicher was building.
On 31 May 1932, Hindenburg dismissed Brüning as chancellor and replaced him with the man that Schleicher had suggested, Franz von Papen.
The Communist Party of Germany also made striking gains, albeit not so great.
Instead of pursuing an eastern strategy, Falkenhayn unleashed an offensive at Verdun in 1916 in order to "bleed France white" and encourage her to make peace.
Hindenburg agreed to this request.
The four coffins were hastily marked of their contents using red crayon, and interred behind a  masonry wall in a deep recess of the  mine complex,  underground.
Ludendorff never forgave Hindenburg for this.
In accordance with Schleicher's "gentleman's agreement", Hindenburg dissolved the Reichstag and set new elections for July 1932.
He felt that building up forces in the east could not lead to  victory in an overall conflict involving two fronts.
He was promoted to captain in 1878, major in 1881, lieutenant-colonel in 1891, colonel in 1893, major-general in 1897 and lieutenant general in 1900.
Hindenburg in many ways served as the real commander-in-chief of the German armed forces instead of the emperor, who had been reduced to a mere figurehead, while Ludendorff served as the ''de facto'' general chief of staff.
In the first round of the German presidential election of 1932, held in March, Hindenburg emerged as the frontrunner, but failed to gain a majority.
Hindenburg's remains were moved six times in the 12 years following his initial interment.
Suspecting that the war games were faked to force Papen out, he came to bear a grudge against Schleicher.
However, Papen and Hitler agreed to keep talking.
After Schleicher as well despaired of his efforts to get hold of the situation, Hindenburg accepted his resignation with the words, "Thanks, General, for everything you have done for the Fatherland.
Thus, as long as Hindenburg was alive, Hitler was always very careful to avoid offending him or the Army.
Afterwards, Hindenburg retired from most public appearances and spent most of his time with his family.
He and his deputy Erich Ludendorff then led Germany in a ''de facto'' military dictatorship throughout the remainder of the war, marginalizing German Emperor Wilhelm II as well as the German Reichstag.
The first attempt to establish a "presidential government" occurred in 1926–27, but floundered for lack of political support.
Instead, he assigned all of the blame to Groener.
* Article 53 allowed the president to appoint the chancellor.
The younger Hindenburg served as his father's aide-de-camp and controlled politicians' access to the President.
He also served as an Honour Guard prior to the Military funeral of Emperor William I in 1888.
In response, Papen had Hindenburg dissolve the ''Reichstag'' for elections in November 1932.
There were clear signs of tension throughout the meeting as it became evident to everyone present that both men took an immediate dislike to each other.
The minutes of the meeting were kept by Otto Meißner, the Chief of the Presidential Chancellery.
After the Reichstag fire on 27 February, Hindenburg, at Hitler's urging, signed into law the ''Reichstag Fire Decree'', which effectively suspended all civil liberties in Germany.
Unlike Brüning, Papen ingratiated himself with Hindenburg and his son through flattery.
For his part, Hindenburg was anxious to conquer the Baltic region from the Russian Empire.
Brüning continued with his policies of raising taxes and cutting spending to address the onset of the Great Depression; the only areas in which government spending increased were the military budget and the subsidies for Junkers in the so-called ''Osthilfe'' (Eastern Aid) program.
The only time that Hindenburg ever objected to a Nazi bill occurred in early April 1933, when the Reichstag passed a ''Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service'' that called for the immediate dismissal of all Jewish civil servants at the ''Reich'', ''Land'', and municipal levels.
He fought in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871.
It was a measure of Hindenburg's public appeal that, when the Government launched an all-out programme of industrial mobilisation in 1916, it was named the Hindenburg Programme.
In January 1945, as Soviet forces advanced into East Prussia, Hitler ordered both coffins to be disinterred for their safety.
During the war, there were wooden statues of Hindenburg built all over Germany, onto which people nailed money and cheques for war bonds.
When the ''Reichstag'' convened in September 1932, its only act was to pass a massive vote of no-confidence in Papen's government.
This action effectively removed all institutional checks and balances on Hitler's power.
Hitler's first act as chancellor was to ask Hindenburg to dissolve the Reichstag, so that the Nazis and DNVP could win an outright majority.
Papen, for his part, was determined to get back into office, and on 4 January 1933 he met Hitler to discuss how they could bring down Schleicher's government, though the talks were inconclusive largely because Papen and Hitler each coveted the chancellorship for himself.
Hitler staged an electoral comeback, with his Nazi Party winning a solid plurality of seats in the Reichstag.
In October 1931, Hindenburg and Adolf Hitler met for the very first time in a high-level conference in Berlin over Nazi Party politics among Hindenburg's cabinet members.
His paternal lineage was considered highly distinguished; in fact, he was descended from one of the most respected ancient noble families in Prussia.
