In 1945, his family moved to the Kew Gardens Hills section of Flushing, Queens, in New York City.
In one ''SNL'' skit from 1986 (when he was promoting ''Graceland''), Simon plays himself, waiting in line with a friend to get into a movie.
On June 29, 2016, Simon announced that he may be retiring from performing music.
Simon's album ''So Beautiful or So What'' was released on the Concord Music Group label on April 12, 2011.
Most of the album was inspired by the September 11 terrorist attacks, the Iraq invasion, and the war that followed.
'', "Slip Slidin' Away," reaching No.
The track featured many memorable elements—a catchy synthesizer riff (played by Adrian Belew of King Crimson, an easy whistle solo, and an unusual bass run, in which the second half was a reversed recording of the first half.
Sessions for the album began in December 1989, and took place in Rio de Janeiro and New York, featuring guitarist JJ Cale and many Brazilian and African musicians.
The event was professionally filmed and broadcast and is now available as ''Paul Simon and Friends''.
2 in the U.S. Simon also contributed to the Seekers catalogue with "Someday One Day," which was released in March 1966, charting around the same time as Simon and Garfunkel's "Homeward Bound."
A successful U.S. solo tour featured Simon and his guitar, with a recording of the rhythm track and horns for "Late In The Evening."
Most critics also praised the album, and many of them called it a "comeback".
His albums were issued by Warner Music Group until mid-2010.
In August 2010, ''The Capeman'' was staged for three nights in the Delacorte Theatre in New York's Central Park.
It contained some of his most popular and polished recordings.
On June 26, Warner Bros. released the definitive Paul Simon greatest-hits collection.
Although not as successful as ''Graceland'', ''The Rhythm of the Saints'' was received as a competent successor and consistent complement on Simon's attempts to explore (and popularize) world music, and also received a Grammy nomination for Album of the Year.
Gates, also entitled "Getting Ready for Christmas Day".
Among the six teenage songwriters Simon selected for tutelage were Melissa Manchester, Tommy Mandel and rock/beat poet Joe Linus, with Maggie and Terre Roche (the Roche Sisters), who later sang back-up for Simon, joining the workshop in progress through an impromptu appearance.
In 2001, Simon was honored as MusiCares Person Of The Year.
The album received universal acclaim, with critics praising the variety of styles and the confessional lyrics, reaching No.
He sits on the organization's board of directors as an honorary member.
Simon was introduced to him by his son, Adrian, who was a fan of his work.
Interested by the unusual sound, he wrote lyrics to the number, which he sang over a re-recording of the song.
All of Simon's solo recordings, including those originally issued by Columbia Records, are currently distributed by Sony Records' Legacy Recordings unit.
On August 4, 2015, Simon performed "Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard", "Homeward Bound", and "Late in the Evening" alongside Billy Joel at the final concert of Nassau Coliseum on Long Island, New York.
Together, they were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1990.
The cast album was never released on CD but eventually became available online.
2 hit in America, and the follow-up, the gospel-flavored "Loves Me Like a Rock" was even bigger, topping the Cashbox charts.
In 1995 he made news for appearing on ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'', where he performed the song "Ten Years," which he composed specially for the tenth anniversary of the show.
Simon has been married three times, first to Peggy Harper in late autumn 1969.
After graduating from Forest Hills High School, Simon majored in English at Queens College, while Garfunkel studied mathematics at Columbia University in Manhattan.
His third wife is folk singer Edie Brickell, 24 years his junior, whom he married on May 30, 1992.
Simon released ''Hearts and Bones'' in 1983.
Simon's next project was the pop-folk album, ''There Goes Rhymin' Simon'', released in May 1973.
Released on October 1990, the album received excellent critical reviews and achieved very respectable sales, peaking at #4 in the U.S. and No.
''Hearts and Bones'' included  "The Late Great Johnny Ace," a song partly about Johnny Ace, an American R&B singer, and partly about slain Beatle John Lennon.
In an attempt to capitalize on his renewed success, WB Records released the album ''Negotiations and Love Songs'' in November 1988, a mixture of popular hits and personal favorites that covered Simon's entire career and became an enduring seller in his catalog.
In 2007, Simon received the first annual Library of Congress Gershwin Prize for Popular Song.
In October 2009, they appeared together at the 25th Anniversary of The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City.
In the interview, Simon explains the basic themes in his songwriting: love, family, social commentary, etc., as well as the overarching messages of religion, spirituality, and God in his lyrics.
The collaboration was generally well-received, with just one critic, Seth Rogovoy, from the ''Berkshire Eagle'', questioning the collaboration.
In 1998 he was entered in the Grammy Hall of Fame for the Simon & Garfunkel album ''Bridge over Troubled Water''.
99 on the pop charts as Jerry Landis with the novelty song "The Lone Teen Ranger."
As he put it, "Once you go away for a bit, you wonder who people think you are.
9 on Billboard), the album was his only No.
At age 45, Simon found himself back at the forefront of popular music.
Simon appeared alongside George Harrison as musical guest on the Thanksgiving Day episode of ''SNL'' (November 20, 1976).
We're making a movie here!
Simon goes on in the interview to explain the process of how he goes about writing songs, "The music always precedes the words.
One year later, Simon's studio albums were re-released both individually and together in a limited-edition nine-CD boxed set, ''Paul Simon: The Studio Recordings 1972–2000''.
Simon also wrote all the songs in the film.
It's like a puzzle to find the right words to express what the music is saying."
The single reached No.
"You Can Call Me Al" was accompanied by a humorous video featuring actor Chevy Chase, which introduced Simon to a new audience through MTV.
1 on the Billboard charts to date.
In 2003, Simon signed on as an official supporter of Little Kids Rock, a nonprofit organization that provides free musical instruments and free lessons to children in public schools throughout the U.S.
Simon is one of a small number of performers who are named as the copyright owner on their recordings (most records have the recording company as the named owner of the recording).
As a souvenir for the tour that came next, in 1974 it was released as a live album, ''Live Rhymin''', which was moderately successful and displayed some changes in Simon's music style, adopting world and religious music.
I suspect people are thinking, 'What culture did you go to?'
Their first bus was in the impoverished South Bronx of New York City, but they now operate in 12 states, including on the Gulf Coast.
When Simon returned to the U.S. with the growing success of "The Sound of Silence", Kathy, who was quite shy, wanted no part of the success and fame that awaited Simon and they split.
Among many other honors, Simon was the first recipient of the Library of Congress's Gershwin Prize for Popular Song in 2007.
Much of the success of the album was due to the lead single, the upbeat "You Can Call Me Al," whose lyrics describe a man experiencing an identity crisis.
It was the second-best-selling album of 1987 in the US, selling five million copies and eventually reaching 5x Platinum certification.
They have three children: Adrian, Lulu, and Gabriel.
Simon has also dabbled in acting.
Laird-Clowes has credited Simon with helping to shape the band's biggest hit, "Life in a Northern Town".
In an attempt to return successfully to the music market, Simon wrote and recorded a new album very quickly, with ''You're the One'' arriving in October 2000.
But this record is straight-ahead American."
In March 2004, Walter Yetnikoff published a book called 'Howling at the Moon', in which he criticized Simon personally and for his tenuous business partnership with Columbia Records in the past.
On February 22, 2016 a Simon spokesperson announced the upcoming release of his thirteenth solo studio album, ''Stranger to Stranger.''
Simon showed special care about the musical venture he traveled since 1986's ''Graceland.''
He has been the subject of two films by Jeremy Marre, the first on ''Graceland'', the second on ''The Capeman''.
On June 5, 2012, Simon released a 25th anniversary box set of ''Graceland'', which included a remastered edition of the original album, the 2012 documentary film ''Under African Skies'', the original 1987 "African Concert" from Zimbabwe, an audio narrative "The Story of 'Graceland'" as told by Paul Simon, and other interviews and paraphernalia.
In 1978, Simon made a cameo appearance in the movie, ''The Rutles: All You Need Is Cash''.
He played music producer Tony Lacey, a supporting character, in the 1977 Woody Allen feature film ''Annie Hall''.
Simon closed the 40th anniversary SNL show on February 15, 2015, with a performance of "Still Crazy After All These Years," sans turkey outfit.
In 2012, Simon was awarded the Polar Music Prize.
In September 2013, Simon delivered the  Richard Ellmann Lectures in Modern Literature at Emory University.
Gates' giving the sermon and his church in 2010 with its display board showing many of Simon's lyrics; the second video illustrates the song with cartoon images.
The Guitar Study Center later became part of The New School in New York City.
He amazes his friend by remembering intricate details about prior meetings with passers-by, but draws a complete blank when approached by Art Garfunkel, despite the latter's numerous memory prompts.
1 in the UK and Japan.
worked together via email over the course of making the album.
In 2003, he participated on another Simon & Garfunkel reunion.
"I always liked working with him more than anyone else," Simon noted.
Simon says about his childhood, "I was a ballplayer.
After ''Graceland'', Simon decided to extend his roots with the Brazilian music-flavored ''The Rhythm of the Saints''.
It was the first composition of a new musical project that became the Grammy-award winning album ''Graceland'', a mixture of musical styles including pop, a cappella, isicathamiya, rock, zydeco and mbaqanga.
On February 26, 2012, Simon paid tribute to fellow musicians Chuck Berry and Leonard Cohen who were the recipients of the first annual PEN Awards for songwriting excellence at the JFK Presidential Library in Boston, Massachusetts.
The track was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Song.
In 2005, Simon was saluted as a BMI  Icon at the 53rd Annual BMI Pop Awards.
The song "Hearts and Bones" was written about this relationship.
He achieved another hit in this decade, with the lead single of his 1977 compilation, ''Greatest Hits, Etc.
He toured extensively for the album, and one performance in Paris was released to home video.
A Simon & Garfunkel reunion took place in September 1993, and in another attempt to capitalize on the occasion, Columbia released ''Paul Simon 1964/1993'' in September, a three-disc compilation that received a reduced version on the two-disc album ''The Paul Simon Anthology'' one month later.
The success of the concert surpassed all expectations, and reportedly over 750,000 people attended—one of the largest concert audiences in history.
Kathy returned to England on her own with Simon returning to her some weeks later.
In 2006, Simon was selected by ''Time Magazine'' as one of the "100 People Who Shaped the World."
In 2002, he wrote and recorded "Father and Daughter," the theme song for the animated family film ''The Wild Thornberrys Movie''.
He adds that his father was a New York Yankees fan:
Simon has won 12 Grammy Awards (one of them a Lifetime Achievement Award) and five Album of the Year Grammy nominations, the most recent for ''You're the One'' in 2001.
In 2015 he was named as one of The 100 Greatest Songwriters by Rolling Stone Magazine.
About halfway through the song, Simon tells the band to stop playing because of his embarrassment.
Broadcast in June, the show was a success, though it did not receive an album release.
The event featured his music, and was nationally broadcast on PBS on the evening of June 27, 2007.
Marty Cooper, known as Tico, sang lead on several of these releases.
Simon's musical career began after meeting Art Garfunkel when they were both 11.
1 on the U.S. pop charts.
In mid-2010, Simon moved his catalog of solo work from Warner Bros. Records to Sony/Columbia Records  where Simon and Garfunkel's catalog is.
In October 2011, Simon was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Science.
Simon was born on October 13, 1941, in Newark, New Jersey, to Hungarian Jewish parents.
On March 4, 1992, he appeared on his own episode of ''MTV Unplugged'', offering renditions of many of his most famous compositions.
On August 15, 1991, almost a decade after his concert with Garfunkel, Simon staged a second concert in Central Park with African and South American bands.
He was unfamiliar with Pro Tools, so engineer Andy Smith helped him with it.
Simon and Garfunkel returned to England in the fall of 1968 and did a church concert appearance at Kraft Hall, which was broadcast on the BBC, and also featured Paul's brother Ed on a performance of the instrumental "Anji."
He is also a friend of former ''SNL'' star Chevy Chase, who appeared in his video for "You Can Call Me Al" lip synching the song while Simon looks disgruntled and mimes backing vocals and the playing of various instruments beside him.
His mother, Belle (1910–2007), was an elementary school teacher.
The album was a commercial hit, reaching #12 in the UK.
In the late 1990s, Simon wrote and produced a Broadway musical called ''The Capeman'', which lost $11 million during its 1998 run.
The sessions featured many South African musicians and groups, particularly Ladysmith Black Mambazo.
Simon worked enthusiastically on the project for many years and described it as "a New York Puerto Rican story based on events that happened in 1959—events that I remembered."
In April 2008, the Brooklyn Academy of Music celebrated Paul Simon's works, and dedicated a week to ''Songs From the Capeman'' with a good portion of the show's songs performed by a cast of singers and the Spanish Harlem Orchestra.
Simon also wrote and performed the theme song for the comedian Louis C.K.
Further singles, including the title track, "The Boy in the Bubble" and "Diamonds on the Soles of Her Shoes," were not commercial hits but became radio standards and were highly praised.
As of 2005, he has amassed nearly 75 million broadcast airplays, according to BMI surveys.
The album consisted mostly of folk-pop writing combined with foreign musical sounds, particularly grooves from North Africa.
Simon performed a Stevie Wonder song at the White House in 2009 at an event honoring Wonder's musical career and contributions.
Simon and Garfunkel also contributed extensively to the soundtrack of the Mike Nichols film ''The Graduate'' (1967), starring Dustin Hoffman and Anne Bancroft.
Their producer, Tom Wilson, overdubbed the track with electric guitar, bass guitar and drums, releasing it as a single that eventually went to No.
With Simon in the forefront of popular music, the third single from the album, "50 Ways to Leave Your Lover" reached the top spot of the Billboard charts, his only single to reach No.
In 1957, in their mid-teens, they recorded the song "Hey, Schoolgirl" under the name ''Tom & Jerry'', given to them by their label Big Records.
Tico and the Triumphs released four 45s.
Simon also developed an interest in jazz, folk, and blues, especially in the music of Woody Guthrie and Lead Belly.
The first video featured J.M.
The parents are either immigrants or first-generation Americans who felt like outsiders, and assimilation was the key thought—they gravitated to black music and baseball looking for an alternative culture."
In 2005, the pair sang "Mrs. Robinson" and "Homeward Bound," plus "Bridge Over Troubled Water" with Aaron Neville, in the benefit concert ''From the Big Apple to The Big Easy – The Concert for New Orleans'' (eventually released as a DVD) for Hurricane Katrina victims.
Violinist Isaac Stern also visited the group with a CBS film crew, speaking to the young musicians about lyrics and music after Joe Linus performed his song "Circus Lion" for Stern.
Simon's back catalog of solo recordings would be marketed by Sony Music's Legacy Recordings unit.
Simon's songwriting catalog has earned 39 BMI Awards including multiple citations for "Bridge over Troubled Water," "Mrs. Robinson," "Scarborough Fair" and "The Sound of Silence".
1 on the Cashbox album charts.
The album initially flopped.
's show ''Horace and Pete'', which debuted January 30, 2016.
The musical tells the story of real-life Puerto Rican youth Salvador Agron, who wore a cape while committing two murders in 1959 New York, and went on to become a writer in prison.
In the end, the track reached UK Top 5 and the U.S. Top 25.
Other younger musicians Simon has mentored include Nick Laird-Clowes, who later co-founded the band the Dream Academy.
The two performed "Here Comes the Sun" and "Homeward Bound" together, while Simon performed "50 Ways to Leave Your Lover" solo earlier in the show.
In February 2009, Simon performed back-to-back shows in New York City at the Beacon Theatre, which had recently been renovated.
While in the UK, Simon co-wrote several songs with Bruce Woodley of the Australian pop group the Seekers, including "I Wish You Could Be Here," "Cloudy," and "Red Rubber Ball."
Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic wrote that "Simon doesn't achieve his comeback by reconnecting with the sound and spirit of his classic work; he has achieved it by being as restless and ambitious as he was at his popular and creative peak, which makes ''Surprise'' all the more remarkable."
During these sessions, Bob Dylan was downstairs recording the album ''Self-Portrait'', which included a version of Simon's "The Boxer".
He used several pseudonyms for these recordings, including Jerry Landis, Paul Kane, and True Taylor.
In May 2012, Paul Simon performed at a benefit dinner for the Turkana Basin Institute in New York City, raising more than $2 million for Richard Leakey's research institute in Africa.
His father wrote the words and chords on paper for the boys to use.
on three songs—"The Werewolf", "Street Angel", and "Wristband".
On November 18, 2008, Simon was a guest on ''The Colbert Report'' promoting his book ''Lyrics 1964–2008''.
Overdubbing and additional recording was done in April 1986, in New York.
After giving a frustrating speech to the audience, he leaves the stage, backed by applause.
Contrary to popular belief, the song is not autobiographical of Simon's early life in New York City.
He performed at Les Cousins in London and toured provincial folk clubs that exposed him to a wide range of musical influences.
Between 1957 and 1964, Simon wrote, recorded, and released more than 30 songs, occasionally reuniting with Garfunkel as Tom & Jerry for some singles, including "Our Song" and "That's My Story".
Advertised in the Village Voice, the auditions brought hundreds of hopefuls to perform for Simon.
In the middle, Simon embarked on the successful ''Born at the Right Time Tour'', and promoted the album with further singles, including "Proof"—accompanied with a humorous video that again featured Chevy Chase, and added Steve Martin.
On November 10, 2010, Simon released a new song called "Getting Ready for Christmas Day".
It was reported that Simon attempted to have Bob Dylan guest on the album.
On June 14, 2013, at Sting's Back to Bass Tour, Simon performed his song "The Boxer" and Sting's "Fields of Gold" with Sting.
He is also a two-time inductee into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; as a solo artist in 2001, and in 1990 as half of Simon & Garfunkel.
In personal terms, Simon was also inspired by the fact of having turned 60 in 2001, which he humorously referred to on "Old" from ''You're the One''.
This noteworthy development was spearheaded by the Bee Gees after their successful $200 million lawsuit against RSO Records, which remains the largest successful lawsuit against a record company by an artist or group.
''The Essential Paul Simon'' consisted of two discs that reviewed 36 songs from his ten studio albums, and was also released on a special edition featuring a DVD of music videos and memorable live performances.
On September 29, 2001, Simon made a special appearance on the first ''SNL'' to air after the September 11, 2001 attacks.
Simon enjoyed some moderate success in recording a few singles as part of a group called ''Tico and the Triumphs'', including a song called "Motorcycle" that reached No.
The mood of the album was darker, as he wrote and recorded it in the wake of his divorce.
The American group the Cyrkle recorded a cover of "Red Rubber Ball" that reached No.
He played a few concerts in Europe with the original musicians to commemorate the anniversary.
It has expanded greatly, partnering with major hospitals, local public schools and medical schools and advocating policy for children's health and medical care.
After an interview with Stephen Colbert, Simon performed "American Tune".
That paper became the first officially copyrighted Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel song, and is now in the Library of Congress.
He is one of only five artists to have won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year more than once as the main credited artist.
In 1986, Simon was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Music degree from Berklee College of Music, where he currently serves on the Board of Trustees.
''Surprise'' was a commercial hit, reaching #14 in the ''Billboard'' 200 and #4 in the UK.
The song, which can be heard during the show's opening, intermission, and closing credits, is sparse, featuring only Simon's voice and an acoustic guitar.
Simon travelled to South Africa to embark on further recording the album.
Simon began writing new material shortly after releasing his twelfth studio album, ''So Beautiful or So What'', in April 2011.
He received an Oscar nomination for the song "Father and Daughter" in 2002.
He later remembered the concert as, "...the most memorable moment in my career."
If they don't know what you're up to, they just go by your history.
I can think of a few who have expressed my words and music far better than I. I'm excited at the prospect of that happening again.
The following year, he was one of the five recipients of the annual Kennedy Center Honors, the nation's highest tribute to performing and cultural artists.
The lead single, "Kodachrome," was a No.
Simon's 1972 song "Run That Body Down," from his second solo album, casually mentions both himself and his then-wife ("Peg") by name.
On one appearance in the late 1980s, he worked with his political namesake, Illinois Senator Paul Simon.
On September 11, 2011, Paul Simon performed "The Sound of Silence" at the National September 11 Memorial & Museum, site of the World Trade Center, on the 10th anniversary of the September 11 attacks.
1 hit on the Radio & Records American charts), the album did not sell well, in a music market dominated by disco music.
Later that year they visited the U.S. together, touring around mainly by bus.
While driving his car in late 1984 in this state of frustration, Simon listened to a cassette of the Boyoyo Boys' instrumental "Gumboots: Accordion Jive Volume II" which had been lent to him by Heidi Berg, a singer songwriter he was working with at the time.
The PBS concert was recorded in 2007.
The production was directed by Diane Paulus and produced in conjunction with the Public Theater.
They performed in a production of Alice in Wonderland for their sixth-grade graduation, and began singing together when they were 13, occasionally performing at school dances.
