Also in 1995, Prince Charles presented him with an Honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of Music—"kind of amazing for somebody who doesn't read a note of music", commented McCartney.
He spent days in bed and drank excessively: "I nearly had a breakdown," he said.
His studio album release in November that year, ''Driving Rain'', included the song "Freedom", written in response to the attacks.
American rhythm and blues influenced him, and Little Richard was his schoolboy idol; "Long Tall Sally" was the first song McCartney performed in public, at a Butlins holiday camp talent competition.
Benitez identified "Hope of Deliverance" and "Put It There" as examples of McCartney's folk music efforts while musicologist Walter Everett considered "When I'm Sixty-Four" and "Honey Pie" attempts at vaudeville.
Director Richard Lester overheard two physically attractive women trying to persuade McCartney to use heroin, but he refused.
The tour earned a reported $126.2&nbsp;million, an average of over $2&nbsp;million per night, and ''Billboard'' named it the top tour of the year.
While McCartney would often phone Lennon, he was apprehensive about the reception he would receive.
In 2009, he played three sold-out concerts at the newly built Citi Field—a venue constructed to replace Shea Stadium in Queens, New York.
The festival has included guest performances by famous musicians, songwriting competitions, drawing contests and special events featuring performances by the Crickets.
McCartney played lead guitar on several Beatles recordings, including what MacDonald described as a "fiercely angular slide guitar solo" on "Drive My Car", which McCartney played on an Epiphone Casino.
But what they didn't know is that sometimes she was playing a thing called a Minimoog, which could only be played with one finger.
McCartney shared lead vocals on the Alice Cooper-led ''Hollywood Vampires'' supergroup's cover of his song "Come and Get It" which appears on their debut album, released 11 September 2015.
The Beatles produced a short promotional film for the song, and another for its B-side, "Rain".
Though the children were baptised in their mother's Catholic faith, their father was a former Protestant turned agnostic, and religion was not emphasised in the household.
By 1981, McCartney felt he had accomplished all he could creatively with Wings and decided he needed a change.
McCartney attended Stockton Wood Road Primary School in Speke from 1947 until 1949, when he transferred to Joseph Williams Junior School in Belle Vale because of overcrowding at Stockton.
In 1979, the ''Guinness Book of World Records'' recognised McCartney as the "most honored composer and performer in music", with 60 gold discs (43 with the Beatles, 17 with Wings) and, as a member of the Beatles, sales of over 100 million singles and 100 million albums, and as the "most successful song writer", he wrote jointly or solo 43 songs which sold one million or more records between 1962 and 1978.
As a result of his drug convictions, the US government repeatedly denied him a visa until December 1973.
Best known for primarily using a plectrum or pick, McCartney occasionally plays fingerstyle.
Critics described ''Rubber Soul'' as a significant advance in the refinement and profundity of the band's music and lyrics.
The soundtrack failed to chart, but it won McCartney an Ivor Novello Award for Best Instrumental Theme.
The two released their first electronica album together, ''Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest'', in 1993.
In 1975, they began the fourteen-month Wings Over the World Tour, which included stops in the UK, Australia, Europe and the US.
I Love You"—were published by an EMI subsidiary, Ardmore & Beechwood, before signing with James.
The films, described by Harrison as "the forerunner of videos", aired on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' and ''Top of the Pops'' in June 1966.
Following the second European leg of the tour and extensive rehearsals in London, the group undertook an ambitious US arena tour that yielded the US number-one live triple LP ''Wings over America''.
Having donated his time, he received £1 from the Olympic organisers.
But when I met him the fascination faded fast, and I found it was Paul I liked."
The pair collaborated again in 1998, on Starr's ''Vertical Man'', which featured McCartney's backing vocals on three songs, and instrumentation on one.
Bacon and Morgan described his bassline for the Beatles song "Rain" as "an astonishing piece of playing&nbsp;... McCartney thinking in terms of both rhythm and 'lead bass'&nbsp;... choosing the area of the neck&nbsp;... he correctly perceives will give him clarity for melody without rendering his sound too thin for groove."
Included on the ''Help!''
Bacon and Morgan agreed, calling McCartney's groove on the track "a high point in pop bass playing and ... the first proof on a recording of his serious technical ability on the instrument."
The tour marked the first time McCartney performed Beatles songs live with Wings, with five in the two-hour set list: "I've Just Seen a Face", "Yesterday", "Blackbird", "Lady Madonna" and "The Long and Winding Road".
McCartney signed his first recording contract, as a member of the Beatles, with Parlophone Records, an EMI subsidiary, in June 1962.
McCartney has released an extensive catalogue of songs as a solo artist and has composed classical and electronic music.
Later that year, ex-Moody Blues guitarist Denny Laine joined the McCartneys and Seiwell to form the band Wings.
McCartney stated that for his bassline for "I Saw Her Standing There", he directly quoted Berry's "I'm Talking About You".
She became a popular photographer with several rock groups, including the Jimi Hendrix Experience, the Grateful Dead, the Doors and the Beatles, whom she first met at Shea Stadium in 1966.
He described his first exchange with Ono after the murder, and his last conversation with Lennon:
McCartney's first serious girlfriend in Liverpool was Dot Rhone, whom he met at the Casbah club in 1959.
McCartney then formed a band consisting of himself and Linda, with Hamish Stuart and Robbie McIntosh on guitars, Paul "Wix" Wickens on keyboards and Chris Whitten on drums.
Now formally dissolved, in 1995 it became absorbed in the Sony/ATV catalogue.
After the Beatles' break-up in 1970, McCartney continued his musical career with his first solo release, ''McCartney'', a US number-one album.
Discussing his relationship with McCartney, Harrison said, "Paul would always help along when you'd done his ten songs—then when he got 'round to doing one of my songs, he would help.
In 1998, he released ''Rushes'', the second electronica album by the Fireman.
McCartney said, "I've been offered an exhibition of my paintings at the Walker Art Gallery ... where John and I used to spend many a pleasant afternoon.
MacDonald described the track as "among the finest work on ''Sgt.
A UK number one and a US top five, ''Ram'' included the co-written US number-one hit single "Uncle Albert/Admiral Halsey".
Matters worsened the following year during the ''Let It Be'' sessions, when a camera crew filmed McCartney lecturing the group: "We've been very negative since Mr. Epstein passed away&nbsp;... we were always fighting his discipline a bit, but it's silly to fight that discipline if it's our own".
In 1992, he worked with Dunbar on an animated film about the work of French artist Honoré Daumier, which won them a BAFTA award.
There was at times discord between them as well, particularly during sessions for the White Album.
In September 1989, they launched the Paul McCartney World Tour, his first in over a decade.
It also earned Martin a Grammy for his orchestral arrangement.
Later that year, McCartney completed his first musical project apart from the group—a film score for the UK production ''The Family Way''.
In 1981, McCartney sang backup on Harrison's tribute to their ex-bandmate, "All Those Years Ago", which featured Starr on drums.
MacDonald praised the "swinging beat" of the Beatles' twenty-four bar blues song, "She's a Woman" as "the most extreme sound they had manufactured to date", with McCartney's voice "at the edge, squeezed to the upper limit of his chest register and threatening to crack at any moment."
He released ''Kisses on the Bottom'', a collection of standards, in February 2012; that same month the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences honoured him as the MusiCares Person of the Year, two days prior to his performance at the 54th Grammy Awards.
That same year, he released ''Flowers in the Dirt''; a collaborative effort with Elvis Costello that included musical contributions from Gilmour and Nicky Hopkins.
Performed around the world after its London premiere, the ''Liverpool Oratorio'' reached number one on the UK classical chart, ''Music Week''.
I wrote something deep and meaningful—which was promptly rejected—and I suppose I have been trying to get my own back ever since".
McCartney became interested in painting after watching artist Willem de Kooning work in de Kooning's Long Island studio.
Save the Arctic is a campaign to protect the Arctic and an international outcry and a renewed focus concern on oil development in the Arctic, attracting the support of more than five million people.
He participated in the National Football League's Super Bowl, performing "Freedom" during the pre-game show for Super Bowl XXXVI in 2002 and headlining the halftime show at Super Bowl XXXIX in 2005.
McCartney was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 as a member of the Beatles and again as a solo artist in 1999.
McCartney later purchased works by Magritte, using his painting of an apple for the Apple Records logo.
There were a lot of tracks, though, where I played bass&nbsp;... because what Paul would do—if he'd written a song, he'd learn all the parts for Paul and then come in the studio and say (sometimes he was very difficult): 'Do this'.
According to engineer Geoff Emerick, "the Beatles were looking to go out on a limb, both musically and sonically&nbsp;... we were utilising a lot of tape varispeeding and other manipulation techniques&nbsp;... limiters and&nbsp;... effects like flanging and ADT."
We didn't have to justify ourselves."
Though initially reluctant to display his paintings publicly, McCartney chose the gallery because events organiser Wolfgang Suttner showed genuine interest in McCartney's art.
I talked to Yoko the day after he was killed, and the first thing she said was, "John was really fond of you."
Following the addition of guitarist Henry McCullough, Wings' first concert tour began in 1972 with a debut performance in front of an audience of seven hundred at the University of Nottingham.
And I wrote back again, saying, you know, I don't think that's right&nbsp;...
McCartney's enduring fame has made him a popular choice to open new venues.
MacDonald considered the track the Beatles' best B-side, stating that its "clangorously saturated texture resonates around McCartney's bassline", which MacDonald described as "so inventive that it threatens to overwhelm the track".
He told ''Mojo'' magazine in 2002 that Lennon was his greatest hero.
In 1991, McCartney performed a selection of acoustic-only songs on ''MTV Unplugged'' and released a live album of the performance titled ''Unplugged (The Official Bootleg)''.
MacDonald considered the piano part in "Lady Madonna" as reminiscent of Fats Domino, and "Let It Be" as having a gospel rhythm.
Also during 1999, he continued his experimentation with orchestral music on ''Working Classical''.
The press quickly criticised him for what appeared to be a superficial response.
The band invited McCartney to join soon afterwards as a rhythm guitarist, and he formed a close working relationship with Lennon.
McCartney has written, or co-written 32 number-one singles on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100: twenty with the Beatles; seven solo or with Wings; one as a co-writer of "A World Without Love", a number-one single for Peter and Gordon; one as a co-writer on Elton John's cover of "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"; one as a co-writer on Stars on 45's "Medley"; one as a co-writer with Michael Jackson on "Say Say Say"; and one as a co-writer with Stevie Wonder on "Ebony and Ivory".
Two of the Beatles' earliest songs—"Love Me Do" and "P.S.
McCartney collaborated with Eric Stewart on ''Press to Play'' (1986), with Stewart co-writing more than half the songs on the LP.
The accompanying single, "Tropic Island Hum"/"We All Stand Together", reached number 21 in the UK.
In October 1969, a rumour surfaced that McCartney had died in a car crash in 1966 and been replaced by a lookalike, but this was quickly refuted when a November ''Life'' magazine cover featured him and his family, accompanied by the caption "Paul is still with us".
A primetime entertainment special celebrating the legacy of seven-time Grammy-winning group the Beatles and their groundbreaking first performance on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'', featuring Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr, was taped 27 January 2014 at the Ed Sullivan Theater with a 9 February 2014 CBS airing.
Epstein's death in August 1967 created a void, which left the Beatles perplexed and concerned about their future.
He kept an upright piano in the front room, encouraged his sons to be musical and advised Paul to take piano lessons, but Paul preferred to learn by ear.
VH1 fictionalised this event in the 2000 television film ''Two of Us''.
"Hey Jude" is the best-selling Beatles single, achieving sales of over five&nbsp;million copies soon after its release.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, he used a Wal 5-String, which he said made him play more thick-sounding basslines, in contrast to the much lighter Höfner, which inspired him to play more sensitively, something he considers fundamental to his playing style.
Ingham described the Wings songs "With a Little Luck" and "London Town" as "full of the most sensitive pop synthesizer touches".
The shield includes four curved emblems which resemble beetles' backs.
In 2000, he released the electronica album ''Liverpool Sound Collage'' with Super Furry Animals and Youth, using the sound collage and musique concrète techniques that had fascinated him in the mid-1960s.
He has married three times and is the father of five children.
They separated in April 2006 and divorced acrimoniously in March 2008.
The album fared much better, reaching number one in the UK and producing the US top-ten hit single "No More Lonely Nights", featuring David Gilmour on lead guitar.
They adopted the name ''the Beatles'' in August 1960 and recruited drummer Pete Best shortly before a five-engagement residency in Hamburg.
He referred to the finished product as "electronic symphonies".
The sessions produced the double A-side single "Strawberry Fields Forever"/"Penny Lane" in February 1967, and the LP followed in June.
However, he resumed the tour with a high-energy three hour appearance in Albany, New York, on 5 July 2014.
He is known for his belting power, versatility and wide tenor vocal range, spanning over four octaves.
In 2003, the McCartneys had a child, Beatrice Milly.
After her death, Paul stated in the ''Daily Mail'', "I got a counsellor because I knew that I would need some help.
The pair first properly met in 1967 at a Georgie Fame concert at The Bag O'Nails club, during her UK assignment to photograph rock musicians in London.
On 26 January 2014 McCartney and Starr performed "Queenie Eye" from McCartney's new album ''New'' at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards.
His bluff was all on the surface.
Pepper'' cover, McCartney replied, "Elvis was too important and too far above the rest even to mention ... so we didn't put him on the list because he was more than merely a ... pop singer, he was Elvis the King."
Michael Jackson subsequently purchased ATV in 1985.
He recorded a radio series called ''Oobu Joobu'' in 1995 for the American network Westwood One, which he described as "widescreen radio".
It was the same venue that the Beatles played their final concert in 1966.
In 2009, after a four-year break, he returned to touring and has since performed over 80 shows.
After the band's break-up, he pursued a solo career and formed the band Wings with his first wife, Linda, and Denny Laine.
He added that "every love song I write is for Linda."
After the departure of McCullough and Seiwell in 1973, the McCartneys and Laine recorded ''Band on the Run''.
In 1988, McCartney released ''Choba B CCCP'', released only in the Soviet Union, which contained eighteen covers; recorded over the course of two days.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" (with U2) and closing it with "Drive My Car" (with George Michael), "Helter Skelter", and "The Long and Winding Road".
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'', and for about a year total but stopped because of his dislike of the unpleasant melancholy he felt afterwards.
Inspired to create a new persona for the group, to serve as a vehicle for experimentation and to demonstrate to their fans that they had musically matured, McCartney invented the fictional band of the album's title track.
McCartney is lead patron of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts, a school in the building formerly occupied by the Liverpool Institute for Boys.
It is cruel and unnecessary and will lose them support from ordinary people and animal lovers like myself."
McCartney also teasingly tried out classical singing, namely singing various renditions of "Besame Mucho" with the rest of The Beatles.
In the foreword of the book, he explains: "When I was a teenager&nbsp;...
In 1982 McCartney collaborated with Stevie Wonder on the Martin-produced number-one hit "Ebony and Ivory", included on McCartney's ''Tug of War'' LP, and with Michael Jackson on "The Girl Is Mine" from ''Thriller''.
Though McCartney had a strained relationship with Lennon, they briefly became close again in early 1974, and played music together on one occasion.
The album contained the song "Coming Up", the live version of which, recorded in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1979 by Wings, became the group's last number-one hit.
Music professor and author Vincent Benitez described the track as "symphonic rock at its best".
In October 2000, McCartney's art debuted in his hometown of Liverpool.
In 2015, it was revealed that McCartney turned down an offer to play the role of father to Helen Baxendale's character Emily in ''Friends''.
Harrison joined in 1958 as lead guitarist, followed by Lennon's art school friend Stuart Sutcliffe on bass, in 1960.
Also that year, McCartney collaborated with American recording artist Kanye West on the single "Only One", released on 31 December.
One of the best-selling releases of the decade, it remained on the UK charts for 124 weeks.
Those are the moments I treasure.
On 12 December, McCartney performed with three former members of Nirvana (Krist Novoselic, Dave Grohl, and Pat Smear) during the closing act of 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief, seen by approximately two billion people worldwide.
He is the only artist to reach the UK number one as a soloist ("Pipes of Peace"), duo ("Ebony and Ivory" with Wonder), trio ("Mull of Kintyre", Wings), quartet ("She Loves You", the Beatles), quintet ("Get Back", the Beatles with Billy Preston) and as part of a musical ensemble for charity (Ferry Aid).
They included mixes of various songs, musical pieces and comments made by McCartney that Dick James made into a demo for him.
McCartney played a kazoo solo on another track from the album, "You're Sixteen".
In 2010, McCartney opened the Consol Energy Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
In 1961, Sutcliffe left the band and McCartney reluctantly became their bass player.
The Quarrymen played a mix of rock and roll and skiffle, a type of popular music with jazz, blues and folk influences.
As Apple's Peter Brown recalled, "it was a poorly kept secret among Beatle intimates that after Ringo left the studio Paul would often dub in the drum tracks himself&nbsp;... Starr would pretend not to notice".
Pepper''—imperishable popular art of its time".
He said, "The whole meditation experience was very good and I still use the mantra&nbsp;...
On 24 April 1976, the two were watching an episode of ''Saturday Night Live'' together at Lennon's home in the Dakota, during which Lorne Michaels made a $3,000 cash offer for the Beatles to reunite.
McCartney said of the instrument, "if I had to pick one electric guitar it would be this."
His father invited Paul and his brother Michael to solve crosswords with him, to increase their "word power", as McCartney said.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, standing with a host of celebrities.
They eventually compromised, agreeing to McCartney's suggestion: an LP featuring individual songs on side one, and a long medley on side two.
The tension grew during the recording of their self-titled double album, also known as the "White Album".
The album was the first of seven platinum Wings LPs.
On 10 April 1970, in the midst of business disagreements with his bandmates, McCartney announced his departure from the group.
In 1980, McCartney released his second solo LP, the self-produced ''McCartney&nbsp;II'', which peaked at number one in the UK and number three in the US.
MacDonald also indicated the influence of Indian classical music in "exotic melismas in the bass part".
In 1963, Dick James established Northern Songs to publish the songs of Lennon–McCartney.
But then I thought, hang on a minute.
He was always a very warm guy, John.
LP, the song was the group's first recorded use of classical music elements and their first recording that involved only a single band member.
His use of the drug soon became habitual, and according to Miles, McCartney wrote the lyrics "another kind of mind" in "Got to Get You into My Life" specifically as a reference to cannabis.
As Paul remembers, "The night Linda and I met, I spotted her across a crowded club, and although I would normally have been nervous chatting her up, I realised I had to&nbsp;... Pushiness worked for me that night!"
McCartney primarily flatpicks while playing acoustic guitar, though he also uses elements of fingerpicking.
In 2008, he released his third Fireman album, ''Electric Arguments''.
For ''Abbey Road'', the band's last recorded album, Martin suggested "a continuously moving piece of music", urging the group to think symphonically.
Starr appeared on drums and backing vocals in "Beautiful Night".
McCartney has also supported campaigns headed by the Humane Society of the United States, Humane Society International, World Animal Protection, and the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation.
Prior to, and for a while after leaving the group, McCartney suffered from a deep depression as a result of the band's break-up.
In his first interview after Linda's death, he promised to continue working for animal rights, and in 1999 he spent £3,000,000 to ensure Linda McCartney Foods remained free of genetically engineered ingredients.
At the age of fifteen, McCartney met Lennon and his band, the Quarrymen, at the St Peter's Church Hall fête in Woolton on 6 July 1957.
McCartney's mother Mary was a midwife and the family's primary wage earner; her earnings enabled them to move into 20&nbsp;Forthlin Road in Allerton, where they lived until 1964.
As McCartney explained, "He wrote back very kindly, saying, 'my doctors tell me that I must eat meat'.
Biographer Howard Sounes writes that "McCartney sank into whisky-soaked oblivion, and only Linda knew how to save him."
The two quickly became friends; McCartney later admitted: "I tended to talk down to him because he was a year younger."
It was also the longest single released by the band, and at seven minutes eleven seconds, the longest ever number one to that point.
More legal disputes followed as McCartney's attorneys, his in-laws John and Lee Eastman, fought Lennon's, Harrison's, and Starr's business manager, Allen Klein, over royalties and creative control.
In 2001, McCartney published ''Blackbird Singing'', a volume of poems and lyrics to his songs for which he gave readings in Liverpool and New York City.
According to Gould, the song is "a neoclassical tour de force ... a true hybrid, conforming to no recognizable style or genre of song".
McCartney's loss later became a point of connection with John Lennon, whose mother, Julia, had died when he was seventeen.
But fortunately for me, the last phone conversation I ever had with him was really great, and we didn't have any kind of blow-up."
While at school during the 1950s, McCartney thrived at art assignments, often earning top accolades for his visual work.
In June 2012, McCartney closed Queen Elizabeth's Diamond Jubilee Concert held outside Buckingham Palace, performing a set that included "Let It Be" and "Live and Let Die".
On 19 May 2014, it was reported that McCartney had been bedridden by an unspecified virus on doctor's orders, and had to cancel a sold-out concert tour of Japan scheduled to begin later in the week.
In 2007, McCartney signed with Hear Music, becoming the label's first artist.
In 2004, they worked together on the animated short film ''Tropic Island Hum''.
On 14 August 2014, McCartney performed the final concert at Candlestick Park in San Francisco, California before its demolition.
Shevell is vice-president of a family-owned transportation conglomerate which owns New England Motor Freight.
He was also influenced by Brian Wilson, as he commented: "because he went to very unusual places".
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" with U2 at Live 8 became the fastest-released single in history.
In 2004, he commented on media animosity toward his partners: "the British public didn't like me giving up on Jane Asher&nbsp;...
He was great, particularly in helping me get rid of my guilt about wishing I'd been perfect all the time&nbsp;... a real bugger.
It achieved the highest sales in the UK that year, topping the US charts for nine weeks, longer than any other Beatles single.
MacDonald inferred the influence of James Brown's "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag" and Wilson Pickett's "In the Midnight Hour", American soul tracks from which McCartney absorbed elements and drew inspiration as he "delivered his most spontaneous bass-part to date".
McCartney has participated in several charity recordings and performances, including the Concerts for the People of Kampuchea, Ferry Aid, Band Aid, Live Aid, Live 8, and the recording of "Ferry Cross the Mersey".
He had been planning such an album for years, having been previously encouraged to do so by Linda, who had died of cancer in April 1998.
I was with somebody else that night&nbsp;... and I saw Paul at the other side of the room.
The album also included the top-ten hits "Jet" and "Helen Wheels", and earned the 413th spot on ''Rolling Stone's'' list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.
We were just a boyfriend and girlfriend having babies."
McCartney also produced and hosted ''The Real Buddy Holly Story'', a 1985 documentary featuring interviews with Keith Richards, Phil and Don Everly, the Holly family, and others.
'''Sir James Paul McCartney''',  (born 18 June 1942) is an English singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and composer.
McCartney remains one of the world's top draws.
"I was going crazy."
