In 1931, Klee transferred to Düsseldorf to teach in the Akademie; the Nazis shut down the Bauhaus soon after.
Around 1897, Klee started his diary, which he kept until 1918, and which has provided scholars with valuable insight into his life and thinking.
The later works are distinguished by spidery hieroglyph-like symbols.
In the later 1930s, his health recovered somewhat and he was encouraged by a visit from Kandinsky and Picasso.
Demonstrating his range of exploration, mixing color and line, his ''Warning of the Ships'' (1918) is a colored drawing filled with symbolic images on a field of suppressed color.
In that manner he created about 57 Verre églomisé pictures, among those the 1905 ''Gartenszene'' (Scene on a Garden) and the 1906 ''Porträt des Vaters'' (Portrait of a Father), with which he tried to combine painting and scratching.
He responded to the colors of Italy, but sadly noted, "that a long struggle lies in store for me in this field of color."
Whereupon Breton, as Joan Miró remembers, was critical of Klee: "Masson and I have both discovered Paul Klee.
File:GUGG Acrobats.jpg| ''Acrobats'', 1915, watercolor, pastel and ink on paper, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
He is somebody, and has an exceptionally beautiful and lucid mind."
Klee began to introduce a new technique in 1905: scratching on a blackened glass panel with a needle.
Klee was at the peak of his creative output.
He never abandoned the object; a permanent segregation never took  place.
He had so much to say, that a Klee never became an other Klee."
The first ''Blaue Reiter'' exhibition took place from 18 December 1911 to 1 January 1912 in the Moderne Galerie Heinrich Thannhauser in Munich.
File:Paul Klee, Ohne Titel (Der Todesengel).jpg|''Ohne Titel (Letztes Stillleben)'', 1940, oil on canvas on stretcher frame, Zentrum Paul Klee, Bern
The abstract portrait was painted in dark colors and shows closed eyes and compressed lips, while on the back part of his head there is a large "X", symbolizing that his art was no longer valued in Germany.
He often combined them into one work.
'''Paul Klee''' (; 18 December 1879 – 29 June 1940) was a Swiss-German artist.
Other examples from that period are ''der Goldfisch'' (The Goldfish) from 1925, ''Katze und Vogel'' (Cat and Bird), from 1928, and ''Hauptweg und Nebenwege'' (Mainway and Sideways) from 1929.
Klee was a foundation member and manager of the Munich artists' union ''Sema'' that summer.
With his parents' reluctant permission, in 1898 Klee began studying art at the Academy of Fine Arts in Munich with Heinrich Knirr and Franz von Stuck.
It is located within the art history department, established by Franz-Joachim Verspohl.
In 1929, the first major monograph on Klee's work was published, written by Will Grohmann.
For Klee, color represented the optimism and nobility in art, and a hope for relief from the pessimistic nature he expressed in his black-and-white grotesques and satires.
He often used geometric forms as well as letters, numbers, and arrows, and combined them with figures of animals and people.
During this time, Klee illustrated a series of guardian angels.
Herwarth Walden, Klee's art dealer, saw in them a "Wachablösung" (changing of the guard) of his art.
Initially planned to be released in 1911, the release date of the ''Der Blau Reiter'' almanac by Kandinsky and Marc was delayed in May 1912, including the reproduced ink drawing ''Steinhauer'' by Klee.
That is why, inwardly, it is none of my concern."
In January 1911 Alfred Kubin met Klee in Munich and encouraged him to illustrate Voltaire's ''Candide''.
He excelled at drawing but seemed to lack any natural color sense.
In ''Viadukt'' (1937) the bridge arches split from the bank as they refuse to be linked to a chain and are therefore rioting.
One of his last paintings, ''Death and Fire'', features a skull in the center with the German word for death, "Tod", appearing in the face.
Klee was still dividing his time with music, playing the violin in an orchestra and writing concert and theater reviews.
Many of his works combine these skills.
The colored rectangle became his basic building block, what some scholars associate with a musical note, which Klee combined with other colored blocks to create a color harmony analogous to a musical composition.
Klee did not attend it, but in the second exhibition, which occurred from 12 February to 18 March 1912 in the Galerie Goltz, 17 of his graphic works were shown.
He was buried at Schosshaldenfriedhof, Bern, Switzerland.
In his "Theses on the Philosophy of History" Benjamin suggests that the angel depicted in the painting might be seen as representing the angel of history.
In 1968, a jazz group called The National Gallery featuring composer Chuck Mangione released the album ''Performing Musical Interpretations of the Paintings of Paul Klee''.
Examples are the watercolor painting ''Musiker'' (musician), a stickman face with partially serious, partially smiling mouth; and the ''Revolution des Viadukts'' (Revolution of the Viadukt), an anti-fascist art.
As a musician, he played and felt emotionally bound to traditional works of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, but as an artist he craved the freedom to explore radical ideas and styles.
His early inclination towards the absurd and the sarcastic was well received by Kubin, who befriended Klee and became one of his first significant collectors.
On his own time, in addition to his deep interests in music and art, Klee was a great reader of literature, and later a writer on art theory and aesthetics.
… For Klee, the German classic painter of the Cubism, the world music became his companion, possibly even a part of his art; the composition, written in notes, seems to be not dissimilar."
Klee has been variously associated with Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Surrealism, and Abstraction, but his pictures are difficult to classify.
Pamela Kort observed: "Klee's 1933 drawings present their beholder with an unparalleled opportunity to glimpse a central aspect of his aesthetics that has remained largely unappreciated: his lifelong concern with the possibilities of parody and wit.
He continued to paint during the entire war and managed to exhibit in several shows.
Paul Klee was born in Münchenbuchsee, Switzerland, as the second child of German music teacher Hans Wilhelm Klee (1849–1940) and Swiss singer Ida Marie Klee, née Frick (1855–1921).
Later that year the first Bauhaus exhibition and festival was held, for which Klee created several of the advertising materials.
Klee worked in many different media—oil paint, watercolor, ink, pastel, etching, and others.
But Breton despises him."
Klee had removed the third Invention, ''Pessimistische Allegorie des Gebirges'' (Pessimistic Allegory of the Mountain), in February 1906 from his cycle.
Gunther Schuller composed ''Seven Studies on Themes of Paul Klee'' in the years 1959/60, consisting of ''Antique Harmonies'', ''Abstract Trio'', ''Little Blue Devil'', ''Twittering Machine'', ''Arab Village'', ''An Eerie Moment'', and ''Pastorale''.
… At a second analyse one can discover a technique, which takes as a basis a large maturity in thinking.
3, Jungfrau im Baum (1903).jpg|Third Invention: ''Jungfrau im Baum'', 1903, etching, Museum of Modern Art, New York
Thirty of the preserved puppets are stored at the Zentrum Paul Klee, Bern.
File:Paul Klee, In den Häusern von St. Germain.jpg|''In den Häusern von St. Germain'', 1914, watercolor on paper on cardboard, Zentrum Paul Klee, Bern
It was made using portions and cutouts from Paul Klee's paintings.
He produced nearly 500 works in 1933 during his last year in Germany.
His output in 1936 was only 25 pictures.
His attempt to be a magazine illustrator failed.
Sometimes he uses complementary pairs of colors, and other times "dissonant" colors, again reflecting his connection with musicality.
Other exhibitions include the Sammlung Rosengart in Luzern, the Albertina in Wien and the Berggruen Museum in Berlin.
Klee moved on 20 August to the aircraft maintenance company  in Oberschleissheim, executing skilled manual work, such as restoring aircraft camouflage, and  accompanying aircraft transports.
He was inventive in his methods and technique.
Back in Germany in 1937, seventeen of Klee's pictures were included in an exhibition of "Degenerate art" and 102 of his works in public collections were seized by the Nazis.
Klee's art work progressed slowly for the next five years, partly from having to divide his time with domestic matters, and partly as he tried to find a new approach to his art.
During his twelve-day educational trip to Tunis in April 1914 Klee produced with Macke and Moilliet watercolor paintings, which implement the strong light and color stimulus of the North African countryside in the fashion of Paul Cézanne and Robert Delaunays' cubistic form concepts.
His art work was considered too revolutionary, even degenerate, by the Swiss authorities, but eventually they accepted his request six days after his death.
He was a "Form" master in the bookbinding, stained glass, and mural painting workshops and was provided with two studios.
Architect Renzo Piano constructed the Zentrum Paul Klee in June 2005.
The art of mentally ill people inspired Klee as well as Kandinsky and Max Ernst, after Hans Prinzhorns book ''Bildnerei der Geisteskranken'' (Artistry of the Mentally Ill) was published in 1922.
Klee visited Egypt in 1928, which impressed him less than Tunisia.
His ''Ad Parnassum'' (1932) is considered his masterpiece and the best example of his pointillist style; it is also one of his largest, most finely worked paintings.
He died in Muralto, Locarno, Switzerland, on 29 June 1940 without having obtained Swiss citizenship, despite his birth in that country.
In gaining a second artistic vocabulary, Klee added color to his abilities in draftsmanship,  and in many works combined them  successfully, as he did in one series he called "operatic paintings".
File:Red Green Architecture yellow violet gradation by Paul Klee.jpeg|''Red/Green Architecture (yellow/violet gradation)'', 1922, oil on canvas on cardboard mat, Yale University Art Gallery, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
After finishing the military training course, which began on 11 March 1916, he was committed as a soldier behind the front.
He used canvas, burlap, muslin, linen, gauze, cardboard, metal foils, fabric, wallpaper, and newsprint.
This attempt failed but he had a major success in securing a three-year contract (with a minimum annual income) with dealer Hans Goltz, whose influential gallery gave Klee major exposure, and some commercial success.
Since 1938, Klee worked more intensively with hieroglyphic-like elements.
Its overlaying technique evinces the polyphonic character of his drawing method between 1920 and 1932 .
Located in Bern, the museum exhibits about 150 (of 4000 Klee works overall) in a six-month rotation, as it is impossible to show all of his works at once.
This allowed him to stay in a small room outside of the barrack block and continue painting.
In the architecture of the ancient funerary moments Klee discovered a sense of proportion and measure in which human beings appeared to establish a convincing relationship with the immensity of the landscape; furthermore, he was drawn to the esoteric numerology that governed the way in which these monuments had been built."
After the onset of illness, there were about 25 works in the 1936 catalogue, but his productivity increased in 1937 to 264 pictures, 1938 to 489, and 1939 &ndash; his most productive year &ndash; to 1254.
One of Klee's paintings, ''Angelus Novus'', was the object of an interpretative text by German philosopher and literary critic Walter Benjamin, who purchased the painting in 1921.
It indicates the relations between color and the stimulus of Macke and Delaunay.
The self-portrait in the same year – with the programmatic title ''von der Liste gestrichen'' (removed from the list) – provides information about his feeling after losing professorship.
They frequently allude to poetry, music and dreams and sometimes include words or musical notation.
Klee's artistic breakthrough came in 1914 when he briefly visited Tunisia with August Macke and Louis Moilliet and was impressed by the quality of the light there.
File:Senecio2.JPG|''Senecio'', 1922, oil on gauze, Kunstmuseum Basel, Basel
Rather than copy these artists, Klee began working out his own color experiments in pale watercolors and did some primitive landscapes, including ''In the Quarry'' (1913) and ''Houses near the Gravel Pit'' (1913), using blocks of color with limited overlap.
Humanism wants to suffocate me."
File:Paul Klee, Föhn im Marc'schen Garten, 1915.jpg|''Föhn im Marc’schen Garten'', 1915, watercolor on paper on cardboard, Lenbachhaus, Munich
By 1905, he was developing some experimental techniques, including drawing with a needle on a blackened pane of glass, resulting in fifty-seven works including his ''Portrait of My Father'' (1906).
File:GUGG Fright of a Girl.jpg| ''Fright of a Girl'', 1922, Watercolor, India ink and oil transfer drawing on paper, with India ink on paper mount, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
His varied color palettes, some with bright colors and others sober, perhaps reflected his alternating moods of optimism and pessimism.
In 1995 the Greek experimental filmmaker, Kostas Sfikas, created a film based entirely on Paul Klee's paintings.
In the 1918 watercolor painting ''Einst dem Grau der Nacht enttaucht'', a compositional implemented poem, possible written by Klee, he incorporated letters in small, in terms of color separated squares, cutting off the first verse from the second one with silver paper.
Klee's solitary early work ended in 1911, the year he met and was inspired by the graphic artist Alfred Kubin, and became associated with the artists of the ''Blaue Reiter''.
The watercolor painting appears at a first glance childish, but it allows more interpretations.
In a minimum of one line he can reveal his wisdom.
Instead, Klee began to delve into the "cool romanticism of abstraction".
File:GUGG Hilterfingen.jpg | ''Hilterfingen'', 1895, ink on paper, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York
''8 Pieces on Paul Klee'' is the title of the debut album by the Ensemble Sortisatio, recorded February and March 2002 in Leipzig and August 2002 in Luzern, Switzerland.
They stayed in Rome, Florence, and Naples, and studied the master painters of past centuries.
His partially morbid motifs appealed to the surrealists.
File:Paul Klee Zeichen in Gelb 1937.jpg|''Zeichen in Gelb'', 1937, pastel on cotton on colored paste on jute on stretcher frame, Foundation Beyeler, Riehen near Basel
The film is entitled "''Paul Klee's Prophetic Bird of Sorrows''", and draws its title from Klee's Landscape with Yellow Birds.
Under the impression of his military service he created the painting ''Trauerblumen'' (Velvetbells) in 1917, which, with its graphical signs, vegetal and phantastic shapes, is a forerunner of his future works, harmonically combining graphic, color and object.
At first, Klee was somewhat detached from it, as he wrote ironically, "I have long had this war in me.
It features an cultural pessimism, which can be found at the turn of the 20th century in works by Symbolists.
With  it is one of his largest paintings, as he usually worked with small formats.
The Spanish composer Benet Casablancas wrote ''Alter Klang'', Impromptu for Orchestra after Klee (2006); Casablancas is author also of the ''Retablo on texts by Paul Klee'', Cantata da Camera for Soprano, Mezzo and Piano (2007).
They dealt with ambivalent themes, expressing his personal fate, the political situation and his joke.
That same year, Klee had his first exhibits in Paris, and he became a hit with the French Surrealists.
In 1950,  Giselher Klebe performed his orchestral work ''Die Zwitschermaschine'' with the subtitle ''Metamorphosen über das Bild von Paul Klee'' at the Donaueschinger Musiktage.
A retrospective of over 300 works in 1920 was also notable.
… The terrible the world, the abstract the art, while a happy world produces secularistic art.
His selection of a particular color palette emulates a musical key.
At sixteen, Klee’s landscape drawings already show considerable skill.
With that realization, faithfulness to nature faded in importance.
''Jungfrau im Baum'' ties on the motive ''Le cattive madri'' (1894) by Giovanni Segantini.
Klee also taught at the Düsseldorf Academy from 1931 to 1933, and was singled out by a Nazi newspaper, "Then that great fellow Klee comes onto the scene, already famed as a Bauhaus teacher in Dessau.
He was so talented on violin that, aged 11, he received an invitation to play as an extraordinary member of the Bern Music Association.
His highly individual style was influenced by movements in art that included  Expressionism, Cubism, and Surrealism.
One of the most literal examples of this new synthesis is ''The Bavarian Don Giovanni'' (1919).
Many of his works and their titles reflect his dry humor and varying moods; some express political convictions.
They lived in a suburb of Munich, and while she gave piano lessons and occasional performances, he kept house and tended to his art work.
Bitterness and sorrow are not rare in much of his works during this time.
The "twittering" in the title refers to the open-beaked birds, while the "machine" is illustrated by the crank.
His works reflect his dry humor and his sometimes childlike perspective, his personal moods and beliefs, and his musicality.
File:Paul-Klee-Dame-mit-Sonnenschirm.jpg|''Dame mit Sonnenschirm'', 1883–1885, pencil on paper on cardboard, Zentrum Paul Klee, Bern
During these times of youthful adventure, Klee spent much time in pubs and had affairs with lower class women and artists' models.
File:Paul Klee, Insula dulcamara.jpg|''Insula dulcamara'', 1938, oil color and colored paste on newsprint on jute on stretcher frame, Zentrum Paul Klee, Bern
The ''Villa R'' (Kunstmuseum Basel) from 1919 unites visible realities such as sun, moon, mountains, trees and architectures, as well as surreal pledges and sentiment readings.
On meeting Kandinsky, Klee recorded, "I came to feel a deep trust in him.
In 1937, some papers from Prinzhorn's anthology were presented at the National Socialist propaganda exhibition "Entartete Kunst" in Munich, with the purpose of defaming the works of Kirchner, Klee, Nolde and other artists by likening them to the works of the insane.
Klee was a natural draftsman who experimented with and eventually deeply explored color theory, writing about it extensively; his lectures ''Writings on Form and Design Theory'' (''Schriften zur Form und Gestaltungslehre''), published in English as the ''Paul Klee Notebooks'', are held to be as important for modern art as Leonardo da Vinci's ''A Treatise on Painting'' for the Renaissance.
Klee's work has influenced composers including Argentinian Roberto García Morillo in 1943, with ''Tres pinturas de Paul Klee'', and the American artist David Diamond in 1958, with the four-part Opus ''Welt von Paul Klee'' (World of Paul Klee).
It took over ten years that Klee worked on experiments and analysis of the color, resulting to an independent artificial work, whereby his design ideas were based on the colorful oriental world.
Among these figurations is "In Engelshut" (In the Angel's Care).
Returning to Bern, he lived with his parents for several years, and took occasional art classes.
"Klee's act is very prestigious.
File:Paul Klee, Revolution des Viadukts, 1937.jpg|''Revolution des Viadukts'', 1937, oil on oil grounding on cotton on stretcher frame, Hamburger Kunsthalle
It employs watercolor on gauze and paper with a chalk ground, which produces a rich texture of triangular, circular, and crescent patterns.
He also created abstract works in that period such as ''Abstract'' and ''Farbige Kreise durch Farbbänder verbunden'' (Colored Circles Tied Through Inked Ribbons).
The name of this art exhibition was ''Schwarz-Weiß'', as it only regarded graphic painting.
Herein lies their real significance, particularly for an audience unaware that Klee's art has political dimensions."
In this period Klee mainly worked on large-sized pictures.
In 1949 Marcel Duchamp commented on Paul Klee: "The first reaction in front of a Klee painting is the very pleasant discovery, what everyone of us could or could have done, to try drawing like in our childhood.
The painting ''Insula dulcamara'' from the same year, which is one of his largest (), shows a white face in the middle of the elements, symbolizing death with its black-circled eye sockets.
In this mosaic-like work in the style of pointillism he combined different techniques and compositional principles.
Through variations of the canvas ground and his combinated painting techniques Klee created new color effects and picture impressions.
Klee taught at the Bauhaus from January 1921 to April 1931.
He stated, "I didn't find the idea of going in for music creatively particularly attractive in view of the decline in the history of musical achievement."
On the other side, his experiment was adopted in the last 30 years by many other artists as a basis for newer creations in the most different areas in painting.
A deep understanding of dealing with watercolors to paint a personal method in oil, structured in decorative shapes, let Klee stand out in the contemporary art and make him incomparable.
Venting his distress, he created several pen and ink lithographs on war themes including ''Death for the Idea'' (1915).
The release of the almanac was delayed for the benefit of an exhibition.
File:Fenster u. Palmen, 1914.jpg|''Fenster und Palmen'', 1914, watercolor on grounding on paper on cardboard, Kunsthaus Zürich, Zurich
Although elements of the garden are clearly visible, a further steering towards abstraction is noticeable.
Klee was also a member of Die Blaue Vier (The Blue Four), with Kandinsky, Lyonel Feininger, and Alexej von Jawlensky; formed in 1923, they lectured and exhibited together in the USA in 1925.
In 1880, his family moved to Bern, where they moved 17 years later after numerous changes of residence into a house at the Kirchenfeld district.
His travels to Paris in 1912 also exposed him to the ferment of Cubism and the pioneering examples of "pure painting", an early term for abstract art.
File:Heroic Roses.JPG|''Heroische Rosen'' (Heroic Roses), 1938, oil on canvas, Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf
Klee married Bavarian pianist Lily Stumpf in 1906 and they had one son named Felix Paul in the following year.
By 1917, Klee's work was selling well and art critics acclaimed him as the best of the new German artists.
He barely passed his final exams at the "Gymnasium" of Bern, where he qualified in the Humanities.
He had an illegitimate son in 1900 who died several weeks after birth.
He and his colleague, Russian painter Wassily Kandinsky, both taught at the Bauhaus school of art, design and architecture.
As their clothes and insignia were bereft, "both of them have no clue if their conventional salute … is in order or not.
A total of 19 etchings were produced during the Bern years; ten of these were made between 1903 and 1905 in the cycle "Inventionen" (Inventions), which were presented in June 1906 at the "Internationale Kunstausstellung des Vereins bildender Künstler Münchens 'Secession'" (International Art Exhibition of the Association for Graphic Arts, Munich, Secession), his first appearance as a painter in the public.
Klee was able to develop his music skills as his parents encouraged and inspired him until his death.
The picture can be interpreted as a critic by Klee, who shows through denaturation of the birds, that the world technization heist the creatures' self-determination.
The moon on black ground is separated from these groups.
In 1922, Kandinsky joined the staff and resumed his friendship with Klee.
I’m not a specialist."
From 1886 to 1890, Klee visited primary school and received, at the age of 7, violin classes at the Municipal Music School.
In 1933-4, Klee had shows in London and Paris, and finally met Pablo Picasso, whom he greatly admired.
Soon, he discovered "the style which connects drawing and the realm of color."
A few weeks later, World War I began.
File:Paul Klee Nach der Überschwemmung.jpg|''Nach der Überschwemmung'', 1936, wallpaper glue and watercolors on Ingres paper on cardboard
When Klee visited the Paris surrealism exhibition in 1925, Max Ernst was impressed by his work.
File:Paul Klee, Inventionen Nr.
6, the 1903 etching ''Zwei Männer, einander in höherer Stellung vermutend'' (Two Men, Supposing to be in Major Position), depicts two naked men, presumably emperor Wilhelm II and Franz Joseph I of Austria, recognizable by their hairstyle and beards.
Here, Klee did not lean on Delaunay's colors, but on Marc's, although the picture content of both painters does not correspond with each other.
He exclaimed, "The Forum and the Vatican have spoken to me.
He later recalled, "During the third winter I even realized that I probably would never learn to paint."
Above the roof of the "Parnassus" there is a sun.
The use of bold color by Robert Delaunay and Maurice de Vlaminck also inspired him.
Klee's simpler and larger designs enabled him to keep up his output in his final years, and in 1939 he created over 1,200 works, a career high for one year.
Klee created in 1940 a picture which strongly differs from the previous works, leaving it unsigned on the scaffold.
The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art has a comprehensive Klee collection, donated by Carl Djerassi.
The association opened Klee's mind to modern theories of color.
The picture was influenced by grotesque lyric poetries of Alfred Jarry, Max Jacob and Christian Morgenstern.
The 1932 painting ''Ad Parnassum'' was also created in the Düsseldorfer period.
