During his year in Papeete and thereafter, he played an increasing role in local politics, contributing abrasively to a local journal opposed to the colonial government, ''Les Guêpes (The Wasps)'', that had recently been formed, and eventually edited his own monthly publication ''Le Sourire: Journal sérieux (The Smile: A Serious Newspaper)'', later titled simply ''Journal méchant (A Wicked Newspaper)''.
Gauguin's Martinique paintings were exhibited at his color merchant Arsène Poitier's gallery.
Gauguin lived at 15, rue la Bruyère.
However he was sufficiently concerned by the habit he was developing to turn his syringe set over to a neighbour, relying instead on laudanum.
He spent the first three months in Papeete, the capital of the colony and already much influenced by French and European culture.
Gauguin's relationship with Vincent proved fraught.
He was helped in the task by the two best Marquesan carpenters on the island, one of them called Tioka, tattooed from head to toe in the traditional Marquesan way (a tradition suppressed by the missionaries).
The Gauguins came originally from the area and were market gardeners and greengrocers: ''gauguin'' means "walnut-grower".
An exhibition at the Durand-Ruel gallery in November 1894 was a moderate success, selling at quite elevated prices eleven of the forty paintings exhibited.
The first of these was ''Te aa no areois (The Seed of the Areoi)'', representing Oro's terrestrial wife Vairaumati, now held by the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Few of his wooden carvings from this period survive, most of them collected by Monfreid.
One of the paintings auctioned in Papeete was ''Maternité II'', a smaller version of ''Maternité I'' in the Hermitage Museum.
Much like his watercolour monotype technique, it was a hybrid of drawing and printmaking.
His ''Jeunes Bretons au bain'' ("Young Breton Boys Bathing"), introducing a theme he returned to each time he visited Pont-Aven, is clearly indebted to Degas in its design and bold use of pure color.
Later the same evening, Van Gogh cut off his left ear.
He began an autobiographical memoir he called ''Avant et après (Before and After)'' (published in translation in the US as ''Intimate Journals''), which he completed over the next two months.
Both David Sweetman and John Richardson point to the Gauguin sculpture called ''Oviri'' (literally meaning 'savage'), the gruesome phallic figure of the Tahitian goddess of life and death that was intended for Gauguin's grave, exhibited in the 1906 retrospective exhibition that even more directly led to ''Les Demoiselles.''
Nevertheless, its publication inspired him to consider writing other books.
The European cultural elite discovering the art of Africa, Micronesia, and Native Americans for the first time were fascinated, intrigued and educated by the newness, wildness and the stark power embodied in the art of those faraway places.
Instead of incising his blocks with the intent of making a detailed illustration, Gauguin initially chiseled his blocks in a manner similar to wood sculpture, followed by finer tools to create detail and tonality within his bold contours.
At the end of the year he completed his monumental ''Where Do We Come From?
The agreement provided Gauguin a regular monthly advance of 300 francs against a guaranteed purchase of at least 25 unseen paintings a year at 200 francs each, and in addition Vollard undertook to provide him with his art materials.
He maintained a horse and trap, so was in a position to travel daily to Papeete to participate in the social life of the colony should he wish.
The painting is notable for the care with which it delineates Polynesian features.
In any case, Gauguin took the opportunity to increase his public exposure by writing an outraged letter on the state of modern ceramics to ''Le Soir''.
Thomson notes that the auction inventory of his effects (some of which were burned as pornography) revealed a life that was not as impoverished or primitive as he had liked to maintain.
He had in any case largely run out of funds, depending on a state grant for a free passage home.
Durrio tried to help his poverty-stricken friend in Tahiti by promoting his oeuvre in Paris.
He included in it attacks on subjects as diverse as the local ''gendarmerie'', Bishop Martin, his wife Mette and the Danes in general, and concluded with a description of his personal philosophy conceiving life as an existential struggle to reconcile opposing binaries.
Despite the moderate success of his November exhibition, he subsequently lost Durand-Ruel's patronage in circumstances that are not clear.
Sweetman writes, "Gauguin's statue ''Oviri,'' which was prominently displayed in 1906, was to stimulate Picasso's interest in both sculpture and ceramics, while the woodcuts would reinforce his interest in print-making, though it was the element of the primitive in all of them which most conditioned the direction that Picasso's art would take.
According to Gauguin biographer David Sweetman, Picasso as early as 1902 became a fan of Gauguin's work when he met and befriended the expatriate Spanish sculptor and ceramist Paco Durrio (1875–1940), in Paris.
Picasso was very struck by ''Oviri.''
His memoir proved to be a fragmented collection of observations about life in Polynesia, his own life, and comments on literature and paintings.
In 2014, forensic examination of four teeth found in a glass jar in a well near Gauguin's house threw into question the conventional belief that Gauguin had suffered from syphilis.
It was in Lima that Gauguin encountered his first art.
His mother admired Pre-Columbian pottery, collecting Inca pots that some colonists dismissed as barbaric.
File:Paul Gauguin 087.jpg|''Among the Mangoes (La Cueillette des Fruits)'', 1887, Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam
By November he had settled into his new home with Vaeoho, a cook (Kahui), two other servants (nephews of Tioka), his dog, Pegau (a play on his initials ''PG''), and a cat.
He bought a plot of land in the center of the town from the Catholic mission, having first ingratiated himself with the local bishop by attending mass regularly.
Durrio had several of Gauguin's works on hand because he was a friend of Gauguin's and an unpaid agent of his work.
File:Paul Gauguin 060.jpg|''Garden in Vaugirard'' (Painter's Family in the Garden in Rue Carcel), 1881, Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen
File:Paul Gauguin 059.jpg|''Winter Landscape'', 1879, Museum of Fine Arts, Budapest
Catholic missionaries held sway and, in their effort to control drunkenness and promiscuity, obliged all native children to attend missionary schools into their teens.
His avowed intent was to escape European civilization and "everything that is artificial and conventional".
He recycled some of his figures and sketches in later paintings, like the motif in ''Among the Mangoes'' which is replicated on his fans.
The naive drawings of the English illustrator Randolph Caldecott, used to illustrate a popular guide-book on Brittany, had caught the imagination of the ''avant-garde'' student artists at Pont-Aven, anxious to free themselves from the conservatism of their academies, and Gauguin consciously imitated them in his sketches of Breton girls.
Gauguin outlived three of his children; his favorite daughter Aline died of pneumonia, his son Clovis died of a blood infection following a hip operation, and a daughter, whose birth was portrayed in Gauguin's painting of 1896 ''Te tamari no atua'', the child of Gauguin's young Tahitian mistress Pau'ura, died only a few days after her birth on Christmas Day 1896.
*The Danish-produced film ''Oviri'' (1986) is a biographical film.
Gauguin had nurtured his plan of settling in the Marquesas ever since seeing a collection of intricately carved Marquesan bowls and weapons in Papeete during his first months in Tahiti.
Disappointed with Impressionism, Gauguin felt that traditional European painting had become too imitative and lacked symbolic depth.
His first portrait of a Tahitian model is thought to be '' (Woman with a Flower)''.
The power evoked by Gauguin's work led directly to ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon'' in 1907.
File:Gauguin Il Cristo giallo.jpg|''The Yellow Christ (Le Christ jaune)'', 1889, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, NY.
He was invited to participate in the 1889 exhibition organized by Les XX.
His mother died on 7 July 1867, but he did not learn of it for several months until a letter from his sister Marie caught up with him in India.
Although Gauguin made some of his early strides in the world of art under Pissarro, Edgar Degas was Gauguin's most admired contemporary artist and a great influence on his work from the beginning, with his figures and interiors as well as a carved and painted medallion of singer Valérie Roumi.
This methodology and use of space ran parallel to his painting of flat, decorative reliefs.
Gauguin didn't waver from his printing inexperience and made a number of provocative and unorthodox choices, such as a zinc plate instead of limestone (lithography), wide margins and large sheets of yellow poster paper.
His process, nearly alchemical in nature, had elements of chance by which unexpected marks and textures regularly arose, something that fascinated him.
For this, the oil (binder) is drained from the paint and the remaining sludge of pigment is mixed with turpentine.
A successful auction of paintings in Paris at the Hôtel Drouot in February 1891, along with other events such as a banquet and a benefit concert, provided the necessary funds.
There was a vogue in Europe at the time for the art of other cultures, especially that of Japan (Japonism).
This activity of arranging and rearranging was similar to his own process of repurposing his images and motifs, as well as a symbolism tendency.
Claverie, however, escaped censure.
He was attracted in the first place because it was cheap to live there.
These sketches were later worked up into paintings back in his Paris studio.
His close friend Émile Schuffenecker, a former stockbroker who also aspired to become an artist, lived close by.
During his stay, the writer Lafcadio Hearn was also on the island.
Scholars are in disagreement if Gauguin intentionally or spontaneously decided to stay on the island.
However, the weather in the summer was hot and the hut leaked in the rain.
Until 1987, when the Musée d'Orsay acquired this little-known work (exhibited only once since 1906) it had never been recognized as the masterpiece it is, let alone recognized for its relevance to the works leading up to the ''Demoiselles.''
The buyer is believed to be the Qatar Museums.
There were some initial problems on both sides, but Gauguin was finally able to realise his long cherished plan of resettling in the Marquesas Islands in search of a yet more primitive society.
This was Teha'amana, called Tehura in the travelogue, who was pregnant by him by the end of summer 1892.
His work was influential to the French avant-garde and many modern artists, such as Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse.
Artists and movements in the early 20th century inspired by him include Vincent van Gogh, Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, André Derain, Fauvism, Cubism and Orphism, among others.
These were treated with arsenic.
File:Paul Gauguin, Eve (The Nightmare), 1899–1900 monotype.jpg|''Eve (The Nightmare)'', 1899–1900, monotype, J. Paul Getty Museum
At this time he was very weak and in great pain.
Gauguin's art became popular after his death, partially from the efforts of art dealer Ambroise Vollard, who organized exhibitions of his work late in his career, as well as assisting in organizing two important posthumous exhibitions in Paris.
Gauguin soon learned French, though his first and preferred language remained Peruvian Spanish.
Mathews notes that this speedy dispersal of his effects led to the loss of much valuable information about his later years.
became the world's most expensive artwork when its owner, the family of Rudolf Staechelin, sold it privately for US$300&nbsp;million in February 2015.
His painting later evolved towards Synthetism in which neither form nor color predominate but each has an equal role.
Gauguin responded in April by refusing to pay his taxes and encouraging the settlers, traders and planters, to do likewise.
Gauguin chose to paint landscapes, still lifes, and figure studies at this time, with an eye to Vollard's clientele, avoiding the primitive and lost paradise themes of his Tahiti paintings.
His techniques remained innovative and it was an apt medium for him as it didn't require elaborate equipment, such as a printing press.
In April 1897 he received word that his favourite daughter Aline had died tragically from pneumonia.
While he was in France, he had his ankle shattered in a drunken brawl on a seaside visit to Concarneau.
Most of these paintings were earlier work from Rouen or Copenhagen and there was nothing really novel in the few new ones, although his ''Baigneuses à Dieppe'' ("Women Bathing") introduced what was to become a recurring motif, the woman in the waves.
File:Gauguin - Badende Bretonin- 1887.jpg| ''Breton Bather'', 1886, Art Institute of Chicago
His next major woodcut and monotype project wasn't until 1898–99, known as the ''Vollard Suite''.
Gauguin's late canvas ''Riders on the Beach'' (two versions) recalls Degas' horse pictures which he started in the 1860s, specifically ''Racetrack'' and ''Before the Race'', testifying to his enduring effect on Gauguin.
Monfreid advised him:
Gauguin prized oil transfers for the way they transformed the quality of drawn line.
The following January, Gauguin moved with his family to Rouen, where they could live more cheaply and where he thought he had discerned opportunities when visiting Pissarro there the previous summer.
At around the same time, Gauguin's health began to deteriorate again, revisited by the same familiar constellation of symptoms involving pain in the legs, heart palpitations, and general debility.
They have no counterparts at all in reality, in the vulgar sense of that word; they do not give direct expression to any idea, their only purpose is to stimulate the imagination—just as music does without the aid of ideas or pictures—simply by that mysterious affinity which exists between certain arrangements of colours and lines and our minds.
had done much to restore his reputation.
In correspondence, he also asserts a passion for Cambodian art and the masterful colouring of Persian carpet and Oriental rug.
Possibly prompted by loneliness, and at times unable to paint, Gauguin took to writing.
File:Paul Gauguin- Manao tupapau (The Spirit of the Dead Keep Watch).JPG|''Spirit of the Dead Watching'' 1892, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, NY
State funding for the missionary schools had ceased as a result of the 1901 Associations Bill promulgated throughout the French empire.
John Rewald, recognized as a foremost authority on late 19th-century art, wrote a series of books about the Post-Impressionist period, including ''Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin'' (1956) and an essay, ''Paul Gauguin: Letters to Ambroise Vollard and André Fontainas'' (included in Rewald's ''Studies in Post-Impressionism'', 1986), discusses Gauguin's years in Tahiti, and the struggles of his survival as seen through correspondence with the art dealer Vollard and others.
The title was supposed to reflect his experiences before and after coming to Tahiti and as tribute to his own grandmother's unpublished memoir ''Past and Future''.
He would often complete the image with a wash of oiled-down olive or brown ink.
File:Annah la Javanaise by Mucha.jpg|Paul Gauguin, Alfons Mucha, Luděk Marold, and Annah the Javanese at Mucha's studio, 1893
Gauguin set out for Tahiti again on 28 June 1895.
He followed this with a private letter to the head of the ''gendarmerie'' in Papeete, complaining about his own local gendarme Charpillet's excesses in making prisoners labour for him.
:Every feature in my paintings is carefully considered and calculated in advance.
Gauguin also sent the letter to ''Mercure de France'', which published a redacted version of it after his death.
Their relationship deteriorated and eventually Gauguin decided to leave.
Even though his time on the island was short, it surely was influential.
File:Paul Gauguin 106.jpg|''Cavaliers sur la Plage II (Riders on the Beach)'', 1902, Private collection
He submitted a large ceramic sculpture he called ''Oviri'' he had fired the previous winter to the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts 1895 ''salon'' opening in April.
Art is an abstraction.
*Gauguin's life inspired W. Somerset Maugham's novel ''The Moon and Sixpence''.
He subscribed to the ''Mercure de France'' (indeed was a shareholder), by then France's foremost critical journal, and kept up an active correspondence with fellow artists, dealers, critics, and patrons in Paris.
a third gender person) rather than a ''taua'' or priest.
He spent his final months in Tahiti living in considerable comfort, as attested by the liberality with which he entertained his friends at that time.
Gauguin's masters were Giotto, Raphael, Ingres, Eugène Delacroix, Manet, Degas and Cézanne.
Emile Marae a Tai, illiterate and raised in Tahiti by Pau'ura, was brought to Chicago in 1963 by the French journalist Josette Giraud and was an artist in his own right, his descendants still living in Tahiti as of 2001.
The doctor was relocated to Papeete the following February and thereafter Gauguin had to rely on the island's two health care workers, the Vietnamese adventurer Nguyen Van Cam (Ky Dong), who had settled on the island but had no formal medical training, and the Protestant pastor Paul Vernier, who had studied medicine in addition to theology.
The lintel named the house as ''Maison du Jouir'' (i.e.
Danielsson notes that, while these and similar complaints were well-founded, the motivation for them all was wounded vanity and simple animosity.
This was the administrative capital of the island group, but considerably less developed than Papeete although there was an efficient and regular steamer service between the two.
He decided to set up his studio in Mataiea, Papeari, some forty-five kilometres from Papeete, installing himself in a native-style bamboo hut.
File:Paul Gauguin 089.jpg|''Bord de Mer II,'' 1887, Private collection, Paris
Where Are We Going?''
Derive it from nature as you dream in nature's presence, and think more about the act of creation than the outcome.
Pissarro introduced him to various other artists.
Many of his finest paintings date from this period.
In such works Gauguin paid little attention to classical perspective and boldly eliminated subtle gradations of color, thereby dispensing with the two most characteristic principles of post-Renaissance painting.
Gauguin, along with Émile Bernard, Charles Laval, Émile Schuffenecker and many others, re-visited Pont-Aven after his travels in Panama and Martinique.
A close family friend, Gustave Arosa, got him a job at the Paris Bourse; Gauguin was 23.
Amongst these new associates was Charles Laval, who accompanied Gauguin the following year to Panama and Martinique.
In July 1902, Vaeoho, by then seven months pregnant, left Gauguin to return home to her neighbouring valley of Hekeani to have her baby amongst family and friends.
His father had broken with family tradition to become a journalist in Paris.
Failing health and pressing debts brought him to the brink of despair.
In March 1902, the governor of French Polynesia, , arrived in the Marquesas to make an inspection.
While in Martinique, he produced between 10 and 20 works (12 being the most common estimate), traveled widely and apparently came into contact with a small community of Indian immigrants; a contact that would later influence his art through the incorporation of Indian symbols.
It was at this time that his quarrel with Bishop Martin over missionary schools reached its height.
He exhibited nineteen paintings and a wood relief at the eighth (and last) Impressionist exhibition in May 1886.
Gauguin began making prints in 1889, highlighted by a series of zincographs commissioned by Theo van Gogh known as the ''Volpini Suite'', which also appeared in the Cafe des Arts show of 1889.
An artist could also confound conventional notions of beauty, he demonstrated, by harnessing his demons to the dark gods (not necessarily Tahitian ones) and tapping a new source of divine energy.
In 1887, after visiting Panama, Gauguin spent several months near Saint Pierre in Martinique, accompanied by his friend the artist Charles Laval.
The third picture of the trio is the mysterious and beautiful ''Contes barbares (Primitive Tales)'' featuring Tohotau again at the right.
In 1879 he was earning 30,000 francs a year (about $125,000 in 2008 US dollars) as a stockbroker, and as much again in his dealings in the art market.
Gauguin also suffered dysentery and marsh fever.
On 27 May that year, the steamer service ''Croix du Sud'' was shipwrecked off the Apataki atoll and for a period of three months the island was left without mail or supplies.
Gauguin also visited galleries frequently and purchased work by emerging artists.
He returned to Pont-Aven for the summer.
The practice consumed Gauguin until his death, fueling his imagination and conception of new subjects and themes for his paintings.
File:Gauguin - Die Gesandten der Oro.jpg|Page from Gauguin's notebook (date unknown), ''Ancien Culte Mahorie''.
This exhibition also established Georges Seurat as leader of the ''avant-garde'' movement in Paris.
His own beliefs, and in some cases the psychology behind his work, were also influenced by philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer and poet Stéphane Mallarmé.
His bold, colorful and design oriented paintings significantly influenced Modern art.
Many of his later paintings were acquired by the Russian collector Sergei Shchukin.
Teha'amana was the subject of several of Gauguin's paintings, including ''Merahi metua no Tehamana'' and the celebrated ''Spirit of the Dead Watching'', as well as a notable woodcarving ''Tehura'' now in the Musée d'Orsay.
'''Eugène Henri Paul Gauguin''' (; ; 7 June 1848 – 8 May 1903) was a French post-Impressionist artist.
In the absence of a will, his less valuable effects were auctioned in Atuona while his letters, manuscripts and paintings were auctioned in Papeete on 5 September 1903.
In 1873, around the same time as he became a stockbroker, Gauguin began painting in his free time.
The model for ''Le sorcier'' may have been Haapuani, an accomplished dancer as well as a feared magician, who was a close friend of Gauguin's and, according to Danielsson, married to Tohotau.
Gauguin's emerging preference for the woodcut was not only a natural extension of his wood reliefs and sculpture, but may have also been provoked by its historical significance to medieval artisans and the Japanese.
Many of his tools and techniques were considered experimental.
He had thought he would find new motifs in the Marquesas, writing to Monfreid: In fact his Marquesas work for the most part can only be distinguished from his Tahiti work by experts or by their dates, paintings such as ''Two Women'' remaining uncertain in their location.
50 years later he was delighted when Douglas Cooper and I told him that we had come upon this sculpture in a collection that also included the original plaster of his cubist head.
His bold experimentation with color led directly to the Synthetist style of modern art, while his expression of the inherent meaning of the subjects in his paintings, under the influence of the cloisonnist style, paved the way to Primitivism and the return to the pastoral.
They were shown again at a small show in his studio in 1894, where he garnered rare critical praise for his exceptional painterly and sculptural effects.
This was actually a portrait commenced by his friend Ky Dong that he completed himself, thus accounting for its uncharacteristic style.
Paul Durand-Ruel, the Impressionists' primary art dealer, was especially affected by the crash and for a period of time stopped buying pictures from painters such as Gauguin.
By 1884, Gauguin had moved with his family to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he pursued a business career as a tarpaulin salesman.
Paul Gauguin spent approximately 6 months on the island of Martinique in June to November 1887.
Gauguin blamed the tropical climate and described the sores as "eczema", but his biographers agree this must have been the progress of syphilis.
He sought out a bare emotional purity of his subjects conveyed in a straightforward way, emphasizing major forms and upright lines to clearly define shape and contour.
The Paul Gauguin Cultural Center at Atuona has a reconstruction of the ''Maison du Jouir''.
He affected an exotic ''persona'', dressing in Polynesian costume, and conducted a public affair with a young woman still in her teens, "half Indian, half Malayan", known as .
He spent three years at the school.
On the evening of 23 December 1888 according to a much later account of Gauguin's, van Gogh confronted Gauguin with a razor blade.
This complimented one of Gauguin's favourite themes, which was the intrusion of the supernatural into day-to-day life, in one instance going so far as to recall ancient Egyptian tomb reliefs with ''Her Name is Vairaumati'' and ''Ta Matete''.
… He was always drawn to women with a 'traditional' look.
The painting was exhibited at Vollard's gallery in November the following year, along with eight thematically related paintings he had completed by July.
Nevertheless, she lived willingly with him and the following year gave birth to a healthy daughter whose descendants continue to live on the island.
The original house stood empty for a few years, the door still carrying Gauguin's carved lintel.
Tioka was a deacon in Vernier's congregation and became Gauguin's neighbour after the cyclone when Gauguin gifted him a corner of his plot.
In 1888, at Theo's instigation, Gauguin and Vincent spent nine weeks painting together at Vincent's Yellow House in Arles.
He built a spacious reed and thatch house at Punaauia in an affluent area ten miles east of Papeete, settled by wealthy families, in which he installed a large studio, sparing no expense.
Picasso's paintings of massive figures from 1906 were directly influenced by Gauguin's sculpture, painting and his writing as well.
At the same time Vincent and Gauguin became close friends (on van Gogh's part it amounted to something akin to adulation) and they corresponded together on art, a correspondence that was instrumental in Gauguin formulating his philosophy of art.
By September the pain was so extreme that he resorted to morphine injections.
The cylinder may have been inspired by similar symbolic carvings in Brittany, such as at Pleumeur-Bodou, where ancient menhirs have been Christianised by local craftsmen.
File:Paul Gauguin, ca.1891-1893, Tehura (Teha'amana), polychromed pua wood, H. 22.2 cm.
During this first year, he produced very little art.
Both of these were to become close friends.
For Anna Szech, what distinguishes them is their repose and melancholy, albeit containing elements of disquiet.
The androgynous nature of the image has attracted critical attention, giving rise to speculation that Gauguin intended to depict a ''māhū'' (i.e.
''Be in Love, You Will Be Happy'').
For a while he considered returning to Europe, to Spain, to get treatment.
Earlier, he had sent for his pastor Paul Vernier, complaining of fainting fits.
