Saul replied, "Who art thou, Lord?
It was in Antioch that the followers of Jesus were first called "Christians".
Acts also quotes Paul referring to his father by saying he, Paul, was "a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee" ().
Vatican archaeologists declared this to be the tomb of Paul the Apostle in 2005.
* Ignatius of Antioch's letter To the Romans (early 2nd century);
Acts reports that he initially was warmly received.
He writes that  is a tremendously important witness to the important role of women in the early church.
* Lactantius wrote that Nero "crucified Peter, and slew Paul."
* The 2nd-century document ''Martyrdom of Polycarp''.
Fourteen of the twenty-seven books in the New Testament have traditionally been attributed to Paul.
'''Paul the Apostle''' (; ; c. 5&nbsp;– c. 67), commonly known as '''Saint Paul''', and also known by his native name '''Saul of Tarsus''' (; ) was an apostle (though not one of the Twelve Apostles) who taught the gospel of the Christ to the 1st-century world.
Before the so-called Jewish reclamation of Jesus (as a Jew) in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, he had hardly featured in the popular Jewish imagination and little had been written about him by the religious leaders and scholars.
Irenaeus wrote in the 2nd century that Peter and Paul had been the founders of the church in Rome and had appointed Linus as succeeding bishop.
On their trip around the Mediterranean sea, Paul and his companion Barnabas stopped in Antioch where they had a sharp argument about taking John Mark with them on their trips.
The Acts of Paul, an apocryphal work written around 160, describes the martyrdom of Paul.
Gallio Inscription).
Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is not asserted in the Epistle itself and was already doubted in the 2nd and 3rd centuries.
Also according to legend, Paul's body was buried outside the walls of Rome, at the second mile on the Via Ostiensis, on the estate owned by a Christian woman named Lucina.
However Paul himself never mentions a victory and L. Michael White's ''From Jesus to Christianity'' draws the opposite conclusion: "The blowup with Peter was a total failure of political bravado, and Paul soon left Antioch as ''persona non grata'', never again to return".
Paul praises Phoebe for her work as a deaconess and Junia who is described by Paul in Scripture as being respected among the Apostles.
He was from a devout Jewish family in the city of Tarsus–one of the largest trade centers on the Mediterranean coast.
The latest research into the life of Paul disputes his claim of conversion.
Some of his family may have resided in Jerusalem since later the son of one of his sisters saved his life there.
Similarly, 1st&nbsp;Timothy, 2nd&nbsp;Timothy, and Titus may be "Trito-Pauline" meaning they may have been written by members of the Pauline school a generation after his death.
Seven of the epistles are undisputed by scholars as being authentic, with varying degrees of argument about the remainder.
Paul and Silas initially visited Tarsus (Paul's birthplace), Derbe and Lystra.
After a miraculous earthquake, the gates of the prison fell apart and Paul and Silas could have escaped but remained; this event led to the conversion of the jailor ().
Paul's narrative in Galatians states that 14 years after his conversion he went again to Jerusalem.
Powell argues that Paul, in his epistles, made use of many of the ideas of the Greek philosopher Plato, sometimes even using the same metaphors and language.
* Jerome in his ''De Viris Illustribus (On Illustrious Men)'' (392 AD) states that Paul was beheaded at Rome.
Antioch served as a major Christian center for Paul's evangelism, and he remained there for "a long time with the disciples" at the conclusion of his first journey.
In the ''Acts of Paul'' he is described as "A man of small stature, with a bald head and crooked legs, in a good state of body, with eyebrows meeting and nose somewhat hooked" and in the Latin version of the ''Acts of Paul and Thecla'' it is added that he had a red, florid face.
Defenders of the authenticity say that they were probably written in the name and with the authority of the Apostle by one of his companions, to whom he distinctly explained what had to be written, or to whom he gave a written summary of the points to be developed, and that when the letters were finished, Paul read them through, approved them, and signed them.
Paul also says that he then went first to Arabia, and then came back to Damascus.
* He became a partner in ministry with the couple Priscilla and Aquila who are specifically named seven times in the New Testament—always by their couple name and never individually.
With Priscilla and Aquila, the missionaries then sailed to Ephesus and then Paul alone went on to Caesarea to greet the Church there.
The author of Acts arranges Paul's travels into three separate journeys.
Conversely, Howard Marshall writes that the speeches were not entirely the inventions of the author and while they may not be accurate word-for-word, the author nevertheless records the general idea of them.
Among the critics of Paul the Apostle was Thomas Jefferson, a Deist, who wrote that Paul was the "first corrupter of the doctrines of Jesus."
It was renowned for its university.
According to the Vatican, these findings support the conclusion that the tomb is Paul's.
Paul taught that Christians are redeemed from sin by Jesus' death and resurrection.
As summarised by Barnes, Chrysostom records that Paul's stature was low, his body crooked and his head bald.
Biblical scholars have typically treated the ''Haustafel'' in Ephesians as a resource in the debate over the role of women in ministry and in the home.
These scribes also may have had access to letters written by Paul that no longer survive.
They lived, worked, and traveled with the Apostle Paul, becoming his honored, much-loved friends and coworkers in Christ Jesus.
In June 2009, Pope Benedict XVI announced excavation results concerning the tomb.
After seven days in Jerusalem, some "Jews from Asia" (most likely from Roman Asia) accused Paul of defiling the temple by bringing gentiles into it.
Baur considers the Acts of the Apostles were late and unreliable.
He was struck blind but, after three days, his sight was restored by Ananias of Damascus, and Paul began to preach that Jesus of Nazareth is the Jewish Messiah and the Son of God.Acts 9:21 But all that heard ''him'' were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?
At this meeting, Paul states in his letter to the Galatians that Peter, James, and John accepted Paul's mission to the Gentiles.
He thereafter refers to him as Paul, apparently Paul's preference since he is called Paul in all other Bible books where he is mentioned, including those that he authored.
The Hillel school was noted for giving its students a balanced education, likely giving Paul broad exposure to classical literature, philosophy, and ethics.
An underlying Household Code is also reflected in four additional Pauline letters and 1 Peter: 1&nbsp;Timothy&nbsp;2:1ff., 8ff.
He was seized and dragged out of the temple by an angry mob.
Paul refers to his mother in  as among those at Rome.
Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that Paul's Damascus road encounter does not fit the pattern of Merkabah.
Although approximately half of Acts deals with Paul's life and works, the Book of Acts does not refer to Paul writing letters.
His method was to put people at their ease and to approach them with his message in a language and style to which they could relate, as in 1 Cor 9:19-23.
Around 50–52, Paul spent 18 months in Corinth.
Although we know from his biography and from Acts that Paul could speak Hebrew, modern scholarship suggests that Koine Greek was his first language.
His letters have been characterized as being the most influential books of the New Testament after the Gospels of Matthew and John.
Both the Jews and the "God-fearing" Gentiles invited them to talk more next Sabbath.
Apparently they held equal rank in prophesying right along with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Elisha, Aaron, and Samuel.
Barrie Wilson states that Paul differs from Jesus in terms of the origin of his message, his teachings and his practices.
''Der Römerbrief''; particularly in the thoroughly re-written second edition of 1922) Karl Barth argued that the God who is revealed in the cross of Jesus challenges and overthrows any attempt to ally God with human cultures, achievements, or possessions.
In 52, departing from Corinth, Paul stopped at the nearby village of Cenchreae to have his hair cut off, because of a vow he had earlier taken.
According to writings in the New Testament, Paul was dedicated to the persecution of the early disciples of Jesus in the area of Jerusalem.
Jewish interest in Paul is a recent phenomenon.
* Chloe was an important member of the church in Corinth
* Phoebe was a "deacon" and a "benefactor" of Paul and others
His death was an expiation as well as a propitiation, and by Christ's blood peace is made between God and man.
From this point on, Paul is described as the leader of the group.
Another well-known passage addresses the topic more obliquely: .
The key question raised was whether Gentile converts needed to be circumcised.
He is generally considered one of the most important figures of the Apostolic Age.
The Muratorian fragment mentions "the departure of Paul from the city of Rome 5a (39) when he journeyed to Spain".
Paul's teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his letters to the Christians at Thessalonica.
Paul's influence on Christian thinking arguably has been more significant than any other New Testament author.
He also pointed out that there are no references to John the Baptist in the Pauline Epistles, although Paul mentions him several times in the book of Acts.
The reference in Acts to Proconsul Gallio helps ascertain this date (cf.
There are debates as to whether Paul understood himself as commissioned to take the gospel to the Gentiles at the moment of his conversion.
After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, 5:6 having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance".Where Lightfoot has "had preached" above, the  Hoole translation has "having become a herald".See also the endnote(#3) by Arthur Cleveland Coxe on the last page of wikisource 1st Clement regarding Paul's preaching in Britain.
Paul only played a supporting part in the life of the church in Rome.
According to the account in Acts, it took place on the road to Damascus, where he reported having experienced a vision of the resurrected Jesus.
Scholarly surveys of Jewish interest in Paul include those by Hagner (1980), Meissner (1996), and Langton (2010, 2011).
In Corinth, Paul met Priscilla and Aquila (), who became faithful believers and helped Paul through his other missionary journeys.
Paul's conversion can be dated to 31–36 by his reference to it in one of his letters.
Eisenman makes a connection between Paul and an individual identified by Josephus as "Saulus", a "kinsman of Agrippa".
Arguably, he is absent from the Talmud and rabbinical literature, although he makes an appearance in some variants of the medieval polemic Toledot Yeshu (as a spy for the rabbis).
In 2015, independent researchers P.J.
The New Testament offers little if any information about the physical appearance of Paul, but several descriptions can be found in apocryphal texts.
Acts says that he was in the tent-making profession.
When a plot to kill Paul on his way to an appearance before the Jews was discovered, he was transported by night to Caesarea Maritima.
Other scholars argue that the idea of a pseudonymous author for the disputed epistles raises many problems.
It was almost unquestioningly accepted from the 5th to the 16th centuries that Paul was the author of ''Hebrews'', but that view is now almost universally rejected by scholars.
They continued traveling, going by Berea and then to Athens, where Paul preached to the Jews and God-fearing Greeks in the synagogue and to the Greek intellectuals in the Areopagus.
While he was still fairly young, he was sent to Jerusalem to receive his education at the school of Gamaliel, one of the most noted rabbis in history.
Jesus called him "Saul, Saul" in "the Hebrew tongue" in the book of Acts, when he had the vision which led to his conversion on the Road to Damascus.
It is possible this was to be a final haircut prior to fulfilling his vow to become a Nazirite for a defined period of time.
The family had a history of religious piety ()  Apparently the family lineage had been very attached to Pharisaic traditions and observances for generations.
The narrative of Acts ends with Paul preaching in Rome for two years from his rented home while awaiting trial.
Persons or religious orders with special affinity for St. Paul can still celebrate their patron on June 30.
Paul went through Macedonia into Achaea () and stayed in Greece, probably Corinth, for three months () during 56-57 AD.
Nevertheless, in Romans he insisted on the positive value of the Law, as a moral guide.
At the end of this time, Barnabas went to find Paul and brought him back to Antioch.
He claimed almost total independence from the Jerusalem community, (possibly in the Cenacle), but agreed with it on the nature and content of the gospel.
Paul's nephew, his sister's son, is mentioned in .
He is claimed to have performed numerous miracles, healing people and casting out demons, and he apparently organized missionary activity in other regions.
The bone was radiocarbon-dated to the 1st or 2nd century.
The undisputed letters are considered the most important sources since they contain what everyone agrees to be Paul's own statements about his life and thoughts.
It was here, in the fourth century, that the Emperor Constantine built a first church.
Paul used the occasion to announce a change in his mission which from then on would be to the Gentiles.
Of the 27 books in the New Testament, 14 have been attributed to Paul; 7 of these are widely considered authentic and Paul's own, while the authorship of the other 7 is disputed.
* Tertullian in his ''Prescription Against Heretics'' (200 AD) writes that Paul had a similar death to that of John the Baptist, who was beheaded.
On their way back to Jerusalem, Paul and his companions visited other cities such as Philippi, Troas, Miletus, Rhodes, and Tyre.
Paul and Barnabas go on to Pisidian Antioch.
Paul's theology of the gospel accelerated the separation of the messianic sect of Christians from Judaism, a development contrary to Paul's own intent.
F. F. Bruce suggested that the "fourteen years" could be from Paul's conversion rather than from his first visit to Jerusalem.
The Bible reveals very little about Paul's family.
Among the writings of the early Christians, Pope Clement I said that Paul was "Herald (of the Gospel of Christ) in the West", and that "he had gone to the extremity of the west".1 Clem 5:5 "By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed out the prize of patient endurance.
In the narrative of the book of Acts of the Apostles (often referred to simply as ''Acts''), Paul was traveling on the road from Jerusalem to Damascus on a mission to "bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem" when the resurrected Jesus appeared to him in a great light.
In his writings, Paul used the persecutions he endured to avow proximity and union with Jesus and as a validation of his teaching.
Three main reasons have been advanced by those who question Paul's authorship of 1&nbsp;Timothy, 2&nbsp;Timothy, and Titus—also known as the Pastoral Epistles.
The couple followed Paul and his companions to Ephesus, and stayed there to start one of the strongest and most faithful churches at that time ().
* Third, 2&nbsp;Thessalonians, like Colossians, is questioned by some on stylistic grounds, with some noting, among other peculiarities, a dependence on 1&nbsp;Thessalonians—yet a distinctiveness in language from the Pauline corpus.
In , as he lists the order in which Jesus appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, Paul writes, "last of all, as to one untimely born, He appeared to me also."
In , thought to have been written in 56 or 57, Paul sends his greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and proclaims that both of them "risked their necks" to save Paul's life.
The other six are believed by some scholars to have come from followers writing in his name, using material from Paul's surviving letters and letters written by him that no longer survive.
* Clement of Rome's epistle to the Corinthians (late 1st/early 2nd century);
He asks if we might be ignorant of other matters simply because no crises arose that prompted Paul to comment on them.
The form of the end will be a battle between Jesus and the man of lawlessness whose conclusion is the triumph of Christ.
Acts recounts that on the way to Rome for his appeal as a Roman citizen to Caesar, Paul was shipwrecked on "Melita" (Malta), where the islanders showed him "unusual kindness" and where he was met by Publius.
The final outcome of the incident remains uncertain.
Paul as described in the Book of Acts is much more interested in factual history, less in theology; ideas such as justification by faith are absent as are references to the Spirit, according to Maccoby.
Dionysius of Corinth, in a letter to the Romans (166–174 AD), stated that Paul and Peter were martyred in Italy.
The Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul is celebrated on January 25.
In  Paul writes that God "was pleased to reveal his son to me."
He was held as a prisoner there for two years, until a new governor reopened his case in 59.
Paul wrote down much of the theology of atonement.
British Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby contended that the Paul as described in the book of Acts and the view of Paul gleaned from his own writings are very different people.
Professor Robert Eisenman of California State University, Long Beach argues that Paul was a member of the family of Herod the Great.
The sarcophagus was not opened but was examined by means of a probe, which revealed pieces of incense, purple and blue linen, and small bone fragments.
It is not known what happened during this time, but both Acts and Galatians provide some details.
The Staggs present a serious study of what has been termed the New Testament domestic code, also known as the ''Haustafel''.
In ''The History of the Contending of Saint Paul'' his countenance is actually described as "ruddy with the ruddiness of the skin of the pomegranate" and ''The Acts of Saint Peter'' confirms that Paul had a bald and shining head, with red hair.
In Sunni polemics, Paul plays the same role (of deliberately corrupting the early teachings of Jesus) as a later Jew, Abdullah ibn Saba', would play in seeking to destroy the message of Islam from within (by introducing proto-Shi'ite beliefs).
This was to become an initial connection with Priscilla and Aquila with whom he would partner in tentmaking and later become very important teammates as fellow missionaries.
However, the epistles contain little information about Paul's past.
The leaders invite them to speak.
The present-day Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls was built there in 1800.
Finally, according to R.E.
Adopting his Roman name was typical of Paul's missionary style.
Heinrich Graetz and Martin Buber) or bridges (e.g.
Martin Luther's interpretation of Paul's writings influenced Luther's doctrine of ''sola fide''.
A tradition holds that Paul was interred with Saint Peter ''ad Catacumbas'' by the via Appia until moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome.
The authenticity of Colossians has been questioned on the grounds that it contains an otherwise unparalleled description (among his writings) of Jesus as "the image of the invisible God", a Christology found elsewhere only in John's gospel.
They sail to Perga in Pamphylia.
He appeared eager to bring material support to Jerusalem from the various growing Gentile churches that he started.
It lacks the emphasis on the cross to be found in other Pauline writings, reference to the Second Coming is missing, and Christian marriage is exalted in a way which contrasts with the reference in .
Augustine of Hippo developed Paul's idea that salvation is based on faith and not "works of the law".
Kirk's third example of a more inclusive view is :
The most common term for prophet in the Old Testament is ''nabi'' ayib"n in the masculine form, and nab"a(h) h'ayibn in the Hebrew feminine form, is used six times of women who performed the same task of receiving and proclaiming the message given by God.
He does not believe it to be a general prohibition on any woman speaking in worship settings since in 1 Corinthians Paul affirms the right (responsibility) of women to prophesy.
John Chrysostom indicated that Paul preached in Spain: "For after he had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these parts, we know not".
From Malta, he travelled to Rome via Syracuse, Rhegium and Puteoli.
This suggests an imminent end but he is unspecific about times and seasons, and encourages his hearers to expect a delay.
Paul then traveled to Ephesus, an important center of early Christianity, and stayed there for almost three years, probably working there as a tentmaker, as he had done when he stayed in Corinth.
As an example, if the Corinthian church had not experienced problems concerning its celebration of the Lord's Supper, today we would not know that Paul even believed in that observance or had any opinions about it one way or the other.
Discrepancies between the Pauline epistles and Acts would further support the conclusion that the author of Acts did not have access to those epistles when composing Acts.
Paul's trip to Arabia is not mentioned anywhere else in the Bible, and some suppose he actually traveled to Mount Sinai for meditations in the desert.
Paul's influence on Christian thought and practice has been characterized as being as "profound as it is pervasive", among that of many other apostles and missionaries involved in the spread of the Christian faith.
The ''Catholic Encyclopedia'' suggests that Paul won the argument, because "Paul's account of the incident leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke".
According to Acts, Antioch had become an alternative center for Christians following the dispersion of the believers after the death of Stephen.
Colossians, and 2nd&nbsp;Thessalonians are thought by some to be "Deutero-Pauline" meaning they may have been written by Paul's followers after his death.
This upset some influential Jews who spoke against them.
Classicist Evelyn Stagg and theologian Frank Stagg believe that Paul was attempting to "Christianize" the societal household or domestic codes that significantly oppressed women and empowered men as the head of the household.
However, Acts goes on to recount how Paul was warned by James and the elders that he was gaining a reputation for being against the Law, saying "they have been told about you that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or walk according to our customs".
During his stay in Ephesus, Paul wrote four letters to the church in Corinth.
Nothing more is known of his background until he takes an active part in the martyrdom of Stephen.
Josephus the Jewish historian writes, "The Essenes also, as we call a sect of ours…live the same kind of life as do those whom the Greeks call Pythagoreans…" " The Greek historian Plutarch ties "Pythagoreans" and "enigmatical modes of expression" together: "Pythagoras greatly admired the Egyptian priests, and, copying their symbolism and secret teachings, incorporated his doctrines in enigmas."
When Ananias came to restore his sight, he called him "Brother Saul".
Paul is considered the patron saint of London.
He features in an oratorio (by Felix Mendelssohn), a painting (by Ludwig Meidner) and a play (by Franz Werfel), and there have been several novels about Paul (by Shalom Asch and Samuel Sandmel).
Lucian, in his Philopatris, describes Paul as "corpore erat parvo (he was small), contracto (contracted), incurvo (crooked), tricubitali (of three cubits, or four feet six)", while Nicephorus claims that Paul was a little man, crooked, and almost bent like a bow, with a pale countenance, long and wrinkled, and a bald head.
Paul finished his trip with a stop in Caesarea, where he and his companions stayed with Philip the Evangelist before finally arriving at Jerusalem.
He then made ready to continue on to Syria, but he changed his plans and traveled back through Macedonia because of some Jews who had made a plot against him.
In addition to the many questions about the true origins of some of Paul's teachings posed by historical figures as noted above, some modern theologians also hold that the teachings of Paul differ markedly from those of Jesus as found in the Gospels.
The Church kept growing, adding believers, and strengthening in faith daily.
For example, the Jerusalem visit for famine relief apparently corresponds to the "first visit" (to Peter and James only).
The two main passages that explain these "household duties" are Paul's letters to the  and to the .
He quotes from the Septuagint to assert that Jesus was the promised Christos who brought them forgiveness for their sins.
Cyril of Jerusalem said that Paul, "fully preached the Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of his preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing Signs and wonders".
Paul also mentions that even Barnabas, his traveling companion and fellow apostle until that time, sided with Peter.
Paul reviews Israelite history from life in Egypt to King David.
He concludes that Paul distinguishes between performing Christian works which are signs of ethnic identity and others which are a sign of obedience to Christ.
The author (Luke) indicates that the names were interchangeable: "Saul, who also is called Paul."
Paul was not a bishop of Rome, nor did he bring Christianity to Rome since there were already Christians in Rome when he arrived there.
Finally, Paul and his companions sailed for Rome where Paul was to stand trial for his alleged crimes.
In his letters, Paul drew heavily on his knowledge of Stoic philosophy, using Stoic terms and metaphors to assist his new Gentile converts in their understanding of the revealed word of God.
