They are quite small, typically only a few millimeters.
Pearls of abalone, or pāua, are mabe pearls, or blister pearls, unique to New Zealand waters and are commonly referred to as 'blue pearls'.
The combination of aragonite and conchiolin is called nacre, which makes up mother-of-pearl.
Saltwater pearls grow within pearl oysters, family Pteriidae, which live in oceans.
One discovered and named pearl, La Peregrina pearl, was offered to the Spanish queen.
Nishikawa was granted the patent in 1916, and married the daughter of Mikimoto.
A graduated strand of pearls most often has at least 3&nbsp;mm of differentiation from the ends to the center of the necklace.
The largest pearl oyster is the ''Pinctada maxima'', which is roughly the size of a dinner plate.
One way that jewelers can determine whether a pearl is cultured or natural is to have a gemlab perform an X-ray examination of the pearl.
These pearls are then processed (often simply matched and sorted), relabeled as product of Japan, and exported.
The second largest pearl known was found in the Philippines in 1934 and is known as the ''Pearl of Lao Tzu''.
Sizes up to 14&nbsp;mm in diameter are not uncommon.
Earrings and necklaces can also be classified on the grade of the color of the pearl: saltwater and freshwater pearls come in many different colors.
52:24 Round about them will serve, devoted to them, youths handsome as pearls well-guarded.
After a bead is inserted into the oyster, it secretes a few layers of nacre around the bead; the resulting cultured pearl can then be harvested in as few as six months.
When a cultured pearl with a bead nucleus is X-rayed, it reveals a different structure to that of a natural pearl (see diagram).
The very best pearls have a metallic mirror-like luster.
Because pearls are made primarily of calcium carbonate, they can be dissolved in vinegar.
These species include the bailer shell ''Melo'', the giant clam ''Tridacna'', various scallop species, Pen shells ''Pinna'', and the ''Haliotis iris'' species of abalone.
According to Rebbenu Bachya, the word ''Yahalom'' in the verse Exodus 28:18 means "pearl" and was the stone on the Hoshen representing the tribe of Zebulun.
In seeding the cultured pearl, a piece of mantle muscle from a sacrificed oyster is placed with a bead of mother of pearl within the oyster.
Ayurveda contains references to pearl powder as a stimulant of digestion and to treat mental ailments.
Pearl dealers publicly disputed the authenticity of these new cultured products, and left many consumers uneasy and confused about their much lower prices.
In the Cartoon Network show Steven Universe, one of the main characters is Pearl, a gemstone based being whose gemstone is a Pearl.
It is thought that natural pearls form under a set of accidental conditions when a microscopic intruder or parasite enters a bivalve mollusk and settles inside the shell.
The original Japanese cultured pearls, known as akoya pearls, are produced by a species of small pearl oyster, ''Pinctada fucata martensii'', which is no bigger than  in size, hence akoya pearls larger than 10&nbsp;mm in diameter are extremely rare and highly priced.
This perliculture process was first developed by the British biologist William Saville-Kent who passed the information along to Tatsuhei Mise and Tokichi Nishikawa from Japan.
South Sea pearls are the largest and rarest of the cultured pearls&nbsp;– making them the most valuable.
They are a byproduct of the culturing process, and hence do not happen without human intervention.
Nucleated cultured pearls are often 'preformed' as they tend to follow the shape of the implanted shell bead nucleus.
Teardrop-shaped pearls are often used in pendants.
A beadless cultured pearl (whether of freshwater or saltwater origin) may show growth rings, but also a complex central cavity, witness of the first precipitation of the young pearl sac.
The most famous Margarita necklace that any one can see today is the one that then Venezuelan President Romulo Betancourt gave to Jacqueline Kennedy when she and her husband, President John F. Kennedy paid an official visit to Venezuela.
Previously, natural pearls were found in many parts of the world.
The extensive and successful use of the Biwa Pearl Mussel is reflected in the name ''Biwa pearls'', a phrase which was at one time nearly synonymous with freshwater pearls in general.
It also records that eight varieties of pearls accompanied Prince Vijaya's embassy to the Pandyan king as well as king Devanampiya Tissa's embassy to Emperor Ashoka.
Saltwater pearl oysters are usually cultivated in protected lagoons or volcanic atolls.
Single natural pearls are often sold as collectors' items, or set as centerpieces in unique jewelry.
Most beadless cultured pearls are mantle-grown in freshwater shells in China, and are known as freshwater cultured pearls.
Very few matched strands of natural pearls exist, and those that do often sell for hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Freshwater pearls form in various species of freshwater mussels, family Unionidae, which live in lakes, rivers, ponds and other bodies of fresh water.
These freshwater pearl mussels occur not only in hotter climates, but also in colder more temperate areas such as Scotland (where they are protected under law).
The accepted process of pearl culture was developed by the British Biologist William Saville-Kent in Australia and brought to Japan by Tokichi Nishikawa and Tatsuhei Mise.
X-ray examination is required to positively verify natural pearls found today.
Calcium carbonate is susceptible to even a weak acid solution because the crystals of calcium carbonate react with the acetic acid in the vinegar to form calcium acetate and carbon dioxide.
Margarita pearls are extremely difficult to find today and are known for their unique yellowish color.
Apart from religious connotations, stories and folklore abound of pearls occurring in snakes, the Naaga Mani, and elephants, the Gaja Mukta.
In time, the pearl sac's external mantle cells proceed to the formation of tabular aragonite.
"And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!"
There is a wide range of views among traditional sources about which tribe the stone refers to.
One family of nacreous pearl bivalves&nbsp;– the pearl oyster&nbsp;– lives in the sea,  while the other&nbsp;– a very different group of bivalves&nbsp;– lives in freshwater; these are the river mussels such as the freshwater pearl mussel.
After a couple of years, a pearl forms and the shell may be found by a lucky pearl fisher.
South Sea and Tahitian pearl oysters, also known as ''Pinctada maxima'' and ''Pinctada margaritifera'', which survive the subsequent surgery to remove the finished pearl, are often implanted with a new, larger beads as part of the same procedure and then returned to the water for another 2–3 years of growth.
This industry has also nearly ceased production, due to pollution.
Most freshwater cultured pearls sold today come from China.
Button pearls are like a slightly flattened round pearl and can also make a necklace, but are more often used in single pendants or earrings where the back half of the pearl is covered, making it look like a larger, rounder pearl.
The differentiation of natural pearls from non-beaded cultured pearls can be very difficult without the use of this X-ray technique.
The first category covers the beaded cultured pearls, including Akoya, South Sea and Tahiti.
A tiny piece of mantle tissue (called a ''graft'') from a donor shell is transplanted into a recipient shell, causing a pearl sac to form into which the tissue precipitates calcium carbonate.
These pearls are gonad grown, and usually one pearl is grown at a time.
Mitsubishi's Baron Iwasaki immediately applied the technology to the south sea pearl oyster in 1917 in the Philippines, and later in Buton, and Palau.
If no nucleus is present, but irregular and small dark inner spots indicating a cavity are visible, combined with concentric rings of organic substance, the pearl is likely a cultured freshwater.
A uniform strand of akoya pearls, for example, will measure within 0.5&nbsp;mm.
Mise's brother was the first to produce a commercial crop of pearls in the akoya oyster.
After the patent was granted in 1916, the technology was immediately commercially applied to akoya pearl oysters in Japan in 1916.
These objects used to be referred to as "calcareous concretions" by some gemologists, even though a malacologist would still consider them to be pearls.
Drop and pear shaped pearls are sometimes referred to as teardrop pearls and are most often seen in earrings, pendants, or as a center pearl in a necklace.
Natural pearls will often show larger cavities where organic matter has dried out and decomposed.
A few species produce pearls that can be of interest as gemstones.
In 1914, pearl farmers began growing cultured freshwater pearls using the pearl mussels native to Lake Biwa.
While most other necklaces are simply referred to by their physical measurement, pearl necklaces are  named by how low they hang when worn around the neck.
Other pearls from giant clams are known to exist, but this is a particularly large one weighing 14&nbsp;lb (6.4&nbsp;kg).
The pearls are usually harvested after one year for akoya, 2–4 years for Tahitian and South Sea, and 2–7 years for freshwater.
Because it did not grow in a pearl oyster it is not pearly; instead the surface is glossy like porcelain.
It is a naturally-occurring, non-nacreous, calcareous concretion (pearl) from a giant clam.
Megasthenes reported about the pearl fisheries of the Pandyas, indicating that the Pandyas derived great wealth from the pearl trade.
Pearl's appearance and personality are based around aspects of a pearl.
The most valuable pearls occur spontaneously in the wild, but are extremely rare.
Mikimoto was able to use Nishikawa's technology.
Before the beginning of the 20th century, pearl hunting was the most common way of harvesting pearls.
They have also been crushed and used in cosmetics, medicines and paint formulations.
Such displacement may occur via an injury.
Kuri Bay is now the location of one of the largest and most well-known pearl farms owned by Paspaley, the biggest producer of South Sea pearls in the world.
However, most of these molluskan pearls have no luster or iridescence.
Another example is the conch pearl (sometimes referred to simply as the 'pink pearl'), which is found very rarely growing between the mantle and the shell of the queen conch or pink conch, ''Strombus gigas'', a large sea snail or marine gastropod from the Caribbean Sea.
The mollusk creates a ''pearl sac'' to seal off the irritation.
If X-rays reveals a nucleus, the pearl is likely a bead-nucleated saltwater pearl.
Prized for their exquisitely beautiful 'orient' or lustre, South Sea pearls are now farmed in various parts of the world where the ''Pinctada maxima'' oysters can be found, with the finest South Sea pearls being produced by Paspaley along the remote coastline of North-Western Australia.
Canning Factory (International Pearl Company L.T.D.)
A beaded cultured pearl shows a solid center with no concentric growth rings, whereas a natural pearl shows a series of concentric growth rings.
Some imitation pearls (also called shell pearls) are simply made of mother-of-pearl, coral or conch shell, while others are made from glass and are coated with a solution containing fish scales called ''essence d'Orient''.
However, it is more abundant than the South Sea pearl, which is more valuable than the black cultured pearl.
Tahitian pearls, frequently referred to as black pearls, are highly valued because of their rarity; the culturing process for them dictates a smaller volume output and they can never be mass-produced because, in common with most sea pearls, the oyster can only be nucleated with one pearl at a time, while freshwater mussels are capable of multiple pearl implants.
By 1931 this project was showing signs of success, but was upset by the death of Tatsuhei Mise.
Japanese companies were involved in all projects using technicians from the original Mitsubishi South Sea pre-war projects.
Large, perfectly round pearls are rare and highly valued.
The largest known pearl (also from a giant clam) was found in the Philippines as well by a fisherman from Puerto Princesa, Palawan Island.
Pearls have been harvested and cultivated primarily for use in jewelry, but in the past were also used to adorn clothing.
Popularized in the United States during the 1950s by the GIs bringing strands of cultured akoya pearls home from Japan, a 3.5 momme, 3&nbsp;mm to 7&nbsp;mm graduated strand was much more affordable than a uniform strand because most of the pearls were small.
Saltwater pearls can grow in several species of marine pearl oysters in the family Pteriidae.
While white, and more recently black, saltwater pearls are by far the most popular, other color tints can be found on pearls from the oceans.
This secretion process is repeated many times, thus producing a pearl.
''Pearl chokers'', measuring 14 to 16&nbsp;inches or 35 to 41&nbsp;cm in length, nestle just at the base of the neck.
The fragile rim of the shell is exposed and is prone to damage and injury.
Therefore, a Keshi pearl could be considered superior to cultured pearls with a mother of pearl bead center.
The mollusk, irritated by the intruder, forms a pearl sac of external mantle tissue cells and secretes the calcium carbonate and conchiolin to cover the irritant.
Cultured freshwater pearls can often be confused for natural pearls which present as homogeneous pictures which continuously darken toward the surface of the pearl.
Divers manually pulled oysters from ocean floors and river bottoms and checked them individually for pearls.
Typical stimuli include organic material, parasites, or even damage that displaces mantle tissue to another part of the mollusk's body.
The iridescence that pearls display is caused by the overlapping of successive layers, which breaks up light falling on the surface.
Despite the common misperception, Mikimoto did not discover the process of pearl culture.
Keshi pearls, although they often occur by chance, are not considered natural.
Semi-rounds are also used in necklaces or in pieces where the shape of the pearl can be disguised to look like it is a perfectly round pearl.
In the last two years large near perfect round bead nucleated pearls up to 15mm in diameter have been produced with metallic luster.
There is a special vocabulary used to describe the length of pearl necklaces.
''Cultured'' or ''farmed'' pearls from pearl oysters and freshwater mussels make up the majority of those currently sold.
Cultured pearls are the response of the shell to a tissue implant.
Just like the shell of a clam, a pearl is composed of calcium carbonate in minute crystalline form, which has been deposited in concentric layers.
In a haul of three tons, only three or four oysters will produce perfect pearls.
The Hindu tradition describes the sacred Nine Pearls which were first documented in the Garuda Purana, one of the books of the Hindu mythology.
All nacre pearls may one day be limited to natural found pearls.
The thinner and more numerous the layers in the pearl, the finer the luster.
Today, the cultured pearls on the market can be divided into two categories.
The GIA and CIBJO now simply use the term 'pearl' (or, where appropriate, the more descriptive term 'non-nacreous pearl') when referring to such items and, under Federal Trade Commission rules, various mollusk pearls may be referred to as 'pearls', without qualification.
South Sea pearls are the color of their host ''Pinctada maxima'' oyster&nbsp;– and can be white, silver, pink, gold, cream, and any combination of these basic colors, including overtones of the various colors of the rainbow displayed in the pearl nacre of the oyster shell itself.
By the 1950s, when a significant number of women in developed countries could afford their own cultured pearl necklace, natural pearls were reduced to a small, exclusive niche in the pearl industry.
Also called Concha Nácar, the pearls from these rainbow lipped oysters fluoresce red under ultraviolet light.
In the cultured pearl industry, the resources used to create a mistaken all nacre baroque pearl is a drain on the production of round cultured pearls.
Cultured pearls can be distinguished from natural pearls by X-ray examination.
Natural pearls come in many shapes, with perfectly round ones being comparatively rare.
Embedded in the conjunctive tissue of the mantle, these cells may survive and form a small pocket in which they continue to secrete calcium carbonate, their natural product.
Japanese pearl producers also invested in producing cultured pearls with freshwater mussels in the region of Shanghai, China.
This lake, the largest and most ancient in Japan, lies near the city of Kyoto.
Hence significant numbers of natural pearls are still found in the Australian Indian Ocean waters from wild oysters.
As they grow in the mantle, where on each wing up to 25 grafts can be implanted, these pearls are much more frequent and saturate the market completely.
Essentially, the controversy damaged the images of both natural and cultured pearls.
There are a number of methods for producing cultured pearls: using freshwater or seawater shells, transplanting the graft into the mantle or into the gonad, and adding a spherical bead as a nucleus.
Tradenames of cultured pearls are Akoya, white or golden South sea, and black Tahitian.
The finest quality natural pearls have been highly valued as gemstones and objects of beauty for many centuries.
However, almost all species of shelled mollusks are capable of producing pearls (technically "calcareous concretions") of lesser shine or less spherical shape.
A farm in the Gulf of California, Mexico, is culturing pearls from the black lipped ''Pinctada mazatlanica'' oysters and the rainbow lipped ''Pteria sterna'' oysters.
Today, momme weight is still the standard unit of measure used by most pearl dealers to communicate with pearl producers and wholesalers.
So a strand will never be 7&nbsp;mm, but will be 6.5–7&nbsp;mm.
In a uniform strand of pearls, all pearls are classified as the same size, but actually fall in a range.
One momme corresponds to 1/1000 kan.
The nucleus bead in a beaded cultured pearl is generally a polished sphere made from freshwater mussel shell.
Cultured pearls are formed in pearl farms, using human intervention as well as natural processes.
Crabs, other predators and parasites such as worm larvae may produce traumatic attacks and cause injuries in which some external mantle tissue cells are disconnected from their layer.
Pearls are also found in numerous references showing the wickedness and pride of a people, as in ''Revelation'' 18:16.
(In 1917, jeweler Pierre Cartier purchased the Fifth Avenue mansion that is now the New York Cartier store in exchange for a matched double strand of natural pearls Cartier had been collecting for years; at the time, it was valued at $1 million USD.)
The rarity of the black cultured pearl is now a "comparative" issue.
Hence, 1 momme = 3.75 grams or 3750 milligrams.
Black cultured pearls from the black pearl oyster&nbsp;– ''Pinctada margaritifera''&nbsp;– are not South Sea pearls, although they are often mistakenly described as black South Sea pearls.
Natural pearls are nearly 100% calcium carbonate and conchiolin.
Freshwater pearls, Tahitian pearls, and South Sea pearls all measure to a full millimeter when considered uniform.
The presence of columnar calcium carbonate rich in organic material indicates juvenile mantle tissue that formed during the early stage of pearl development.
Led by pearl pioneer John Latendresse and his wife Chessy, the United States began farming cultured freshwater pearls in the mid-1960s.
''Yahalom'' is similar to a Hebrew word meaning hit hard, so some people think that it means diamond.
Biologically speaking, under the right set of circumstances, almost any shelled mollusk can produce some kind of pearl.
A '''pearl''' is a hard object produced within the soft tissue (specifically the mantle) of a living shelled mollusk.
The mollusk's mantle (protective membrane) deposits layers of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) in the form of the mineral aragonite or a mixture of aragonite and calcite (polymorphs with the same chemical formula, but different crystal structures) held together by an organic horn-like compound called conchiolin.
Although the project was recommenced after Tatsuhei's death, the project was discontinued at the beginning of WWII before significant productions of pearls were achieved.
For many cultured pearl dealers and wholesalers, the preferred weight measure used for loose pearls and pearl strands  is the momme.
Japanese pearl farmers recently cultured a hybrid pearl mussel&nbsp;– a cross between Biwa Pearl Mussels and a closely related species from China, ''Hyriopsis cumingi'', in Lake Kasumigaura.
With X-rays it is possible to see the growth rings of the pearl, where the layers of calcium carbonate are separated by thin layers of conchiolin.
An ''opera length'', measuring 28 to 35&nbsp;inches or 70 to 90&nbsp;cm in length, will be long enough to reach the breastbone or sternum of the wearer; and longer still, a ''pearl rope'', measuring more than 45&nbsp;inches or 115&nbsp;cm in length, is any length that falls down farther than an ''opera''.
''Yahalom'' is usually translated by the Septuagint as an "onyx", but sometimes as "beryl" or as "jasper"; onyx only started being mined after the Septuagint was written, so the Septuagint's term "onyx" probably does not mean onyx&nbsp;– onyx is originally an Assyrian word meaning ring, and so could refer to anything used for making rings.
In the United States, during the 19th and 20th centuries, through trade with Japan in silk cloth the momme became a unit indicating the quality of silk cloth.
Today, a hybrid mollusk is used in both Japan and China in the production of akoya pearls.
An impressive improvement in quality has taken place in the last ten years when the former rice-grain-shaped pebbles are compared with the near round pearls of today.
Although imitation pearls look the part, they do not have the same weight or smoothness as real pearls, and their luster will also dim greatly.
Since the development of pearl culture technology, the black pearl oysters ''Pinctada margaritifera'' found in Tahiti and many other Pacific islands including the Cook Islands and Fiji are being extensively used for producing cultured pearls.
Natural (or wild) pearls, formed without human intervention, are very rare.
These were packed in Japan by the I.C.P.
Valueless pearls of this type are sometimes found in edible mussels, edible oysters, escargot snails, and so on.
The Pandyas excelled in both trade and literature before the Christian Era.
Starting in the Han Dynasty (206 BC–220 AD), the Chinese hunted extensively for seawater pearls in the South China Sea.
Therefore, they are trying to improve culturing technique so that keshi pearls do not occur.
Because of this, ''pearl'' has become a metaphor for something rare, fine, admirable and valuable.
In the past two decades, cultured pearls have been produced using larger oysters in the south Pacific and Indian Ocean.
When the transition to nacre secretion occurs, the brown pebble becomes covered with a nacreous coating.
The ancient chronicle Mahavamsa mentions of the thriving pearl industry in the port of Oruwella in the Gullf of Mannar in Sri Lanka.
The commonly held belief that a grain of sand acts as the irritant is in fact rarely the case.
Not all mussels and oysters produce pearls.
Mitsubishi was the first to produce a cultured south sea pearl&nbsp;– although it was not until 1928 that the first small commercial crop of pearls was successfully produced.
A well-equipped gem testing laboratory can distinguish natural pearls from cultured pearls by using gemological X-ray equipment to examine the center of a pearl.
A strand called a ''princess length'', measuring 17 to 19&nbsp;inches or 43 to 48&nbsp;cm in length, comes down to or just below the collarbone.
These wild pearls are referred to as ''natural'' pearls.
In the 14th-century Arabian Sea, the traveller Ibn Battuta provided the earliest known description of pearl diving by means of attaching a cord to the diver's waist.
In general, cultured pearls are less valuable than natural pearls, whereas imitation pearls have almost no value.
Circled pearls are characterized by concentric ridges, or rings, around the body of the pearl.
The Gulf of Mannar is known for its pearl banks of ''Pinctada radiata'' and ''Pinctada fucata'' for at least two thousand years.
In cultured pearls, the irritant is typically an introduced piece of the mantle epithelium, with or without a spherical bead (beaded or beadless cultured pearls).
The black cultured pearl is rare when compared to Chinese freshwater cultured pearls, and Japanese and Chinese akoya cultured pearls, and is more valuable than these pearls.
These pearls, which are often pink in color, are a by-product of the conch fishing industry, and the best of them display a shimmering optical effect related to chatoyance known as 'flame structure'.
If the piece of mantle should slip off the bead, a pearl forms of baroque shape about the mantle piece which is entirely nacre.
Although these may also be legitimately referred to as "pearls" by gemological labs and also under U.S. Federal Trade Commission rules, and are formed in the same way, most of them have no value except as curiosities.
According to Marco Polo, the kings of Malabar  wore a necklace of 104 rubies and pearls which was given from one generation of kings to the next.
Many hundreds of pearl oysters or mussels must be gathered and opened, and thus killed, to find even one wild pearl; for many centuries, this was the only way pearls were obtained, and why pearls fetched such extraordinary prices in the past.
Keshi pearls are actually a mistake in the cultured pearl seeding process.
