Of these, A, U and Sc groups are sometimes lumped together as Species Derived (Sppd).
''Pelargonium'' is the second largest genus (after ''Geranium'') within the Geraniaceae family, within which it is sister to the remaining genera of the family in its strict sense, ''Erodium'', ''Geranium'', and ''Monsonia'' including ''Sarcocaulon''.
odoratissimum'' is used for its astringent, tonic and antiseptic effects.
Species pelargoniums have a large diversity of characteristics in habit, shape, size and colour, which probably accounts for them having retained their popularity for more than 300 years.
None of these were published.
They should not exceed 200&nbsp;mm in height, grown in an 11&nbsp;cm pot.
Petals five, but may be four, colour mainly white.
Conversely, it also attracts other insect life to visit the bloom and pollinate the plant.
Fancy-leaf zonal pelargoniums – besides having green leaves with or without zoning, this group also have variable coloured foliage that is sometimes used in classifying for exhibition purposes, e.g.
In the 1970s the British Pelargonium and Geranium Society produced a checklist and the Australian Geranium Society started to produce a register but it was not completed till its author, Jean Llewellyn's death in 1999.
These are as follows;
Frequently xerophytic deciduous perennials with many geophytes and succulent subshrubs, less frequently woody evergreen shrubs or annual herbs.
Also known as "The Five-fingered Geraniums", "Staphysagroides", "Both’s Staphs", "Both’s Hybrid Staphs", "Fingered Flowers" and "Bodey’s Formosum Hybrids".
The large cup shaped petals open just sufficiently to resemble a miniature tulip.
Some have bicolour foliage.
There are hundreds of zonal pelargoniums available for sale, and like other cultivars are sold in series such as 'Rocky Mountain', each of which is named after its predominant colour, ''e.g.''
other terms include “Pansy Geraniums”or “Pansy Pelargoniums”.
* Camphor - ''Pelargonium betulinum''
(1977-1997) who added ''Chorisma'', ''Reniformia'' and ''Subsucculentia''.
* subgenus ''Paucisignata'' 2 sections
* Balsam - ''Pelargonium panduriforme''
''Pelargonium'' itself is native to southern Africa (including Namibia) and Australia.
* subgenus ''Paucisignata'' Roeschenbl.
'Rocky Mountain Orange', 'White', 'Dark Red' ''etc''.
'''Subgenus ''Magnipetala''''': Corresponds to clade C1, with 24 species.
The name was then formally introduced by Johannes Burman in 1738.
The Plant list currently accepts 250 species names.
* Hybrid Ivy — the result of ivy × zonal crosses, but still more closely resemble ivy-leaved pelargoniums.
This is the standard flower set for all Pelargoniums.
Often called "pansy-faced" in the US.
× ''domesticum'' (i.e.
A primary hybrid is recognised as being the resultant plant from a first-time cross between two different known species.
In 1916 the American botanist Liberty Hyde Bailey (1858–1954) introduced two new terms for zonal and regal pelargoniums.
** section ''Pelargonium'' L'Hér.
sidoides'' along with Echinacea is used for bronchitis.
Research conducted by Dr. Christopher Ranger with the USDA Agricultural Research Service and other collaborating scientists have demonstrated the excitatory amino acid called quisqualic acid present within the flower petals is responsible for causing paralysis of the Japanese beetle.
Dillenius originally suggested the name 'stork', because Geranium was named after a crane — "''a'' πελαργός, ''ciconia, sicuti vocamus Gerania,'' γερανός '', grus''" (as pelargos, the crane, as we call the Gerania, geranos, crane).
triste'', a native of South Africa.
** section ''Peristera'' de Candolle - 30 species
Steudel - 3 species (''P.
* Peppermint - ''Pelargonium tomentosum''
peltatum'' had been introduced to Europe.
Much used for hanging pots, tubs and basket cultivation.
* Lime - ''Pelargonium x nervosum''
The species are the forefathers of all the cultivar groups listed above.
* section ''Polyactium'' de Candolle
Other foliage types are: ‘Black’ or ‘Butterfly’.
peltatum'' to retain moisture during periods of drought.
Petals five and equal, colour white or pink to deep purplish red.
The nomenclature has changed considerably since the first plants were introduced to Europe in the 17th century.
quercifolium'', ''P.
Pelargoniums rank as one of the highest number of potted flowering plants sold and also in terms of wholesale value.
Perennials, partly annuals.
* Hazelnut - ''Pelargonium 'Odorata Hazelnut''
** section ''Magnistipulacea'' Roeschenbl.
** section ''Cortusina'' (DC.)
There are an increasing number of these plants with showy blooms;
* Apricot/Lemon - ''Pelargonium scabrum''
crispum'' in their parentage.
Single varieties tend to have larger elongated triangular petals whereas doubles tend to have thin feathered petals that are tightly packed together.
May have bicolour leaves and may have flowers that are single, double or rosette.
*(d) Gold Leaved – Leaves coloured golden/yellow or green/yellow but not showing a tendency to green.
crispum'' were introduced, followed by ''P.
The most complete list in its time was the 2001 compilation by The Geraniaceae Group, which included all cultivars up to 1959.
* Coloured foliage (C)
a few species in East Africa and Ethiopia.
* subgenus ''Magnipetala'' 3 sections
Thus Röschenbleck ''et al.''
'''Subgenus ''Paucisignata''''': Corresponds to clade C2, with 25-27 species.
Registration of cultivars is the responsibility of the Pelargonium & Geranium Society (PAGS: formed in 2009 from the British Pelargonium and Geranium Society and the British and European Geranium Society) which administers the International Register of Pelargonium Cultivars.
* F. Scented-leaved (Sc)
Leaves are lobed, toothed, incised or variegated.
Other terms include ‘Langley-Smith Hybrids’.
''Pelargonium'' species are evergreen perennials indigenous to temperate and tropical regions of the world, with many species in southern Africa.
Chromosomes x=11, may be 8-10.
* section ''Isopetalum'' (Sweet) de Candolle
Unique pelargoniums resemble upright Scented Leaf pelargoniums in being shrubby and woody evergreens.
Below: the dwarf ‘Dovepoint’ which has full double blooms.
Additional descriptive terms include;
* 'Attar of Roses' - a cultivar of ''P.
'''Subgenus ''Parvulipetala''''': Corresponds to clade B, with 39-42 species.
The remaining few species are found in southern Madagascar, Yemen, Iraq, Asia Minor, the north of New Zealand and isolated islands in the south Atlantic Ocean (Saint Helena and Tristan da Cunha) and Socotra in the Indian Ocean.
Erect sometimes trailing shrubs or subshrubs, rarely geophytes or semi-geophytes.
This can be encompassed in many of the coloured leaf varieties.
These are known as zonal geraniums because many have zones or patterns in the center of the leaves and because their parentage includes ''Pelargonium zonale''.
double the standard flower set) but not ‘hearted’ like the bud of a rose.
*(c) Bronze Leaved – Leaves of Green or Golden/Green with a heavy bronze or chestnut coloured centre zone which is known as a medallion.
** section ''Ciconium'' (Sweet) Harvey - 16 species
The dwarf plant ‘Overchurch’ which has a heavy bronze medallion.
The posterior sepal is fused with the pedicel to form a hypanthium (nectary tube).
They have rounded, sometimes lobed or partially toothed (serrated) leaves, unlike the Zonal groups, without any type of zoning.
''Pelargonium'' occurs in a large number of growth forms, including herbaceous annuals, shrubs, subshrubs, stem succulents and geophytes.
* Ginger - ''Pelargonium 'Torrento' or 'Cola Bottles' which is a variety of Pelargonium x Nervosum''
‘Bicolour’, ‘Tricolour’, ‘Bronze’ or ‘Gold’.
For exhibition these should be grown in a pot exceeding  in diameter but not normally exceeding 6½&nbsp;" (165&nbsp;mm).
They may also be referred to as ''Pelargonium x hortorum'' Bailey.
*** subsection ''Caulescentia'' Knuth - 1 species (''Pelargonium gibbosum'')
The phenomenon was first described in 1920, and subsequently confirmed.
For exhibition purposes, when exhibited in specific ‘Gold’ Leaf class – Must have over 50% of leaf surface gold coloured.
The scent of some species growing in their natural habitat, acts as a deterrent to grazing animals who appear to dislike the emitted scent.
Examples are ''P x ‘ardens’'' – from ''P.
This term implies that they are closely related to a species from which they were derived, and do not fit into the R, I or Z groups.
Most of those cultivars grown currently are the result of hybridization over the last 50 years.
The first species of ''Pelargonium'' known to be cultivated was ''P.
* section ''Subsucculentia'' J.J.A.
Zonals include a variety of plant types along with genetic hybrids such as hybrid ivy-leaved varieties that display little or no ivy leaf characteristics (the Deacons group), or the Stellar varieties.
''Pelargonium'' has between 200 - 280 species.
& F. Albers Type: ''Pelargonium hypoleucum'' Turczaninow
Cultivated pelargoniums are commonly treated as six groups in addition to species pelargoniums and primary hybrids.
* Myrrh - ''Pelargonium myrrhifolium''
In the late 1950s a list (the Spalding List) was produced in the United States, based on nursery listings and the 1897 list of Henri Dauthenay.
** section ''Hoarea'' (Sweet) de Candolle - 72 species
There is considerable confusion as to which ''Pelargonium'' are true species, and which are cultivars or hybrids.
** section ''Chorisma'' (Lindley ex Sweet) de Candolle - 4 species
Thus the lower three (anterior) petals are differentiated from the upper two (posterior) petals.
** section ''Polyactium'' de Candolle - 2 subsections
* Miniature — miniature leaves and flowers, stems with short nodes, and compact growth.
Those pelargoniums which were largely derived from ''P.
The nectary tube varies from only a few millimeters, up to several centimeters, and is an important floral characteristic in morphological classification.
Flowers may be double or single.
The name ''Pelargonium'' is derived from the Greek πελαργός, ''pelargós'' (stork), because the seed head looks like a stork's beak.
In the proposed scheme of Weng ''et al''.
Some species are extremely popular garden plants, grown as bedding plants in temperate regions.
crispum'' in leaf shape and growth habit.
The flower has a single symmetry plane (zygomorphic), which distinguishes it from the ''Geranium'' flower, which has radial symmetry (actinomorphic).
In addition to "Regals" they are also known as “Show Pelargoniums”.
Mature plants with foliage normally less than 5&nbsp;" (125&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot.
capitatum'' in 1790.
Röschenbleck lists 281 taxa.
''P x ‘glauciifolium’'' – from ''P.
The group extends to include similar small-leaved and -flowered types but usually with ''P.
crispum'' in their genetic makeup, can often have a strong citrus scent.
In addition to the primary groups, additional descriptors are used in creating a classification code.
*(b) Semi-double flowered (SD) – each flower pip normally having between six and nine petals.
** section ''Isopetalum'' (Sweet) de Candolle - 1 species (''Pelargonium cotyledonis'' (L.) L'Hér.)
Crosses between groups are indicated with an x, ''e.g.''
The centre of diversity is in southwestern South Africa where rainfall is confined to the winter, unlike the rest of the country where rainfall is predominantly in the summer months.
It is also used to balance the hormonal system, menstrual flow, and clean the body of toxins.
*(iv) Micro-miniature plants – Smaller and more slowly growing than miniature pelargoniums.
sidoides'' and ''P.
Mature plants with foliage more than 5&nbsp;" (125&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot, but not normally more than 7&nbsp;" (180&nbsp;mm).
The edible leaves and flowers are also used as a flavouring in desserts, cakes, jellies and teas.
Additional descriptive terms include;
** section ''Reniformia'' (Knuth) Dreyer - 8 species
Stamens vary from 2 to 7, and their number, position relative to staminodes, and curvature are used to identify individual species.
Angel pelargoniums are similar to Regal pelargoniums but more closely resemble ''P.
Linnaeus' reputation prevented further differentiation for forty years.
The essential oil is used in aromatherapy.
Pelargonium distillates and absolutes, commonly known as "scented geranium oil" are sometimes used to supplement or adulterate expensive rose oils.
crispum'' and a Regal variety in the early part of the 20th century.
**(ii) Silver Tricolour or Silver Leaf – These tend to resemble a normal bi-colour leaf plant with two distinct colours usually of green and pale cream or white; the third colour is usually made up of bronze zoning.
The scented leaves can be used for potpourri and they also have a use as flavourings in cooking.
Mainly winter rainfall region of South Africa, spreading into summer rainfall region.
This incorrect nomenclature is widely used in horticulture, particularly in North America.
*(vi) Stellar varieties – A relatively modern genetic hybrid originating from the work done by the Australian hybridiser Ted Both in the late 1950s and 1960s from crosses between Australian species and Zonal types.
* Nutmeg - ''Pelargonium x fragrans''
However Carl Linnaeus who first formally described these plants in 1753 did not recognise ''Pelargonium'' and grouped together in the same genus (''Geranium'') the three similar genera ''Erodium'', ''Geranium'', and ''Pelargonium''.
The Japanese beetle, an important agricultural insect pest, becomes rapidly paralyzed after consuming flower petals of the garden hybrids known as "zonal geraniums" (''P.''
Also known as 'ivy geraniums".
Flowers are single, rarely double, in mauve, pink, purple or white.
* section ''Hoarea'' (Sweet) de Candolle
Various types of ''Pelargonium'' are regular participants in flower shows and competitive events, with numerous societies devoted exclusively to their cultivation.
* section ''Reniformia'' (Knuth) Dreyer
* Fancy leaf — leaves with marked colur variation, together with or other than green.
*(f) Butterfly Leaved – Leaves with a butterfly marking of distinct tone or hue in centre of leaf.
The chemist, John Dalton, first realized that he was color blind in 1794 when he heard others describe the color of the flowers of the pink (''Pelargonium zonale''), as pink or red, when to him it looked either pink or blue, having no relationship to red at all.
cucullatum''  he named ''P.''
odoratissimum'' , ''P.
For exhibition purposes there is a separate class for 'Stellar' varieties, but being Zonals could be shown in an open class for Basic, Dwarf or Miniature Zonals (unless otherwise stated).
Mature plants with foliage normally less than 4&nbsp;" (100&nbsp;mm) above the rim of the pot.
* Pine - ''Pelargonium denticulatum''
* section ''Glaucophyllum'' Harvey
Shrubby evergreen perennials grown chiefly for their fragrance, may be species or cultivars but all must have a clear and distinct scented foliage.
PAGS is the International Cultivar Registration Authority (ICRA) of the  International Society for Horticultural Science for pelargoniums.
* Miniature — flowers and leaves similar to Regal, but miniature in form, with compact growth.
** section ''Ligularia'' (Sweet) Harvey - 10 species
graveolens'' and members of the ''P.
They should not exceed 75&nbsp;cm in height, grown in a 6&nbsp;cm pot.
Southern Africa contains 90% of the genus, with only about 30 species found elsewhere, predominantly the East African rift valley (about 20 species) and southern Australia, including Tasmania.
* subgenus ''Pelargonium''  L'Hér.
A study by the Laboratory of Apiculture & Social Insects group at the University of Sussex on the attractiveness of common garden plants to pollinators found that a cultivar of ''Pelargonium'' × ''hortorum'' was unattractive to pollinators in comparison to other selected garden plants such as ''Lavandula'' (lavender) and ''Origanum''.
*(b) Tricolour – (May be Silver Tricolour (usually called a Silver Leaf) or a Gold Tricolour).
Some types, popularly known in the hobby as hybrid uniques, have been crossed with Regal pelargoniums and, as a result of this cross, are much more floriferous.
Several of the scented leaved pelargoniums are grown for the oil ‘geranol’, which is extracted from the leaves and is an essential oil much used commercially in perfumery.
They are mostly upright bush-type plants but there are some lax varieties that can be used for basket or hanging pot cultivation.
schlecteri'' & ''P.
Chromosomes x=7-19.
One theory being a derivation from ''P.
*(a) Single flowered (S) – each flower pip normally having no more than five petals.
*** subsection ''Schizopetala'' (Knuth) Roeschenbl.
For exhibition should be grown in a pot exceeding 3½&nbsp;" (90&nbsp;mm) but not exceeding 4¾&nbsp;" (120&nbsp;mm).
There was little attempt at any rational grouping of Pelargonium cultivars, the growing of which was revived in the mid twentieth century, and the origins of many if not most were lost in obscurity.
The eventual distinction between them was made by Charles Louis L'Héritier de Brutelle based on the number of stamens or anthers, seven in the case of ''Pelargonium''.
Zonal pelargoniums have many flower types, as follows:
However phylogenetic analysis shows only three distinct clades, labelled A, B and C. In this analysis not all sections were monophyletic although some were strongly supported including ''Chorisma'', ''Myrrhidium'' and ''Jenkinsonia'', while other sections were more paraphyletic.
* Southernwood - ''Pelargonium abrotanifolium''
* subgenus ''Parvulipetala'' 3 sections
Leaves are usually alternate, and palmately lobed or pinnate, often on long stalks, and sometimes with light or dark patterns.
For the considerable diversity in flower morphology, see figure 1 of Röschenbleck ''et al.''
Zonal pelargoniums are mostly bush-type plants with succulent stems grown for the beauty of their flowers, traditionally red, salmon, violet, white or pink.
