Overall population numbers fluctuate widely and erratically depending on wetland conditions and breeding success across the continent.
In medieval Europe, the pelican was thought to be particularly attentive to her young, to the point of providing her own blood by wounding her own breast when no other food was available.
It is also the state bird of the US state of Louisiana, which is known colloquially as the Pelican State; the bird appears on the state flag and state seal.
Consumption of other birds by pelicans is rare, although great white pelicans have been observed swallowing pigeons in St. James's Park in London.
Most species' populations are more or less stable, although three are classified by the IUCN as being at risk.
Birds of inland and coastal waters, they are absent from polar regions, the deep ocean, oceanic islands (except the Galapagos), and inland South America, as well as from the eastern coast of South America from the mouth of the Amazon River southwards.
The largest is believed to be the Dalmatian, at up to  and  in length, with a maximum wingspan of .
Tropicbirds, darters, cormorants, gannets, boobies and frigatebirds, all traditional members of the order, have since been reclassified: tropicbirds into their own order, Phaethontiformes, and the remainder into Suliformes.
Length , wingspan , weight .
Pelicans in their turn sometimes snatch prey from other waterbirds.
Dark with a white stripe from the crown down the sides of the neck.
Pink-backed pelican''Pelecanus rufescens''Gmelin, 1789
Healthy pelicans can usually cope with their lice, but sick birds may carry hundreds of individuals, which hastens their demise.
Peruvian pelican''Pelecanus thagus''Molina, 1782
* ''Pelecanus intermedius'', Fraas, 1870 (Middle Miocene, Bavaria, Germany) (transferred to ''Miopelecanus'' by Cheneval in 1984)
Leeches may attach to the vent or sometimes the inside of the pouch.
In their place, herons, ibises, spoonbills, the hamerkop and the shoebill have now been transferred into Pelecaniformes.
Cladogram based on Hackett ''et al''.
Status: Least Concern.
Conservation needs include regular monitoring throughout the range to determine population trends, particularly after El Niño years; restricting human access to important breeding colonies; and assessing interactions with fisheries.
With restrictions on DDT use in the US from 1972, its population has recovered, and it was delisted in 2009.
DDT pollution in the environment was a major cause of decline of brown pelican populations in North America in the 1950s and 1960s.
However, in the Western Cape region of South Africa, biologist Marta de Ponte recorded the same species eating Cape gannet chicks on Malgas Island as well as Cape cormorants, crowned cormorants, kelp gulls, greater crested terns and African penguins on Dassen Island and elsewhere.
As the air flows between the wings and the water surface it is compressed to a higher density and exerts a stronger upward force against the bird above.
By 6–8&nbsp;weeks they wander around, occasionally swimming, and may practise communal feeding.
Status: Least Concern.
Both sexes incubate with the eggs on top of or below the feet; they may display when changing shifts.
Numbers declined substantially during the 20th century, one crucial factor being the eradication of the important Sittaung valley breeding colony in Burma through deforestation and the loss of feeding sites.
* ''Pelecanus cadimurka'', Rich & van Tets, 1981 (Late Pliocene, South Australia)
Pelicans give their name to the Pelecaniformes, an order which has a varied taxonomic history.
* ''Pelecanus fraasi'', Lydekker, 1891 (Middle Miocene, Bavaria, Germany)
Starting in the 1880s, American white pelicans were clubbed and shot, their eggs and young were deliberately destroyed, and their feeding and nesting sites were degraded by water management schemes and wetland drainage.
Many of these do little harm, but flies may be implicated in the death of nestlings, particularly if they are weak or unwell, and the soft tick ''Ornithodoros capensis'' sometimes causes adults to desert the nest.
The ground-nesting (white) species have a complex communal courtship involving a group of males chasing a single female in the air, on land, or in the water while pointing, gaping, and thrusting their bills at each other.
An origin myth from the Murri people of Queensland, cited by Andrew Lang, describes how the Australian pelican acquired its black and white plumage.
Status: Least Concern.
Australia and New Guinea; vagrant to New Zealand, Solomons, Bismarck Archipelago, Fiji and Wallacea.
It adorns the seals of Louisiana State University and Tulane University, and is the mascot of the New Orleans Pelicans NBA team, Tulane University, and the University of the West Indies.
Their populations have fallen through habitat destruction, disturbance and environmental pollution, and three species are of conservation concern.
The nematodes ''Contracaecum multipapillatum'' and ''C.
The brown pelican usually plunge-dives for its prey, especially for anchovies and menhaden.
Although principally a fish eater, the Australian pelican is also an eclectic and opportunistic scavenger and carnivore that forages in landfill sites as well as taking carrion and "anything from insects and small crustaceans to ducks and small dogs".
In the late 1960s, following the major decline in brown pelican numbers in Louisiana from DDT poisoning, 500 pelicans were imported from Florida to augment and re-establish the population; over 300 subsequently died in April and May 1975 from poisoning by the pesticide endrin.
* ''Pelecanus schreiberi'', Olson, 1999 (Early Pliocene, North Carolina, US)
Since an effective ban on the use of DDT was implemented in the US in 1972, the eggshells of breeding brown pelicans there have thickened and their populations have largely recovered.
The overall trend in numbers is uncertain, with a mix of regional populations that are increasing, declining, stable or unknown, but there is no evidence of rapid overall decline and the status of the species is assessed as being of Least Concern.
Pelicans have mainly light-coloured plumage, the exceptions being the brown and Peruvian pelicans.
The pelican consequently prepared to go to war against them by daubing himself with white clay as war paint.
A gull will sometimes stand on the pelican's head, peck it to distraction, and grab a fish from the open bill.
Agonistic behaviour consists of thrusting and snapping at opponents with their bills, or lifting and waving their wings in a threatening manner.
It entered the oceanic food web, contaminating and accumulating in several species, including one of the pelican’s primary food fish – the northern anchovy.
He fell in love with a woman he thus saved, but she and her friends tricked him and escaped.
Dalmatian pelican''Pelecanus crispus''Bruch, 1832
Adult pelicans rely on visual displays and behaviour to communicate, particularly using their wings and bills.
They can finish the process in a day.
Fossil finds from North America have been meagre compared with Europe, which has a richer fossil record.
Alcatraz Island was given its name by the Spanish because of the number of large numbers of brown pelicans nesting present.
The bills, pouches and bare facial skin of all species become brightly coloured before the breeding season.
The seal of the Packer Collegiate Institute, a pelican feeding her young, has been in use since 1885.
'''Pelicans''' are a genus of large water birds that makes up the family '''Pelecanidae'''.
Plumage white, with pink facial patch and legs.
The pelican, formerly a black bird, made a canoe during a flood in order to save drowning people.
The Peruvian pelican is listed as Near Threatened because, although the population is estimated by BirdLife International to exceed 500,000 mature individuals, and is possibly increasing, it has been much higher in the past.
They primarily inhabit warm regions, although breeding ranges extend to latitudes of 45° South (Australian pelicans in Tasmania) and 60° North (American white pelicans in western Canada).
Length , wingspan , weight .
The heraldic pelican also ended up as a pub name and image, though sometimes with the image of the ship ''Golden Hind''.
Pacific Coast of South America from Ecuador and Peru south through to southern Chile.
The self-sacrificial aspect of the pelican was reinforced by the widely read medieval bestiaries.
A 2011 report by the Center for Biological Diversity, a year after the April 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill, said that 932 brown pelicans had been collected after being affected by oiling and estimated that ten times that number had been harmed as a result of the spill.
Pelicans also fly low (or "skim") over stretches of water, using a phenomenon known as ground effect to reduce drag and increase lift.
This has led to suggestions that pelican numbers should be controlled at vulnerable colonies.
American white pelican''Pelecanus erythrorhynchos''Gmelin, 1789
Molecular evidence suggests that the shoebill and the hamerkop form a sister group to the pelicans, though there is some doubt as to the exact relationship between the three lineages.
The male brings the nesting material, in ground-nesting species (which may not build a nest) sometimes in the pouch, and in tree-nesting species crosswise in the bill.
Living species of ''Pelecanus''
Many pelican parasites are found in other bird groups, but several lice are very host-specific.
The species is susceptible to bioaccumulation of toxins and to the destruction of nesting trees by logging.
They roost and loaf communally on beaches, sandbanks and in shallow water.
The eggs are oval, white and coarsely textured.
The English name albatross is also derived by corruption of the Spanish word.
Where pelicans interact with fishers, through either sharing the same waters or scavenging for fishing refuse, they are especially vulnerable to being hooked and entangled in both active and discarded fishing lines.
Spot-billed pelican''Pelecanus philippensis''Gmelin, 1789
DNA sequencing of both mitochondrial and nuclear genes yielded relationships quite different; the three New World pelicans formed one lineage, with the American white pelican sister to the two brown pelicans, and the five Old World species the other.
The Dalmatian pelican is the rarest species with a population estimated at between 10,000 and 20,000 following massive declines in the 19th and 20th centuries.
However it is unclear whether its numbers have been affected by exposure to pesticides as it has also lost habitat through wetland drainage and competition with recreational use of lakes and rivers.
They rub the backs of their heads on their preen glands to pick up an oily secretion, which they transfer to their plumage to waterproof it.
Sometimes before, or especially after, being fed, they may seem to have a seizure that ends in falling unconscious; the reason is not clearly known.
A fibrous layer deep in the breast muscles can hold the wings rigidly horizontal for gliding and soaring.
Specialist feather lice of the genus ''Piagetella'' are found in the pouches of all species of pelican, but are otherwise only known from New World and Antarctic cormorants.
Status: Vulnerable.
Anatomical dissections of two brown pelicans in 1939 showed that pelicans have a network of subcutaneous air sacs under their skin situated across the ventral surface including the throat, breast and undersides of the wings, as well as having air sacs in their bones.
References in non-royal funerary papyri show that the pelican was believed to possess the ability to prophesy safe passage in the underworld for someone who had died.
Several ''Pelecanus'' species have been described from fossil material, including:
Ibises, spoonbills, herons and the desolate bitterns have been classified in the same order.
The plumage of immature pelicans is darker than that of adults.
About 14,000 pelicans, including 7500 American white pelicans, perished from botulism after eating fish from the Salton Sea in 1990.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge each have colleges named for the religious festival nearest the dates of their establishment, and both Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, feature pelicans on their coats of arms.
The symbol of the Irish Blood Transfusion Service is a pelican, and for most of its existence the headquarters of the service was located at Pelican House in Dublin, Ireland.
Africa, Seychelles and southwestern Arabia; extinct in Madagascar.
All species normally lay at least two eggs; the usual clutch size is one to three, rarely up to six.
The image became linked to the medieval religious feast of Corpus Christi.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature.
They also have a long history of cultural significance in mythology, and in Christian and heraldic iconography.
Southern Asia from southern Pakistan across India east to Indonesia; extinct in the Philippines and possibly eastern China.
In arid inland Australia, especially in the endorheic Lake Eyre basin, pelicans will breed opportunistically in very large numbers of up to 50,000 pairs, when irregular major floods, which may be many years apart, fill ephemeral salt lakes and provide large amounts of food for several months before drying out again.
The wings are long and broad, suitably shaped for soaring and gliding flight, and have the unusually large number of 30 to 35 secondary flight feathers.
The slender rami of the lower bill and the flexible tongue muscles form the pouch into a basket for catching fish and, sometimes, rainwater, though in order not to hinder the swallowing of large fish, the tongue itself is tiny.
* ''Pelecanus gracilis'', Milne-Edwards, 1863 (Early Miocene, France) (see: ''Miopelecanus'')
Pelicans are very large birds with very long bills characterised by a downcurved hook at the end of the upper mandible, and the attachment of a huge gular pouch to the lower.
Superficial air sacs may also help to round body contours (especially over the abdomen where surface protuberances may be caused by viscera changing size and position) to enable the overlying feathers to form more effective heat insulation and also to enable feathers to be held in position for good aerodynamics.
The genus ''Pelecanus'' was first formally described by Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his ''Systema Naturae''.
Holding their wings only loosely against their bodies, pelicans float with relatively little of their bodies below the water surface.
Likewise, a folktale from India says that a pelican killed her young by rough treatment but was then so contrite that she resurrected them with her own blood.
mexicanum'' and the trematode ''Ribeiroia ondatrae'' have caused illness and mortality in the Puerto Rican population, possibly endangering the pelican on this island.
A white pelican logo is used by the Portuguese bank Montepio Geral, and a pelican is depicted on the reverse of the Albanian 1 lek coin, issued in 1996.
The smallest species is the brown pelican, small individuals of which can be no more than  and  long, with a wingspan of as little as .
It is listed as Vulnerable by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species as the population trend is downwards, especially in Mongolia where it is nearly extinct.
Numbers of brown pelican plummeted in the 1950s and 1960s, largely as a consequence of environmental DDT pollution, and the species was listed as endangered in the US in 1970.
The female then heaps the material up to form a simple structure.
However, before he had finished, another pelican, on seeing such a strange piebald creature, killed him with its beak, and all such pelicans have been black and white ever since.
In reality, it often presses this onto its chest in order to fully empty the pouch.
The legends of self-wounding and the provision of blood may have arisen because of the impression a pelican sometimes gives that it is stabbing itself with its bill.
As waterbirds that feed on fish, pelicans are highly susceptible to oil spills, both directly by being oiled and by the impact on their food resources.
* ''Pelecanus odessanus'', Widhalm, 1886 (Late Miocene, near Odessa, Ukraine)
Fish hooks are swallowed or catch in the skin of the pouch or webbed feet, and strong monofilament fishing line can become wound around bill, wings or legs, resulting in crippling, starvation, and often death.
Status: Least Concern.
Status: Least Concern.
Aquatic prey is most commonly taken at or near the water surface.
Pelicans frequent inland and coastal waters where they feed principally on fish, catching them at or near the water surface.
The location of the breeding colony is constrained by the availability of an ample supply of fish to eat, although pelicans can use thermals to soar and commute for hundreds of kilometres daily to fetch food.
The medical faculties of Charles University in Prague also have a pelican as their emblem.
The pouch louse ''Piagetiella peralis'', which occurs in the pouch and therefore cannot be removed by preening, is usually not a serious problem, even when present in such numbers that it covers the whole interior of the pouch, but sometimes inflammation and bleeding may harm the host.
The tail is short and square.
Brown pelicans have been reported preying on young common murres in California as well as the eggs and nestlings of cattle egrets and nestling great egrets in Baja California, Mexico.
The Late Eocene ''Protopelicanus'' may be a pelecaniform or suliform – or a similar aquatic bird such as a pseudotooth (Pelagornithidae).
Even in the 21st century, an increase in the population of American white pelicans in south-eastern Idaho in the US was seen to threaten the recreational cutthroat trout fishery there, leading to official attempts to reduce pelican numbers through systematic harassment and culling.
The Australian pelican has two reproductive strategies depending on the local degree of environmental predictability.
The tree-nesting species have a simpler process in which perched males advertise for females.
Pelicans are gregarious and nest colonially.
Local rescue organisations have been established in North America and Australia by volunteers to treat and rehabilitate injured pelicans and other wildlife.
They dissipate excess heat by gular flutter – rippling the skin of the throat and pouch with the bill open to promote evaporative cooling.
Plumage almost entirely white, except for black primary and secondary remiges only visible in flight.
Great white pelicans on Dyer Island, in the Western Cape region of South Africa, were culled during the 19th century because their predation of the eggs and chicks of guano-producing seabirds was seen to threaten the livelihood of the guano collectors.
They are gregarious birds, travelling in flocks, hunting cooperatively and breeding colonially.
All species breed readily in zoos, which is potentially useful for conservation management.
This finding suggests that pelicans evolved in the Old World and spread into the Americas, and that preference for tree- or ground-nesting is more related to size than genetics.
Parents of ground-nesting species sometimes drag older young around roughly by the head before feeding them.
Length up to , wingspan , average weight .
The fossil record shows that the pelican lineage has existed for at least 30&nbsp;million years; the oldest known pelican fossil was found in Early Oligocene deposits at the Luberon in southeastern France and is remarkably similar to modern forms.
The bills, pouches and bare facial skin of all species become brighter before breeding season commences.
Food is not stored in a pelican's throat pouch, contrary to popular folklore.
The brown pelican is the national bird of three Caribbean countries—Saint Kitts and Nevis, Barbados and Sint Maarten—and features on their coats of arms.
Status: Near Threatened.
Thus they use thermals for soaring to heights of 3000&nbsp;m (10,000&nbsp;ft) or more, combined both with gliding and with flapping flight in V formation, to commute distances of up to  to feeding areas.
Incubation takes 30–36 days; hatching success for undisturbed pairs can be as high as 95 percent but, because of sibling competition or siblicide, in the wild usually all but one nestling dies within the first few weeks (later in the pink-backed and spot-billed species).
Earlier medieval examples of the motif appear in painted murals, for example that of c. 1350 in the parish church of Belchamp Walter, Essex.
Regional threats include the drainage of wetlands and increasing disturbance in southern Africa.
Conversely, colonies are noisy as chicks vocalise extensively.
The air sacs serve to keep the pelican remarkably buoyant in the water and may also cushion the impact of the pelican's body on the water surface when they dive from flight into water to catch fish.
Adult pelicans grunt when at the colony, but are generally silent elsewhere or outside breeding season.
This operation takes up to a minute, during which time other seabirds may steal the fish.
Status: Near Threatened.
The great white pelican also belonged to this lineage but was the first to diverge from the common ancestor of the other four species.
Length , wingspan , weight .
An older version of the myth is that the pelican used to kill its young then resurrect them with its blood, again analogous to the sacrifice of Jesus.
Length , wingspan , weight .
Sir Francis Drake's famous ship was initially called ''Pelican'', and adorned the British halfpenny coin.
Pelicans have been persecuted by humans for their perceived competition for fish, despite the fact that their diet overlaps little with fish caught by people.
They are mature at three or four years old.
Hence substantial energy is saved while flying.
Its metabolite DDE is a reproductive toxicant in pelicans and many other birds, causing eggshell thinning and weakening, and consequent breeding failure through the eggs being accidentally crushed by brooding birds.
The air sacs are connected to the airways of the respiratory system, and the pelican can keep its air sacs inflated by closing its glottis, but it is not clear how air sacs are inflated.
Young of all species fledge 10–12&nbsp;weeks after hatching.
The diet of pelicans usually consists of fish, which can be up to 30&nbsp;cm (1&nbsp;ft) long, but amphibians, turtles, crustaceans and occasionally birds are also eaten.
More recently, such predation at South African seabird colonies has impacted on the conservation of threatened seabird populations, especially crowned cormorants, Cape cormorants and bank cormorants.
The pink-backed pelican has a large population ranging over much of Sub-Saharan Africa.
The species is assessed as being of Least Concern.
However, several colonies are increasing in size and the colony at the Small Prespa Lake in Greece has nearly 1000 breeding pairs.
Great white pelicans range over a large area of Africa and southern Asia.
The pelican is the subject of a popular limerick originally composed by Dixon Lanier Merritt in 1910 with several variations by other authors.
The Dalmatian, pink-backed and spot-billed were all closely related to one another, while the Australian white pelican was their next-closest relative.
Nearer the shore, several will encircle schools of small fish or form a line to drive them into the shallows, beating their wings on the water surface and then scooping up the prey.
Great white pelican''Pelecanus onocrotalus''Linnaeus, 1758
Colonies of tens or hundreds, rarely thousands, of birds breed regularly on small coastal and subcoastal islands where food is seasonally or permanently available.
The supposed Miocene pelican ''Liptornis'' from Patagonia is a ''nomen dubium'' (of doubtful validity), being based on fragments providing insufficient evidence to support a valid description.
The National Audubon Society estimates the global population of the brown pelican at 300,000.
Newly hatched chicks are naked and pink, darkening to grey or black after 4 to 14 days, then developing a covering of white or grey down.
An Early Miocene fossil has been named ''Miopelecanus gracilis'' on the basis of certain features originally considered unique but later thought to lie within the range of inter-specific variation in ''Pelecanus''.
They are thought to have evolved in the Old World and spread into the Americas; this is reflected in the relationships within the genus as the eight species divide into Old World and New World lineages.
In the absence of substantial threats or evidence of declines across its range, its conservation status is assessed as being of Least Concern.
The name and image were used for Pelican Books, an imprint of non-fiction books published by Penguin Books.
Although they are among the heaviest of flying birds, they are relatively light for their apparent bulk because of air pockets in the skeleton and beneath the skin enabling them to float high in the water.
* ''Pelecanus sivalensis'', Davies, 1880 (Early Pliocene, Siwalik Hills, India)
The chief threats it faces are from habitat loss and human disturbance but populations have mostly stabilised following increased protection in India and Cambodia.
Small chicks are fed by regurgitation; after about a week they are able to put their heads into their parent’s pouch and feed themselves.
They catch multiple small fish by expanding the throat pouch, which must be drained above the water surface before swallowing.
Spokeswoman for the Royal Parks Louise Wood opined that feeding on other birds is more likely with captive pelicans that live in a semi-urban environment and are in constant close contact with humans.
Large fish are caught with the bill-tip, then tossed up in the air to be caught and slid into the gullet head-first.
The original version ran:
Human presence alone can cause the birds to accidentally displace or destroy their eggs, leave hatchlings exposed to predators and adverse weather, or even abandon their colonies completely.
