Some tower clocks and precision clocks use a tray attached near to the midpoint of the pendulum rod, to which small weights can be added or removed.
If these variations in the escapement's force cause changes in the pendulum's width of swing (amplitude), this will cause corresponding slight changes in the period, since (as discussed at top) a pendulum with a finite swing is not quite isochronous.
A quality home pendulum clock might have a ''Q'' of 10,000 and an accuracy of 10 seconds per month.
These materials are the choice for modern high accuracy pendulums.
In the discussions leading up to the French adoption of the metric system in 1791, the leading candidate for the definition of the new unit of length, the metre, was the seconds pendulum at 45° North latitude.
A pendulum clock was first operated in a constant-pressure tank by Friedrich Tiede in 1865 at the Berlin Observatory, and by 1900 the highest precision clocks were mounted in tanks that were kept at a constant pressure to eliminate changes in atmospheric pressure.
Christiaan Huygens proved in 1673 that the pivot point and the center of oscillation are interchangeable.
Once the pendulum was set in motion, the plane of swing was observed to precess or rotate 360° clockwise in about 32 hours.
Around 1900 low thermal expansion materials were developed which, when used as pendulum rods, made elaborate temperature compensation unnecessary.
Released by a lever, a small ball would fall out of the urn-shaped device into one of eight metal toad's mouths below, at the eight points of the compass, signifying the direction the earthquake was located.
Huygens also solved the problem of how to calculate the period of an arbitrarily shaped pendulum (called a ''compound pendulum''), discovering the ''center of oscillation'', and its interchangeability with the pivot point.
By the mid 19th century, increasingly accurate pendulum measurements by Edward Sabine and Thomas Young revealed that gravity, and thus the length of any pendulum standard, varied measurably with local geologic features such as mountains and dense subsurface rocks.
The realization that only small swings were isochronous  motivated the development of the anchor escapement around 1670, which reduced the pendulum swing in clocks to 4°–6°.
A plan for a complete system of units based on the pendulum was advanced in 1675 by Italian polymath Tito Livio Burratini.
(However, since 1983 the metre has been officially defined in terms of the length of the second and the speed of light.)
He suspended a pendulum free to swing in two dimensions (later named the Foucault pendulum) from the dome of the Panthéon in Paris.
where ''I'' is the moment of inertia of the pendulum about the pivot point,
So a pendulum length standard had to be defined at a single point on Earth and could only be measured there.
In quality clocks the bob is made as heavy as the suspension can support and the movement can drive, since this improves the regulation of the clock (see Accuracy below).
Pendulums spread over Europe as existing clocks were retrofitted with them.
Precision pendulums are suspended on low friction pivots consisting of triangular shaped 'knife' edges resting on agate plates.
Then the length of the cord was measured.
The period depends on the length of the pendulum and also to a slight degree on the amplitude, the width of the pendulum's swing.
The reason harmonic oscillators are used in clocks is that they vibrate or oscillate at a specific resonant frequency or period and resist oscillating at other rates.
This effectively shifts the centre of oscillation and allows the rate to be adjusted without stopping the clock.
The British parliament passed the ''Imperial Weights and Measures Act'' in 1824, a reform of the British standard system which declared that if the prototype standard yard was destroyed, it would be recovered by defining the inch so that the length of the solar seconds pendulum at London, at sea level, in a vacuum, at 62&nbsp;°F was 39.1393&nbsp;inches.
So the ''Q'' of clock pendulums is increased by minimizing frictional losses (''Γ'').
Invar pendulums were first used in 1898 in the Riefler regulator clock  which achieved accuracy of 15 milliseconds per day.
This shows that a rigid rod pendulum has the same period as a simple pendulum of 2/3 its length.
The pendulum must be suspended from a rigid support.
This is a weight (or bob) on the end of a massless cord suspended from a pivot, without friction.
The difference between this true period and the period for small swings (1) above is called the ''circular error''.
In high precision clocks this caused the clock's rate to change suddenly with each jump.
The largest source of error in early pendulums was slight changes in length due to thermal expansion and contraction of the pendulum rod with changes in ambient temperature.
Leonardo da Vinci made many drawings of the motion of pendulums, though without realizing its value for timekeeping.
This means if any pendulum is turned upside down and swung from a pivot located at its previous center of oscillation, it will have the same period as before and the new center of oscillation will be at the old pivot point.
The most accurate commercially produced pendulum clock was the Shortt-Synchronome free pendulum clock, invented in 1921.
He used the motions of this device as a model to analyze the orbital motions of the planets.
From the length and the period, ''g'' could be calculated from equation (1).
The accuracy of the best pendulum clocks topped out at around a second per year.
His biographer and student, Vincenzo Viviani, claimed his interest had been sparked around 1582 by the swinging motion of a chandelier in the Pisa cathedral.
Because the acceleration of gravity is constant at a given point on Earth, the period of a simple pendulum at a given location depends only on its length.
Each time the pendulum swings through its centre position, it releases one tooth of the ''escape wheel'' ''(g)''.
The clock's wheels, geared to the escape wheel, move forward a fixed amount with each pendulum swing, advancing the clock's hands at a steady rate.
The liquid metal mercury expands in volume with temperature.
He first employed freeswinging pendulums in simple timing applications.
This took much of the appeal from the concept, and efforts to adopt pendulum standards were abandoned.
In 1641 Galileo conceived and dictated to his son Vincenzo a design for a pendulum clock; Vincenzo began construction, but had not completed it when he died in 1649.
Pendulums (unlike, for example, quartz crystals) have a low enough ''Q'' that the disturbance caused by the impulses to keep them moving is generally the limiting factor on their timekeeping accuracy.
Pendulums are also seen at many gatherings in eastern Mexico where they mark the turning of the tides on the day which the tides are at their highest point.
The wood had to be varnished to prevent water vapor from getting in, because changes in humidity also affected the length.
Later fused quartz was used which had even lower CTE.
Around 1900 low-thermal-expansion materials began to be used for pendulum rods in the highest precision clocks and other instruments, first invar, a nickel steel alloy, and later fused quartz, which made temperature compensation trivial.
These were vulnerable to damage or destruction over the years, and because of the difficulty of comparing prototypes, the same unit often had different lengths in distant towns, creating opportunities for fraud.
The pendulum clock invented by Christian Huygens in 1658 became the world's standard timekeeper, used in homes and offices for 270 years, and achieved accuracy of about one second per year before it was superseded as a time standard by quartz clocks in the 1930s.
Its function was to sway and activate one of a series of levers after being disturbed by the tremor of an earthquake far away.
The swinging incense burner called a censer, also known as a thurible, is an example of a pendulum.
In 1790, then US Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson proposed to Congress a comprehensive decimalized US 'metric system' based on the seconds pendulum at 38° North latitude, the mean latitude of the United States.
A pendulum definition was rejected because of its variability at different locations, and because it defined length by a unit of time.
But there was no accurate way of determining the center of oscillation in a real pendulum.
By 1700 its length had been measured with submillimeter accuracy at several cities in Europe.
Their Q of 103–105  is one reason why pendulums are more accurate timekeepers than the balance wheels in watches, with ''Q'' around 100-300, but less accurate than the quartz crystals in quartz clocks, with ''Q'' of 105–106.
During his expedition to Cayenne, French Guiana in 1671, Jean Richer found that a pendulum clock was  minutes per day slower at Cayenne than at Paris.
In 1851, Jean Bernard Léon Foucault showed that the plane of oscillation of a pendulum, like a gyroscope, tends to stay constant regardless of the motion of the pivot, and that this could be used to demonstrate the  rotation of the Earth.
The rods are connected by a frame, as shown in the drawing at the right, so that an increase in length of the zinc rods pushes the bob up, shortening the pendulum.
British physicist and army captain Henry Kater in 1817 realized that Huygens' principle could be used to find the length of a simple pendulum with the same period as a real pendulum.
:That the vibration of this pendulum
A pendulum in which the rod is not vertical but almost horizontal was used in early seismometers for measuring earth tremors.
The pendulum in a clock is disturbed by the pushes it receives from the clock movement, so freeswinging pendulums were used, and were the standard instruments of gravimetry up to the 1930s.
The initial attraction of the pendulum length standard was that it was believed (by early scientists such as Huygens and Wren) that gravity was constant over the Earth's surface, so a given pendulum had the same period at any point on Earth.
Almost from the pendulum's discovery until the early 19th century, this property led scientists to suggest using a pendulum of a given period as a standard of length.
The pendulum always has a means of adjusting the period, usually by an adjustment nut ''(c)'' under the bob which moves it up or down on the rod.
Many sources claim that the 10th-century Egyptian astronomer Ibn Yunus used a pendulum for time measurement, but this was an error that originated in 1684 with the British historian Edward Bernard.
In addition, it could be recreated at any location at which the gravitational acceleration had been accurately measured.
Pendulums are also used in scientific instruments such as accelerometers and seismometers.
So at any given latitude (east-west line), gravity was constant enough that the length of a seconds pendulum was the same within the measurement capability of the 18th century.
It can be seen that the smaller the fraction of the pendulum's energy that is lost to friction, the less energy needs to be added, the less the disturbance from the escapement, the more 'independent' the pendulum is of the clock's mechanism, and the more constant its period is.
This process is called entrainment or mode locking in physics and is observed in other coupled oscillators.
The idea was that anyone, anywhere on Earth, could recreate the standard by constructing a pendulum that swung with the defined period and measuring its length.
In 1818 British Captain Henry Kater invented the reversible Kater's pendulum which used this principle, making possible very accurate measurements of gravity.
Marin Mersenne and René Descartes had discovered around 1636 that the pendulum was not quite isochronous; its period increased somewhat with its amplitude.
The difference between clock pendulums and gravimeter pendulums is that to measure gravity, the pendulum's length as well as its period has to be measured.
From the first scientific investigations of the pendulum around 1602 by Galileo Galilei, the regular motion of pendulums was used for timekeeping, and was the world's most accurate timekeeping technology until the 1930s.
In 1671 Jean Picard proposed a pendulum defined 'universal foot' in his influential ''Mesure de la Terre''.
The first official proposal for a pendulum standard was made by the British Royal Society in 1660, advocated by Christiaan Huygens and Ole Rømer, basing it on Mersenne's work, and Huygens in ''Horologium Oscillatorium'' proposed a "horary foot" defined as 1/3 of the seconds pendulum.
By the 18th century its length had been measured with sub-millimeter accuracy at a number of cities in Europe and around the world.
By using the correct height of mercury in the container these two effects will cancel, leaving the pendulum's centre of mass, and its period, unchanged with temperature.
''ω'' is fixed by the pendulum's period, and ''M'' is limited by the load capacity and rigidity of the suspension.
The bob of the pendulum does not move when its mounting does, and the difference in the movements is recorded on a drum chart.
For 300 years, from its discovery around 1581 until development of the quartz clock in the 1930s, the pendulum was the world's standard for accurate timekeeping.
The word "pendulum" is new Latin, from the Latin ''pendulus'', meaning 'hanging'.
The crutch is pushed back and forth by the clock's escapement, ''(g,h)''.
Gridiron pendulums adjust to temperature changes faster than mercury pendulums, but scientists found that friction of the rods sliding in their holes in the frame caused gridiron pendulums to adjust in a series of tiny jumps.
This avoids the friction and 'play' caused by a pivot, and the slight bending force of the spring merely adds to the pendulum's restoring force.
For real pendulums, corrections to the period may be needed to take into account the buoyancy and viscous resistance of the air, the mass of the string or rod, the size and shape of the bob and how it is attached to the string, flexibility and stretching of the string, and motion of the support.
These were only used in a few of the highest precision clocks before the pendulum became obsolete as a time standard.
In 1826 British astronomer George Airy proved what clockmakers had known for centuries; that the disturbing effect of a drive force on the period of a pendulum is smallest if given as a short impulse as the pendulum passes through its bottom equilibrium position.
Instead of hanging from a pivot, clock pendulums are usually supported by a short straight spring ''(d)'' of flexible metal ribbon.
With a temperature rise, the pendulum rod gets longer, but the mercury also expands and its surface level rises slightly in the container, moving its centre of mass closer to the pendulum pivot.
So the modern world's standard unit of length is certainly closely linked historically with the seconds pendulum.
This solution didn't prove as practical as simply limiting the pendulum's swing to small angles of a few degrees.
Robert Hooke was also responsible for suggesting as early as 1666 that the pendulum could be used to measure the force of gravity.
In 1817 Henry Kater used this idea to produce a type of reversible pendulum, now known as a Kater pendulum, for improved measurements of the acceleration due to gravity.
It was advocated by a group led by French politician Talleyrand and mathematician Antoine Nicolas Caritat de Condorcet.
Substituting this expression in (1) above, the period ''T'' of a compound pendulum is given by
Increases in barometric pressure increase a pendulum's period slightly due to the first two effects, by about 0.11 seconds per day per kilopascal (0.37 seconds per day per inch of mercury or 0.015 seconds per day per torr).
For small swings the pendulum approximates a harmonic oscillator, and its motion as a function of time, t, is approximately simple harmonic motion:
Although Huygens only observed out-of-phase synchronization, recent investigations have shown the existence of in-phase synchronization, as well as "death" states wherein one or both clocks stops.
Historically they were used as gravimeters to measure the acceleration of gravity in geophysical surveys, and even as a standard of length.
''m'' is the mass of the pendulum, and ''R'' is the distance between the pivot point and the center of mass.
The appropriate equivalent length ''L'' for calculating the period of any such pendulum is the distance
Any swinging rigid body free to rotate about a fixed horizontal axis is called a '''compound pendulum''' or '''physical pendulum'''.
It was found that a major source of error was that the pendulum rod expanded and contracted with changes in ambient temperature, changing the period of swing.
In addition to clock pendulums, freeswinging seconds pendulums were widely used as precision timers in scientific experiments in the 17th and 18th centuries.
That is, if a pendulum were turned upside down and hung from its center of oscillation, it would have the same period as it did in the previous position, and the old pivot point would be the new center of oscillation.
Christopher Wren was another early supporter.
Marin Mersenne, who first measured the seconds pendulum in 1644, also suggested it.
In the early measurements, a weight on a cord was suspended in front of the clock pendulum, and its length adjusted until the two pendulums swung in exact synchronism.
Mercury pendulums were the standard used in precision regulator clocks into the 20th century.
Pendulum motion appears in religious ceremonies as well.
In the case of a typical grandfather clock whose pendulum has a swing of 6° and thus an amplitude of 3° (0.05&nbsp;radians), the difference between the true period and the small angle approximation (1) amounts to about 15 seconds per day.
Only a few large tower clocks use longer pendulums, the 1.5 second pendulum,  long, or occasionally the two-second pendulum,   which is used in Big Ben.
The measure of a harmonic oscillator's resistance to disturbances to its oscillation period is a dimensionless parameter called the ''Q'' factor equal to the resonant frequency divided by the resonance width.
The higher the ''Q'', the smaller the resonance width, and the more constant the frequency or period of the oscillator for a given disturbance.
The existing clock movement, the verge escapement, made pendulums swing in very wide arcs of about 100°.
The timekeeping accuracy of the pendulum was exceeded by the quartz crystal oscillator, invented in 1921, and quartz clocks, invented in 1927, replaced pendulum clocks as the world's best timekeepers.
The most accurate escapements, such as the deadbeat, approximately satisfy this condition.
In Britain the leading advocate of the pendulum was politician John Riggs Miller.
Gravitational acceleration increases smoothly from the equator to the poles, due to the oblate shape of the Earth.
To get around this problem, the early researchers above approximated an ideal simple pendulum as closely as possible by using a metal sphere suspended by a light wire or cord.
Huygens analyzed this problem by determining what curve an object must follow to descend by gravity to the same point in the same time interval, regardless of starting point; the so-called ''tautochrone curve''.
In a mercury pendulum, the pendulum's weight (bob) is a container of mercury.
where  is a constant value, dependent on initial conditions.
Thermal expansion of pendulum rods was first studied by Jean Picard in 1669.
The ''Q'' is related to how long it takes for the oscillations of an oscillator to die out.
The period of pendulums could be measured very precisely by timing them with clocks that were set by the stars.
These pushes, applied by a mechanism called the escapement, are the main source of disturbance to the pendulum's motion.
Britain and Denmark appear to be the only nations that (for a short time) based their units of length on the pendulum.
However, when the prototype yard was lost in the 1834 Houses of Parliament fire, it proved impossible to recreate it accurately from the pendulum definition, and in 1855 Britain repealed the pendulum standard and returned to prototype standards.
James Steuart (1780) and George Skene Keith were also supporters.
representing a precision of gravity measurement of 7×10−6 (7 mGal or 70 µm/s2).
Portable pendulums began to be taken on voyages to distant lands, as precision gravimeters to measure the acceleration of gravity at different points on Earth, eventually resulting in accurate models of the shape of the Earth.
From this he deduced that the force of gravity was lower at Cayenne.
Gabriel Mouton around 1670 suggested defining the ''toise'' either by a seconds pendulum or a minute of terrestrial degree.
After applying corrections for the finite amplitude of swing, the buoyancy of the bob, the barometric pressure and altitude, and temperature, he obtained a value of 39.13929&nbsp;inches for the seconds pendulum at London, in vacuum, at sea level, at 62&nbsp;°F.
The reciprocal of the Q is roughly proportional to the limiting accuracy achievable by a harmonic oscillator as a time standard.
Its Invar master pendulum swinging in a vacuum tank had a ''Q'' of 110,000 and an error rate of around a second per year.
Pendulums require great mechanical stability: a length change of only 0.02%, 0.2&nbsp;mm in a grandfather clock pendulum, will cause an error of a minute per week.
''L'' was the length of an idealized simple gravity pendulum (described at top), which has all its mass concentrated in a point at the end of the cord.
The accuracy of gravity measurements made with pendulums was limited by the difficulty of finding the location of their center of oscillation.
A pendulum standard amounted to defining the unit of length by the gravitational force of the Earth, for all intents constant, and the second, which was defined by the rotation rate of the Earth, also constant.
It could be swung from either pivot, with the knife blades supported on agate plates.
The presence of the acceleration of gravity ''g'' in the periodicity equation (1) for a pendulum means that the local gravitational acceleration of the Earth can be calculated from the period of a pendulum.
To improve thermal accommodation several thin containers were often used, made of metal.
This property, called isochronism, is the reason pendulums are so useful for timekeeping.
Researchers using pendulums to measure the acceleration of gravity had to correct the period for the air pressure at the altitude of measurement, computing the equivalent period of a pendulum swinging in vacuum.
Hooke suggested to Isaac Newton in 1679 that the components of orbital motion consisted of inertial motion along a tangent direction plus an attractive motion in the radial direction.
In 1673, Christiaan Huygens published his theory of the pendulum, ''Horologium Oscillatorium sive de motu pendulorum''.
The force of the clock's mainspring or a driving weight hanging from a pulley, transmitted through the clock's gear train, causes the wheel to turn, and a tooth presses against one of the pallets ''(h)'', giving the pendulum a short push.
This consists of alternating rods of two different metals, one with lower thermal expansion (CTE), steel, and one with higher thermal expansion, zinc or brass.
Two clocks had been placed on his mantlepiece, and he noted that they had acquired an opposing motion.
The pendulum was the first harmonic oscillator used by man.
Regardless of how the two clocks were started, he found that they would eventually return to this state, thus making the first recorded observation of a coupled oscillator.
from the pivot to the ''center of oscillation''.
Suspension springs of Elinvar were used to eliminate temperature variation of the spring's restoring force on the pendulum.
This is called an ''isochronous escapement''.
Kater built a reversible pendulum (shown at right) consisting of a brass bar with two opposing pivots made of short triangular "knife" blades ''(a)'' near either end.
Synchronized pendulums have been used in clocks and were widely used in gravimeters in the early 20th century.
Around the resonant frequency there is a narrow natural band of frequencies (or periods), called the resonance width or bandwidth, where the harmonic oscillator will oscillate.
For a seconds pendulum, ''g'' is proportional to its length:
When his efforts to promote a joint British–French–American metric system fell through in 1790, he proposed a British system based on the length of the seconds pendulum at London.
Pendulums are affected by changes in gravitational acceleration, which varies by as much as 0.5% at different locations on Earth, so pendulum clocks have to be recalibrated after a move.
When a pendulum is displaced sideways from its resting, equilibrium position, it is subject to a restoring force due to gravity that will accelerate it back toward the equilibrium position.
To make its period isochronous, Huygens mounted cycloidal-shaped metal 'chops' next to the pivots in his clocks, that constrained the suspension cord and forced the pendulum to follow a cycloid arc.
Virtually all proposals were based on the seconds pendulum, in which each swing (a half period) takes one second, which is about a meter (39&nbsp;inches) long, because by the late 17th century it had become a standard for measuring gravity (see previous section).
Enlightenment scientists argued for a length standard that was based on some property of nature that could be determined by measurement, creating an indestructible, universal standard.
Although not defined by the pendulum, the final length chosen for the metre, 10−7 of the pole-to-equator meridian arc, was very close to the length of the seconds pendulum (0.9937 m), within 0.63%.
To reduce air resistance (which accounts for most of the energy loss in clocks)  the bob is traditionally a smooth disk with a lens-shaped cross section, although in antique clocks it often had carvings or decorations specific to the type of clock.
If most of the mass is concentrated in a relatively small bob compared to the pendulum length, the center of oscillation is close to the center of mass.
Pendulum gravimeters were superseded by "free fall" gravimeters in the 1950s, but pendulum instruments continued to be used into the 1970s.
(1) above is the distance from the pivot point to the center of mass of the bob.
By the end of the 18th century, when many nations were reforming their weight and measure systems, the seconds pendulum was the leading choice for a new definition of length, advocated by prominent scientists in several major nations.
If the wire was light enough, the center of oscillation was close to the center of gravity of the ball, at its geometric center.
The ''Q'' is equal to 2''π'' times the energy stored in the pendulum, divided by the energy lost to friction during each oscillation period, which is the same as the energy added by the escapement each period.
See also pendulums for divination and dowsing.
For example, a pendulum standard defined at 45° north latitude, a popular choice, could be measured in parts of France, Italy, Croatia, Serbia, Romania, Russia, Kazakhstan, China, Mongolia, the United States and Canada.
In 1673 Huygens had shown that the period of a real pendulum (called a ''compound pendulum'') was equal to the period of a simple pendulum with a length equal to the distance between the pivot point and a point called the center of oscillation, located under the center of gravity, that depends on the mass distribution along the pendulum.
So the unit of length could be defined at a given latitude and measured at any point at that latitude.
The timekeeping elements in all clocks, which include pendulums, balance wheels, the quartz crystals used in quartz watches, and even the vibrating atoms in atomic clocks, are in physics called harmonic oscillators.
This was solved with the invention of temperature compensated pendulums, the mercury pendulum in 1721 and the gridiron pendulum in 1726, reducing errors in precision pendulum clocks to a few seconds per week.
This has a negligible effect on the period, but dissipates energy, reducing the amplitude.
In 1665 Huygens made a curious observation about pendulum clocks.
For larger amplitudes, the period increases gradually with amplitude so it is longer than given by equation (1).
Substituting these values into the above equation gives ''T''&nbsp;=&nbsp;2π.
This played a part in Newton's formulation of the law of universal gravitation.
During operation, any elasticity will allow tiny imperceptible swaying motions of the support, which disturbs the clock's period, resulting in error.
Successive swings of the pendulum, even if changing in amplitude, take the same amount of time.
This was one of the three final options considered by the French Academy of Sciences committee.
This also became the US standard, since at the time the US used British measures.
The ''simple gravity pendulum'' is an idealized mathematical model of a pendulum.
