Prior to the adoption of the Latin word in English the penis was referred to as a "yard".
Copulation time ranges from 7 to 35 minutes, averaging 11–15 minutes.
Most marsupials, except for the two largest species of kangaroos and marsupial moles (assuming the latter are true marsupials), have a bifurcated penis, separated into two columns, so that the penis has two ends corresponding to the females' two vaginas.
In 2014, a detailed study of the insects reproductive habits led by Kazunori Yoshizawae confirmed that the organ functions similar to a penis – for example, it swells during sexual intercourse – and is used to extract sperm from the male.
A series of muscular contractions delivers semen, containing male gametes known as sperm cells or spermatozoa, from the penis.
During paradoxical sleep, no erections occur, and the penile muscles share the characteristics of the rest of the body.
The foreskin of a capybara is attached to the anus in an unusual way, forming an anogenital invagination.
Post copulation genital grooming has also been observed.
Pizzle, an archaic English word for penis, of Low German or Dutch origin, is now used to denote the penis of a non-human animal.
The male fossa has scent glands near the penis, with the penile glands emitting a strong odor.
The baculum clearly protrudes from the end.
The surface is spined with doubled headed or even tridentate spines pointing towards the body.
Among bird species with a penis are paleognathes (tinamous and ratites) and Anatidae (ducks, geese and swans).
As is usual for sigmodontines, there are two pairs of ventral prostate glands and a single pair of anterior and dorsal prostate glands.
The urethra drains the bladder through the prostate gland where it is joined by the ejaculatory duct, and then onward to the penis.
It involves the animal spreading his thighs and having an erect penis.
In male spotted hyenas, as well as females, the base of the glans is covered with penile spines.
Bulls have a fibro-elastic penis.
Upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which is a trigger for ovulation.
While most male birds have no external genitalia, male waterfowl (Anatidae) have a phallus.
The penile morphology of some types of strepsirrhine primates has provided information about their taxonomy.
The pronghorn's penis is about 5 inches long, and is shaped like an ice pick.
In many mammals, the size of a flaccid penis is smaller than its erect size.
The baculum is clearly visible at the tip.
Once the female retracts her clitoris, the male enters the female by sliding beneath her, an operation facilitated by the penis's upward angle.
The term ''penis'' applies to many intromittent organs, but not to all; for example the intromittent organ of most cephalopoda is the hectocotylus, a specialised arm, and male spiders use their pedipalps.
It is usually partially feathered and in some species features spines and brush-like filaments, and in flaccid state curls up inside the cloaca.
A number of invertebrate species have independently evolved the mating technique of traumatic insemination   where the penis penetrates the female's abdomen and deposits sperm in the wound it produces.
Copulation by male greater short-nosed fruit bats is dorsoventral and the females lick the shaft or the base of the male's penis, but not the glans which has already penetrated the vagina.
Wild boars have a roughly egg-sized sack near the opening of the penis, which collects urine and emits a sharp odour.
The glans terminates with a characteristic set of curves which does not occur in any other species.
This unusually lengthy mating is due to the physical nature of the male's erect penis, which has backwards-pointing spines along most of its length.
During its slow wave sleep phase, penile protrusion makes some very complex movements.
In ''Thomasomys ucucha'' the glans penis is rounded, short, and small and is superficially divided into left and right halves by a trough at the top and a ridge at the bottom.
The lake duck (also called Argentine blue-bill) has the largest penis in relation to body size of all vertebrates; while usually about half the body size (20&nbsp;cm), a specimen with a penis 42.5&nbsp;cm long is documented.
Accurate measurements of the blue whale are difficult to take because the whale's erect length can only be observed during mating.
Genital display among male squirrel monkeys is an important social signal in relation to group hierarchy; it is derived from sexual behavior but is used for social communication.
The penis is quite rigid when non-erect, and becomes even more rigid during erection.
The lack of lateral bacular mounds, presence of a lateral lobule, and size of the preputial glands are all unique traits among the oryzomyines.
For example, an adult gorilla's erect penis is about  in length; an adult chimpanzee, significantly smaller (in body size) than a gorilla, has a penis size about double that of the gorilla.
A bone called the baculum or ''os penis'' is present in most mammals but absent in humans, cattle and horses.
Pizzles are represented in heraldry, where the adjective '''pizzled''' (or  '''vilené''') indicates that part of an animate charge's anatomy, especially if coloured differently.
The outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines, but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue.
The glans penis of a male cape ground squirrel is large with a prominent baculum.
Its penis can be as long as , and usually remains completely withdrawn inside a skin receptacle.
In species where the hectocotylus is missing, the penis is long and able to extend beyond the mantle cavity and transfers the spermatophores directly to the female.
The adjectival form of the word penis is penile.
The blue whale has the largest penis of any organism on the planet, typically measuring .
In Drymoreomys, there are three digits at the tip of the penis, of which the central one is the largest.
For example, the penis of a mammal is at most analogous to the penis of a male insect or barnacle.
In millipedes that have them, the penis is simply one or two projections on underneath the third body segment that produce a spermatophore or sperm packet.
The Latin word ''"phallus"'' (from Greek φαλλος) is sometimes used to describe the penis, although "phallus" originally was used to describe ''representations'', pictorial or carved, of the penis.
Scientists conducting studies on the ''C.
Given the small amount of erectile tissue, there is little enlargement after erection.
Giant squid of the genus ''Architeuthis'' are unusual in that they possess both a large penis and modified arm tips, although it is uncertain whether the latter are used for spermatophore transfer.
Females have a small phallic organ in the cloaca which becomes larger during the breeding season.
The act of insemination however occurs through specialized legs called gonopods which collect the spermatophore and insert it into the female.
The phallus that male waterfowl have evolved everts out of their bodies (in a clockwise coil) and aids in inseminating females without their cooperation.
A bird penis is different in structure from mammal penises, being an erectile expansion of the cloacal wall and being erected by lymph, not blood.
Neither patient age nor size of the flaccid penis accurately predicted erectile length.
The penis of the ring-tailed lemur is nearly cylindrical in shape and is covered in small spines, as well as having two pairs of larger spines on both sides.
Winkelmann's mouse can easily be distinguished from its close relatives by the shape of its penis, which has a partially corrugated glans.
It has a short, thin appendage within a cup-like glans penis and measures greater than  when erect.
On the urethral process, located in the crater at the end of the penis, a fleshy process at the side, the lateral lobule, is present.
Fossa mating includes a copulatory tie, which may be enforced by the male's spiny penis.
The urethra is on the ventral side of the body of the penis.
Male felids urinate backwards by curving the tip of the glans penis backward.
A sambar stag will mark himself by spraying urine directly in the face with a highly mobile penis, which is often erect during its rutting activities.
The clockwise coils are significant because the male phallus everts out of their body in a counter-clockwise spiral; therefore, a clockwise vaginal structure would impede forceful copulation.
Ejaculation is the ejecting of semen from the penis, and is usually accompanied by orgasm.
Most male birds (e.g., roosters and turkeys) have a cloaca (also present on the female), but not a penis.
The glans and shaft are covered in single keratinized spines that point towards the body.
The northern greater galago penis is on average  in length and width of shaft is even from body to bottom of tip.
Between male bottlenose dolphins, homosexual behaviour includes rubbing of genitals against each other, which sometimes leads to the males swimming belly to belly, inserting the penis in the other's genital slit and sometimes anus.
The heads used are swapped each time the mammal copulates.
In comparison, the human penis is larger than that of any other primate, both in proportion to body size and in absolute terms.
The penis during this phase is not erect, but remains outside of its receptacle.
While results vary across studies, the consensus is that the average erect human penis is approximately  in length with 95% of adult males falling within the interval .
The penis of the Sumatran rhinoceros contains two lateral lobes and a structure called the ''processus glandis''.
When mating, the tip of a male pronghorn's penis is often the first part to touch the female pronghorn.
The most common form of genital alteration is circumcision: removal of part or all of the foreskin for various cultural, religious, and more rarely medical reasons.
Some derive that from Indo-European ''*pesnis'', and the Greek word πέος = "penis" from Indo-European ''*pesos''.
When the male armadillo ''Chaetophractus villosus'' is sexually aroused, species determination is easier.
During musth, a male elephant may urinate with his penis still in the sheath, which causes the urine to spray on the hind legs.
Domestic cats have barbed penises, with about 120–150 one millimeter long backwards-pointing spines.
Females have penis-like organs called gynosomes that are inserted into vagina-like openings of males during mating.
As with any other bodily attribute, the length and girth of the penis can be highly variable between mammals of different species.
The pseudo-penis closely resembles the male hyena's penis, but can be distinguished from the male's genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans.
The preputial glands (glands in front of the genitals) are large.
Cetaceans have fibroelastic penises, similar to those of Artiodactyla.
Male galago species possess very distinctive penile morphology that can be used to classify species.
This adjective is commonly used in describing various accessory structures of male copulatory organs found in many kinds of invertebrate animals.
There is only one spine on the papilla (nipple-like projection) on the upper side of the penis.
As with nearly any aspect of the body involved in sexual or excretory functions, the penis is the subject of many slang words and euphemisms for it, a particularly common and enduring one being "cock".
Some features of the accessory glands in the male genital region vary among oryzomyines.
On at least one occasion, a dolphin was known to tow bathers through the water by hooking his large penis around them.
In Pseudorhyzomys, the baculum (penis bone) displays large protuberances at the sides.
The male waterfowl evolution of a phallus to forcefully copulate with females has led to counteradaptations in females in the form of vaginal structures called dead end sacs and clockwise coils.
An elephant's penis is very mobile, being able to move independently of the male's pelvis, and the penis curves forward and upward prior to mounting another elephant.
The male echidna's penis is  long when erect, and its shaft is covered with penile spines.
A '''penis''' (plural ''penises'' or ''penes'' ) is the primary sexual organ that male and hermaphrodite animals use to inseminate sexually receptive mates (usually females and hermaphrodites respectively) during copulation.
The tip of the cetacean penis, which tapers toward the end, is called the ''pars intrapraeputialis'' or ''terminal cone''.
The glans extends about halfway down the shaft and is spiny except at the tip.
Such organs occur in many animals, both vertebrate and invertebrate, but males do not bear a penis in every animal species, and in those species in which the male does bear a so-called penis, the penes in the various species are not necessarily homologous.
In ''Transandinomys talamancae'', the outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines, but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue.
The male tinamou has a corkscrew shaped penis, similar to those of the ratites and to the hemipenis of some reptiles.
The human penis is made up of three columns of tissue: two corpora cavernosa lie next to each other on the dorsal side and one corpus spongiosum lies between them on the ventral side.
Male baboons and squirrel monkeys sometimes gesture with an erect penis as both a warning of impeding danger and a threat to predators.
Part of the end of the vesicular gland is irregularly folded, not smooth as in most oryzomyines.
Some deer species spray urine on their bodies by urinating from an erect penis.
Male echidnas have a four-headed penis.
Male dolphins have two slits, one concealing the penis and one further behind for the anus.
While the females do this, the penis is not withdrawn and research has shown a positive relationship between length of the time that the penis is licked and the duration of copulation.
In giant anteaters, the (retracted) penis and testes are located internally between the rectum and urinary bladder.
* Glans: the free end of the penis.
Near the top, the penis is haired, but the base is almost naked.
In ''Transandinomys talamancae'', a single pair of preputial glands is present at the penis.
Studies have shown that the longer a male's phallus is, the more elaborate the vaginal structures were.
A boar's penis, which rotates rhythmically during copulation, is about 18 inches long, and ejaculates about a pint of semen.
An erection is the stiffening and rising of the penis, which occurs during sexual arousal, though it can also happen in non-sexual situations.
It is a passage both for urine and for the ejaculation of semen.
The Oxford English Dictionary cites an example of the word ''yard'' used in this sense from 1379, and notes that in his ''Physical Dictionary'' of 1684, Steven Blankaart defined the word ''penis'' as "the Yard, made up of two nervous Bodies, the Channel, Nut, Skin, and Fore-skin, etc."
In the baculum (penis bone), the shaft is long and narrow and slightly curved.
When not in use, the penis is retracted inside a preputial sac in the cloaca.
In males, penis length is  and baculum length is .
Monotremes and marsupial moles are the only mammals in which the penis is located inside the cloaca.
It is theorized that the remarkable size of their spiny penises with bristled tips may have evolved in response to competitive pressure in these highly promiscuous birds, removing sperm from previous matings in the manner of a bottle brush.
In mammals the penis is divided into three parts:
These structures make it harder for males to achieve intromission.
It is a reproductive, intromittent organ that additionally serves as the urinal duct.
They are less densely packed than in ''Otolemur crassicaudatus''.
Deep water squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals, second in the entire animal kingdom only to certain sessile barnacles Penis elongation in ''Onykia ingens'' may result in a penis that is as long as the mantle, head and arms combined.
The word "penis" is taken from the Latin word for "tail."
During mating, the heads on one side "shut down" and do not grow in size; the other two are used to release semen into the female's two-branched reproductive tract.
In males, the expulsion of urine from the body is done through the penis.
The penis of a dromedary camel is covered by a triangular penile sheath opening backwards, and is about  long.
In the realm of absolute size, the smallest vertebrate penis belongs to the common shrew (5&nbsp;mm or 0.2 inches).
This has been most fully studied in bed bugs.
Lions also have barbed penises.
''P.&nbsp;endoi'', ''P.&nbsp;paterculus'', and ''P.&nbsp;abramus'' have more similar bacula, but that of ''P.&nbsp;abramus'' is more curved, the shaft and the tip are more robust in ''P.&nbsp;paterculus'', and the proximal (near) end is more robust in ''P.&nbsp;endoi''.
The adult male of each vervet monkey species has a pale blue scrotum and a red penis, and male proboscis monkeys have a red penis with a black scrotum.
On the urethral process, located in the crater at the end of the penis, a fleshy process (the subapical lobule) is present; it is absent in all other oryzomyines with studied penes except ''O.&nbsp;couesi'' and ''Holochilus brasiliensis''.
During its waking hours, it remains hidden beneath a skin receptacle, until it becomes erect and it projects outside in a rostral direction.
* Body: the part of the penis extending from the roots.
Male and female emus are similar in appearance, although the male's penis can become visible when it defecates.
The male pronghorn usually ejaculates immediately after intromission.
In the cartilaginous part of the baculum, the central digit is smaller than those at the sides.
The purpose of this is not fully understood.
An elephant's penis can reach a length of  and a diameter of  at the base.
In 2010, entomologist Charles Linehard described ''Neotrogla'', a new genus of barkflies.
Most birds mate with the males balancing on top of the females and touching cloacas in a "cloacal kiss"; this makes forceful insemination very difficult.
It is S-shaped when fully erect and has a Y-shaped orifice.
See WikiSaurus:penis for a list of alternative words for penis.
The scrotum, penis, and prepuce are usually coated with a foul-smelling secretion.
The camelmen often aid the male to enter his penis into the female's vulva, though the male is considered able to do it on his own.
The beech marten's penis is larger than the pine marten's, with the bacula of young beech martens often outsizing those of old pine martens.
The urethra, which is the last part of the urinary tract, traverses the corpus spongiosum, and its opening, known as the meatus , lies on the tip of the glans penis.
There is controversy surrounding circumcision.
The record for the largest penis to body size ratio is held by the barnacle.
That, in turn, is used to transfer the spermatophores to the female.
* Roots (crura): these begin at the caudal border of the pelvic ischial arch.
Most of the glans is covered with spines, except for an area near the tip.
An adult elephant has the largest penis of any land animal.
Even within the Vertebrata there are morphological variants with specific terminology, such as hemipenes.
The adult male American mink's penis is  long, and is covered by a sheath.
Males of Racey's pipistrelle bat have a long, straight penis with a notch between the shaft and the narrow, egg-shaped glans penis.
When male cheetahs urine-mark their territories, they stand one meter away from a tree or rock surface with the tail raised, pointing the penis either horizontally backward or 60° upward.
The human penis is an external sex organ of  male humans.
The penis on a right whale can be up to  – the testes, at up to  in length,  in diameter, and weighing up to , are also by far the largest of any animal on Earth.
Unlike the penises of other squirrel species, a red squirrel's penis is long, thin, and narrow, without a prominent baculum.
Red deer stags often have erect penises during combat.
This enables them to reach the nearest female.
Raccoons have penis bones which bend at a 90 degree angle at the tip.
villosus'' penis muscles revealed this species' very long penis exhibits variability.
In some fishes, the gonopodium, andropodium, and claspers are intromittent organs (to introduce sperm into the female) developed from modified fins.
The extrusibility of a raccoon's penis can be used to distinguish mature males from immature males.
A male elk's urethra points upward so that urine is sprayed almost at a right angle to the penis.
The penis is nearly a quarter of his body length when erect.
The penis of the bush hyrax is complex and distinct from that of the other hyrax genera.
Additionally, it has been observed that the bush hyrax also has a greater distance between the anus and preputial opening in comparison to other hyraxes.
As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae, the marsh rice rat has a complex penis, with the distal (far) end of the baculum ending in three digits.
The length of the penis and baculum distinguish ''P.&nbsp;raceyi'' from all comparably sized African and Malagasy vespertilionids.
The baculum is well-developed, being triangular in cross section and curved at the tip.
The two lateral digits are not supported by mounds of the baculum (penis bone).
One type of scent-marking behavior in elk is known as "thrash-urination, which typically involves palpitation of the erect penis.
The main parts are the root of the penis (radix): It is the attached part, consisting of the bulb of penis in the middle and the crus of penis, one on either side of the bulb; the body of the penis (corpus); and the epithelium of the penis consists of the shaft skin, the foreskin, and the preputial mucosa on the inside of the foreskin and covering the glans penis.
During copulation, the spotted hyena inserts his penis through the female's pseudo-penis instead of directly through the vagina, which is blocked by the false scrotum and testes.
As a general rule, a mammal's penis is proportional to its body size, but this varies greatly between specieseven between closely related ones.
The central digit is notably larger than those at the sides.
In comparison, the glans of felids is short and spiny, while that of viverrids is smooth and long.
The male fossa has an unusually long penis and baculum (penis bone), reaching to between his front legs when erect, with an average thickness of .
In most species of animals in which there is an organ that might reasonably be described as a penis, it has no major function other than intromission, or at least conveying the sperm to the female, but in the placental mammals the penis bears the distal part of the urethra, which discharges both urine during urination and semen during copulation.
The penis in most male Coleoid cephalopods is a long and muscular end of the gonoduct used to transfer spermatophores to a modified arm called a hectocotylus.
The glans penis of the marsh rice rat is long and robust, averaging  long and  broad, and the baculum (penis bone) is  long.
Each side of the bilaterally symmetrical, rosette-like, four-headed penis similar to that of reptiles and  in length is used alternately, with the other half being shut down between ejaculations.
Some mammals have a lot of erectile tissue relative to connective tissue, for example horses.
The barnacle's penis can grow to up to forty times its own body length.
Male walruses possess large penis bones, up to  in length, the largest of any land mammal, both in absolute size and relative to body size.
The front of a pronghorn's glans penis is relatively flat, while the back is relatively thick.
The lake duck is notable for possessing, in relation to body length, the longest penis of all vertebrates; the penis, which is typically coiled up in flaccid state, can reach about the same length as the animal himself when fully erect, but is more commonly about half the bird's length.
