The current Governor is Tom Wolf.
The Port Authority of Allegheny County is the 25th largest transit agency and provides transit bus and light rail service in and around Pittsburgh.
Primary north–south highways are Interstate 79 from its terminus in Erie through Pittsburgh to West Virginia, Interstate 81 from New York through Scranton, Lackawanna County and Harrisburg to Maryland and Interstate 476, which begins  north of the Delaware border, in Chester, Delaware County and travels  to Clarks Summit, Lackawanna County, where it joins I-81.
* 2.90%  Puerto Rican
The next largest Protestant denomination, the United Church of Christ, has 180,000 members and 627 congregations.
Independence Hall, where the United States Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution were drafted, is located in the state's largest city of Philadelphia.
In the 2004 Presidential Election, Senator John F. Kerry beat President George W. Bush in Pennsylvania 2,938,095 (50.92%) to 2,793,847 (48.42%).
Famous to a lesser extent than Heinz ketchup are the Pittsburgh's Primanti Brothers Restaurant sandwiches, pierogies, and city chicken.
Republican strength was concentrated in the Philadelphia suburbs, as well as the more rural areas in the central, northeastern, and western portions.
Pennsylvania has seven major airports: Philadelphia International, Pittsburgh International, Lehigh Valley International, Harrisburg International, Erie International, University Park Airport and Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International.
The Battle of Gettysburg—the major turning point of the Civil War—took place near Gettysburg.
Personal income tax is a flat 3.07%.
Notable racetracks in Pennsylvania include the Jennerstown Speedway in Jennerstown, the Lake Erie Speedway in North East, the Mahoning Valley Speedway in Lehighton, the Motordome Speedway in Smithton, the Mountain Speedway in St. Johns, the Nazareth Speedway in Nazareth (closed); and the Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, which is home to two NASCAR Cup Series races and an IndyCar Series race.
Pennsylvania also is home to the largest indoor waterpark resort on the East Coast, Splash Lagoon in Erie.
Women made up 52% of the population.
Germans, in their own language, call themselves "Deutsch", (Pennsylvania German: "Deitsch") which in English became, misleadingly, "Dutch".
All machines would be connected to the state's computer system, like commercial casinos.
The chief is, to ill–treat no person on account of religion, and to consider as brethren all those who believe in one God."
If Pennsylvania were an independent country, its economy would rank as the 18th largest in the world.
Additionally, 25.7% have gone on to obtain a bachelor's degree or higher.
The new state Capitol drew rave reviews.
The University of Pittsburgh Panthers claims nine national championships (1915, 1916, 1918, 1929, 1931, 1934, 1936, 1937 and 1976) and has played eight undefeated seasons (1904, 1910, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1920, 1937 and 1976).
A total of 134&nbsp;public-use airports are located in the state.
It was the second state to ratify the United States Constitution, on December 12, 1787.
One unique museum is the Houdini Museum in Scranton, the only building in the world devoted to the legendary magician.
Smarty Jones, the 2004 Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes winner, had Philadelphia Park as his home course.
Pennsylvania's only port on the Great Lakes is located in Erie.
Between 1730 and when it was shut down by Parliament with the Currency Act of 1764, the Pennsylvania Colony made its own paper money to account for the shortage of actual gold and silver.
College basketball is also popular in the state, especially in the Philadelphia area where five universities, collectively termed the Big Five, have a rich tradition in NCAA Division I basketball.
Long before the Commonwealth was visited and later settled by Europeans, the area was home to subgroups of the Delaware (also known as Lenni Lenape), Susquehannock, Iroquois, Eriez, Shawnee, and still other American Indian Nations of uncertain designation.
Of the black population, the vast majority in the state are African American, being descendants of African slaves brought to the US south during the colonial era.
But it needed a more central location, as for example the Paxton Boys massacres of 1763 had made the legislature aware.
There are also a growing number of blacks of West Indian, recent African, and Hispanic origins.
In 1975, McCandless Township adopted a home-rule charter under the name of "Town of McCandless", but is, legally, still a first class township.
Pennsylvania's Hispanic population grew by 82.6% between 2000 and 2010, making it one of the largest increases in a state's Hispanic population.
Most of the remaining Hispanic population is made up of Mexicans and Dominicans.
The Quaker leader William Penn had signed a peace treaty with Tammany, leader of the Delaware tribe, beginning a long period of friendly relations between the Quakers and the Indians.
Two of the three companies that define the U.S. potato chip industry are based in Pennsylvania: Utz Quality Foods, which started making chips in Hanover, Pennsylvania in 1921, and Wise Foods which started making chips in Berwick in 1921 (the third, Lay's Potato Chips, is a Texas company).
High Point Raceway in located in Mt.
The Superior Court hears all appeals from the Courts of Common Pleas not expressly designated to the Commonwealth Court or Supreme Court.
The land was not yet in British possession, but the sale boxed in the portion of New Netherland on the West side of the Delaware River.
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, abbreviated as PennDOT, owns  of the  of roadway in the state, making it the fifth largest state highway system in the United States.
Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, now a part of University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, was the first pharmacy school in the United States.
Net migration to the Commonwealth was 98,289.
There they and its primary author, John Dickinson, drew up the Articles of Confederation that formed 13 independent colonies into a new nation.
Pennsylvania became the second state to ratify the U.S. Constitution on December 12, 1787, five days after Delaware became the first.
The original Frame of Government of William Penn had a unicameral legislature.
It also promoted general employment and prosperity, since the Government used discretion and did not issue too much to inflate the currency.
The term "Dutch", when referring to the language spoken by the Pennsylvania Dutch people (Pennsylvania German) means "German" or "Teutonic" rather than "Netherlander".
Additionally there are many private two- and four-year technical schools, colleges and universities.
The Commonwealth boasts some of the finest museums in the country, including the Carnegie Museums in Pittsburgh, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, and several others.
A report from The Center for Rural Pennsylvania (a Legislative Agency of the Pennsylvania General Assembly) reported that hunting, fishing, and furtaking generated a total of $9.6 billion statewide.
There are nearly one million licensed hunters in Pennsylvania.
In motorsports, the Mario Andretti dynasty of race drivers hails from Nazareth in the Lehigh Valley.
During the American Civil War, the Battle of Gettysburg, was fought in the south central region of the state.
Pennsylvania has 500 public school districts, thousands of private schools, publicly funded colleges and universities, and over 100 private institutions of higher education.
Governor and Lieutenant Governor run as a ticket in the general election and are up for reelection in 2018.
Another major east–west route is Interstate 80, which runs primarily in the northern tier of the state from Ohio to New Jersey at the Delaware Water Gap.
The Asian population swelled by almost 60%, which was fueled by Indian, Vietnamese, and Chinese immigration, as well the many Asian transplants moving to Philadelphia from New York.
Cities include Philadelphia, Reading, Lebanon and Lancaster in the southeast, Pittsburgh in the southwest, the tri-cities of Allentown, Bethlehem, and Easton in the central east (known as the Lehigh Valley), the tri-cities of Scranton, Wilkes-Barre, and Hazleton in the northeast, and Erie in the northwest.
The U.S. chocolate industry is centered in Hershey, Pennsylvania, with Mars, Godiva, and Wilbur Chocolate Company nearby, and smaller manufacturers such as Asher's in Souderton, and Gertrude Hawk Chocolates of Dunmore.
There is one exception to the types of municipalities in Pennsylvania: Bloomsburg was incorporated as a town in 1870 and is, officially, the only town in the state.
From 2008 to 2012, 5.8% of the population was foreign born.
An individual's taxable income is based on the following eight types of income: compensation (salary); interest; dividends; net profits from the operation of a business, profession or farm; net gains or income from the dispositions of property; net gains or income from rents, royalties, patents and copyrights; income derived through estates or trusts; and gambling and lottery winnings (other than Pennsylvania Lottery winnings).
Additional treaties between Quakers and other tribes followed.
The significant growth of the Hispanic population is due to immigration to the state mainly from Puerto Rico, which is a US territory, but to a lesser extent from countries such as the Dominican Republic, Mexico, and various Central and South American nations, as well as from the wave of Hispanics leaving New York and New Jersey for safer and more affordable living.
These include Musikfest and NEARfest in Bethlehem, the Philadelphia Folk Festival, Creation Festival, the Great Allentown Fair, and Purple Door.
James Buchanan, of Franklin County, the only bachelor President of the United States, was the only one to be born in Pennsylvania.
The latter counties have long been among the most conservative areas in the nation.
Net migration to other states resulted in a decrease of 27,718, and immigration from other countries resulted in an increase of 127,007.
One result of this uncommon freedom was a wide religious diversity, which continues to the present.
There are a total of 56&nbsp;cities in Pennsylvania, which are classified, by population, as either first, second, or third class cities.
On a per-capita basis, Pennsylvania's per-capita GSP of $47,274 (in chained 2009 dollars) ranks 26th among the 50 states.
Sports betting is illegal.
The Hispanic population is greatest in Hazleton, Allentown, Reading, Lancaster, York, and around Philadelphia.
The state would impose a 50% tax on net gambling revenues, after winning players have been paid, with the remaining 50% going to the establishment owners.
The University of Pennsylvania, located in Philadelphia, is considered the first university in the United States and established the country's first medical school.
As of 2010, it is estimated that about 85% of all Hispanics in Pennsylvania live within a  radius of Philadelphia, with about 20% living within the city itself.
The state capital is Harrisburg.
*** Black Protestant – 7%
The Tuscarora Nation took up temporary residence in the central portion of Pennsylvania ca.
James Smith wrote that in 1763, "the Indians again commenced hostilities, and were busily engaged in killing and scalping the frontier inhabitants in various parts of Pennsylvania."
Before that the province of Pennsylvania was governed for a century by a Frame of Government, of which there were four versions: 1682, 1683, 1696, and 1701.
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Scranton/Wilkes-Barre generally vote for Democratic candidates, while the majority of the counties in the central part of the state vote Republican.
Representatives are Bob Brady (1st), (2nd) is currently vacant, Mike Kelly (3rd), Scott Perry (4th), Glenn "G.T."
Pennsylvania German is often—even though misleadingly—called "Pennsylvania Dutch".
Pennsylvania's population was reported as 5.9% under 5 and 23.8% under 18, with 15.6% aged 65 or older.
With the addition of the Philadelphia Union in the MLS, the state now boasts three teams that are eligible to compete for the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup annually.
There are 1,454&nbsp;second class townships and 93&nbsp;first class townships.
It is not clear how much of this change reflects a changing population and how much reflects increased willingness to self-identify minority status.
Williamsport serves as the commonwealth's north-central region, with York and the state capital Harrisburg on the Susquehanna River in the east-central region of the Commonwealth and Altoona and Johnstown in the west-central region.
The Sturgis Pretzel House introduced the pretzel to America, and companies like Anderson Bakery Company, Intercourse Pretzel Factory, and Snyder's of Hanover are leading manufacturers in the Commonwealth.
Many state politicians have tried to increase the share of taxes paid by out of state sources.
Auntie Anne's Pretzels began as a market-stand in Downingtown, Pennsylvania, and now has corporate headquarters in Lancaster City.
After the Stamp Act Congress of 1765, Delegate John Dickinson of Philadelphia wrote the ''Declaration of Rights and Grievances''.
Erie also has its share of unique foods, including Greek sauce and sponge candy.
All judges in Pennsylvania are elected; the chief justice is determined by seniority.
There are 67&nbsp;short-line, freight railroads operating in Pennsylvania, the highest number in any U.S. state.
The rest of the cities, like the third and fourth largest—Allentown (118,032) and Erie (101,786)—to the smallest—Parker with a population of only 840—are third class cities.
The Colony issued "bills of credit", which were as good as gold or silver coins because of their legal tender status.
Tables games such as poker, roulette, black jack and dice were finally approved by the state legislature in January 2010, being signed into law by the Governor on January 7.
Pennsylvania borders six other states: New York to the north; New Jersey to the east; Delaware to the southeast; Maryland to the south; West Virginia to the southwest, and Ohio to the west.
The legislature meets in the State Capitol there.
In 2010, Republicans recaptured a U.S. Senate seat as well as a majority of the state's congressional seats, control of both chambers of the state legislature and the governor's mansion.
In 1923 President Calvin Coolidge established the Allegheny National Forest under the authority of the Weeks Act of 1911 in the northwest part of the state in Elk, Forest, McKean, and Warren Counties for the purposes of timber production and watershed protection in the Allegheny River basin.
The Pennsylvania Film Production Tax Credit began in 2004 and stimulated the development of a film industry in the state.
The Lehigh Valley Zoo and ZOOAMERICA are other notable zoos.
The Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts is the first and oldest art school in the United States.
Residents pay a total of $83.7 billion in state and local taxes with a per capita average of $6,640 annually.
Within the American Soccer Pyramid, the MLS takes the first tier, while the USL-2 claims the third tier.
Interstate 90 travels the relatively short distance between Ohio and New York through Erie County, in the extreme northwestern part of the state.
The other two teams are the Pittsburgh Riverhounds and the Harrisburg City Islanders, both of the United Soccer Leagues Second Division (USL-2).
This was partially reversed on February 9, 1674, when the Treaty of Westminster ended the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and reverted all political situations to the ''status quo ante bellum''.
Most criminal and civil cases originate in the Courts of Common Pleas, which also serve as appellate courts to the district judges and for local agency decisions.
Sam Smith is Speaker of the House of Representatives, with Mike Turzai as Majority Leader and Frank Dermody as Minority Leader.
Horse racing courses in Pennsylvania consist of The Meadows near Pittsburgh, Pocono Downs in Wilkes-Barre, and Harrah's Philadelphia in Chester, which offer harness racing, and Penn National Race Course in Grantville, Parx Racing (formerly Philadelphia Park) in Bensalem, and Presque Isle Downs near Erie, which offer thoroughbred racing.
Arnold Palmer, one of the 20th century's most notable pro golfers, comes from Latrobe, while Jim Furyk, a current PGA member, grew up near in Lancaster.
Pennsylvania's largest township is Upper Darby Township (82,795), and the smallest is East Keating Township (11).
American Baptist Churches USA (Northern Baptist Convention) is based in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania.
The financial impact of agriculture in Pennsylvania includes employment of more than 66,800 people are employed by the food manufacturing industry; and over $1.7 billion in food product export (in 2011).
The largest ancestry groups are listed below, expressed as a percentage of total people who responded with a particular ancestry for the 2010 census:
In addition, some local bodies assess a wage tax on personal income.
In 1989, ''The New York Times'' praised it as "grand, even awesome at moments, but it is also a working building, accessible to citizens ... a building that connects with the reality of daily life".
Of a total ,  are land,  are inland waters, and  are waters in Lake Erie.
The majority of Hispanics in Pennsylvania are of Puerto Rican descent, having one of the largest and fastest-growing Puerto Rican populations in the country.
Migration of native Pennsylvanians resulted in a decrease of 100,000 people.
The religious affiliations of the people of Pennsylvania:
The third largest single denomination is the Presbyterian Church (USA) with 250,000 members and 1,011 congregations.
The state is also home to Maple Grove Raceway, near Reading, which hosts major National Hot Rod Association sanctioned drag racing events each year.
Pennsylvania also has a very large Amish population, second only to Ohio among the states.
Pennsylvania's population in 2010 was 12,702,379.
Intercity passenger rail transit is provided by Amtrak, with the majority of traffic occurring on the ''Keystone Service'' in the high-speed Keystone Corridor between Harrisburg and Philadelphia's 30th Street Station before heading north to New York City; the ''Pennsylvanian'' follows the same route from New York City to Harrisburg, but extends out to Pittsburgh.
* Other religions – 1%
Foreign born Pennsylvanians are largely from Asia (36.0%), Europe (35.9%), and Latin America (30.6%), with the remainder from Africa (5%), North America (3.1%), and Oceania (0.4%).
Martin's Famous Pastry Shoppe, Inc., headquartered in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, specializes in potato bread, another traditional Pennsylvania Dutch food.
Sales tax provides 39% of Commonwealth's revenue; personal income tax 34%; motor vehicle taxes about 12%, and taxes on cigarettes and alcohol beverage 5%.
In recent national elections, Pennsylvania has leaned Democratic.
Following an architectural selection contest that many alleged had been "rigged", Chicago architect Henry Ives Cobb was charged with designing and building a replacement building; however, the legislature had little money to allocate to the project, and a roughly finished, somewhat industrial building (the Cobb Capitol) was completed.
In total, 9.85% (1,170,628) of Pennsylvania's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.
All but  of I-476 is the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike, while the highway south of the main line of the Pennsylvania Turnpike is officially called the "Veterans Memorial Highway", but is commonly referred to by locals as the "Blue Route".
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania's largest city, has a population of 1,526,006 and is the state's only first class city.
The Pennsylvania German language is a descendant of German, in the West Central German dialect family.
Pennsylvania has a mixed health record, and is ranked as the 29th overall healthiest state according to the 2013 United Health Foundation's Health Rankings.
Pennsylvania will hold elections for Attorney General, Auditor General and Treasurer in 2016.
* Christianity – 80%
There are three colleges in Pennsylvania that play at the highest level of collegiate football competition, the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision.
* Non-religious/Unaffiliated – 13%
Pennsylvania has a bicameral legislature set up by Commonwealth's constitution in 1790.
There are also notable music festivals that take place in Pennsylvania.
It also has original jurisdiction to review warrants for wiretap surveillance.
The school was founded by Benjamin Rush and named after John Dickinson.
Philadelphia is home to six Fortune 500 companies, with more located in suburbs like King of Prussia; it is a leader in the financial and insurance industry.
Pennsylvania has the 10th highest tax burden in the United States.
Pennsylvania is divided into 67&nbsp;counties.
An estimated 350,000 Pennsylvanians served in the Union Army forces including 8,600 African American military volunteers.
That year, the Pittsburgh Savings & Trust Company received a national charter and renamed itself the First National Bank of Pittsburgh as part of the National Banking Act.
Since 1992, Pennsylvania has been trending Democratic in Presidential elections, voting for Bill Clinton twice by large margins, and slightly closer in 2000 for Al Gore.
The Second Continental Congress, which also met in Philadelphia (in May 1775), drew up and signed the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia, but when that city was captured by the British, the Continental Congress escaped westward, meeting at the Lancaster courthouse on Saturday, September 27, 1777, and then to York.
Among the regional foods associated with Philadelphia are cheesesteaks, hoagie, soft pretzels, Italian water ice, Irish potato candy, scrapple, Tastykake, Wawa, and strombolis.
As of 2010, 90.15% (10,710,239) of Pennsylvania residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 4.09% (486,058) spoke Spanish, 0.87% (103,502) German (which includes Pennsylvania Dutch) and by 0.47% (56,052) Chinese (which includes Mandarin) of the population over the age of five.
Under this plan, any establishment with a liquor license would be allowed up to 5 machines.
The other elected officials composing the executive branch are the Lieutenant Governor Michael Stack, Attorney General Bruce Beemer, Auditor General Eugene DePasquale, and Pennsylvania Treasurer Tim Reese.
The largest bear ever found dead was in Utah in 1975, and the second largest was shot by a poacher in the state in 1987.
For half a century, the Commonwealth's General Assembly (legislature) met at various places in the general Philadelphia area before starting to meet regularly in Independence Hall in Philadelphia for 63 years.
Pennsylvania's current U.S.
The most populous county in Pennsylvania is Philadelphia, while the least populous is Cameron (5,085).
Whitetail deer, black bear, cottontail rabbits, squirrel, turkey, and grouse are common game species.
While Pennsylvania owes its existence to Quakers, and much of the historic character of the Commonwealth is ideologically rooted in the teachings of the Religious Society of Friends (as they are officially known), practicing Quakers are a small minority today.
The largest borough in Pennsylvania is State College (42,034) and the smallest is Centralia (10).
The state is one of the 13 original founding states of the United States; it came into being in 1681 as a result of a royal land grant to William Penn, the son of the state's namesake.
"The State of Independence" currently appears on many road signs entering the state.
It is the 33rd largest state in the United States.
The state of Pennsylvania has a high in-migration of blacks and Hispanics from other nearby states, with eastern and south-central portions of the state seeing the bulk of the increases.
This was one of the largest land grants to an individual in history.
New Sweden claimed and, for the most part, controlled the lower Delaware River region (parts of present-day Delaware, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania) but settled few colonists there.
As of June 2014, the state's unemployment rate is 5.6%.
Thompson (5th), Ryan Costello (6th), Pat Meehan (7th), Mike Fitzpatrick (8th), Bill Shuster (9th), Tom Marino (10th), Lou Barletta (11th), Keith Rothfus (12th), Brendan Boyle (13th), Mike Doyle (14th), Charlie Dent (15th), Joe Pitts (16th), Matt Cartwright (17th), Tim Murphy (18th).
So, in 1799 the General Assembly moved to the Lancaster Courthouse, and finally in 1812 to Harrisburg.
National titles in college basketball have been won by the following Pennsylvania universities: La Salle University (1954), Temple University (1938), University of Pennsylvania (1920 and 1921), University of Pittsburgh (1928 and 1930), and Villanova University (1985 and 2016).
The paper money was called Colonial Scrip.
In his book ''Yo Mama Cooks Like a Yankee'', author Sharon Hernes Silverman calls Pennsylvania the snack food capital of the world.
In 1638, Sweden established the New Sweden Colony, in the region of Fort Christina, on the site of present-day Wilmington, Delaware.
Pennsylvania holds the second highest number of Boone & Crockett-recorded record black bears at 183, second only to Wisconsin's 299.
There are also 15 publicly funded two-year community colleges and technical schools that are separate from the PASSHE system.
The Presbyterian Church in America has also significant, 112 congregations and 23,000 adherents, the EPC has around 50 congregations, as well as ECO.
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, is one of the headquarters of the Moravian Church in America.
The Commonwealth System of Higher Education is organizing body of the 4 state-related schools in Pennsylvania, these schools are independent institutions that receive some state funding.
Morris, Pennsylvania, and Steel City is located in Delmont, Pennsylvania.
The commonwealth borders Delaware to the southeast, Maryland to the south, West Virginia to the southwest, Ohio to the west, Lake Erie and the Canadian province of Ontario to the northwest, New York to the north, and New Jersey to the east.
Pennsylvania has  of coastline along Lake Erie and  of shoreline along the Delaware Estuary.
In 2007, Pennsylvania ranked 14th in mathematics, 12th in reading, and 10th in writing for 8th grade students.
* 2.00%  Scotch Irish
The state has 5 regions, namely the Allegheny Plateau, Ridge and Valley, Atlantic Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and the Erie Plain.
** Jehovah's Witnesses – 1%
The General Assembly met at Grace Methodist Church on State Street (still standing) until a new capitol could be built.
Thirty-two of the Commonwealth's sixty-seven counties levy a personal property tax on stocks, bonds, and similar holdings.
In Pittsburgh, tomato ketchup was improved by Henry John Heinz from 1876 to the early 20th century.
Philadelphia is home to LOVE Park, once a popular spot for skateboarding, and across from City Hall, host to ESPN's X Games in 2001 and 2002.
The Boone and Crockett Club shows that five of the ten largest (skull size) black bear entries came from the state.
Townships are the third type of municipality in Pennsylvania and are classified as either first class or second class townships.
