The central belief of Pentecostalism is that through the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, sins can be forgiven and humanity reconciled with God.
This inspired Frank Ewart who claimed to have received as a divine prophecy revealing a nontrinitarian conception of God.
Many of these non-Pentecostals were baptized in the Holy Spirit through these ministries.
The sick person expresses his or her faith by calling for the elders of the church who pray over and anoint the sick with olive oil.
The ordinance of Holy Communion, or the Lord's Supper, is seen as a direct command given by Jesus at the Last Supper, to be done in remembrance of him.
Within Pentecostalism, there is a belief that speaking in tongues serves two functions.
This is when a person leaves their seat "spontaneously 'dancing' with eyes closed without bumping into nearby persons or objects".
This teaching polarized the Pentecostal movement into two factions.
Baptism with the Holy Spirit and speaking in tongues are not generally required, though Pentecostal converts are usually encouraged to seek these experiences.
Seymour traveled to Los Angeles where his preaching sparked the three-year-long Azusa Street Revival in 1906.
According to Wesleyan Pentecostals, entire sanctification is a definite event that occurs after salvation but before Spirit baptism.
Women wrote religious songs, edited Pentecostal papers, and taught and ran Bible schools.
However, Pentecostals do believe that the biblical pattern is "repentance, regeneration, water baptism, and then the baptism with the Holy Ghost".
The term ''foursquare'' refers to the four fundamental beliefs of Pentecostalism: Jesus saves according to John 3:16; baptizes with the Holy Spirit according to Acts 2:4; heals bodily according to James 5:15; and is coming again to receive those who are saved according to 1 Thessalonians 4:16–17.
(When the majority of missionaries, to their disappointment, learned that tongues speech was unintelligible on the mission field, Pentecostal leaders were forced to modify their understanding of tongues.)
There is a division among Pentecostals on the relationship between the gifts of tongues and prophecy.
The Pentecostal movement, especially in its early stages, was typically associated with the impoverished and marginalized of America, especially African Americans and Southern Whites.
For Pentecostals, prophetic utterances are fallible, i.e.
In this baptism, Christ is the agent and the Holy Spirit is the medium.
The unconventionally intense and emotional environment generated in Pentecostal meetings dually promoted, and was itself created by, other forms of participation such as personal testimony and spontaneous prayer and singing.
A notable exception is Oneness Pentecostalism, most adherents of which believe both water baptism and Spirit baptism are integral components of salvation.
Women such as Florence Crawford, Ida Robinson, and Aimee Semple McPherson founded new denominations, and many women served as pastors, co-pastors, and missionaries.
Regarding healing and prayer Purdy states:
Because speaking in tongues was initially believed to always be actual foreign languages, it was believed that missionaries would no longer have to learn the languages of the peoples they evangelized because the Holy Spirit would provide whatever foreign language was required.
The gifts of power are distinct from the vocal gifts in that they do not involve utterance.
Being "slain in the Spirit" or "falling under the power" is a form of prostration in which a person falls backwards, as if fainting, while being prayed over.
Prophetic and glossolalic utterances are not to replace the preaching of the Word of God  nor to be considered as equal to or superseding the written Word of God, which is the final authority for determining teaching and doctrine.
Pentecostals do not require that an interpretation be a literal word-for-word translation of a glossolalic utterance.
Many of these white ministers were licensed by the African-American, C. H. Mason under the auspices of the Church of God in Christ, one of the few legally chartered Pentecostal organizations at the time credentialing and licensing ordained Pentecostal clergy.
By 1911, many of these white ministers were distancing themselves from an existing arrangement under an African-American leader.
The Finished Work, however, would ultimately gain ascendancy among Pentecostals.
Ironically, the Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene, one of the largest holiness groups, was strongly opposed to the new Pentecostal movement.
The three-year-long Azusa Street Revival, founded and led by William J. Seymour in Los Angeles, California, resulted in the spread of Pentecostalism throughout the United States and the rest of the world as visitors carried the Pentecostal experience back to their home churches or felt called to the mission field.
Women were vital to the early Pentecostal movement.
There are 740 recognized Pentecostal denominations, but the movement also has a significant number of independent churches that are not organized into denominations.
Pentecostals embraced the teachings of Simpson, Dowie, Adoniram Judson Gordon (1836–1895) and Maria Woodworth-Etter (1844–1924; she later joined the Pentecostal movement) on healing.
Women did not shy away from engaging in this forum, and in the early movement the majority of converts and church-goers were female.
This experience cleanses and enables the believer to live a life of personal holiness.
The Holy Spirit is the agent, and the body of Christ is the medium.
"I, the Lord") but always in the third person (e.g.
The new birth is received by the grace of God through faith in Christ as Lord and Savior.
Verses 14–16 supply the framework for congregational healing prayer.
For Christians, this event commemorates the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the followers of Jesus Christ, as described in the second chapter of the Book of Acts.
The fourth value governing Pentecostal spirituality was "otherworldliness" or asceticism, which was partly informed by Pentecostal eschatology.
Azusa participants returned to their homes carrying their new experience with them.
Furthermore, Ewart believed that Jesus' name baptism and the gift of tongues were essential for salvation.
For Pentecostals, there is no prescribed manner in which a believer will be filled with the Spirit.
By December 1906, he had returned to Europe and is credited with beginning the Pentecostal movement in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany, France and England.
For them, baptism is not seen as a "work" but rather the indispensable means that Jesus himself provided to come into his kingdom.
For Pentecostals, spiritual and physical healing serves as a reminder and testimony to Christ's future return when his people will be completely delivered from all the consequences of the fall.
'''Pentecostalism''' or '''Classical Pentecostalism''' is a renewal movement within Protestant Christianity that places special emphasis on a direct personal experience of God through the baptism with the Holy Spirit.
Pentecostals believe that the baptism with the Holy Spirit is available to all Christians.
In 2006, a ten-country survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that 49 percent of Pentecostals in the US, 50 percent in Brazil, 41 percent in South Africa, and 54 percent in India said they "never" speak or pray in tongues.
In 2015, Cardinal Kurt Koch, President of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity, noted that Pentecostalism has become the "second largest reality in Christianity after the Catholic Church," thus surpassing global Orthodoxy and the Anglican Communion.
It was in this environment that the Latter Rain Movement, the most important controversy to affect Pentecostalism since World War II, began in North America and spread around the world in the late 1940s.
Foot washing is also held as an ordinance by some Pentecostals.
One reason for the conflict with the denominations was the sectarianism of Latter Rain adherents.
Oneness Pentecostals hold that repentance is necessary before baptism to make the ordinance valid, and receipt of the Holy Spirit manifested by speaking in other tongues is necessary afterwards, to complete the work of baptism.
Pentecostal denominations reject the use of wine as part of communion, using grape juice instead.
The ordinance of water baptism is an outward symbol of an inner conversion that has already taken place.
Like other forms of evangelical Protestantism, Pentecostalism adheres to the inerrancy of scripture and the necessity of accepting Christ as personal Lord and Savior.
The word of wisdom is defined as a revelation of the Holy Spirit that applies scriptural wisdom to a specific situation that a Christian community faces.
Pentecostals derive biblical precedent for dancing in worship from 2 Samuel 6, where David danced before the Lord.
The global renewal movements manifest many of these tensions as inherent characteristics of Pentecostalism and as representative of the character of global Christianity.
In 1908, Giacomo Lombardi led the first Pentecostal services in Italy.
Many autonomous churches were birthed out of the revival.
The major Oneness churches include the United Pentecostal Church International and the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World.
With the help of many healing evangelists such as Oral Roberts, Pentecostalism spread across America by the 1950s.
One can pray for one's own healing (verse 13) and for the healing of others (verse 16); no special gift or clerical status is necessary.
Rather, as the word "interpretation" implies, Pentecostals expect only an accurate explanation of the utterance's meaning.
The fruit of the Spirit is the result of the new birth and continuing to abide in Christ.
Alongside this high regard for the authority of scripture is a belief that the gift of prophecy continues to operate within the Church.
Second was orality, a feature that might explain Pentecostalism's success in evangelizing nonliterate cultures.
Apostolic Pentecostals are found worldwide in 30 denominations, including the Apostolic Church based in the United Kingdom.
Pentecostal denominations also began to interact with each other both on national levels and international levels through the Pentecostal World Fellowship, which was founded in 1947.
There were prominent participants of the early Pentecostal revivals, such as Stanley Frodsham and Lewi Pethrus, who endorsed the movement citing similarities to early Pentecostalism.
Pentecostal teaching stresses the importance of continually being filled with the Spirit.
The 1904–1905 Welsh Revival laid the foundation for British Pentecostalism and especially for a distinct family of denominations known as Apostolic Pentecostalism (not to be confused with Oneness Pentecostalism).
Amid great controversy, the Assemblies of God rejected the Oneness teaching, and a large number of its churches and pastors were forced to withdraw from the denomination in 1916.
*'''Baptism with the Holy Spirit''': This is an empowering experience distinct from baptism into the body of Christ.
Other immediate evidences include giving God praise, having joy, and desiring to testify about Jesus.
In many cases, whole churches were converted to the Pentecostal faith, but many times Pentecostals were forced to establish new religious communities when their experience was rejected by the established churches.
This revival saw thousands of conversions and also exhibited speaking in tongues.
Among the over 700 Pentecostal denominations, 240 are classified as part of Wesleyan, Holiness, or Methodistic Pentecostalism.
The security of the believer is a doctrine held within Pentecostalism; nevertheless, this security is conditional upon continual faith and repentance.
Prayer plays an important role in Pentecostal worship.
The first generation of Pentecostal believers faced immense criticism and ostracism from other Christians, most vehemently from the Holiness movement from which they originated.
This church later merged with another group forming the United Pentecostal Church International.
They include the Assemblies of God, the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel, and the Open Bible Churches.
It is important to note that the exercise of a gift is a manifestation of the Spirit, not of the gifted person, and though the gifts operate through people, they are primarily gifts given to the Church.
Most of these joined Garfield T. Haywood, an African-American preacher from Indianapolis, to form the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World.
This is done in imitation of Jesus who often healed in this manner.
This initially became known as New or Neo-Pentecostalism (in contrast to the older classical Pentecostalism) but eventually became known as the Charismatic Movement.
Every believer in Christ is made a part of his body, the Church, through baptism.
Comprising over 700 denominations and a large number of independent churches, there is no central authority governing Pentecostalism; however, many denominations are affiliated with the Pentecostal World Fellowship.
It is distinguished by belief in the baptism in the Holy Spirit that enables a Christian to live a Spirit-filled and empowered life.
As gifts freely given by the Holy Spirit, they cannot be earned or merited, and they are not appropriate criteria with which to evaluate one's spiritual life or maturity.
Just as fruit should be evident in the life of every Christian, Pentecostals believe that every Spirit-filled believer is given some capacity for the manifestation of the Spirit.
This type of faith is a manifestation of the Spirit granted only to certain individuals "in times of special crisis or opportunity" and endues them with "a divine certainty ... that triumphs over everything".
Pentecostals understand the word of wisdom and the word of knowledge to be supernatural revelations of wisdom and knowledge by the Holy Spirit.
Other Pentecostals do not consider it an ordinance; however, they may still recognize spiritual value in the practice.
The majority of early Pentecostal denominations taught pacifism and adopted military service articles that advocated conscientious objection.
Like other evangelicals, Pentecostals generally adhere to the Bible's divine inspiration and inerrancy—the belief that the Bible, in the original manuscripts in which it was written, is infallible.
Problems with this view arose when large numbers of converts entered the movement from non-Wesleyan backgrounds, especially from Baptist churches.
The majority of Pentecostals believe that at the moment a person is born again, the new believer has the presence (indwelling) of the Holy Spirit.
This has resulted in Oneness believers being accused by some (including other Pentecostals) of a "works-salvation" soteriology, a charge they vehemently deny.
Even as Pentecostalism has become more organized and formal, with more control exerted over services, the concept of spontaneity has retained an important place within the movement and continues to inform stereotypical imagery, such as the derogatory "holy roller".
After conversion, the believer grows in grace through a lifelong process of progressive sanctification.
The third was spontaneity; members of Pentecostal congregations are expected to follow the leading of the Holy Spirit, sometimes resulting in unpredictable services.
When used in this way, it is referred to as a "prayer language" as the believer is speaking unknown languages not for the purpose of communicating with others but for "communication between the soul and God".
Pentecostals believe in both a literal heaven and hell, the former for those who have accepted God's gift of salvation and the latter for those who have rejected it.
"prayer in the Spirit") "promotes a deepening of the prayer life and the spiritual development of the personality".
It is generally believed that there are as many gifts as there are useful ministries and functions in the Church.
A Pentecostal believer in a spiritual experience may vocalize fluent, unintelligible utterances (glossolalia) or articulate a natural language previously unknown to them (xenoglossy).
Edward Irving's Catholic Apostolic Church (founded ca.
After 1911, most new Pentecostal denominations would adhere to Finished Work sanctification.
In the first case, tongues could work as a sign by which witness is given to the unsaved.
Oneness Pentecostal adherents believe repentance, baptism in Jesus' name, and Spirit baptism are all essential elements of the conversion experience.
One school of thought believes that the gift of tongues is always directed from man to God, in which case it is always prayer or praise spoken to God but in the hearing of the entire congregation for encouragement and consolation.
The terms "Father" and "Holy Ghost" were titles designating different aspects of Christ.
Whether prophetic or not, however, Pentecostals are agreed that all public utterances in an unknown tongue must be interpreted in the language of the gathered Christians.
The movement is enjoying its greatest surge today in the global South, which includes Africa, Latin America, and most of Asia.
Pentecostal soteriology is generally Arminian rather than Calvinist.
In the book ''In Pursuit of Wholeness: Experiencing God's Salvation for the Total Person'', Pentecostal writer and Church historian Wilfred Graves, Jr. describes the healing of the body as a physical expression of salvation.
Believing that the second coming of Christ was imminent, these Christians expected an endtime revival of apostolic power, spiritual gifts, and miracle—working.
Pentecostals believe the private use of tongues in prayer (i.e.
All Spirit-filled believers, according to initial evidence proponents, will speak in tongues when baptized in the Spirit and, thereafter, will be able to express prayer and praise to God in an unknown tongue.
Not all Spirit-filled believers possess the gift of tongues.
No one person or group founded Pentecostalism.
Other important converts of Barratt were German minister Jonathan Paul who founded the first German Pentecostal denomination (the Mülheim Association) and Lewi Pethrus, the Swedish Baptist minister who founded the Swedish Pentecostal movement.
The oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit.
Figures such as Dwight L. Moody and R. A. Torrey began to speak of an experience available to all Christians which would empower believers to evangelize the world, often termed ''baptism with the Holy Spirit''.
Some teach that any of the gifts of the Spirit can be evidence of having received Spirit baptism.
In the second case, tongues are used for praise and prayer when the mind is superseded and "the speaker in tongues speaks to God, speaks mysteries, and ... no one understands him".
In 1995, David Barrett estimated there were 217 million "Denominational Pentecostals" throughout the world.
Simpson believed that Pentecostal tongues speaking was a legitimate manifestation of the Holy Spirit, but he did not believe it was a necessary evidence of Spirit baptism.
Oneness Pentecostals reject the doctrine of the Trinity.
Parham believed this was xenoglossia and that missionaries would no longer need to study foreign languages.
This was especially true in the movement's earlier history, when anyone could initiate a song, chorus, or spiritual gift.
While a prophetic utterance at times might foretell future events, this is not the primary purpose of Pentecostal prophecy and is never to be used for personal guidance.
The holiness movement provided a theological explanation for what was happening to these Christians, and they adapted Wesleyan soteriology to accommodate their new understanding.
Though it never entirely disappeared, interracial worship within Pentecostalism would not reemerge as a widespread practice until after the Civil Rights Movement.
Pentecostals agree with the Protestant principle of ''sola Scriptura''.
Pentecostalism is an evangelical faith, emphasizing the reliability of the Bible and the need for the transformation of an individual's life through faith in Jesus.
The term ''Pentecostal'' is derived from Pentecost, the Greek name for the Jewish Feast of Weeks.
When they were pastors, they often co-pastored with their husbands.
While the baptism with the Holy Spirit is a definite experience in a believer's life, Pentecostals view it as just the beginning of living a Spirit-filled life.
Therefore, most Pentecostal groups practice believer's baptism by immersion.
Early Pentecostals saw themselves as outsiders from mainstream society, dedicated solely to preparing the way for Christ's return.
This is accomplished by the gift of interpretation, and this gift can be exercised by the same individual who first delivered the message (if he or she possesses the gift of interpretation) or by another individual who possesses the required gift.
However, early Pentecostals considered the movement a latter-day restoration of the church's apostolic power, and historians such as Cecil M. Robeck, Jr. and Edith Blumhofer write that the movement emerged from late 19th-century radical evangelical revival movements in America and in Great Britain.
A spiritual gift is often exercised in partnership with another gift.
In the absence of these, Pentecostals teach that seekers should maintain a persistent faith in the knowledge that God will fulfill his promise.
The subsiding of the early Pentecostal movement allowed a socially more conservative approach to women to settle in, and, as a result, female participation was channeled into more supportive and traditionally accepted roles.
In addition to the denominational Pentecostal churches, there are many Pentecostal churches that choose to exist independently of denominational oversight.
The essentially universal belief in the continuation of all the spiritual gifts in the Keswick and Higher Life movements constituted a crucial historical background for the rise of Pentecostalism.
For most Pentecostals there is no other requirement to receive salvation.
These Finished Work Pentecostals (also known as "Baptistic" or "Reformed" Pentecostals because many converts were originally drawn from Baptist and Presbyterian backgrounds) teach that a person is initially sanctified at the moment of conversion.
Pentecostals place the gifts of the Spirit in context with the fruit of the Spirit.
Congregations may also corporately sing in tongues, a phenomenon known as singing in the Spirit.
For example, doctors in the United Kingdom reported that a minority of Pentecostal HIV patients was encouraged to stop taking their medicines and parents were told to stop giving medicine to their children, trends that placed lives at risk.
In 1914, a group of predominately 300 white Pentecostal ministers and laymen from all regions of the United States gathered in Hot Springs, Arkansas, to create a new, national Pentecostal fellowship—the General Council of the Assemblies of God.
Its purpose is for the spiritual edification of the individual.
This differs from other Pentecostals, along with evangelical Christians in general, who see only repentance and faith in Christ as essential to salvation.
The Wesleyan doctrine was strongest in the Southern denominations, such as the Church of God (Cleveland), Church of God in Christ, and the Pentecostal Holiness Church.
Some teach that the gift of tongues is equal to the gift of prophecy when tongues are interpreted.
In 1908, John G. Lake, a follower of Alexander Dowie who had experienced Pentecostal Spirit baptism, traveled to South Africa and founded what would become the Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa and the Zion Christian Church.
While the figure of Jesus Christ and his redemptive work are at the center of Pentecostal theology, that redemptive work is believed to provide for a fullness of the Holy Spirit of which believers in Christ may take advantage.
B. Simpson's Christian and Missionary Alliance negotiated a compromise position unique for the time.
In 1900, Charles Parham, an American evangelist and faith healer, began teaching that speaking in tongues was the Bible evidence of Spirit baptism.
During the period of 1906–24, Pentecostals defied social, cultural and political norms of the time that called for racial segregation and the enactment of Jim Crow laws.
*'''Water baptism''': Symbolic of dying to the world and living in Christ, water baptism is an outward symbol of that which has already been accomplished by the Holy Spirit, namely baptism into the body of Christ.
There must also be in the believer a deep conviction of needing more of God in his or her life, and a measure of consecration by which the believer yields himself or herself to the will of God.
He taught that the baptism with the Holy Spirit was a third experience, subsequent to conversion and sanctification.
Before the 1960s, most non-Pentecostal Christians who experienced the Pentecostal baptism in the Holy Spirit typically kept their experience a private matter or joined a Pentecostal church afterward.
Pentecostal writers point out that the lists of spiritual gifts in the New Testament do not seem to be exhaustive.
In 2011, a Pew Forum study of global Christianity found that there were an estimated 279 million classical Pentecostals, making 4 percent of the total world population and 12.8 percent of the world's Christian population Pentecostal.
In the words of Pentecostal scholar Vernon L. Purdy, "Because sin leads to human suffering, it was only natural for the Early Church to understand the ministry of Christ as the alleviation of human suffering, since he was God's answer to sin ...
Pentecostals are continuationists, meaning they believe that all of the spiritual gifts, including the miraculous or "sign gifts", found in  1 Corinthians 12:4–11,  12:27–31,  Romans 12:3–8, and  Ephesians 4:7–16 continue to operate within the Church in the present time.
In some Pentecostal churches, these spontaneous expressions are primarily found in revival meetings or special prayer meetings, being rare or non-existent in the main services.
An early dispute centered on challenges to the doctrine of the Trinity.
Alma White, leader of the Pillar of Fire Church, wrote a book against the movement titled ''Demons and Tongues'' in 1910.
Pentecostals see in the biblical writings of Paul an emphasis on having both character and power, exercising the gifts in love.
Pentecostals expect certain results following baptism with the Holy Spirit.
The Bible is the "all sufficient rule for faith and practice"; it is "fixed, finished, and objective revelation".
The raising of hands (which itself is a revival of the ancient orans posture) is an example of some Pentecostal worship practices that have been widely adopted by the larger Christian world.
Pentecostal musical and liturgical practice have also played an influential role in shaping contemporary worship trends, with Pentecostal churches such as Hillsong Church being the leading producers of congregational music.
The Church of God in Christ, the Church of God (Cleveland), the Pentecostal Holiness Church, and the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World were all interracial denominations before the 1920s.
Ultimately, North American Pentecostalism would divide into white and African-American branches.
The first foreign Pentecostal missionaries were A. G. Garr and his wife, who were Spirit baptized at Azusa and traveled to India and later Hong Kong.
Pentecostals teach that believers must discern whether the utterance has edifying value for themselves and the local church.
International visitors and Pentecostal missionaries would eventually export the revival to other nations.
Auxiliary women's organizations were created to focus women's talents on more traditional activities.
Holiness Pentecostal denominations include the Church of God in Christ, Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), and the International Pentecostal Holiness Church.
This type of tongue speaking forms an important part of many Pentecostals' personal daily devotions.
The first was individual experience, which emphasizes the Holy Spirit's personal work in the life of the believer.
Pentecostals look to scriptures such as James 5:13–16 for direction regarding healing prayer.
The Latter Rain and the Healing Revival influenced many leaders of the charismatic movement of the 1960s and 1970s.
Enduring or permanent results in the believer's life include Christ glorified and revealed in a greater way, a "deeper passion for souls", greater power to witness to nonbelievers, a more effective prayer life, greater love for and insight into the Bible, and the manifestation of the gifts of the Spirit.
Instead the term sacerdotal ordinance is used to denote the distinctive belief that grace is received directly from God by the congregant with the officiant serving only to facilitate rather than acting as a conduit or vicar.
