In October 1927 the couple agreed to marry.
While the building of the museum proceeded, the Graingers visited England for several months in 1936, during which Grainger made his first BBC broadcast.
At the same time, he adopted the professional name of  "Percy Aldridge Grainger"  for his published compositions and concert appearances.
In search of specific sounds Grainger employed unconventional instruments and techniques: solovoxes, theremins, marimbas, musical glasses, harmoniums, banjos, and ukuleles.
From the late 1920s and early 1930s Grainger became involved increasingly with educational work in schools and colleges, and in late 1931 accepted a year's appointment for 1932–33 as  professor of music at New York University (NYU).
Ella had a daughter, Elsie, who had been born out of wedlock in 1909.
His first recordings, for The Gramophone Company Ltd (later HMV), included the cadenza to Grieg's piano concerto; he did not record a complete version of this work on disc until 1945.
In 1905 Grainger began a close friendship with Karen Holten, a Danish music student who had been recommended to him as a piano pupil.
Since then the  University of Melbourne's commitment to the museum has, Covell asserts, "rescued it permanently from academic denigration and belittlement".
Covell nevertheless remarks that in this endeavour, Grainger's dogged resourcefulness and ingenious  use of available materials demonstrate a particularly Australian aspect of the composer's character – one of which Grainger would have been proud.
Grainger's own works fall into two categories: original compositions and folk music arrangements.
Grainger returned to London in July 1903; almost immediately he departed with Rose on a 10-month tour of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, as a member of a party organised by the Australian contralto Ada Crossley.
Brian Allison from the Grainger Museum, referring to Grainger's early displays of artistic skills, has speculated that had John Grainger's influence not been removed, "Percy Aldridge Grainger may today be remembered as one of Australia's leading painters and designers, who just happened to have a latent talent as a pianist and composer".
Grainger was a life-long atheist and believed he would only endure in the body of work he left behind.
On 25 October 1932 his lecture was illustrated by Duke Ellington and his band, who appeared in person; Grainger admired Ellington's music, seeing  harmonic similarities with Delius.
This was  his  home for the remainder of his life.
He had joined as a saxophonist, though he records learning the oboe: "I long for the time when I can blow my oboe well enough to play in the band".
As well as showing precocious musical talents, he displayed considerable early gifts as an artist, to the extent that his tutors thought his future might lie in art rather than music.
In 1942 a collection of his Kipling settings, the ''Jungle Book'' cycle, was performed in eight cities by the choir of the Gustavus Adolphus College from St. Peter, Minnesota.
Subsequently confined to his home, he continued to revise his music and arrange that of others; in August he informed Elsie  that he was working on an adaptation of one of Cyril Scott's early songs.
The Hoch Conservatory's reputation for piano teaching had been enhanced by the tenure, until 1892, of Clara Schumann as head of piano studies.
Delius, but well ahead of Grieg and Tchaikovsky.
Despite many offers he never accepted another formal academic appointment, and refused all offers of honorary degrees.
John Grainger was an  accomplished artist, with broad cultural interests and a wide circle of friends.
In his early London years he also composed ''Hill Song Number 1'' (1902), an instrumental piece much admired by Busoni.
Of Grainger the pianist, ''The New York Times'' critic Harold Schonberg wrote that his unique style was  expressed with "amazing skill, personality and vigor".
One early  ambitious work was ''The Warriors'' (1913), an 18-minute suite which he dedicated to Delius.
The idea of tonal freedom, he said, had been in his head since as a boy of eleven or twelve he had observed the wave-movements in the sea.
In the course of a long and innovative career he played a prominent role in the revival of interest in British folk music in the early years of the 20th century.
Grainger was known for his musical experimentation and did not hesitate to exploit the capabilities of the orchestra.
Having chosen London as his future base, in May 1901 Grainger abandoned his studies and, with Rose, left Frankfurt for England.
Developments in transistor technology encouraged Grainger and Cross to begin work on a fourth, entirely electronic machine, which was incomplete when Grainger died.
At other times he recorded for Decca (1944–45 and 1957), and Vanguard (1957).
He also designed Nellie Melba's home, Coombe Cottage, at Coldstream.
Grainger first met Grieg at the home of the London financier Sir Edgar Speyer, in May 1906.
He later adds, "I shall thoroly thoroly  understand  if you cannot in any way see yr way to follow up this hot wish of mine".
But I have not succeeded yet."
Lowrey, 20 years Grainger's senior, traded patronage and contacts for sexual favours – he termed the relationship a "love-serve job".
Despite his conservatory training he rebelled against the  disciplines of the central European tradition, largely rejecting conventional forms such as  symphony, sonata, concerto and opera.
From her last letter to Grainger, dated 29 April, it seems that this confrontation unbalanced Rose; on 30 April, while Grainger was touring on the West Coast, she jumped to her death from an office window  on the 18th floor of the Aeolian Building in New York City.
Grainger's piano tutor was James Kwast, who developed his young pupil's skills to the extent that, within a year, Grainger was being lauded as a prodigy.
She became an important confidante; the relationship persisted for eight years, largely through  correspondence.
After accompanying her son on an extended European tour in the summer of 1900 Rose, whose health had been poor for some time, suffered a nervous collapse and could no longer work.
Before going to London Grainger had composed numerous Kipling settings, and his first mature orchestral pieces.
He was experiencing a sense of career failure;  in 1947, when refusing the Chair of Music at Adelaide University, he wrote: "If I were 40 years younger, and not so crushed by defeat in every branch of music I have essayed, I am sure I would have welcomed such a chance".
On 9 June 1917, after America's entry into the war, he enlisted as a bandsman in the U.S. Army with the 15th Coastal Artillery Corps Band in New York City.
These activities coincided with what Bird calls "the halcyon days of the 'First English Folksong Revival'".
However, according to Bird, Grainger often explained that his reason for leaving London was that "he wanted to emerge as Australia's first  composer of worth, and to have laid himself open to the possibility of being killed would have rendered his goal unattainable".
In 1954, after his last Carnegie Hall  appearance, Grainger's long promotion of Grieg's music was recognised when he was awarded the  St. Olav Medal by King Haakon of Norway.
In 1908 he  obtained the tune of "Country Gardens" from the folk music specialist Cecil Sharp, though he did not fashion it into a performable piece for another ten years.
Percy Grainger's father, John Grainger (1854–1917), was an English-born architect who emigrated to Australia  in 1877.
He played works by Bach, Brahms, Handel and Chopin alongside two of his own compositions: "Colonial Song" and "Mock Morris".
After leaving the army in January 1919, Grainger refused an offer to become conductor of the Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra and  resumed his career as a concert pianist.
He believed  that conformity with the traditional rules of set scales, rhythms and harmonic procedures amounted to "absurd goose-stepping", from which music should be set free.
During 1906–07 the two maintained a mutually complimentary correspondence, which culminated in Grainger's ten-day visit in July 1907 to the composer's Norwegian home, "Troldhaugen" near Bergen.
In October 1953 Grainger was operated on for abdominal cancer; his fight against this disease would last for the rest of his life.
On arrival in America the pair separated, but were reunited in England the following autumn after Grainger's final folksong expedition to Denmark.
As a student Grainger  had learned to appreciate the Norwegian's harmonic originality, and by 1906  had  several Grieg pieces in his concert repertoire, including the piano concerto.
He served briefly as a bandsman in the United States Army during 1917–18, and took American citizenship in 1918.
In January 1948 he conducted the premiere of his wind band setting of "The Power of Rome and the Christian Heart", written for the Goldman Band to celebrate the 70th birthday of its founder.
This wish was not carried out.
His body was flown to Adelaide where, on 2 March, he was buried in the Aldridge family vault in the West Terrace Cemetery, alongside Rose's ashes.
After the Second World War, ill health reduced his levels of activity, and he considered his career a failure.
In 1911 Grainger finally felt confident enough of his standing as a pianist to begin large-scale publishing of his compositions.
However, a growing bitterness  was becoming evident in his writings and correspondence; in a letter to his lifelong friend, the Danish composer Herman Sandby, he bemoaned the continuing ascendency in music of the "German form", and asserted that "all my compositional life I have been a leader without followers".
Different textures are defined by Grainger as "smooth", "grained" and "prickly".
After his mother's suicide in 1922 he became increasingly involved in educational work.
Over the next two years his engagements included  concerts with Nellie Melba in Boston and Pittsburgh and a command performance before President Woodrow Wilson.
Nevertheless, in his later years he  frequently denigrated  his career, for example writing to Scott: "I have never been a true musician or true artist".
In a 1941 letter to Scott, Grainger acknowledged that he had failed to produce any large-scale works in the manner of a Bach oratorio, a Wagner opera or a Brahms symphony, but excused this failure on the grounds that all his works prior to the mid-1930s had been mere preparations for his free music.
Amid his concert and teaching duties, Grainger found time to rescore many of his works (a habit he continued throughout his life) and also to compose new pieces: his ''Children's March: Over the Hills and Far Away'', and the orchestral version of ''The Power of Rome and the Christian Heart'' both originated in this period.
Through the winter of 1959–60 Grainger continued to perform his own music, often covering long distances by bus or train; he would not travel by air.
Because of the closeness of the bond between the two, there had long been  rumours that  their relationship was incestuous;  in April 1922 Rose was directly challenged over this issue by her friend Lotta Hough.
This experiment in "aleatory" composition presaged by many decades the use of similar procedures by avant-garde composers such as Berio and Stockhausen.
Here the two spent much time revising and rehearsing the piano concerto in preparation for that year's Leeds Festival.
The boy played  works by Bach, Beethoven, Schumann and Scarlatti, and was warmly complimented in the Melbourne press.
Although now less committed to a year-round schedule of concerts, Grainger remained a very popular performer.
Grainger was a musical democrat; he believed that in a performance each player's role should be of equal importance.
Grainger's complete 78&nbsp;rpm solo piano recordings are now available on compact disc as a CD box set.
Among various new ideas, Grainger introduced his so-called "free-music" theories.
Except for three months' formal schooling as a 12-year-old, during which he was bullied and ridiculed by his classmates, Percy was educated at home.
Rose, an autodidact with a  dominating presence, supervised his music and literature studies and engaged other tutors for languages, art and drama.
While he continued to  revise and rescore his compositions, he increasingly worked on arrangements of music by other composers, in particular works by  Bach, Brahms, Fauré and Delius.
The ethnomusicologist John Blacking, while acknowledging Grainger's contribution to social and cultural aspects of music, nevertheless writes that if the continental foundation of Grainger's musical education had not been "undermined by dilettantism and the disastrous influence of his mother, I am sure that his ultimate contribution to the world of music would have been much greater".
Since Grainger's death, recordings of his works have been undertaken by many artists and issued under many different labels.
Nevertheless, he continued to  visit Britain regularly; in May of that year he made his only television appearance, in a BBC "Concert Hour" programme when  he played "Handel in the Strand" on the piano.
On 10 August 1948, Grainger appeared at the London Proms, playing the piano part in his ''Suite on Danish Folksongs'' with the London Symphony Orchestra under Basil Cameron.
Much of his recording work was done between 1917 and 1931, under contract with  Columbia.
Patti was greatly taken by the young pianist and prophesied a glorious career for him.
In July 1915 Grainger formally registered his intention to apply for US citizenship.
After her marriage in 1916 she and Grainger continued to correspond and occasionally meet until her death in 1953.
After 1950 Grainger virtually ceased to compose.
From his earliest lessons Percy developed a lifelong fascination with Nordic culture; writing late in life he maintained that the Icelandic "Saga of Grettir the Strong" was "the strongest single artistic influence on my life".
The conductor John Eliot Gardiner describes Grainger as "a true original in terms of orchestration and imaginative instrumentation", whose terseness of expression is reminiscent in style both of the 20th century Second Viennese School and the  Italian madrigalists of the 16th and 17th centuries.
He also experimented with music machines that he hoped would supersede human interpretation.
A third machine, the "Cross-Grainger Kangaroo-pouch", was completed by 1952.
The brief "Sea Song" of 1907 was an early attempt by Grainger to write "beatless" music.
He  was soon performing around 120 concerts a year, generally to great critical acclaim, and in  April 1921 reached a wider audience by performing in a cinema, New York's Capitol Theatre.
After his return to Australia  they lived apart; the burden of raising Percy fell to Rose, while John pursued his career as chief architect to the Western Australian Department of Public Works.
Although much of his work was experimental and unusual, the piece with which he is most generally associated is his piano arrangement of the folk-dance tune "Country Gardens".
The two remained close friends until Delius's death in 1934.
She signed the letter: "Your poor insane mother".
On the whole, however, Grainger did not enjoy his tenure at NYU; he disliked the institutional formality, and found the university generally unreceptive to his ideas.
The first of these  was a relatively simple device controlled by an adapted pianola.
The following year he met the German-Italian composer and pianist Ferruccio Busoni.
By 1957 Grainger's physical health had markedly declined, as had his powers of concentration.
To replace lost income Grainger began  giving piano lessons and public performances; his first solo recital was  in Frankfurt on 6 December 1900.
Encouraged by Klimsch, Grainger  turned away from composing classical pastiches reminiscent of Handel, Haydn and Mozart, and  developed a personal compositional style the originality and maturity of which quickly impressed and astonished his friends.
To assist that survival he established the Grainger Museum, which was given little attention before the mid-1970s; it was initially regarded as evidence either of an over-large ego or of extreme eccentricity.
He became a champion of Nordic music and culture, his enthusiasm for which he often expressed in private letters.
His principal creative activity in the last decade of his life was his work with Burnett Cross, a young physics teacher, on free music machines.
His pioneering work in the recording and setting of folksongs greatly influenced the following generation of English composers; Benjamin Britten acknowledged the Australian as his master in this respect.
In November 1926, while returning to America, he met Ella Ström, a Swedish-born  artist with whom he developed a close friendship.
In the autumn of 1940, alarmed that the war might precipitate an invasion of the United States eastern seaboard, he and Ella moved to Springfield, Missouri, in the centre of the continent.
Critics were undecided as to whether the work was "magnificent", or merely "a magnificent failure".
In the late 1930s Grainger spent much time arranging his works in settings for wind bands.
The music, which mixes elements of other Grainger works with references to Arnold Bax, Arnold Schönberg and Richard Strauss, requires a huge orchestral ensemble   alongside at least three pianos – in one performance, Grainger used nineteen pianos with thirty pianists – to be played by "exceptionally strong vigorous players".
After Pabst returned to Europe in the autumn of 1894, Grainger's new piano tutor, Adelaide Burkitt, arranged for his appearances at a series of concerts in October 1894, at Melbourne's Royal Exhibition Building.
The outbreak of war in Europe in September 1939 curtailed Grainger's overseas travelling.
As a regular encore  he began to play a piano setting of the tune "Country Gardens".
He agreed to visit Britten's Aldeburgh Festival in 1959, but was prevented by illness.
However, Britten regarded Grainger's late recording of the Grieg concerto, from a live performance at Aarhus in 1957, as "one of the noblest ever committed to record" – despite the suppression of the disc for many years, because of the proliferation of wrong notes and other faults.
The early enthusiasm which had greeted his concert appearances became muted in later years, and reviews of his performances during the final ten years of his life were often harsh.
Grieg was greatly impressed with Grainger's playing, and wrote that the Australian was "a genius that we Scandinavians cannot do other than love."
From the 1990s an increase in the number of Grainger  recordings has brought a revival of interest in his works, and has enhanced his reputation as a composer.
As his reputation grew he met many of the significant figures in European music, forming important friendships with Frederick Delius and Edvard Grieg.
7 as a "Grieg-Grainger Symphony", but abandoned the project after writing 16 bars of music.
In 1902 he was presented by the socialite Lillith Lowrey to Queen Alexandra, who thereafter frequently attended  his London recitals.
From the beginning of 1922 Rose's health deteriorated sharply; she was suffering from  delusions and nightmares, and became  fearful that her illness would harm her son's career.
In February 1902 Grainger made his first appearance as a piano soloist with an orchestra, playing Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto with the Bath Pump Room Orchestra.
In the United States, Grainger left a strong educational legacy through his involvement, over 40 years, with high school, summer school and college students.
A similarly enthusiastic reception was given to Grainger's music at a second series of Gardiner concerts the following year.
He gave his last concert in 1960, less than a year before his death.
Meanwhile he continued his studies with Kwast, and increased his repertoire until he was confident he could maintain himself and his mother as a concert pianist.
Only a few of his works originated as piano pieces, though in due course almost all of them were, in his phrase, "dished up" in piano versions.
After a lifetime interpreting Grieg's works, in 1944 Grainger began adapting the Norwegian's E minor Piano Sonata, Op.
Between 1908 and 1957 Grainger made numerous recordings, usually as pianist or conductor, of his own and other composers' music.
The work was to become synonymous with Grainger's name through the rest of his life, though he came in time to detest it.
He continued to appear at concerts, often in church halls and educational establishments rather than major concert venues.
Between 1901 and 1914 he was based in London, where he established himself first as a society pianist and later as a concert performer, composer and collector of original folk melodies.
As a student, Grainger had learned to appreciate the music of Grieg, and came to regard the Norwegian as a paragon of Nordic beauty and greatness.
His elastic scoring technique was developed to enable groups of all sizes and combinations of instruments to give effective performances of his music.
On his 1958 visit to England he met Benjamin Britten, the two having previously maintained a mutually complimentary correspondence.
In 1937 Grainger began an association with the Interlochen International Music Camp, and taught regularly at its summer schools until 1944.
Its vast quantities of materials have been used to investigate not only Grainger's life and works, but those of contemporaries whom Grainger had known: Grieg, Delius, Scott and others.
Together with a group of slightly older British students – Roger Quilter, Balfour Gardiner, Cyril Scott and Norman O'Neill, all of whom became his friends – Grainger helped form the "Frankfurt Group", whose long-term objective was to rescue British and Scandinavian music from what they considered the negative influences of central European music.
In October of that year he toured Britain in a concert party with Adelina Patti, the Italian-born opera singer.
From 1906 Grainger used a phonograph, one of the first collectors to do so, and by this means he assembled more than 200 Edison cylinder recordings of native folk singers.
In London, when he found time he continued to compose; a letter to Balfour Gardiner dated 21 July 1901 indicates that he was working on his ''Marching Song of Democracy'' (a Walt Whitman setting), and had made good progress with the experimental works ''Train Music'' and ''Charging Irishrey''.
Their plans for a long-term working relationship were thwarted by Grieg's sudden death in September 1907; nevertheless, this relatively brief acquaintance had a considerable impact on Grainger, and he championed Grieg's music for the rest of his life.
At this time Grainger discovered the poetry of Rudyard Kipling and began setting it to music; according to Scott, "No poet and composer have been so suitably wedded since Heine & Schumann".
He also made many adaptations of other composers' works.
In 1956, the suggestion by  the composer Keith Humble that Grainger  be invited to write  music for the opening of the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne was rejected by the organisers of the Games.
Before leaving Melbourne, he deposited in a bank a parcel that contained  an essay and photographs related to his sex life, not to be opened until 10 years after his death.
In 1907 he met Frederick Delius, with whom he achieved an immediate rapport – the two musicians had similar ideas about composition and harmony, and shared a dislike for the classical German masters.
This public acclaim helped Rose to decide that her son should continue his studies at  the Hoch Conservatory in Frankfurt, Germany, an institution recommended  by William Laver, head of piano studies at Melbourne's Conservatorium of music.
In Britain, Grainger's main legacy is the revival of interest in folk music.
In April 1921 Grainger moved with his mother to a large house in White Plains, New York.
These included  David Mitchell, whose daughter Helen later gained worldwide fame as an operatic soprano under the name Nellie Melba.
Grainger left Australia at the age of 13 to attend the Hoch Conservatory in Frankfurt.
He believed that ideally, free music required non-human performance, and spent much of  his later life developing machines to fulfil this vision.
On this occasion his morning recital  went well, but his conducting in the afternoon  was, in his own words, "a fiasco".
In 1995 Chandos Records began to compile a complete recorded edition of Grainger's original compositions and folk settings.
After spending 1937 in America, Grainger returned to Melbourne in 1938 for the official opening of the Museum; among those present at the ceremony was his old piano teacher Adelaide Burkitt.
She was the first woman with whom he had sex; he later wrote of this initial encounter that he had experienced "an overpowering landslide" of feeling, and that "I thought I was about to die.
Grainger  commented that the huge audiences at these cinema concerts often showed greater appreciation for his playing than those at established concert venues such as Carnegie Hall and the Aeolian.
In April 1914 Grainger gave his first performance of Delius's piano concerto, at a music festival in Torquay.
John's claims to have "discovered" her are unfounded, although he may have offered her encouragement.
His  decision to leave England for America in early September 1914, after the outbreak of the First World War, damaged his reputation among his patriotically minded British friends.
John Bird, Grainger's biographer, also records that during his Frankfurt years Grainger began to develop sexual appetites that were "distinctly abnormal"; by the age of 16 he had started to experiment in  flagellation and other sado-masochistic practices, which he continued to pursue through most of his adult life.
In London, Grainger's charm, good looks and talent (with some assistance from the local Australian community) ensured that he was quickly taken up as a pianist by wealthy patrons, and was soon performing in concerts in private homes.
"Out in nature we hear all kinds of lovely and touching "free" (non-harmonic) combinations of tones; yet we are unable to take up these beauties&nbsp;... into the art of music because of our archaic notions of harmony".
On 3 June 1918 he became a naturalised American citizen.
In his 18 months' service, Grainger  made frequent appearances as a pianist at Red Cross and Liberty bond concerts.
By this time, Grainger acknowledged that he had not fulfilled Grieg's high expectations of him, either as a composer or as a pianist.
Delius was by now almost blind; Grainger  helped fulfil his  friend's wish to see a Norwegian sunset by carrying him (with some assistance)  to the top of a nearby mountain peak.
I don't think that any joy entered into it".
His convictions of Nordic superiority eventually led Grainger, in letters to friends, to  express his views in crudely racial and anti-Semitic terms; the music historian David Pear describes Grainger as, "at root, a racial bigot of no small order".
The letter, which began "I am out of my mind and cannot think properly", asked Grainger if he had ever spoken to Lotta of "improper love".
Both were inspired by folk music; Grainger gave Delius his setting of the folksong ''Brigg Fair'', which  the older composer developed  into his famous orchestral rhapsody, dedicated to Grainger.
Some of his most successful and most characteristic pieces, such as "Mock Morris", "Handel in the Strand", "Shepherd's Hey" and  "Molly on the Shore" date from this period.
In this role he delivered a series of lectures under the heading "A General Study of the Manifold Nature of Music", which introduced his students to a wide range of ancient and modern works.
To finance the project, Grainger embarked on a series of concerts and broadcasts,  in which he subjected his audiences to a vast range of the world's music in accordance with his "universalist" view.
In September 1955 Grainger made his final visit to Australia, where he spent nine months organising and arranging exhibits for the Grainger Museum.
In 1905, inspired by a lecture given by the pioneer folksong historian Lucy Broadwood, Grainger began to collect original folksongs.
Grieg in turn described Grainger as a new way forward for English composition, "quite different from Elgar, very original".
He won professional recognition for his design of the Princes Bridge across the Yarra River in Melbourne.
Grainger's first known composition, "A Birthday Gift to Mother", is dated 1893.
In  autumn 1922 he left for a year-long trip to Europe, where  he collected and recorded Danish folksongs before a concert tour that took him to Norway, the Netherlands, Germany and England.
Grainger made further trips to Europe in 1925 and 1927, collecting more Danish folk music with the aid of the octogenarian ethnologist Evald Tang Kristensen; this work formed the basis of the ''Suite on Danish Folksongs'' of 1928–30.
Back home, after  further surgery  he recovered sufficiently to undertake a modest winter concerts season.
In the 1930s he set up the Grainger Museum in Melbourne, his birthplace, as a monument to his life and works and as a future research archive.
In April 1917 Grainger received news of his father's death in Perth.
He refused to consider a "Grainger Festival", as suggested by the Australian Broadcasting Commission, because he felt that his homeland had rejected him and his music.
Before leaving Frankfurt, Grainger had fallen in love with Kwast's daughter Mimi; in an autobiographical essay dated 1947 he admits to being "already sex-crazy" at this time.
Initially the two men were on cordial terms (Busoni offered to give Grainger lessons free of charge) and as a result, Grainger spent part of the 1903 summer in Berlin as Busoni's pupil.
In 1914, Grainger moved to the United States, where he lived for the rest of his life, though he travelled widely in Europe and in Australia.
Grainger always acknowledged her as a family member, and developed a warm personal relationship with her.
During his association with the Duo-Art company between 1915 and 1932, Grainger made around 80 piano rolls of his own and others' music using a wooden robot designed to play a concert grand piano via an array of precision mechanical fingers and feet; replayings of many of these rolls have subsequently been recorded on to compact disc.
Over the next few years several friends died: Gardiner in 1950, Quilter and  Karen Holten in 1953.
