It includes ''caucasicus'' and most specimens of the proposed race ''punicus'', though others may be ''pelegrinoides'', Barbary falcons (see also below), or perhaps the rare hybrids between these two which might occur around Algeria.
The Latin term for falcon, ''falco'', is related to ''falx'', the Latin word meaning sickle, in reference to the silhouette of the falcon's long, pointed wings in flight.
In most subspecies, males weigh less than  and females weigh more than , with cases of females weighing about 50% more than their male breeding mates not uncommon.
The Barbary falcon has a peculiar way of flying, beating only the outer part of its wings like fulmars sometimes do; this also occurs in the peregrine, but less often and far less pronounced.
*'''''Falco peregrinus ernesti''','' described by Sharpe in 1894, is found from Indonesia to Philippines and south to Papua New Guinea and the nearby Bismarck Archipelago.
In Britain, there has been a recovery of populations since the crash of the 1960s.
''The Peregrine'', by J.
The successful recovery program was aided by the effort and knowledge of falconers – in collaboration with The Peregrine Fund and state and federal agencies – through a technique called hacking.
Admirers of the book include Robert Macfarlane, Mark Cocker, who regards the book as "one of the most outstanding books on nature in the twentieth century" and Werner Herzog, who called it "the one book I would ask you to read if you want to make films," and said elsewhere "... it has prose of the calibre that we have not seen since Joseph Conrad."
The peregrine falcon lives mostly along mountain ranges, river valleys, coastlines, and increasingly in cities.
The air pressure from such a dive could possibly damage a bird's lungs, but small bony tubercles on a falcon's nostrils guide the powerful airflow away from the nostrils, enabling the bird to breathe more easily while diving by reducing the change in air pressure.
Its range includes South Asia from Pakistan across India and Bangladesh to Sri Lanka and Southeastern China.
An alternate point of view is that populations in the eastern North America had vanished due to hunting and egg collection.
To protect their eyes, the falcons use their nictitating membranes (third eyelids) to spread tears and clear debris from their eyes while maintaining vision.
*'''''Falco peregrinus minor''','' first described by Bonaparte in 1850.
It is non-migratory.
A study testing the flight physics of an "ideal falcon" found a theoretical speed limit at  for low altitude flight and  for high altitude flight.
using natural contours to surprise and ambush prey on the ground, have been reported and even rare cases of prey being pursued on foot.
The date of egg-laying varies according to locality, but is generally from February to March in the Northern Hemisphere, and from July to August in the Southern Hemisphere, although the Australian subspecies ''macropus'' may breed as late as November, and equatorial populations may nest anytime between June and December.
Peregrine falcons handled by falconers are also occasionally used to scare away birds at airports to reduce the risk of bird-plane strikes, improving air-traffic safety.
peregrinus'' in the 1994 ''Handbook of the Birds of the World''.
Most vagrants that reach western Europe seem to belong to the more northern and strongly migratory ''tundrius'', only considered distinct since 1968.
Its range includes South America from Ecuador through Bolivia, northern Argentina, and Chile to Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands.
Males have a rufous wash on crown, nape, ears, and back; underside conspicuously washed pinkish-brown.
*'''''Falco peregrinus submelanogenys''','' described by Mathews in 1912, is the Southwest Australian peregrine falcon.
It is the largest subspecies, and it looks like an oversized and darker ''tundrius'' or like a strongly barred and large ''anatum''.
The main reason for taking wild peregrines at this point is to maintain healthy genetic diversity in the breeding lines.
Chicks fledge 42 to 46 days after hatching, and remain dependent on their parents for up to two months.
It is also paler than ''anatum''; most have a conspicuous white forehead and white in ear region, but the crown and "moustache" are very dark, unlike in ''calidus''.
*'''''Falco peregrinus macropus''','' described by Swainson in 1837, is the Australian peregrine falcon.
It is similar to ''peregrinus'' but is slightly smaller; adults are somewhat paler and less patterned below, but juveniles are darker and more patterned below.
The peregrine falcon is a highly admired falconry bird, and has been used in falconry for more than 3,000 years, beginning with nomads in central Asia.
It apparently reaches north along the Atlantic coast as far as Morocco.
Generally three to four eggs, but sometimes as few as one or as many as five, are laid in the scrape.
Due to the extirpation of the eastern ''anatum'' (''Falco peregrinus anatum''), the near extirpation of the ''anatum'' in the Midwest, and the limited gene pool within North American breeding stock, the inclusion of non-native subspecies was justified to optimize the genetic diversity found within the species as a whole.
A few birds winter in northern and northwestern India, mainly in dry semi-desert habitats.
Peregrines defending their nests have managed to kill raptors as large as golden eagles and bald eagles (both of which they normally avoid as potential predators) that have come too close to the nest by ambushing them in a full stoop.
Peregrine falcons were removed from the United States' endangered species list in 1999.
The courtship flight includes a mix of aerial acrobatics, precise spirals, and steep dives.
Several peregrine subspecies were included in the breeding stock, including birds of Eurasian origin.
It is a vector for Avipoxvirus, Newcastle disease virus, Falconid herpesvirus 1 (and possibly other Herpesviridae), and some mycoses and bacterial infections.
Apart from such anthropogenic threats as collision with human-made objects, the peregrine may be killed by larger hawks and owls.
Females are tinged rich brown overall, especially on the crown and nape.
Prey is plucked before consumption.
Peregrine falcons have been successfully bred in captivity, both for falconry and for release back into the wild.
It is most similar to ''brookei'', but is markedly paler above, with a rusty neck, and is a light buff with reduced barring below.
Both the English and scientific names of this species mean "wandering falcon", referring to the migratory habits of many northern populations.
Some controversy has existed over the origins of captive breeding stock used by The Peregrine Fund in the recovery of peregrine falcons throughout the contiguous United States.
The peregrine falcon has a body length of  and a wingspan from .
The scientific name ''Falco peregrinus'' is a Medieval Latin phrase that was used by Albertus Magnus in 1225.
It is smaller than ''anatum''.
*'''''Falco peregrinus furuitii''','' described by Momiyama in 1927, is found on the Izu and Ogasawara Islands south of Honshū, Japan.
The top of the head and a "moustache" along the cheeks are black, contrasting sharply with the pale sides of the neck and white throat.
They are incubated for 29 to 33 days, mainly by the female, with the male also helping with the incubation of the eggs during the day, but only the female incubating them at night.
A pair mates for life and returns to the same nesting spot annually.
Known peregrine falcon ectoparasites are chewing lice, ''Ceratophyllus garei'' (a flea), and Hippoboscidae flies (''Icosta nigra'', ''Ornithoctona erythrocephala'').
It is found in Australia in all regions except the southwest.
The cere is yellow, as are the feet, and the beak and claws are black.
This has been greatly assisted by conservation and protection work led by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
A large, crow-sized falcon, it has a blue-grey back, barred white underparts, and a black head.
In mild-winter regions, it is usually a permanent resident, and some individuals, especially adult males, will remain on the breeding territory.
In several parts of the world, such as the eastern United States and Belgium, this species became extirpated (locally extinct) as a result.
A population estimate of 40 breeding pairs in Sri Lanka was made in 1996.
In urban areas, the main component of the peregrine's diet is the rock or feral pigeon, which comprise 80% or more of the dietary intake for peregrines in some cities.
Since peregrine eggs and chicks are still often targeted by illegal collectors, it is common practice not to publicize unprotected nest locations.
They were also used to intercept homing pigeons during World War II.
The most serious predators of peregrine nests in North America and Europe are the great horned owl and the Eurasian eagle owl.
It includes ''brevirostris'', ''germanicus'', ''rhenanus'', and ''riphaeus''.
Once prey is spotted, it begins its stoop, folding back the tail and wings, with feet tucked.
If the eggs are lost early in the nesting season, the female usually lays another clutch, although this is extremely rare in the Arctic due to the short summer season.
South-facing sites are favoured.
The Barbary falcon's shoulder and pelvis bones are stout by comparison with the peregrine, and its feet are smaller.
To release a captive-bred falcon, the bird is placed in a special cage at the top of a tower or cliff ledge for some days or so, allowing it to acclimate itself to its future environment.
Males weigh , while females weigh .
When reintroductions have been attempted for peregrines, the most serious impediments were these two owls routinely picking off nestlings, fledglings and adults by night.
Additionally the versatility of the species, with agility allowing capture of smaller birds and a strength and attacking style allowing capture of game much larger than themselves, combined with the wide size range of the many peregrine subspecies, means there is a subspecies suitable to almost any size and type of game bird.
This lineage probably diverged from other falcons towards the end of the Late Miocene or in the Early Pliocene, about 5–8&nbsp;million years ago (mya).
It is a dark form, resembling ''pealei'' in colour, but darker, especially on tail.
The female chooses a nest site, where she scrapes a shallow hollow in the loose soil, sand, gravel, or dead vegetation in which to lay eggs.
In the Brazilian mangrove swamp of Cubatão, a wintering falcon of the subspecies ''tundrius'' was observed while successfully hunting a juvenile scarlet ibis.
Then, when they are old enough, the rearing box is opened, allowing the bird to train its wings.
It is paler than ''pelegrinoides'', and somewhat similar to a small, pale lanner falcon (''Falco biarmicus'').
The peregrine falcon has been designated the official city bird of Chicago.
The standard linear measurements of peregrines are: the wing chord measures , the tail measures  and the tarsus measures .
Most mature ''anatum'', except those that breed in more northern areas, winter in their breeding range.
The 2007 U.S. Idaho state quarter features a peregrine falcon.
It has become extinct in eastern North America, and populations there are hybrids as a result of reintroductions of birds from elsewhere.
Northern populations are migratory, while those of Japan are resident.
It is very rare, and may only remain on a single island.
*'''''Falco peregrinus pelegrinoides''','' first described by Temminck in 1829, is found in the Canary Islands through north Africa and the Near East to Mesopotamia.
As the fledgling gets stronger, feeding is reduced, forcing the bird to learn to hunt.
The bill is very wide.
The peregrine falcon nests in a scrape, normally on cliff edges.
Native Americans of the Mississippian culture (c. 800–1500) used the peregrine, along with several other birds of prey, in imagery as a symbol of "aerial (celestial) power" and buried men of high status in costumes associating to the ferocity of "raptorial" birds.
It has been determined that they are only approximately 0.6–0.8% genetically differentiated.
It was formerly sometimes known as ''Falco atriceps'' or ''Falco shaheen''.
Males weigh , while females weigh .
*'''''Falco peregrinus cassini''','' described by Sharpe in 1873, is also known as the Austral peregrine falcon.
The widespread restriction of DDT use eventually allowed released birds to breed successfully.
p. babylonicus'') are often instead treated together as a distinct species, ''Falco pelegrinoides'' (the Barbary falcon), although they were included within ''F.
Today, peregrines are regularly paired in captivity with other species such as the lanner falcon (''F.&nbsp;biarmicus'') to produce the "perilanner", a somewhat popular bird in falconry as it combines the peregrine's hunting skill with the lanner's hardiness, or the gyrfalcon to produce large, strikingly coloured birds for the use of falconers.
Terminology used by peregrine breeders also used the Old French term ''gentil'', "of noble birth; aristocratic", particularly with the peregrine.
In many parts of its range, peregrines now also nest regularly on tall buildings or bridges; these human-made structures used for breeding closely resemble the natural cliff ledges that the peregrine prefers for its nesting locations.
Endoparasites include ''Plasmodium relictum'' (usually not causing malaria in the peregrine falcon), Strigeidae trematodes, ''Serratospiculum amaculata'' (nematode), and tapeworms.
They occur from the Iberian Peninsula around the Mediterranean, except in arid regions, to the Caucasus.
In some regions, as in parts of Australia and on the west coast of northern North America, large tree hollows are used for nesting.
As can be seen, the peregrine is still genetically close to the hierofalcons, though their lineages diverged in the Late Pliocene (maybe some 2.5–2&nbsp;mya in the Gelasian).
Cliff nests are generally located under an overhang, on ledges with vegetation.
It is found from northeast Siberia to Kamchatka (though it is possibly replaced by ''pealei'' on the coast there) and Japan.
Its relationship to other falcons is not clear, as the issue is complicated by widespread hybridization confounding mtDNA sequence analyses.
Nocturnal migrants taken by peregrines include species as diverse as yellow-billed cuckoo, black-necked grebe, virginia rail, and common quail.
Males weigh around , while females weigh up to .
It is effective on most game bird species from small to large.
Males weigh  and the noticeably larger females weigh .
Coastal populations of the large subspecies ''pealei'' feed almost exclusively on seabirds.
Since 1927, the peregrine falcon has been the official mascot of Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio.
The peregrine falcon is host to a range of parasites and pathogens.
Only populations that breed in Arctic climates typically migrate great distances during the northern winter.
At one time, it was partly included in ''leucogenys''.
It is mainly non-migratory in Europe, but migratory in Scandinavia and Asia.
It is non-migratory.
Barbary falcons breed at different times of year than neighboring peregrine falcon subspecies, but they are capable of interbreeding.
Large congregations of migrants, especially species that gather in the open like shorebirds, can be quite attractive to hunting peregrines.
Populations of the peregrine falcon have bounced back in most parts of the world.
The peregrine falcon takes the most diverse range of bird species of any raptor in North America, with more than 300 species having fallen victim to the falcon, including nearly 100 shorebirds.
It breeds in the Arctic tundra of Eurasia, from Murmansk Oblast to roughly Yana and Indigirka Rivers, Siberia.
The peregrine's breeding range includes land regions from the Arctic tundra to the tropics.
While its diet consists almost exclusively of medium-sized birds, the peregrine will occasionally hunt small mammals, small reptiles, or even insects.
Smaller hawks and owls are regularly predated, mainly smaller falcons such as the American kestrel, merlin and sharp-shinned hawks.
In Southampton, a nest prevented restoration of mobile telephony services for several months, after Vodafone engineers despatched to repair a faulty transmitter mast discovered a nest in the mast, and were prevented by the Wildlife and Countryside Act, on pain of a possible prison sentence, from proceeding with repairs until the chicks fledged.
Due to its striking hunting technique, the peregrine has often been associated with aggression and martial prowess.
*'''''Falco peregrinus anatum''','' described by Bonaparte in 1838, is known as the American peregrine falcon, or "duck hawk"; its scientific name means "duck peregrine falcon".
*'''''Falco peregrinus babylonicus''','' described by P.L.
The development of captive breeding methods has led to peregrines being commercially available for falconry use, thus mostly eliminating the need to capture wild birds for support of falconry.
In 2005, Ken Franklin recorded a falcon stooping at a top speed of .
Males weigh , while females weigh .
*'''''Falco peregrinus madens''','' described by Ripley and Watson in 1963, is unusual in having some sexual dichromatism.
The average number of young found in nests is 2.5, and the average number that fledge is about 1.5, due to the occasional production of infertile eggs and various natural losses of nestlings.
It includes ''kreyenborgi'', the pallid falcon, a leucistic morph occurring in southernmost South America, which was long believed to be a distinct species.
The upper beak is notched near the tip, an adaptation which enables falcons to kill prey by severing the spinal column at the neck.
The variation ''kreyenborgi'' is medium grey above, has little barring below, and has a head pattern like the saker falcon, but the ear region is white.
Sclater in 1861, is found in eastern Iran along the Hindu Kush and Tian Shan to Mongolian Altai ranges.
The following map shows the general ranges of these 19 subspecies:
Experts recognize 17 to 19 subspecies which vary in appearance and range; there is disagreement over whether the distinctive Barbary falcon is represented by two subspecies of ''Falco peregrinus,'' or is a separate species, ''F.
They are non-migratory.
Hybrids of peregrines and gyrfalcons are also available that can combine the best features of both species to create what many consider to be the ultimate falconry bird for the taking of larger game such as the sage-grouse.
If the Barbary falcon (see below) is considered a distinct species, it is sometimes placed therein.
Pesticide biomagnification caused organochlorine to build up in the falcons' fat tissues, reducing the amount of calcium in their eggshells.
The male (called the "tiercel") and the female (simply called the "falcon") both leave the nest to gather prey to feed the young.
It is found in the Cape Verde Islands, and is non-migratory; it is endangered with only six to eight pairs surviving.
Compared with Europe where pigeon populations have exploded to the point they are both a tourist attraction and a public nuisance.
It is non-migratory, and is small and dark, with rufous underparts.
It is non-migratory and dark coloured.
In the United States, falcon and other raptors are in numbers high enough to ward off pigeon nest building in major highrises.
It is non-migratory.
It was formerly common throughout North America between the tundra and northern Mexico, where current reintroduction efforts seek to restore the population.
It was considered "a royal bird, more armed by its courage than its claws".
*'''''Falco peregrinus peregrinus''','' the nominate (first-named) subspecies, described by Tunstall in 1771, breeds over much of temperate Eurasia between the tundra in the north and the Pyrenees, Mediterranean region and Alpide belt in the south.
In the book, Baker recounts, in diary form, his detailed observations of peregrines (and their interaction with other birds) near his home in Chelmsford, Essex, over a single winter from October to April.
Finally, after years of close work with the US Fish and Wildlife Service, a limited take of wild peregrines was allowed in 2004, the first wild peregrines taken specifically for falconry in over 30 years.
In one instance, when a snowy owl killed a newly fledged peregrine, the larger owl was in turn killed by a stooping peregrine parent.
Numerous subspecies of ''Falco peregrinus'' have been described, with 19 accepted by the 1994 ''Handbook of the Birds of the World'', which considers the Barbary falcon of the Canary Islands and coastal north Africa to be two subspecies (''pelegrinoides'' and ''babylonicus'') of ''Falco peregrinus,'' rather than a distinct species, ''F.
Barbary falcons have a red neck patch but otherwise differ in appearance from the peregrine proper merely according to Gloger's Rule, relating pigmentation to environmental humidity.
A. Baker, is widely regarded as one of the best nature books in English written in the twentieth century.
*'''''Falco peregrinus peregrinator''','' described by Sundevall in 1837, is known as the Indian peregrine falcon, Shaheen falcon, Indian shaheen or shaheen falcon.
small passerines) to  (i.e.
*'''''Falco peregrinus calidus''','' described by John Latham in 1790, was formerly called ''leucogenys'' and includes ''caeruleiceps''.
The pair defends the chosen nest site against other peregrines, and often against ravens, herons, and gulls, and if ground-nesting, also such mammals as foxes, wolverines, felids, bears, wolves, and mountain lions.
There is a 0.6–0.7% genetic distance in the peregrine-Barbary falcon ("peregrinoid") complex.
The male and female have similar markings and plumage, but as in many birds of prey the peregrine falcon displays marked sexual dimorphism in size, with the female measuring up to 30% larger than the male.
The peregrine falcon was removed from the U.S.
No nest materials are added.
It is similar to ''peregrinus'', but the young are even darker than those of ''anatum''.
The hunting territory of the parents can extend a radius of  from the nest site.
*'''''Falco peregrinus tundrius''','' described by C.M.
Endangered Species list on August 25, 1999.
The speed and energy of the stoop allows the falcon to catch fast flying birds, and to deliver a knock out blow with a fist-like clenched talon against game that may be much larger than itself.
Their faeces are highly acidic causing damage to historic buildings and statues made of soft stone.
From an ecological perspective, raptor populations in urban areas are highly beneficial.
It is paler than ''peregrinus'', especially on the crown.
The '''peregrine falcon''' (''Falco peregrinus''), also known as the '''peregrine''', and historically as the '''duck hawk''' in North America, is a widespread bird of prey in the family ''Falconidae''.
This procedure is called hacking back to the wild.
The peregrine falcon has the additional advantage of a natural flight style of circling above the falconer ("waiting on") for game to be flushed, and then performing an effective and exciting high speed diving stoop to take the quarry.
If its prey is too heavy to carry, a peregrine will drop it to the ground and eat it there.
The peregrine falcon is a well respected falconry bird due to its strong hunting ability, high trainability, versatility, and in recent years availability via captive breeding.
With thinner shells, fewer falcon eggs survived to hatching.
In Sri Lanka this species is found to favour the higher hills while the migrant ''calidus'' is more often seen along the coast.
The eggs are white to buff with red or brown markings.
It is non-migratory.
The RSPB has estimated that there are 1,402 breeding pairs in the UK.
White in 1968, was at one time included in ''leucogenys'' It is found in the Arctic tundra of North America to Greenland, and migrates to wintering grounds in Central and South America.
The life span of peregrine falcons in the wild is up to 15.5&nbsp;years.
The peregrine falcon became an endangered species over much of its range because of the use of organochlorine pesticides, especially DDT, during the 1950s, '60s, and '70s.
It is completely migratory, and travels south in winter as far as South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
This makes it the world's most widespread raptor and one of the most widely found bird species.
In fact, the only land-based bird species found over a larger geographic area is not always naturally occurring but one widely introduced by humans, the rock pigeon, which in turn now supports many peregrine populations as a prey species.
Peregrines now breed in many mountainous and coastal areas, especially in the west and north, and nest in some urban areas, capitalising on the urban feral pigeon populations for food.
The distance between nests ensures sufficient food supply for pairs and their chicks.
The peregrine falcon belongs to a genus whose lineage includes the hierofalcons and the prairie falcon (''F.&nbsp;mexicanus'').
The male passes prey it has caught to the female in mid-air.
