The wide range in the percentages of aromatic compounds that may be present in each concentration means that the terminology of extrait, EdP, EdT, and EdC is quite imprecise.
Thanks to Rene, France quickly became one of the European centers of perfume and cosmetics manufacture.
These naturally derived substances have a history of use, therefore it is easy to determine whether they are safe or not.
The water collected from the condensate, which retains some of the fragrant compounds and oils from the raw material is called hydrosol and sometimes sold.
In some cases, words such as ''extrême'', ''intense'', or ''concentrée'' that might indicate a higher aromatic concentration are actually completely different fragrances, related only because of a similar perfume ''accord''.
Dependent on synthesis method.
Perfume is described in a musical metaphor as having three sets of ''notes'', making the harmonious scent ''accord''.
Contains many different organic compounds, each adding a different note to the overall scent.
Nonetheless, connoisseurs of perfume can become extremely skillful at identifying components and origins of scents in the same manner as wine experts.
Although not traditionally thought of as a flower, the unopened flower buds of the clove are also commonly used.
Until his discovery, liquid perfumes consisted of mixtures of oil and crushed herbs or petals, which made a strong blend.
Many modern perfumes contain synthesized odorants.
Includes the flowers of several species of rose and jasmine, as well as osmanthus, plumeria, mimosa, tuberose, narcissus, scented geranium, cassie, ambrette as well as the blossoms of citrus and ylang-ylang trees.
Although it is difficult to completely remove oxygen from the headspace of a stored flask of fragrance, opting for spray dispensers instead of rollers and "open" bottles will minimize oxygen exposure.
Commonly used resins in perfumery include labdanum, frankincense/olibanum, myrrh, balsam of Peru, gum benzoin.
Classification by olfactive family is a starting point for a description of a perfume, but it cannot by itself denote the specific characteristic of that perfume.
* '''Eau de Toilette''' (EdT): 5–15% (typical ~10%) aromatic compounds
Sometimes chiral mixtures of isomers, such as in the case of Iso E Super.
They were discovered in an ancient perfumery, a  factory housing at least 60 stills, mixing bowls, funnels, and perfume bottles.
Diet is one factor, as eating spicy and fatty foods can increase the intensity of a fragrance.
Typically the relationship between, longevity of a perfume, cost and the concentration of essential oils follows the graph below:
For instance, linalool, which is listed as an irritant, causes skin irritation when it degrades to peroxides, however the use of antioxidants in perfumes or reduction in concentrations can prevent this.
As a class, chypre perfumes are more difficult to place since they would be located under parts of the Oriental and Woody families.
Synthetics can provide fragrances which are not found in nature.
In 2004 – 2005, archaeologists uncovered what are believed to be the world's oldest surviving perfumes in Pyrgos, Cyprus.
*'''Base notes''': The scent of a perfume that appears close to the departure of the middle notes.
* '''Leaves''' and '''twigs''': Commonly used for perfumery are lavender leaf, patchouli, sage, violets, rosemary, and citrus leaves.
A perfume's scent is not eligible for trademark protection because the scent serves as the functional purpose of the product.
The art of perfumery was known in western Europe from 1221, taking into account the monks' recipes of Santa Maria delle Vigne or Santa Maria Novella of Florence, Italy.
For instance, in order to make the EdT version of a fragrance brighter and fresher than its EdP, the EdT oil may be "tweaked" to contain slightly more top notes or fewer base notes.
** ''Fractionation'': Through the use of a fractionation column, different fractions distilled from a material can be selectively excluded to modify the scent of the final product.
Even if they were widely published, they would be dominated by such complex ingredients and odorants that they would be of little use in providing a guide to the general consumer in description of the ''experience'' of a scent.
Many of Guerlain's ''Aqua Allegoria'' line, with their simple fragrance concepts, are good examples of what perfume fragrance bases are like.
If these impurities have low smell (detection) thresholds, the differences in the scent of the synthetic aromatic will be significant.
Some of what is called amber and copal in perfumery today is the resinous secretion of fossil conifers.
Base notes bring depth and solidity to a perfume.
Synthetic aromatics are not necessarily cheaper than naturals, with some synthetics being more costly than most natural ingredients due to various factors such as the long synthesis routes, low availability of precursor chemicals, and low overall yield.
Various sources differ considerably in the definitions of perfume types.
These notes are created carefully with knowledge of the evaporation process of the perfume.
#A perfumer can quickly rough out a concept from a brief by combining multiple bases, then present it feedback.
Dependent on extraction method.
Guerlain, for example, offered an Eau de Cologne version of its flagship perfume ''Shalimar''.
For example, for one of the main polycyclic musks Galaxolide (HHCB) these reviews includes those of the EU Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety, the EU's Priority Substances Review, the EU Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risk and more recently also the US EPA.
Eau de Toilette appeared alongside parfum around the turn of the century.
Each of these companies patents several processes for the production of aromatic synthetics annually.
Perfume compositions are an important part of many industries ranging from the luxury goods sectors, food services industries, to manufacturers of various household chemicals.
Many fragrances contain aspects of different families.
Nevertheless, this may be misleading, since the harm presented by many of these chemicals (either natural or synthetic) is dependent on environmental conditions and their concentrations in a perfume.
Highly fragrant and antiseptic resins and resin-containing perfumes have been used by many cultures as medicines for a large variety of ailments.
Generally cheaper, but not necessarily.
Manufacturers of perfumes usually publish perfume notes and typically they present it as fragrance pyramid, with the components listed in imaginative and abstract terms.
In Europe, as from 11 March 2005, the mandatory listing of a set of 26 recognized fragrance allergens was enforced.
More expensive, but not always, as prices are determined by the labor and difficulty of properly extracting each unit of the natural materials, as well as its quality.
One of the most commonly used classes of synthetic aromatics by far are the white musks.
For instance, acetophenone, ethyl acetate and acetone while present in many perfumes, are also known or potential respiratory allergens.
Although many ingredients do not contribute to the smell of a perfume, many perfumes include colorants and anti-oxidants to improve the marketability and shelf life of the perfume, respectively.
Possible allergenic compounds.
Soft, with subtle scent nuances.
#Ingredients with "difficult" or "overpowering" scents that are tailored into a blended base may be more easily incorporated into a work of perfume
Reverse engineering of best-selling perfumes in the market is a very common practice in the fragrance industry due to the relative simplicity of operating GC equipment, the pressure to produce marketable fragrances, and the highly lucrative nature of the perfume market.
Most orchid flowers are not commercially used to produce essential oils or absolutes, except in the case of vanilla, an orchid, which must be pollinated first and made into seed pods before use in perfumery.
File:Coco Mademoiselle 2001.jpg|Coco Mademoiselle from Chanel
Smoothing out the "edges" of the perfume can be done after a positive response.
Balsam of Peru has been banned by the International Fragrance Association since 1982 from use as a fragrance compound, but may be present as an extract or distillate in other products, where mandatory labelling is not required for usage of 0.4% or less.
In India, perfume and perfumery existed in the Indus civilization (3300 BC – 1300 BC).
Creating perfumes through reverse engineering with analytical techniques such as Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC/MS) can reveal the "general" formula for any particular perfume.
The EdP concentration and terminology is the most recent.
The composition of a perfume typically begins with a ''brief'' by the perfumer's employer or an outside customer.
Furthermore, some fragrances with the same ''product name'' but having a different ''concentration'' may not only differ in their dilutions, but actually use different perfume oil mixtures altogether.
The art of perfumery prospered in Renaissance Italy, and in the 16th century the personal perfumer to Catherine de' Medici (1519–1589), Rene the Florentine (Renato il fiorentino), took Italian refinements to France.
*'''Roots, rhizomes and bulbs''': Commonly used terrestrial portions in perfumery include iris rhizomes, vetiver roots, various rhizomes of the ginger family.
Depending on purity, consists primarily of one chemical compound.
In 2006 the Dutch Supreme Court granted copyright protection to Lancôme's perfume ''Tresor'' (''Lancôme v. Kecofa'').
The most practical way to start describing a perfume is according to the elements of the ''fragrance notes'' of the scent or the "family" it belongs to, all of which affect the overall impression of a perfume from first application to the last lingering hint of scent.
today best known as eau de cologne; his nephew Johann Maria Farina (Giovanni Maria Farina) took over the business in 1732.
Notable exceptions include blackcurrant leaf, litsea cubeba, vanilla, and juniper berry.
Much more consistent than natural aromatics.
Instead of building a perfume from "ground up", many modern perfumes and colognes are made using ''fragrance bases'' or simply '''bases'''.
Orange leaves, blossoms, and fruit zest are the respective sources of petitgrain, neroli, and orange oils.
The French Supreme Court has twice taken the position that perfumes lack the creativity to constitute copyrightable expressions (''Bsiri-Barbir v. Haarman & Reimer'', 2006; ''Beaute Prestige International v. Senteur Mazal'', 2008).
Reminiscent of its originating material, although extraction may capture a different "layer" of the scent, depending on the how the extraction method denatures the odoriferous compounds.
Classical colognes first appeared in Europe in the 17th century.
Partly due to this patronage, the perfume industry developed.
It is in fact part of the procedures of the Cosmetic Regulation in Europe that materials classified as carcinogens require such a safety evaluation by the authorities to be allowed in cosmetic consumer products.
This means that a certain flower grown in Morocco and in France will smell different, even if the same method is used to grow, harvest, and extract the scent.
Flowers whose scents cannot be extracted, such as gardenia or hyacinth, are composed as bases from data derived from headspace technology.
* '''Esprit de Parfum''' (ESdP): 15–30% aromatic compounds, a seldom used strength concentration in between EdP and perfume
The book also described 107 methods and recipes for perfume-making and perfume-making equipment, such as the alembic (which still bears its Arabic name.
An example of this is Chanel's ''Pour Monsieur'' and ''Pour Monsieur Concentrée''.
* '''Fruits''': Fresh fruits such as apples, strawberries, cherries rarely yield the expected odors when extracted; if such fragrance notes are found in a perfume, they are more likely to be of synthetic origin.
Proper preservation of perfumes involves keeping them away from sources of heat and storing them where they will not be exposed to light.
He first experimented with the rose.
Synthetic aromatics are often used as an alternate source of compounds that are not easily obtained from natural sources.
* International Flavors and Fragrances (IFF)
The condensate from distillation are settled in a Florentine flask.
Eau de toilette lasts from 2 to 4 hours, while perfume may last up to six hours.
''Maceration'' lasts anywhere from hours to months.
Before perfumes can be composed, the odorants used in various perfume compositions must first be obtained.
A number of national and international surveys have identified balsam of Peru, often used in perfumes, as being in the "top five" allergens most commonly causing patch test reactions in people referred to dermatology clinics.
Some synthetics attempt to mimic natural notes, while others explore the entire spectrum of scent.
An opened bottle will keep its aroma intact for several years, as long as it is well stored.
The raw material is heated and the fragrant compounds  of the distilled vapor.
Commonly used solvents for ''maceration/solvent extraction'' include ethane, hexane, and dimethyl ether.
Fragrant compounds for woody and fibrous plant materials are often obtained in this manner as are all aromatics from animal sources.
The technique can also be used to extract odorants that are too volatile for ''distillation'' or easily denatured by heat.
These musks are added in large quantities to laundry detergents in order to give washed clothes a lasting "clean" scent.
In the 20th century, the term took on a second meaning.
Even a perfume designated as "single flower", however subtle, will have undertones of other aromatics.
All scents in their collection are preserved in non-actinic glass flasks flushed with argon gas, stored in thermally insulated compartments maintained at 12&nbsp;°C (53.6&nbsp;°F) in a large vault.
For instance, Calone, a compound of synthetic origin, imparts a fresh ozonous metallic marine scent that is widely used in contemporary perfumes.
In the 9th century the Arab chemist Al-Kindi (Alkindus) wrote the ''Book of the Chemistry of Perfume and Distillations'', which contained more than a hundred recipes for fragrant oils, salves, aromatic waters, and substitutes or imitations of costly drugs.
As such, each perfumer will prefer flowers grown in one country over another, or one extraction method to the next.
Although other ingredients such as polycyclic synthetic musks, have been reported to be positive in some in-vitro hormone assays, these reports have been reviewed by various authorities.
Balsam of Peru is used as a marker for perfume allergy.
The precise formulae of commercial perfumes are kept secret.
Reviews with similar positive outcome exists for another main polycyclic musk (AHTN) as well for instance on its safe us in cosmetics by the EU.
File:Poison Perfume.jpg|Poison from Dior
The relative dryness of the wearer's skin is important, since dry skin will not hold fragrance as long as skin with more oil.
An EdT from one house may have a higher concentration of aromatic compounds than an EdP from another.
Also called the '''''head notes'''''.
On top of its reusability, the benefit in using bases for construction are quite numerous:
Different perfumeries or perfume houses assign different amounts of oils to each of their perfumes.
The outcome of all of these reviews over the past decade or so is that there is no safety concerns for human health.
Examples include Mäurer & Wirtz's ''4711'' (created in 1799), and Guerlain's ''Eau de Cologne Impériale'' (1853).
Extraction by enfleurage was commonly used when distillation was not possible because some fragrant compounds denature through high heat.
Synthetic odorants are produced through organic synthesis and purified.
Antique or badly preserved perfumes undergoing this analysis can also be difficult due to the numerous degradation by-products and impurities that may have resulted from breakdown of the odorous compounds.
This technique is not commonly used in the modern industry due to prohibitive costs and the existence of more efficient and effective extraction methods.
It is also true that sometimes inhalation alone can cause skin irritation.
It is doubtful whether perfumes qualify as appropriate copyright subject matter under the US Copyright Act.
The base and middle notes together are the main theme of a perfume.
Supposedly these were first developed in the early 18th century in Cologne, Germany, hence the name.
* '''Expression''': Raw material is squeezed or compressed and the essential oils are collected.
The purpose of using perfume or fragrance compositions in these industries is to affect customers through their sense of smell and entice them into purchasing the perfume or perfumed product.
These are used in the form of macerations or dry-distilled (rectified) forms.
Cultivation of flowers for their perfume essence, which had begun in the 14th century, grew into a major industry in the south of France.
* '''Eau de Parfum''' (EdP), '''Parfum de Toilette''' (PdT): 10–20% (typical ~15%) aromatic compounds, sometimes listed as "eau de perfume" or "millésime"; Parfum de Toilette is a less common term, most popular in the 1980s, that is generally analogous to Eau de Parfum
Due to the low heat of process and the relatively nonreactive solvent used in the extraction, the fragrant compounds derived often closely resemble the original odor of the raw material.
Rose water was more delicate, and immediately became popular.
The limits above which the allegens are required to be declared are 0.001% for products intended to remain on the skin, and 0.01% for those intended to be rinsed off.
Perfume types reflect the concentration of aromatic compounds in a solvent, which in fine fragrance is typically ethanol or a mix of water and ethanol.
* In addition to these widely seen concentrations, companies have marketed a variety of perfumed products under the name of "splashes," "mists," "veils" and other imprecise terms.
The world's first-recorded chemist is considered a woman named Tapputi, a perfume maker mentioned in a cuneiform tablet from the 2nd millennium BC in Mesopotamia.
Plants are by far the largest source of fragrant compounds used in perfumery.
The Persian chemist Ibn Sina (also known as Avicenna) introduced the process of extracting oils from flowers by means of distillation, the procedure most commonly used today.
Fragrance companies began to offer lighter, less concentrated interpretations of their existing perfumes, making their products available to a wider range of customers.
The customers to the perfumer or their employers, are typically fashion houses or large corporations of various industries.
However, differences in organic synthesis may result in minute differences in concentration of impurities.
Although grapefruit rind is still used for aromatics, more and more commercially used grapefruit aromatics are artificially synthesized since the natural aromatic contains sulfur and its degradation product is quite unpleasant in smell.
* '''Seeds''': Commonly used seeds include tonka bean, carrot seed, coriander, caraway, cocoa, nutmeg, mace, cardamom, and anise.
The actual product worn by a man may technically be an eau de toilette, but he may still say that he "wears cologne."
Fragrances marketed to men are typically sold as EdT or EdC, rarely as EdP or perfume extracts.
As a rule of thumb, women's fragrances tend to have higher levels of aromatic compounds than men's fragrances.
Highly valued for ideal composition.
This is due to the use of heat, harsh solvents, or through exposure to oxygen in the extraction process which will denature the aromatic compounds, which either change their odor character or renders them odorless.
Each base is essentially modular perfume that is blended from essential oils and aromatic chemicals, and formulated with a simple concept such as "fresh cut grass" or "juicy sour apple".
This type of "classical cologne" describes unisex compositions "which are basically citrus blends and do not have a perfume parent."
Parfum de toilette and EdP began to appear in the 1970s and gained popularity in the 1980s.
The effort used in developing bases by fragrance companies or individual perfumers may equal that of a marketed perfume, since they are useful in that they are reusable.
Odorants from natural sources require the use of various methods to extract the aromatics from the raw materials.
However, due to their low odor threshold, they should be diluted when making a perfume.
* '''Resins''': Valued since antiquity, resins have been widely used in incense and perfumery.
A plant can offer more than one source of aromatics, for instance the aerial portions and seeds of coriander have remarkably different odors from each other.
As such there is significant interest in producing a perfume formulation that people will find aesthetically pleasing.
However the presence of oxygen in the head space of the bottle and environmental factors will in the long run alter the smell of the fragrance.
The notes unfold over time, with the immediate impression of the top note leading to the deeper middle notes, and the base notes gradually appearing as the final stage.
The use of medications can also impact the character of a fragrance.
Ethanol extraction from fresh plant materials contain large quantities of water, which will also be extracted into the ethanol.
Sometimes leaves are valued for the "green" smell they bring to perfumes, examples of this include hay and tomato leaf.
Cologne fragrance is released rapidly, lasting around 2 hours.
Due to the almost pure composition of one chemical compound, the same molecules found diluted in nature will have a different scent and effect on the body, if used undiluted.
Ancient texts and archaeological excavations show the use of perfumes in some of the earliest human civilizations.
or through various limitations set by the International Fragrance Association.
A variety of factors can influence how fragrance interacts with the wearer's own physiology and affect the perception of the fragrance.
*'''Middle notes''': The scent of a perfume that emerges just prior to the dissipation of the top note.
For example, linalool and coumarin are both naturally occurring compounds that can be inexpensively synthesized from terpenes.
Both the raw ingredients and the distillation technology significantly influenced western perfumery and scientific developments, particularly chemistry.
from Greek ἄμβιξ, "cup", "beaker" described by Synesius in the 4th century).
As the percentage of aromatic compounds increases, so does the intensity and longevity of the scent.
The new scheme was created in order to simplify fragrance classification and naming scheme, as well as to show the relationships between each of the individual classes.
), or marketed and sold directly to the public as a ''fine fragrance''.
His laboratory was connected with her apartments by a secret passageway, so that no formulae could be stolen en route.
Ingredients and compounds can usually be ruled out or identified using gas chromatograph (GC) smellers, which allow individual chemical components to be identified both through their physical properties and their scent.
They form a person's initial impression of a perfume and thus are very important in the selling of a perfume.
This method is used to obtain fragrant compounds from fossil amber and fragrant woods where an intentional "burned" or "toasted" odor is desired.
Finally, the term "cologne" has entered the English language as a generic, overarching term to denote a fragrance worn by a man, regardless of its concentration.
The cologne version is often the lightest concentration from a line of fragrance products.
** ''Steam distillation'': Steam from boiling water is passed through the raw material, which drives out their volatile fragrant compounds.
Even today, Italy and France remain the center of European perfume design and trade.
These reports were evaluated by the EU Scientific Committee for Consumer Safety (SCCS, formerly the SCCNFP ) and musk xylene was found to be safe for continued use in cosmetic products.
Certain chemicals found in perfume are often toxic, at least for small insects if not for humans.
*'''Top notes''': The scents that are perceived immediately on application of a perfume.
Sprays also have the advantage of isolating fragrance inside a bottle and preventing it from mixing with dust, skin, and detritus, which would degrade and alter the quality of a perfume.
Therefore, although the oil concentration of a perfume in EdP dilution will necessarily be higher than the same perfume in EdT from within a company's same range, the actual amounts vary among perfume houses.
Novel scent compounds not found in nature will often be unique in their scent.
In this classification scheme, ''Chanel No.5'', which is traditionally classified as an aldehydic floral, would be located under the Soft Floral sub-group, and amber scents would be placed within the Oriental group.
The perfumes date back more than 4,000 years.
File:Lancome Tresor.jpg|Tresor from Lancôme
The scents in the top and middle notes are influenced by the base notes, as well the scents of the base notes will be altered by the type of fragrance materials used as middle notes.
The product of this process is called a "concrete."
