It was from the alliance's treasury that Pericles drew the funds necessary to enable his ambitious building plan, centered on the "Periclean Acropolis", which included the Propylaea, the Parthenon and the golden statue of Athena, sculpted by Pericles' friend, Phidias.
This is considered to be a  monumental oration, revealing Pericles' virtues but also his bitterness towards his compatriots' ingratitude.
The democratic party gradually became dominant in Athenian politics, and Pericles seemed willing to follow a populist policy in order to cajole the public.
In the first legendary oration Thucydides puts in his mouth, Pericles advised the Athenians not to yield to their opponents' demands, since they were militarily stronger.
If it was actually made, this bargain would constitute a concession on Pericles' part that he was not a great strategist.
He offered her to another husband, with the agreement of her male relatives.
Pericles promoted the arts and literature; it is principally through his efforts that Athens holds the reputation of being the educational and cultural center of the ancient Greek world.
Nonetheless, objections did not undermine Pericles' morale, although he burst into tears to protect Aspasia when she was accused of corrupting Athenian society.
Paparrigopoulos wrote that these masterpieces are "sufficient to render the name of Greece immortal in our world".
His proverbial calmness and self-control are also often regarded as products of Anaxagoras' influence.
According to King, by increasing the power of the people, the Athenians left themselves with no authoritative leader.
In 447 BC the oligarchs of Thebes conspired against the democratic faction.
Around 461 BC, the leadership of the democratic party decided it was time to take aim at the Areopagus, a traditional council controlled by the Athenian aristocracy, which had once been the most powerful body in the state.
The residents of Histiaea, meanwhile, who had butchered the crew of an Athenian trireme, were uprooted and replaced by 2,000 Athenian settlers.
In the mid-450s the Athenians launched an unsuccessful attempt to aid an Egyptian revolt against Persia, which led to a prolonged siege of a Persian fortress in the Nile Delta.
Around 447 BC Clearchus  proposed the Coinage Decree, which imposed Athenian silver coinage, weights and measures on all of the allies.
In response, Pericles passed a decree dispatching an expedition to Samos, "alleging against its people that, although they were ordered to break off their war against the Milesians, they were not complying".
He remained in power until his death in 429&nbsp;BC.
Critics of Pericles' strategy, however, have been just as numerous as its supporters.
It is told that when his political opponent, Thucydides, was asked by Sparta's king, Archidamus, whether he or Pericles was the better fighter, Thucydides answered without any hesitation that Pericles was better, because even when he was defeated, he managed to convince the audience that he had won.
When the Athenians ordered the two sides to stop fighting and submit the case to arbitration in Athens, the Samians refused.
Finally, Pericles proposed to reimburse the city for all questionable expenses from his private property, with the proviso that he would make the inscriptions of dedication in his own name.
Hanson stresses that the Periclean strategy was not innovative, but could lead to a stagnancy in favor of Athens.
With his last attempt at negotiation thus declined, Archidamus invaded Attica, but found no Athenians there; Pericles, aware that Sparta's strategy would be to invade and ravage Athenian territory, had previously arranged to evacuate the entire population of the region to within the walls of Athens.
Pericles' manner of thought and rhetorical charisma may have been in part products of Anaxagoras' emphasis on emotional calm in the face of trouble and skepticism about divine phenomena.
In 431 BC, while peace already was precarious, Archidamus&nbsp;II, Sparta's king, sent a new delegation to Athens, demanding that the Athenians submit to Sparta's demands.
Pericles may have realized the importance of Cimon's contribution during the ongoing conflicts against the Peloponnesians and the Persians.
Pericles also fostered Athenian democracy to such an extent that critics call him a populist.
Throughout these years he endeavored to protect his privacy and to present himself as a model for his fellow citizens.
According to Plutarch, after assuming the leadership of Athens, "he was no longer the same man as before, nor alike submissive to the people and ready to yield and give in to the desires of the multitude as a steersman to the breezes".
According to Herodotus and Plutarch, Agariste dreamed, a few nights before Pericles' birth, that she had borne a lion.
When Pericles was later audited for the handling of public money, an expenditure of 10 talents was not sufficiently justified, since the official documents just referred that the money was spent for a "very serious purpose".
Gomme rejects Kakridis position, defending the fact that "Nobody of men has ever been so conscious of envy and its workings as the Greeks, and that the Greeks and Thucydides in particular had a passion for covering all ground in their generalizations, not always relevantly.
Pericles, following Athenian custom, was first married to one of his closest relatives, with whom he had two sons, Paralus and Xanthippus, but around 445&nbsp;BC, Pericles divorced his wife.
Pericles had such a profound influence on Athenian society that Thucydides, a contemporary historian, acclaimed him as "the first citizen of Athens".
The ambitious new leader of the conservatives, Thucydides (not to be confused with the historian of the same name), accused Pericles of profligacy, criticizing the way he spent the money for the ongoing building plan.
He then punished the landowners of Chalcis, who lost their properties.
According to Aristotle, Pericles' stance can be explained by the fact that his principal political opponent, Cimon, was both rich and generous, and was able to gain public favor by lavishly handing out portions of his sizable personal fortune.
Pericles, though moribund, heard them and interrupted them, pointing out that they forgot to mention his fairest and greatest title to their admiration; "for", said he, "no living Athenian ever put on mourning because of me".
The name of his first wife is not known; the only information about her is that she was the wife of Hipponicus, before being married to Pericles, and the mother of Callias from this first marriage.
Pericles and his "expansionary" policies have been at the center of arguments promoting democracy in oppressed countries.
Being always cautious, he never undertook of his own accord a battle involving much uncertainty and peril and he did not accede to the "vain impulses of the citizens".
Plutarch seems to believe that Pericles and the Athenians incited the war, scrambling to implement their belligerent tactics "with a sort of arrogance and a love of strife".
It is a popular conclusion that those succeeding him lacked his abilities and character.
The historian Loren J. Samons II argues, however, that Pericles had enough resources to make a political mark by private means, had he so chosen.
In 433 BC the enemy fleets confronted each other at the Battle of Sybota and a year later the Athenians fought Corinthian colonists at the Battle of Potidaea; these two events contributed greatly to Corinth's lasting hatred of Athens.
Although his countrymen engaged in several aggressive actions soon after his death, Platias and Koliopoulos argue that the Athenians remained true to the larger Periclean strategy of seeking to preserve, not expand, the empire, and did not depart from it until the Sicilian Expedition.
Just before his death, the Athenians allowed a change in the law of 451 BC that made his half-Athenian son with Aspasia, Pericles the Younger, a citizen and legitimate heir, a decision all the more striking in consideration that Pericles himself had proposed the law confining citizenship to those of Athenian parentage on both sides.
By 450–449 BC the revolts in Miletus and Erythrae were quelled and Athens restored its rule over its allies.
According to another historian, Justin Daniel King, radical democracy benefited people individually, but harmed the state.
He then unsuccessfully tried to conquer Oeniadea on the Corinthian gulf, before returning to Athens.
This project beautified and protected the city, exhibited its glory, and gave work to the people.
Pericles lived during the first two and a half years of the Peloponnesian War and, according to Thucydides, his death was a disaster for Athens, since his successors were inferior to him; they preferred to incite all the bad habits of the rabble and  followed an unstable policy, endeavoring to be popular rather than useful.
Angelos Vlachos, a Greek Academician, points out the utilization of the alliance's treasury, initiated and executed by Pericles, as one of the largest embezzlements in human history; this misappropriation financed, however, some of the most marvellous artistic creations of the ancient world.
Kakridis believes that Thucydides altered Pericles words.
In 463 BC, Pericles was the leading prosecutor of Cimon, the leader of the conservative faction who was accused of neglecting Athens' vital interests in Macedon.
That is to say, Thucydides could simply have used two different writing styles for two different purposes.
John Fine, on the other hand, suggests that the first peace between Athens and Persia was concluded in 450–449&nbsp;BC, due to Pericles' calculation that ongoing conflict with Persia was undermining Athens' ability to spread its influence in Greece and the Aegean.
Paparrigopoulos maintains that an unprecedented regression descended upon the city, whose glory perished as a result of Pericles' populist policies.
The Athenians' justification was that the Megarians had cultivated the sacred land consecrated to Demeter and had given refuge to runaway slaves, a behavior which the Athenians considered to be impious.
Pericles marked a whole era and inspired conflicting judgments about his significant decisions.
After Cimon's ostracism, Pericles continued to promote a populist social policy.
In the summer of the same year an epidemic broke out and devastated the Athenians.
As meetings of the assembly were called at the discretion of its rotating presidents, the "prytanies", Pericles had no formal control over their scheduling; rather, the respect in which Pericles was held by the prytanies was apparently sufficient to persuade them to do as he wished.
Donald Kagan called the Periclean strategy "a form of wishful thinking that failed", Barry S. Strauss and Josiah Ober have stated that "as strategist he was a failure and deserves a share of the blame for Athens' great defeat", and Victor Davis Hanson believes that Pericles had not worked out a clear strategy for an effective offensive action that could possibly force Thebes or Sparta to stop the war.
Although Aspasia was acquitted thanks to a rare emotional outburst of Pericles, his friend, Phidias, died in prison and another friend of his, Anaxagoras, was attacked by the ecclesia for his religious beliefs.
Cimon, on the other hand, apparently believed that no further free space for democratic evolution existed.
Pericles also gave his compatriots some advice on their present affairs and reassured them that, if the enemy did not plunder his farms, he would offer his property to the city.
Kagan believes that Pericles used Callias, a brother-in-law of Cimon, as a symbol of unity and employed him several times to negotiate important agreements.
During the same period, Pericles proposed the Megarian Decree, which resembled a modern trade embargo.
The two groups addressed were the ones who were prepared to believe him when he praised the dead, and the ones who did not.
Plutarch states that Cimon struck a power-sharing deal with his opponents, according to which Pericles would carry through the interior affairs and Cimon would be the leader of the Athenian army, campaigning abroad.
His greatest personal tragedy was the death of his sister and of both his legitimate sons,  Xanthippus and Paralus, all affected by the epidemic, a calamity he never managed to overcome.
According to the provisions of the decree, Megarian merchants were excluded from the market of Athens and the ports in its empire.
The promotion of such an arrogant imperialism is said to have ruined Athens.
In matters of character, Pericles was above reproach in the eyes of the ancient historians, since "he kept himself untainted by corruption, although he was not altogether indifferent to money-making".
During the Peloponnesian War, Pericles initiated a defensive "grand strategy" whose aim was the exhaustion of the enemy and the preservation of the ''status quo''.
The Congress failed because of Sparta's stance, but Pericles' intentions remain unclear.
Constantine Paparrigopoulos, a major modern Greek historian, argues that Pericles sought for the expansion and stabilization of all democratic institutions.
Kagan states that Pericles adopted "an elevated mode of speech, free from the vulgar and knavish tricks of mob-orators" and, according to Diodorus Siculus, he "excelled all his fellow citizens in skill of oratory".
For more than 20 years Pericles led many expeditions, mainly naval ones.
In 454 BC he attacked Sicyon and Acarnania.
Hence, he enacted legislation granting the lower classes access to the political system and the public offices, from which they had previously been barred.
It is for that reason that Hans Delbrück called him one of the greatest statesmen and military leaders in history.
At this time, however, Athens was seriously challenged by a number of revolts among its subjects.
Pericles focused also on internal projects, such as the fortification of Athens (the building of the "middle wall" about 440&nbsp;BC), and on the creation of new cleruchies, such as Andros, Naxos and Thurii (444&nbsp;BC) as well as Amphipolis (437–436&nbsp;BC).
This ban strangled the Megarian economy and strained the fragile peace between Athens and Sparta, which was allied with Megara.
Temporarily, he managed to tame the people's resentment and to ride out the storm, but his internal enemies' final bid to undermine him came off; they managed to deprive him of the generalship and to fine him at an amount estimated between 15 and 50 talents.
Sir Richard C. Jebb concludes that "unique as an Athenian statesman, Pericles must have been in two respects unique also as an Athenian orator; first, because he occupied such a position of personal ascendancy as no man before or after him attained; secondly, because his thoughts and his moral force won him such renown for eloquence as no one else ever got from Athenians".
According to Athanasios G. Platias and Constantinos Koliopoulos, professors of strategic studies and international politics, "rather than to submit to coercive demands, Pericles chose war".
Pericles was not prepared to make unilateral concessions, believing that "if Athens conceded on that issue, then Sparta was sure to come up with further demands".
Ioannis Kakridis and Arnold Gomme were two scholars who debated the originality of Pericles’ oratory and last speech.
In any case, the city's plight, caused by the epidemic, triggered a new wave of public uproar, and Pericles was forced to defend himself in an emotional final speech, a rendition of which is presented by Thucydides.
According to Paparrigopoulos, history vindicated Cimon, because Athens, after Pericles' death, sank into the abyss of political turmoil and demagogy.
The freedom of expression is regarded as the lasting legacy deriving from this period.
The biographer points out, however, that the poet Ion reported that Pericles' speaking style was "a presumptuous and somewhat arrogant manner of address, and that into his haughtiness there entered a good deal of disdain and contempt for others".
Pericles is lauded as "the ideal type of the perfect statesman in ancient Greece" and his Funeral Oration is nowadays synonymous with the struggle for participatory democracy and civic pride.
He learned music from the masters of the time (Damon or Pythocleides could have been his teacher) and he is considered to have been the first politician to attribute importance to philosophy.
His judgement is not unquestioned; some 20th-century critics, such as Malcolm F. McGregor and John S. Morrison, proposed that he may have been a charismatic public face acting as an advocate on the proposals of advisors, or the people themselves.
Consequently, Pericles asked the Spartans to offer a ''quid pro quo''.
He also avoided convening the ecclesia, fearing that the populace, outraged by the unopposed ravaging of their farms, might rashly decide to challenge the vaunted Spartan army in the field.
No definite record exists of how exactly Pericles managed to convince the residents of Attica to agree to move into the crowded urban areas.
Pericles also tried to minimize the advantages of Sparta by rebuilding the walls of Athens, which, it has been suggested, radically altered the use of force in Greek international relations.
Such measures impelled Pericles' critics to hold him responsible for the gradual degeneration of the Athenian democracy.
Through bribery and negotiations, Pericles defused the imminent threat, and the Spartans returned home.
His family's nobility and wealth allowed him to fully pursue his inclination toward education.
According to Quintilian, Pericles would always prepare assiduously for his orations and, before going on the rostrum, he would always pray to the Gods, so as not to utter any improper word.
Nevertheless, within just a year, in 429 BC, the Athenians not only forgave Pericles but also re-elected him as strategos.
According to the historian Terry Buckley the objective of the Congress Decree was a new mandate for the Delian League and for the collection of "phoros" (taxes).
In exchange for retracting the Megarian Decree, the Athenians demanded from Sparta to abandon their practice of periodic expulsion of foreigners from their territory (xenelasia) and to recognize the autonomy of its allied cities, a request implying that Sparta's hegemony was also ruthless.
He enjoyed the company of the philosophers Protagoras, Zeno of Elea, and Anaxagoras.
He asserts that since Pericles must have known about these limitations he probably planned for a much shorter war.
He was certain that democracy had reached its peak and Pericles' reforms were leading to the stalemate of populism.
In that year, however, Pericles witnessed the death of both his legitimate sons from his first wife, Paralus and Xanthippus, in the epidemic.
In 461 BC, Pericles achieved the political elimination of this opponent using ostracism.
In 449 BC Pericles proposed a decree allowing the use of 9,000 talents to finance the major rebuilding program of Athenian temples.
Pericles was born c. 495 BC, in Athens, Greece.
He also attributes authorship of the Funeral Oration to Aspasia and attacks his contemporaries' veneration of Pericles.
However, as he is generally regarded as an admirer of Pericles, Thucydides has been criticized for bias towards Sparta.
This deputation was not allowed to enter Athens, as Pericles had already passed a resolution according to which no Spartan deputation would be welcomed if the Spartans had previously initiated any hostile military actions.
One interpretation of the dream treats the lion as a traditional symbol of greatness, but the story may also allude to the unusually large size of Pericles' skull, which became a popular target of contemporary comedians (who called him "Squill-head", after the squill or sea-onion).
Another consideration that may well have influenced Pericles' stance was the concern that revolts in the empire might spread if Athens showed itself weak.
In Menexenus, however, Socrates (through Plato) casts aspersions on Pericles' rhetorical fame, claiming ironically that, since Pericles was educated by Aspasia, a trainer of many orators, he would be superior in rhetoric to someone educated by Antiphon.
The crisis was brought to an official end by the Thirty Years' Peace (winter of 446–445&nbsp;BC), in which Athens relinquished most of the possessions and interests on the Greek mainland which it had acquired since 460&nbsp;BC, and both Athens and Sparta agreed not to attempt to win over the other state's allies.
After the Spartan threat had been removed, Pericles crossed back to Euboea to crush the revolt there.
Beloch also believes that Pericles deliberately brought on the war to protect his political position at home.
The Ecclesia (the Athenian Assembly) adopted Ephialtes' proposal without opposition.
Other analysts maintain an Athenian humanism illustrated in the Golden Age.
The Acropolis, though in ruins, still stands and is a symbol of modern Athens.
Although Pericles was a main source of his inspiration, some historians have noted that the passionate and idealistic literary style of the speeches Thucydides attributes to Pericles is completely at odds with Thucydides' own cold and analytical writing style.
His early years were quiet; the introverted young Pericles avoided public appearances, instead preferring to devote his time to his studies.
(The fleet, backbone of Athenian power since the days of Themistocles, was manned almost entirely by members of the lower classes.)
In the spring of 449 BC, Pericles proposed the Congress Decree, which led to a meeting ("Congress") of all Greek states in order to consider the question of rebuilding the temples destroyed by the Persians.
Beyond these initial prosecutions, the ecclesia attacked Pericles himself by asking him to justify his ostensible profligacy with, and maladministration of, public money.
Cimon defeated the Persians in the Battle of Salamis-in-Cyprus, but died of disease in 449&nbsp;BC.
During the autumn of 431 BC, Pericles led the Athenian forces that invaded Megara and a few months later (winter of 431–430 BC) he delivered his monumental and emotional Funeral Oration, honoring the Athenians who died for their city.
The Samian War was one of the last significant military events before the Peloponnesian War.
The causes of the Peloponnesian War have been much debated, but many ancient historians lay the blame on Pericles and Athens.
The fact that he was at the same time a vigorous statesman, general and orator makes more complex the objective assessment of his actions.
His stance was greeted with applause, and Thucydides was soundly, if unexpectedly, defeated.
According to Platias and Koliopoulos, Athens as the strongest party did not have to beat Sparta in military terms and "chose to foil the Spartan plan for victory".
In 442&nbsp;BC, the Athenian public voted to ostracize Thucydides from the city for 10 years and Pericles was once again the unchallenged ruler of the Athenian political arena.
Pericles is said to have initiated both expeditions in Egypt and Cyprus, although some researchers, such as Karl Julius Beloch, argue that the dispatch of such a great fleet conforms with the spirit of Cimon's policy.
Although Plutarch claims that this deformity was the reason that Pericles was always depicted wearing a helmet, this is not the case; the helmet was actually the symbol of his official rank as strategos (general).
Even when in the face of mounting pressure, Pericles did not give in to the demands for immediate action against the enemy or revise his initial strategy.
In any case, seeing the pillage of their farms, the Athenians were outraged, and they soon began to indirectly express their discontent towards their leader, who many of them considered to have drawn them into the war.
He himself died of the plague in the autumn of 429 BC.
Kagan believes that Cimon adapted himself to the new conditions and promoted a political marriage between Periclean liberals and Cimonian conservatives.
His strategy is said to have been "inherently unpopular", but Pericles managed to persuade the Athenian public to follow it.
According to Samons, Pericles believed that it was necessary to raise the demos, in which he saw an untapped source of Athenian power and the crucial element of Athenian military dominance.
Kakridis proposes that it is impossible to imagine Pericles deviating away from the expected funeral orator addressing the mourning audience of 430 after the Peloponnesian war.
The obvious purpose of these proposals was the instigation of a confrontation between Pericles and the people; this event, indeed, would come about a few years later.
In 430 BC, the army of Sparta looted Attica for a second time, but Pericles was not daunted and refused to revise his initial strategy.
Anaxagoras, in particular, became a close friend and influenced him greatly.
Pausanias (c. 150 C.E.)
The exact identity of the disease is uncertain, typhus or typhoid fever are suspected, but this has been the source of much debate.
According to Kagan, Pericles' vehement insistence that there should be no diversionary expeditions may well have resulted from the bitter memory of the Egyptian campaign, which he had allegedly supported.
With these bitter comments, Thucydides not only laments the loss of a man he admired, but he also heralds the flickering of Athens' unique glory and grandeur.
Some historians think that he wanted to prompt a confederation with the participation of all the Greek cities; others think he wanted to assert Athenian pre-eminence.
However, when Pericles took the floor, his resolute arguments put Thucydides and the conservatives firmly on the defensive.
Agariste was the great-granddaughter of the tyrant of Sicyon, Cleisthenes, and the niece of the Athenian reformer Cleisthenes.
records (I.29) seeing the tomb of Pericles along a road near the Academy.
He was the son of the politician Xanthippus, who, though ostracized in 485–484 BC, returned to Athens to command the Athenian contingent in the Greek victory at Mycale just five years later.
Just before his death, Pericles' friends were concentrated around his bed, enumerating his virtues during peace and underscoring his nine war trophies.
The woman whom he really adored was Aspasia of Miletus, who became Pericles' mistress and with whom he lived as if married.
In 447 BC Pericles engaged in his most admired excursion, the expulsion of barbarians from the Thracian peninsula of Gallipoli, in order to establish Athenian colonists in the region.
This promise was prompted by his concern that Archidamus, who was a friend of his, might pass by his estate without ravaging it, either as a gesture of friendship or as a calculated political move aimed to alienate Pericles from his constituents.
He started an ambitious project that generated most of the surviving structures on the Acropolis (including the Parthenon).
Others, such as Donald W. Knight, conclude that the strategy was too defensive and would not succeed.
After consultations with its allies, Sparta sent a deputation to Athens demanding certain concessions, such as the immediate expulsion of the Alcmaeonidae family including Pericles and the retraction of the Megarian Decree, threatening war if the demands were not met.
Through this comment, the historian illustrates what he perceives as Pericles' charisma to lead, convince and, sometimes, to manipulate.
Between 438–436 BC Pericles led Athens' fleet in Pontus and established friendly relations with the Greek cities of the region.
His morale undermined, he burst into tears and not even Aspasia's companionship could console him.
Unwilling to engage the Spartan army in battle, he again led a naval expedition to plunder the coasts of the Peloponnese, this time taking 100 Athenian ships with him.
For example, he would often avoid banquets, trying to be frugal.
In 451–450 BC the Athenians sent troops to Cyprus.
Therefore, he did not hesitate to send troops to Corcyra to reinforce the Corcyraean fleet, which was fighting against Corinth.
Some contemporary scholars call Pericles a populist, a demagogue and a hawk, while other scholars admire his charismatic leadership.
On the other hand, in one of his dialogues, Plato rejects the glorification of Pericles and quote as saying: "as I know, Pericles made the Athenians slothful, garrulous and avaricious, by starting the system of public fees".
During the Peloponnesian War, Pericles' dependence on popular support to govern was obvious.
Although Thucydides mentions the fining of Pericles, he does not mention the accusations against Pericles but instead focuses on Pericles' integrity.
Aspasia, who was noted for her ability as a conversationalist and adviser, was accused of corrupting the women of Athens in order to satisfy Pericles' perversions.
Pericles then quelled a revolt in Byzantium and, when he returned to Athens, gave a funeral oration to honor the soldiers who died in the expedition.
For his part, Ben X. de Wet concludes his strategy would have succeeded had he lived longer.
Pericles was convinced that the war against Sparta, which could not conceal its envy of Athens' pre-eminence, was inevitable if unfortunate.
According to George Cawkwell, a praelector in ancient history, with this decree Pericles breached the Thirty Years' Peace "but, perhaps, not without the semblance of an excuse".
Although Cimon was acquitted, this confrontation proved that Pericles' major political opponent was vulnerable.
Without opposition after the expulsion of Cimon, the unchallengeable leader of the democratic party became the unchallengeable ruler of Athens.
Thucydides initially managed to incite the passions of the ecclesia regrading these charges in his favor.
Ancient Greek writers call Pericles "Olympian" and extol his talents; referring to him "thundering and lightening and exciting Greece" and carrying the weapons of Zeus when orating.
Pericles turned the Delian League into an Athenian empire, and led his countrymen during the first two years of the Peloponnesian War.
He was reinstated in command of the Athenian army and led all its military operations during 429 BC, having once again under his control the levers of power.
Therefore, although they agreed to leave, many rural residents were far from happy with Pericles' decision.
The Spartan army was at this time gathered at Corinth, and, citing this as a hostile action, the Athenians refused to admit their emissaries.
With other decrees he lowered the property requirement for the archonship in 458–457 BC and bestowed generous wages on all citizens who served as jurymen in the Heliaia (the supreme court of Athens) some time just after 454&nbsp;BC.
Gorgias, in Plato's homonymous dialogue, uses Pericles as an example of powerful oratory.
Worsted in the war, the Milesians came to Athens to plead their case against the Samians.
Interestingly, legends say that Philip II of Macedon had a similar dream before the birth of his son, Alexander the Great.
Plutarch mentions other criticism of Pericles' leadership: "many others say that the people were first led on by him into allotments of public lands, festival-grants, and distributions of fees for public services, thereby falling into bad habits, and becoming luxurious and wanton under the influence of his public measures, instead of frugal and self-sufficing".
Plutarch says that Pericles stood first among the Athenians for forty years.
