Kurt Schneider had argued that they were simply 'abnormal varieties of psychic life' and therefore not necessarily the domain of psychiatry, a view said to still have influence in Germany today.
The prevalence of personality disorder in the general community was largely unknown until surveys starting from the 1990s.
ICD classifies transgenderism as a personality disorder, while the DSM-5 declassifies transgender, per se, as a mental illness, and introduces a new and distinct classification (gender dysphoria).
'''Passive–aggressive (Negativistic)'''
There are accepted diagnostic issues and controversies with regard to distinguishing particular personality disorder categories from each other.
Magical thinking and strange beliefs.
They are suspicious of people who treat them well.
In general, patients suffering from the disorder can be paranoid, have difficulty being understood by others as they have an odd or eccentric manner of speaking and a lack of close relationships.
* "Significant impairments in self (identity or self-direction) and interpersonal (empathy or intimacy) functioning."
Apart from all these issues, an individual may not consider their personality to be disordered or the cause of problems.
Would likely engage in a sadomasochist relationship.
'Moral' in this sense referred to affect (emotion or mood) rather than ethics, but it was arguably based in part on religious, social and moral beliefs, with a pessimism about medical intervention so that social control should take precedence.
Gordon Allport published theories of personality traits from the 1920s—and Henry Murray advanced a theory called ''personology'', which influenced a later key advocate of personality disorders, Theodore Millon.
The sexually abused group demonstrated the most consistently elevated patterns of psychopathology.
This process is fairly time consuming.
Schizoid personality disorder
Schizotypal patients may improve on antipsychotic medication; otherwise not indicated
See themselves as inept, inferior, or unappealing.
A screening survey across 13 countries by the World Health Organization using DSM-IV criteria, reported in 2009 a prevalence estimate of around 6% for personality disorders.
Is an uncommon condition in which people avoid social activities and consistently shy away from interaction with others.
Egotistical, arrogant, grandiose, insouciant.
They are opinionated and close-minded.
Constantly seeking others' attention.
* Paranoid personality disorder: characterized by a pattern of irrational suspicion and mistrust of others, interpreting motivations as malevolent.
* Markedly disharmonious attitudes and behavior, generally involving several areas of functioning; e.g.
See themselves as free and independent.
Is a mental disorder in which people have an inflated sense of their own importance and a deep need for admiration.
The definitions may vary somewhat, according to source.
Tense in social situations due to fear of rejection.
However, they may encounter the second risk they described: under-appreciation of the developmental context in which these syndromes occur.
Will not communicate when there is something problematic to discuss.
This is for conditions that seem to arise in adults without a diagnosis of personality disorder, following catastrophic or prolonged stress or other psychiatric illness.
Much of this research has been framed by the adult personality disorder constructs from Axis II of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.
Child abuse and neglect consistently evidence themselves as antecedent risks to the development of personality disorders in adulthood.
A UK national epidemiological study (based on DSM-IV screening criteria), reclassified into levels of severity rather than just diagnosis, reported in 2010 that the majority of people show some personality difficulties in one way or another (short of threshold for diagnosis), while the prevalence of the most complex and severe cases (including meeting criteria for multiple diagnoses in different clusters) was estimated at 1.3%.
Blur line between reality and fantasy.
'''Self-defeating (Masochistic)'''
Neither desire nor need human attachments.
Separately, Richard von Krafft-Ebing popularized the terms sadism and masochism, as well as homosexuality, as psychiatric issues.
They fear  being abandoned or separated from important people in their life.
One tool of diagnosing personality disorders is a process involving interviews with scoring systems.
In the most recent edition of the DSM, DSM-5, the diagnostic criteria of a personality disorder have been revised.
'Inadequate' and 'asthenic' personality disorder' categories were deleted, and others were expanded into more types, or changed from being personality disorders to regular disorders.
Always seeking confirmatory evidence of hidden schemes.
They experience long-standing feelings of inadequacy and are very sensitive of what others think about them.
Preoccupied with fantasies of success, beauty, or achievement.
On the one hand, an individual may not consider themselves to have a mental health problem, while on the other, community mental health services may view individuals with personality disorders as too complex or difficult, and may directly or indirectly exclude individuals with such diagnoses or associated behaviors.
Maintain a rule-bound lifestyle.
Some elements of Gannushkin's typology were later incorporated into the theory developed by a Russian adolescent psychiatrist, Andrey Yevgenyevich Lichko, who was also interested in psychopathies along with their milder forms, the so-called accentuations of character.
Paranoid personality disorder
The vulnerabilities of a client, and indeed a therapist, may become lost behind actual or apparent strength and resilience.
The DSM-III published in 1980 made some major changes, notably putting all personality disorders onto a second separate 'axis' along with mental retardation, intended to signify more enduring patterns, distinct from what were considered axis one mental disorders.
Poor in antisocial personality.
The general criterion for a personality disorder specifies that an individual's personality must deviate significantly from what is expected within their culture.
Few drives or ambitions, if any.
A person may meet the criteria for multiple personality disorder diagnoses and/or other mental disorders, either at particular times or continually, thus making coordinated input from multiple services a potential requirement.
Deliberately inefficient.
* Histrionic personality disorder: including superficial charm, insincerity, egocentricity and manipulation
Deliberately defeat own achievements.
According to leadership academic Manfred F.R.
* "One or more pathological personality traits domains or trait facets."
Exhibitionistic as a means of securing attention and favors.
It affects more males than females.
In the early 20th century, another German psychiatrist, Emil Kraepelin, included a chapter on psychopathic inferiority in his influential work on clinical psychiatry for students and physicians.
Medications may help with comorbid anxiety and depression
In the following study, efforts were taken to match retrospective reports of abuse with a clinical population that had demonstrated psychopathology from childhood to adulthood who were later found to have experienced abuse and neglect.
As an example of one extreme, people who may have been exposed to hostility, deceptiveness, rejection, aggression or abuse in their lives, may in some cases be made confused, intimidated or suspicious by presentations of warmth, intimacy or positivity.
Avoidant personality disorder
Officially verified physical abuse showed an extremely strong correlation with the development of antisocial and impulsive behavior.
Seek condemning or mistreatful partners.
They generally don't understand how relationships form or the impact of their behavior on others.
Personality disorders are characterized by an enduring collection of behavioral patterns often associated with considerable personal, social, and occupational disruption.
There are different specific theories or schools of therapy within many of these modalities.
Somewhat more neutral language was employed in the DSM-II in 1968, though the terms and descriptions had only a slight resemblance to current definitions.
In 1933 Russian psychiatrist Pyotr Borisovich Gannushkin published his book ''Manifestations of psychopathies: statics, dynamics, systematic aspects'', which was one of the first attempts to develop a detailed typology of psychopathies.
Disrespect societal customs, rules, and standards.
This perspective may be caused by the patient's ignorance or lack of insight into their own condition, an ego-syntonic perception of the problems with their personality that prevents them from experiencing it as being in conflict with their goals and self-image, or by the simple fact that there is no distinct or objective boundary between 'normal' and 'abnormal' personalities.
Meanwhile, a more general personality psychology had been developing in academia and to some extent clinically.
Therapists in this area can become disheartened by lack of initial progress, or by apparent progress that then leads to setbacks.
Around mid-century, Hans Eysenck was analysing traits and personality types, and psychiatrist Kurt Schneider was popularising a clinical use in place of the previously more usual terms 'character', 'temperament' or 'constitution'.
Hence, personality disorders are defined by experiences and behaviors that differ from societal norms and expectations.
Those with narcissistic personality disorder believe that they're superior to others and have little regard for other people's feelings.
In addition, in Robert F. Krueger's review of their research indicates that some children and adolescents do suffer from clinically significant syndromes that resemble adult personality disorders, and that these syndromes have meaningful correlates and are consequential.
They are generally difficult to work with and are very hard to form relationships with.
This group have been termed the Type R, or treatment-resisting personality disorders, as opposed to the Type S or treatment-seeking ones, who are keen on altering their personality disorders and sometimes clamor for treatment.
the patterns are consistent with the ego integrity of the individual) and are therefore perceived to be appropriate for that individual.
Encourage others to take advantage of them.
Find pleasure in abusing others.
Act without due consideration.
Eccentric, self-estranged, bizarre, absent.
See the world in terms of regulations and hierarchies.
* "The impairments in personality functioning and the individual's personality trait expressions are not better understood as normative for individual's developmental stage or sociocultural environment."
'''Obsessive–compulsive'''
Vent anger indirectly by undermining others’ goals.
In clinical practice, individuals are generally diagnosed by an interview with a psychiatrist based on a mental status examination, which may take into account observations by relatives and others.
'''Response of Patients with Personality Disorders to Biological and Psychosocial Treatments'''
These patterns of behavior typically are recognized in adolescence and the beginning of adulthood and, in some unusual instances, childhood.
With regard to their similarities, the findings revealed that the most prominent and consistent personality dimensions underlying a large number of the personality disorders are positive associations with neuroticism and negative associations with agreeableness.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (currently the DSM-5) provides a definition of a General personality disorder that stress such disorders are an enduring and inflexible pattern of long duration that lead to significant distress or impairment and are not due to use of substances or another medical condition.
Kraepelin also described three paranoid (meaning then delusional) disorders, resembling later concepts of schizophrenia, delusional disorder and paranoid personality disorder.
aiming for mutual respect, trust and boundaries).
People with schizotypal personality disorder are often described as odd or eccentric and usually have few, if any, close relationships.
See themselves and others alternatively as all-good and all-bad.
* The above manifestations always appear during childhood or adolescence and continue into adulthood;
Variable in borderline, narcissistic, and histrionic personalities
For example, ICD-10 does not include narcissistic personality disorder as a distinct category, while DSM-5 does not include enduring personality change after catastrophic experience or after psychiatric illness.
Feel righteous, but persecuted.
Antisocial personality disorder
See themselves as attractive and charming.
* The abnormal behavior pattern is enduring, of long standing, and not limited to episodes of mental illness;
People with antisocial personality disorder depict a long pattern of disregard for other people's rights.
This has been looked at in terms of both therapist and client; in terms of social skills, coping efforts, defense mechanisms, or deliberate strategies; and in terms of moral judgments or the need to consider underlying motivations for specific behaviors or conflicts.
Personality disorder is a term with a distinctly modern meaning, owing in part to its clinical usage and the institutional character of modern psychiatry.
Response to Psychosocial Treatments
It is commonly stated that there is always a need to maintain appropriate professional personal boundaries, while allowing for emotional expression and therapeutic relationships.
There is also often a focus on common themes that seem to be beneficial regardless of techniques, including attributes of the therapist (e.g.
This referred to continual and rigid patterns of misconduct or dysfunction in the absence of apparent mental retardation or illness, supposedly without a moral judgment.
These were typically understood as weaknesses of character or willful deviance, and were distinguished from neurosis or psychosis.
Meet social obligations only when self-serving.
See themselves as weak or fragile.
There are also some sex differences in the frequency of personality disorders.
Those diagnosed with a personality disorder may experience difficulties in cognition, emotiveness, interpersonal functioning, or impulse control.
Would likely engage in a sadomasochist relationship, but will not play the role of a masochist.
Restrained, conscientious, respectful, rigid.
Borderline personality disorder
Rigidity is the most obvious aspect of (low) openness among personality disorders and that shows lack of knowledge of one's emotional experiences.
Liable to sudden outbursts of rage.
Helpless, incompetent, submissive, immature.
Hypervigilant to the motives of others to undermine or do harm.
No direct response.
This sense of the term has been compared to the use of the term 'multiple personality disorder' in the first versions of the DSM.
However, people diagnosed with an odd-eccentric personality disorder tend to have a greater grasp on reality than those diagnosed with schizophrenia.
A diagnostic term for the latter concept would be included in the DSM from 1952, and from 1980 the DSM would also include schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders; interpretations of earlier (1921) theories of Ernst Kretschmer led to a distinction between these and another type later included in the DSM, avoidant personality disorder.
To others, they may appear somewhat dull or humorless.
Physicians in the early 19th century started to diagnose forms of insanity that involved disturbed emotions and behaviors but seemingly without significant intellectual impairment or delusions or hallucinations.
For example, the Greek philosopher Theophrastus described 29 'character' types that he saw as deviations from the norm, and similar views have been found in Asian, Arabic and Celtic cultures.
On the other hand, cases of abuse of the neglectful type that created childhood pathology were found to be subject to partial remission in adulthood.
They were dropped in the DSM-IV, though a proposed 'depressive personality disorder' was added; in addition, the official diagnosis of passive-aggressive personality disorder was dropped, tentatively renamed 'negativistic personality disorder.'
James Cowles Prichard advanced a similar concept he called moral insanity, which would be used to diagnose patients for some decades.
However, there can be difficulty acknowledging the different worlds and views that both the client and therapist may live with.
The prevalence of individual personality disorders ranges from about 2% to 3% for the more common varieties, such as schizotypal, antisocial, borderline, and histrionic, to 0.5–1% for the least common, such as narcissistic and avoidant.
Tests were developing or being applied for personality evaluation, including projective tests such as the Rorshach, as well as questionnaires such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory.
Experience rapidly fluctuating moods.
For example, in a study published in 2003 titled "The five-factor model and personality disorder empirical literature: A meta-analytic review", the authors analyzed data from 15 other studies to determine how personality disorders are different and similar, respectively, with regard to underlying personality traits.
Children who had experienced such verbal abuse were three times as likely as other children (who did not experience such verbal abuse) to have borderline, narcissistic, obsessive-compulsive or paranoid personality disorders in adulthood.
In a study of 793 mothers and children, researchers asked mothers if they had screamed at their children, and told them that they did not love them or threatened to send them away.
A passive aggressive style was defined clinically by Colonel William Menninger during World War II in the context of men's reactions to military compliance, which would later be referenced as a personality disorder in the DSM.
Overreact to minor events.
They argue that the theory and diagnosis of personality disorders are based strictly on social, or even sociopolitical and economic considerations.
They often cross the line and violate these rights.
This included the concept of ''character disorders'', which were seen as enduring problems linked not to specific symptoms but to pervasive internal conflicts or derailments of normal childhood development.
In 1939, psychiatrist David Henderson published a theory of 'psychopathic states' that contributed to popularly linking the term to anti-social behavior.
Regarding maladaptation, ubiquity, and stability as the three main symptoms of behavioral pathology, he distinguished 9 clusters of psychopaths: cycloids (including constitutionally depressive, constitutionally excitable, cyclothymics, and emotionally labile), asthenics (including psychasthenics), schizoids (including dreamers), paranoiacs (including fanatics), epileptoids, hysterical personalities (including pathological liars), unstable psychopaths, antisocial psychopaths, and constitutionally stupid.
Psychological concepts of character and 'self' became widespread.
A personality disorder diagnosis must meet these criteria:
They have the need to be taken care of by a person.
The ICD-10 'clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines' introduces its specific personality disorder diagnoses with some general guideline criteria that are similar.
* The disorder leads to considerable personal distress but this may only become apparent late in its course;
They are also known to be somewhat short-tempered.
This often involves interpersonal issues, and there can be difficulties in seeking and obtaining help from organizations in the first place, as well as with establishing and maintaining a specific therapeutic relationship.
There is significant evidence that suggests that a small proportion of people with Type A personality disorder, specifically schizotypal personality disorder, have the potential to develop schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.
Preoccupied with odd daydreams and beliefs.
Antidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers may help for borderline personality; otherwise not indicated
Most categories were given more specific 'operationalized' definitions, with standard criteria that psychiatrists could agree on in order to conduct research and diagnose patients.
There is also a category for Mixed and other personality disorders, defined as conditions that are often troublesome but do not demonstrate the specific pattern of symptoms in the named disorders.
The DSM-5, lists personality disorders in the same way as other mental disorders, rather than on a separate 'axis', as previously.
The ICD adds: "For different cultures it may be necessary to develop specific sets of criteria with regard to social norms, rules and obligations."
Explosively hostile, abrasive, cruel, dogmatic.
Unstable and frequently changing moods.
The DSM-5 also contains three diagnoses for personality patterns that do not match these ten disorders, but nevertheless exhibit characteristics of a personality disorder.
* The disorder is usually, but not invariably, associated with significant problems in occupational and social performance.
ability to express and confide difficulties and emotions), and the match between the two (e.g.
Schizotypal personality disorder
Dramatic, seductive, shallow, stimulus-seeking, vain.
Alternately moody and irritable, then sullen and withdrawn.
Evidence for relationship of schizotypal personality to schizophrenia; otherwise none known
The patient is asked to answer questions, and depending on their answers, the trained interviewer tries to code what their responses were.
In clinical practice, many therapists use an 'eclectic' approach, taking elements of different schools as and when they seem to fit to an individual client.
British psychiatrists have also been reluctant to address such disorders or consider them on par with other mental disorders, which has been attributed partly to resource pressures within the National Health Service, as well as to negative medical attitudes towards behaviors associated with personality disorders.
'''Personality disorders''' are a class of mental disorders characterized by enduring maladaptive patterns of behavior, cognition, and inner experience, exhibited across many contexts and deviating markedly from those accepted by the individual's culture.
American psychiatrists officially recognised concepts of enduring personality disturbances in the first Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in the 1950s, which relied heavily on psychoanalytic concepts.
* Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder: including perfectionism, excessive devotion to work, rigidity, stubbornness and dictatorial tendencies.
Most common treatment for these disorders.
In addition to classifying by category and cluster, it is possible to classify personality disorders using such additional factors as severity, impact on social functioning, and attribution.
Clients may be perceived as negative, rejecting, demanding, aggressive or manipulative.
People with borderline personality disorder have a pervasive pattern of instability in interpersonal relationships.
Although highly anachronistic, and ignoring radical differences in the character of subjectivity and social relations, some have suggested similarities to other concepts going back to at least the ancient Greeks.
This behavior can result in maladaptive coping skills, which may lead to personal problems that induce extreme anxiety, distress, or depression.
See themselves as devoted, reliable, efficient, and productive.
That is, although PD constructs show continuity over time, they are probabilistic predictors; not all youths who exhibit PD symptomatology become adult PD cases.
Kets de Vries, it seems almost inevitable that some personality disorders will be present in a senior management team.
* "The impairments in personality functioning and the individual's personality trait expressions are not solely due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, medication) or a general medical condition (e.g., severe head trauma)."
The German psychiatrist Koch sought to make the moral insanity concept more scientific, and in 1891 suggested the phrase 'psychopathic inferiority', theorized to be a congenital disorder.
It can take several months of sessions, and perhaps several stops and starts, to begin to develop a trusting relationship that can meaningfully address a client's issues.
Unpredictable, manipulative, unstable.
ICD-10 classifies the DSM-5 schizotypal personality disorder as a form of schizophrenia rather than as a personality disorder.
'''Sex differences in the frequency of personality disorders'''
Resentful, contrary, skeptical, discontented.
Gain satisfaction through dominating, intimidating and humiliating others.
Withdrawn from relationships and prefer to be alone.
