Increasingly it was these services sectors, concentrated around the Perth metropolitan area, that provided jobs.
Consideration was given to piping water from the Kimberley region, but the idea was rejected in May 2006 due primarily to its high cost.
The administrative region of Perth includes 30 local governments, with the outer extent being the City of Wanneroo and the City of Swan to the north, the Shire of Mundaring, Shire of Kalamunda and the City of Armadale to the east, the Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale to the southeast and the City of Rockingham to the southwest, and including the islands of Rottnest Island and Garden Island off the west coast; this also correlates with the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
Subsequent sightings between this date and 1829 were made by other Europeans, but as in the case of the sighting and observations made by Vlamingh, the area was considered to be inhospitable and unsuitable for the agriculture that would be needed to sustain a settlement.
However, in May 2007, the state government announced that a second desalination plant will be built at Binningup, on the coast between Mandurah and Bunbury.
St John of God Health Care will build and operate the new hospitals under a public-private partnership with the state government.
Suburbs surrounding the Fremantle area, such as Spearwood and Hamilton Hill, also contain high concentrations of Italians, Croatians and Portuguese.
As a result, the city has been described as "the Australian capital of South Africans in exile".
A number of other public and private hospitals operate in Perth.
Perth is geographically closer to both Dili, East Timor (), and Jakarta, Indonesia (), than to Sydney (), Brisbane (), or Canberra ().
Hinduism has over 20,000 adherents in Perth; the Diwali (festival of lights) celebration in 2009 attracted over 20,000 visitors.
Perth also hosts annual music festivals including Future Music, Stereosonic and Soundwave.
The Swan Valley, with fertile soil, uncommon in the Perth region, features numerous wineries such as the large complex at Houghtons, the state's biggest producer, Sandalfords and many smaller operators, including microbreweries and rum distilleries.
Murdoch University was founded in the 1973, and incorporates Western Australia's only veterinary school.
The Eagles, the older club, is one of the most successful teams in the league, and one of the largest sporting clubs in Australia.The next level of football is the Western Australian Football League, comprising nine clubs each having a League, Reserves and Colts team.
With significant population growth post-WWII, employment growth occurred not in manufacturing but in retail and wholesale trade, business services, health, education, community and personal services and in public administration.
Perth came 8th in the Economist Intelligence Unit's August 2015 list of the world's most liveable cities, and was classified by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network in 2010 as a world city.
From the coast in the west to Mundaring in the east is a total distance of approximately .
There is also a wide variety of public art and sculptures on display across the city, throughout the year.
Both of these streets are pedestrian malls between William Street and Barrack Street.
The northern Perth section of the coastline is known as Sunset Coast; it includes numerous beaches and the Marmion Marine Park, a protected area inhabited by tropical fish, Australian sea lions and bottlenose dolphins, and traversed by humpback whales.
This isolation, however, has developed a strong local music scene, and the development of local music groups such as John Butler Trio, The Triffids, Pendulum, Eskimo Joe, Pond, Tame Impala, Karnivool, Gyroscope, Jebediah, Little Birdy, The Panics, Birds of Tokyo and Troye Sivan.
There were 53,390 persons of Chinese descent in Perth in 2006&nbsp;– 2.9% of the city's population.
Perth's electricity is generated, supplied, and retailed by three Western Australian Government corporations.
The University of Notre Dame Australia was established in 1990.
The Perth International Comedy Festival features a variety of local and international comedic talent, with performances held at the Astor Theatre and nearby venues in Mount Lawley, and regular night food markets throughout the summer months across Perth and its surrounding suburbs.
The first documented sighting of the region was made by the Dutch Captain Willem de Vlamingh and his crew on 10 January 1697.
Online news media covering the Perth area include TheWest.com.au backed by ''The West Australian'', Perth Now from the newsroom of The Sunday Times, WAToday from Fairfax Media and other outlets like TweetPerth on social media.
Perth is also home to the largest population of Anglo-Burmese in the world; many settled here following the independence of Burma in 1948 and the city is now the cultural hub for Anglo-Burmese worldwide.
Scitech also conducts live science demonstration shows, and operates the adjacent ''Horizon'' planetarium.
During Australia's involvement in World War II, Fremantle served as a base for submarines operating in the Pacific Theatre, and a US Navy Catalina flying boat fleet was based at Matilda Bay.
The six local commercial stations are: 92.9, Nova 93.7, Mix 94.5, 96fm, on FM and 882 6PR and 1080 6IX on AM.
The Perth Cultural Centre is the location of the city's major arts, cultural and educational institutions, including the Art Gallery of Western Australia, Western Australian Museum, State Library of Western Australia, State Records Office, and Perth Institute of Contemporary Arts (PICA).
St John of God Murdoch Hospital is privately owned and operated.
Some of the oldest remaining building, dating back to the 1830s, include the Round House in Fremantle, the Old Mill in South Perth, and the Old Court House in the city centre.
Though Notre Dame shares its name with the University of Notre Dame in Indiana USA, it is a separate institution, claiming only "strong ties" with its American namesake.
The only contemporary information on the source of the name comes from Fremantle's diary entry for 12 August, which records that they "named the town Perth according to the wishes of Sir George Murray".
These Noongar people occupied the southwest corner of Western Australia and lived as hunter-gatherers.
Perth was originally founded by Captain James Stirling in 1829 as the administrative centre of the Swan River Colony.
A late heritage building is the Perth Mint.
The lowest temperature recorded in Perth was  on 17 June 2006.
Several motorsport facilities exist in Perth including Perth Motorplex, catering to drag racing and speedway, and Barbagallo Raceway for circuit racing and drifting.
The Whadjuk were part of a larger group of fourteen tribes that formed the south-west socio-linguistic block known as the Noongar (meaning "the people" in their language), also sometimes called the ''Bibbulmun''.
The rainfall pattern has changed in Perth and southwest Western Australia since the mid-1970s.
In 2012 the minimum requirements for students to receive their WACE changed.
Traditionally, this water body had been known by Aboriginal inhabitants as ''Derbarl Yerrigan''.
The city's main performance venues include the Riverside Theatre within the Perth Convention Exhibition Centre, the Perth Concert Hall, the historic His Majesty's Theatre, the Regal Theatre in Subiaco and the Astor Theatre in Mount Lawley.
Perth is the seat of the Anglican Diocese of Perth and of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Perth.
The Perth International Arts Festival is a large cultural festival that has been held annually since 1953, and has since been joined by the Winter Arts festival, Perth Fringe Festival, and Perth Writers Festival.
The House of Commons established a select committee to consider the issue but after 18 months of negotiations and lobbying, finally refused to consider the matter, declaring that it could not legally grant secession.
As Fremantle was the first landfall in Australia for many migrant ships coming from Europe in the 1950s and 1960s, Perth started to experience a diverse influx of people, including Italians, Greeks, Dutch, Germans, Croats.
Tourist Drive 204, also known as Sunset Coast Tourist Drive, is a designated route from North Fremantle to Iluka along coastal roads.
Perth is represented by 9 full seats and significant parts of three others in the Federal House of Representatives, with the seats of Canning, Pearce and Brand including some areas outside the metropolitan area.
The lowest temperature within the Perth metropolitan area was  on the same day at Jandakot Airport.
Perth's main container and passenger port is at Fremantle,  south west at the mouth of the Swan River.
Perth receives moderate though highly seasonal rainfall, making it the fourth wettest Australian capital city after Darwin, Sydney and Brisbane.
Songs that refer to the city include "I Love Perth" (1996) by Pavement, and "Perth" (2011) by Bon Iver, while a number of films feature Perth: ''Last Train to Freo'', ''Two Fists, One Heart'', ''Thunderstruck'', ''Bran Nue Dae'', ''Japanese Story'' and ''Nickel Queen''.
Perth became known worldwide as the "City of Light" when city residents lit their house lights and streetlights as American astronaut John Glenn passed overhead while orbiting the earth on Friendship&nbsp;7 in 1962.
The hostile encounters between the two groups of people resulted in a number of events, including the execution of the Whadjuk elder Midgegooroo, the death of his son Yagan in 1833, and the Pinjarra massacre in 1834.
Queen Victoria announced the city status of Perth in 1856.
Actor Isla Fisher was raised in Perth and Hugh Jackman studied at the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts.
The metropolitan area extends along the coast to Two Rocks in the north and Singleton to the south, a total distance of approximately .
Foxtel provides a subscription-based satellite and cable television service.
Temperatures often fall below  a few hours after the arrival of the wind change.
The WACA Ground opened in the 1890s and has hosted Test cricket since 1970.
At the 2006 Census 1,445,079 residents in the Perth statistical area were counted.
Other popular sports include cricket, basketball, association football (soccer), and rugby union.
Perth has hosted numerous state and international sporting events.
ABC, SBS, Seven, Nine and Ten were also broadcast in an analogue format until 16 April 2013, when the analogue transmission was switched off.
Also located in Fremantle is the Army Museum of Western Australia, situated within a historic artillery barracks.
The Perth Metropolitan Region includes 30 local government areas, which themselves consist of a large number of suburbs, extending from Two Rocks in the north to Rockingham in the south, and east inland to The Lakes.
Many firms took advantage of relatively cheap land to build spacious, single-storey plants in suburban locations with plentiful parking, easy access and minimal traffic congestion.
Another more recent wave of arrivals includes white minorities from Southern Africa.
The Perth metropolitan area has two major river systems: the first is made up of the Swan and Canning Rivers; the second is that of the Serpentine and Murray Rivers, which discharge into the Peel Inlet at Mandurah.
In Northbridge every December is the San Nicola (Saint Nicholas) Festival, which involves a pageant followed by a concert, predominantly in Italian.
The Swan Valley also contains specialised food producers, many restaurants and cafes, and roadside local-produce stalls that sell seasonal fruit throughout the year.
The city centre and most of the suburbs are located on the sandy and relatively flat Swan Coastal Plain, which lies between the Darling Scarp and the Indian Ocean.
Perth Arena can be configured as an entertainment or sporting arena, and concerts are also hosted at other sporting venues, including Subiaco Oval, HBF Stadium, and nib Stadium.
Kings Park, located in central Perth between the CBD and the University of Western Australia, is one of the world's largest inner-city parks, at .
In addition to these Perth has hosted the World Rally Championships from 1989 to 2006, international Rugby Union games, including qualifying matches for 2003 Rugby World Cup.
Murray was born in Perth, Scotland, and was in 1829 Secretary of State for the Colonies and Member for Perthshire in the British House of Commons.
Perth is also home to the internationally regarded Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts at Edith Cowan University, from which many successful actors and broadcasters have launched their careers.
Hay Street and Murray Street have most of the retail and entertainment facilities.
Respecting the result of the referendum, the new government nonetheless petitioned the Imperial Parliament at Westminster.
Perth also has two thoroughbred racing facilities: Ascot, home of the Railway Stakes and Perth Cup; and Belmont Park.
Other shopping precincts include Harbour Town in West Perth, featuring factory outlets for major brands, the historically significant Fremantle Markets, which date back to 1897, and the Midland townsite on Great Eastern Highway, combining historic development around the Town Hall and Post Office buildings with the modern Midland Gate shopping centre further east.
The next level of football is the Western Australian Amateur Football League, comprising 68 clubs servicing senior footballers within the metropolitan area.
TAFE began as a system of technical colleges and schools under the Education Department, from which they were separated in the 1980s and ultimately formed into regional colleges.
Four races (2006, 2007, 2008 and 2010) in the Red Bull Air Race World Championship have been held on a stretch of the Swan River called Perth Water, using Langley Park as a temporary air field.
Winters are also known to be clear and sunny.
Buddhism and Islam each claim more than 20,000 adherents.
It incorporates the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts (WAAPA).
It is clear that Stirling had already selected the name ''Perth'' for the capital well before the town was proclaimed, as his proclamation of the colony, read in Fremantle on 18 June 1829, ended "given under my hand and Seal at Perth this 18th Day of June 1829.
Verve Energy operates coal and gas power generation stations, as well as wind farms and other power sources.
It is the fourth-most populous city in Australia, with an estimated population of 2.04&nbsp;million () living in Greater Perth.
In September 2009 Western Australia's dams reached 50% overall capacity for the first time since 2000.
Princess Margaret Hospital for Children is the state's only specialist children's hospital, and Graylands Hospital is the only public stand-alone psychiatric teaching hospital.
Other features include DNA Tower, a 15m high double helix staircase that resembles the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecule, and Jacob's Ladder, comprising 242 steps that lead down to Mounts Bay Road.
The soils of this area are quite infertile.
After WWII, Perth experienced suburban expansion aided by high levels of car ownership.
The University of Western Australia, which was founded in 1911, is renowned as one of Australia's leading research institutions.
Joondalup was granted the status of "tourism precinct" by the State Government in 2009, allowing for extended retail trading hours.
Perth is part of the South West Land Division of Western Australia, with the majority of the metropolitan area of Perth located on the Swan Coastal Plain, a narrow strip between the Indian Ocean and the Darling Scarp, a low coastal escarpment.
Outdoor concert venues include Quarry Amphitheatre, Supreme Court Gardens, Kings Park and Russell Square.
The local business paper is ''Western Australian Business News''.
On 4 June 1829, newly arriving British colonists had their first view of the mainland, and Western Australia's founding has since been recognised by a public holiday on the first Monday in June each year.
James Stirling Lieutenant Governor".
A trial winter (1 June – 31 August) sprinkler ban was introduced in 2009 by the State Government, a move which the Government later announced would be made permanent.
A new children's hospital, due to open in 2015, is being constructed next to Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, and will replace Princess Margaret Hospital.
Tourist Drive 203 is a circular route in the Swan Valley, passing by many attractions on West Swan Road and Great Northern Highway.
Midland Health Campus, a public and a private hospital, is under construction in Midland.
Since the 1950s the area has been dominated by heavy industry, including an oil refinery, steel-rolling mill with a blast furnace, alumina refinery, power station and a nickel refinery.
Reduced rainfall in the region in recent years has lowered inflow to reservoirs by two-thirds over the last 30 years, and affected groundwater levels.
On most summer afternoons a sea breeze, known locally as the "Fremantle Doctor", blows from the southwest, providing relief from the hot north-easterly winds.
Radio stations are on AM, FM and DAB+ frequencies.
Notre Dame was established as a Catholic university with its lead campus in Fremantle and a large campus in Sydney.
Perth Zoo, located in South Perth, houses a variety of Australian and exotic animals from around the globe.
The Perth Arena is a building in the city link area that has received a number of architecture awards.
Australian rules football is the most popular spectator sport in Perth&nbsp;– nearly 23% of Western Australians attended a match at least once in 2009–2010.
Hinduism is the fastest growing religion in Australia.
Perth is a particularly sunny city for this type of climate; it has an average of 8.8 hours of sunshine per day, which equates to around 3200 hours of annual sunshine, and 138.7 clear days annually, making it the sunniest capital city in Australia.
New hospitals are under construction to replace ageing facilities.
A state and federally funded project named Perth City Link sunk a section of the railway line, to link Northbridge and the CBD for the first time in 100 years.
Localised free community papers cater for each local government area.
There are many heritage sites in Perth's CBD, Fremantle, and other parts of the metropolitan areas.
The two Australian Football League teams located in Perth, the West Coast Eagles and the Fremantle Football Club, have two of the largest fan bases in the country.
Workforce decentralisation and transport improvements made it possible for the establishment of small-scale manufacturing in the suburbs.
The museum holds numerous items of significance, including three Victoria Crosses.
Protestants, predominantly Anglican, make up approximately 28% of the population.
Education is compulsory in Western Australia between the ages of six and seventeen, corresponding to primary and secondary school.
Beginning in 1831, hostile encounters between the British settlers and the Noongar people&nbsp;– both large-scale land users with conflicting land value systems&nbsp;– increased considerably as the colony grew.
The Perth metropolitan area covers .
It was gazetted as a public park in 1897, created from  of a chain of wetlands known as Third Swamp.
The Western Australian Maritime Museum in Fremantle displays maritime objects from all eras.
In the summer, the 3&nbsp;pm dewpoint averages at around .
It houses ''Australia II'', the yacht that won the 1983 America's Cup, as well as a former Royal Australian Navy submarine.
Perth is also home of the seat of the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross as the Church of St Ninian and St Chad in Perth was named the principal church of the ordinariate.
'''Perth''' () is the capital and largest city of the Australian state of Western Australia.
The climate of Perth allows for extensive outdoor sporting activity, and this is reflected in the wide variety of sports available to residents of the city.
Perth also has a small Jewish community&nbsp;– numbering 5,082 in 2006&nbsp;– who have emigrated primarily from Eastern Europe and more recently from South Africa.
, 42 of the Legislative Assembly's 59 seats and 18 of the Legislative Council's 36 seats are based in Perth's metropolitan area.
The reason for Perth being so popular among white South Africans has often been the location, the vast amount of land, and the slightly warmer climate compared to other large Australian cities – Perth has a Mediterranean climate reminiscent of Cape Town.
By 2006, there were 18,825 South Africans residing in Perth, accounting for 1.3% of the city's population.
Joondalup's central business district is largely a shopping and retail area lined with townhouses and apartments, and also features Lakeside Joondalup Shopping City.
It gained city status (currently vested in the smaller City of Perth) in 1856, and was promoted to the status of a Lord Mayorality in 1929.
Because of the large amount of building in and around ''Boorloo'', the local Whadjuk Noongar people were slowly dispossessed of their country.
Perth has featured in a variety of artistic works in various mediums.
It is also the state's only university to have produced a Nobel Laureate  Barry Marshall who graduated with a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery in 1975 and was awarded a joint Nobel Prize for physiology or medicine in 2005, together with Robin Warren.
Alinta Energy, which was previously a government owned company, had a monopoly in the domestic gas market since the 1990s.
Perth has its own local newsreaders on ABC (James McHale), Seven (Rick Ardon, Susannah Carr), Nine (Emmy Kubainski, Tim McMillan) and Ten (Narelda Jacobs).
However, temperatures at or below zero are very rare occurrences and it seldom gets cold enough for frost to form.
Boorloo formed part of ''Mooro'', the tribal lands of Yellagonga's group, one of several based around the Swan River and known collectively as the Whadjuk.
Tertiary education is available through a number of universities and technical and further education (TAFE) colleges.
Retail shopping in the Perth CBD is focused around Murray Street and Hay Street.
They were forced to camp around prescribed areas, including the swamps and lakes north of the settlement area including Third Swamp, known to them as ''Boodjamooling''.
Winters are relatively cool and wet, making Perth a classic example of a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification ''Csa'').
Ongoing international events include the V8 Supercars, the Hopman Cup during the first week of January at the Perth Arena.
The museum consists of several galleries which reflect the Army's involvement in Western Australia, and the military service of Western Australians.
Its campus is set in the west end of Fremantle, using historic port buildings built in the 1890s, giving Notre Dame a distinct European university atmosphere.
A number of arcades run between Hay Street and Murray Street, including the Piccadilly Arcade, which housed the Piccadilly Cinema until it closed in late 2013.
Before European colonisation, the area had been inhabited by the Whadjuk Noongar people for over 40,000 years, as evidenced by archaeological findings on the Upper Swan River.
The State Theatre Centre of Western Australia is also located there, and is the home of the Black Swan State Theatre Company and the Perth Theatre Company.
Coupled with the city's relatively high growth rate, this had led to concerns that Perth could run out of water in the near future.
The largest performance area within the State Theatre Centre, the Heath Ledger Theatre, is named in honour of Perth-born film actor Heath Ledger.
The Federal Court of Australia and the Federal Circuit Court of Australia (previously the Federal Magistrates Court) occupy the Commonwealth Law Courts building on Victoria Avenue, which is also the location for annual Perth sittings of Australia's High Court.
Curtin University (previously known as Western Australian Institute of Technology (1966-1986) and Curtin University of Technology (1986-2010) is Western Australia's largest university by student population.
Perth is Australia's fourth-most populous city, having overtaken Adelaide's population in the early 1980s.
This was followed by a surge in economic activity flowing from several mining booms in the late 20th and early 21st centuries that saw Perth become the regional headquarters for a number of large mining operations located around the state.
Whilst most mineral and petroleum production takes place elsewhere in the state, the non-base services provide most of the employment and income to the people of Perth.
Roman Catholics make up about 23% of the population, and Catholicism is the most common single denomination.
However, in 2013 Kleenheat Gas began operating in the market, allowing consumers to choose their gas retailer.
Other performing arts companies based in Perth include the West Australian Ballet, the West Australian Opera and the West Australian Symphony Orchestra, all of which present regular programmes.
These are supported by the Australian Eurasian Association of Western Australia, which also serves a community of Portuguese-Malacca Eurasian or Kristang immigrants.
The Western Australian State Government responded by introducing mandatory household sprinkler restrictions in the city.
Aviation history is represented by the Aviation Heritage Museum in Bull Creek, with its significant collection of aircraft, including a Lancaster bomber and a Catalina of the type operated from the Swan River during WWII.
Other proposals under consideration included the controversial extraction of an extra 45 gigalitres of water a year from the Yarragadee Aquifer in the south-west of the state.
An early novel, ''Moondyne'', set in the Swan River Colony, was written by a former Fenian convict, John Boyle O'Reilly, and a ''A Faithful Picture'', edited by Peter Cowan, gives a good idea of the early days of the colony.
Many Afrikaners and Anglo-Africans emigrated to Perth during the 1980s and 1990s, with the phrase "packing for Perth" becoming associated with South Africans who choose to emigrate abroad, sometimes regardless of the destination.
Since the late 1970s, Southeast Asia has become an increasingly important source of migrants, with communities from Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mainland China, and India all now well-established.
Celebrity musical performers from Perth have included the late AC/DC lead singer Bon Scott, who has been remembered with a statue in Fremantle, and veteran performer and artist Rolf Harris, given the nickname "The Boy From Bassendean".
The highest temperature recorded in Perth was  on 23 February 1991, although Perth Airport recorded  on the same day.
Internationally this is not an isolated occurrence as other countries such as New Zealand and Great Britain are reporting similar increases.
As part of Perth's role as the capital of Western Australia, the state's Parliament and Supreme Court are located within the city, as is Government House, the residence of the Governor of Western Australia.
Industrial estates such as Kwinana, Welshpool and Kewdale were post-war additions contributing to the growth of manufacturing south of the river.
Perth can also be defined by its wider extent of Greater Perth.
In 1933, Western Australia voted in a referendum to leave the Australian Federation, with a majority of two to one in favour of secession.
Summer is not completely devoid of rain and humidity, with sporadic rainfall in the form of short-lived thunderstorms, weak cold fronts and on occasions decaying tropical cyclones from Western Australia's north-west, which can bring significant rainfall.
The Bahá'í community in Perth numbers around 1,500.
In Fremantle the traditional Italian blessing of the fleet festival is held every year at the start of the fishing season.
The Western Australian Athletics Stadium opened in 2009.
Avon Valley, John Forrest and Yanchep national parks are areas of protected bushland at the northern and eastern edges of the metropolitan area.
The Fremantle Outer Harbour at Cockburn Sound  is one of Australia’s major bulk cargo ports.
The wetlands on the Swan Coastal Plain were particularly important to them, both spiritually, featuring in local mythology, and as a source of food.
Four exist in the Perth metropolitan area: Central Institute of Technology (formerly Central TAFE); West Coast Institute of Training (northern suburbs); Polytechnic West (eastern and south-eastern suburbs; formerly Swan TAFE); and Challenger Institute of Technology (Fremantle/Peel).
A number of annual events are held in Perth.
Summers are generally hot and dry, lasting from December to late March, with February generally being the hottest month of the year.
The first areas settled were on the Swan River, with the city's central business district and port (Fremantle) both located on its shores.
In addition to the Perth Cultural Centre, there are a number of museums across the city.
The 24-hour Perth Telethon claims to be "the most successful fundraising event per capita in the world" and raised more than A$20&nbsp;million in 2013, with a combined total of over A$153&nbsp;million since 1968.
The Magistrates' Court has six metropolitan locations.
