At the same time in the north, Guayaquil was occupied by rebel forces under the command of Gregorio Escobedo.
Reforms have permitted sustained economic growth since 1993, except for a slump after the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
However, widespread allegations of fraud prompted the Peruvian military to depose Prado and install a military junta, led by Ricardo Pérez Godoy.
This mixture of cultural traditions has resulted in a wide diversity of expressions in fields such as art, cuisine, literature, and music.
In 1968, the Armed Forces, led by General Juan Velasco Alvarado, staged a coup against Belaúnde.
Primary and secondary education are compulsory and free in public schools.
Because of its varied geography and climate, Peru has a high biodiversity with 21,462 species of plants and animals reported as of 2003, 5,855 of them endemic.
A caretaker government presided over by Valentín Paniagua took on the responsibility of conducting new presidential and congressional elections.
The unemployment rate has fallen steadily in recent years, and  stands at 3.6%.
Almost five years of war ended with the loss of the department of Tarapacá and the provinces of Tacna and Arica, in the Atacama region.
They built churches in every city and replaced some of the Inca temples with churches, such as the Coricancha in the city of Cusco.
In 1975, General Francisco Morales Bermúdez forcefully replaced Velasco, paralyzed reforms, and oversaw the reestablishment of democracy.
In December 1532, a party of ''conquistadors'' led by Francisco Pizarro defeated and captured the Inca Emperor Atahualpa  in the Battle of Cajamarca.
Once in Chile he joined forces with Chilean army General Bernardo O’Higgins and liberated the country in the battles of Chacabuco and Maipú in 1818.
The Incas of Cusco originally represented one of the small and relatively minor ethnic groups, the Quechuas.
Odría was succeeded by Manuel Prado Ugarteche.
Almost 60 percent of the country's area is located within this region.
During the early years of the Republic, endemic struggles for power between military leaders caused political instability.
It is also a participant in international organizations such as the Organization of American States and the United Nations.
The indigenous populations east of the Andes speak various languages and dialects.
On 5 June 2011, Ollanta Humala was elected President.
Because Peru was the stronghold of the Spanish government in South America, San Martin’s strategy to liberate Peru was to use diplomacy.
Many local forms of worship persisted in the empire, most of them concerning local sacred ''Huacas'', but the Inca leadership encouraged the worship of Inti, the sun god and imposed its sovereignty above other cults such as that of Pachamama.
Their capital was at Chan Chan  outside of modern-day Trujillo.
The Peruvian government is directly elected, and voting is compulsory for all citizens aged 18 to 70.
The Peruvian Government tried to mediate the dispute by sending a diplomatic team to negotiate with the Chilean government, but the committee concluded that war was inevitable.
The liberation movement started in Argentina where autonomous juntas were created as a result of the loss of authority of the Spanish government over its colonies.
It is a developing country with a high Human Development Index score and a poverty level around 25.8 percent.
In addition, Peru is a standing member of APEC and the World Trade Organization, and is an active participant in negotiations toward a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).
Peruvian music has Andean, Spanish, and African roots.
Internal struggles after the war were followed by a period of stability under the Civilista Party, which lasted until the onset of the authoritarian regime of Augusto B. Leguía.
In the highlands, both the Tiahuanaco culture, near Lake Titicaca in both Peru and Bolivia, and the Wari culture, near the present-day city of Ayacucho, developed large urban settlements and wide-ranging state systems between 500 and 1000 AD.
The oldest known complex society in Peru, the Norte Chico civilization, flourished along the coast of the Pacific Ocean between 3,000 and 1,800 BC.
Inca expansion was slow until about the middle of the fifteenth century, when the pace of conquest began to accelerate, particularly under the rule of the great emperor Pachacuti.
The ''sierra'' (highlands) is the region of the Andes; it includes the ''Altiplano'' plateau as well as the highest peak of the country, the  Huascarán.
Peruvian territory was home to ancient cultures spanning from the Norte Chico civilization in Caral, one of the oldest in the world, to the Inca Empire, the largest state in Pre-Columbian America.
The majority of towns, cities and villages have their own official church or cathedral and patron saint.
However, the Spanish did not resist the Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian.
Under the current constitution, the President is the head of state and government; he or she is elected for five years and cannot serve consecutive terms.
Fujimori cracked down on the insurgents and was successful in largely quelling them by the late 1990s, but the fight was marred by atrocities committed by both the Peruvian security forces and the insurgents: the Barrios Altos massacre and La Cantuta massacre by Government paramilitary groups, and the bombings of Tarata and Frecuencia Latina by Sendero Luminoso.
After the War of the Pacific, an extraordinary effort of rebuilding began.
From 1438 to 1533, the Incas used a variety of methods, from conquest to peaceful assimilation, to incorporate a large portion of western South America, centered on the Andean mountain ranges, from southern Colombia to Chile, between the Pacific Ocean in the west and the Amazon rainforest in the east.
A final peace treaty in 1929, signed between Peru and Chile called the Treaty of Lima, returned Tacna to Peru.
Concerned about the economy, the increasing terrorist threat from Sendero Luminoso and MRTA, and allegations of official corruption, Alberto Fujimori assumed presidency in 1990.
'''Peru''' (;  ;  ;  ), officially the '''Republic of Peru''' (), is a country in western South America.
The per capita annual income of Peruvians fell to $720 (below the level of 1960) and Peru's GDP dropped 20% at which national reserves were a negative $900 million.
According to 2010 data, 31.3% of its total population is poor, including 9.8% that lives in extreme poverty.
The earliest evidences of human presence in Peruvian territory have been dated to approximately 9,000 BC.
In the 2007 census, 81.3% of the population over 12 years old described themselves as Catholic, 12.5% as Evangelical Protestant, 3.3% as other Protestant, Judaism, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), and Jehovah's Witness, and 2.9% as non-religious.
Godoy ran a short transitional government and held new elections in 1963, which were won by Fernando Belaúnde Terry who assumed presidency until 1968.
The third region is the ''selva'' (jungle), a wide expanse of flat terrain covered by the Amazon rainforest that extends east.
*Insufficient service coverage;
The need to ease communication and trade with Spain led to the split of the viceroyalty and the creation of new viceroyalties of New Granada and Rio de la Plata at the expense of the territories that formed the viceroyalty of Peru; this reduced the power, prominence and importance of Lima as the viceroyal capital and shifted the lucrative Andean trade to Buenos Aires and Bogotá, while the fall of the mining and textile production accelerated the progressive decay of the Viceroyalty of Peru.
The name of the country may be derived from ''Birú'', the name of a local ruler who lived near the Bay of San Miguel, Panama, in the early 16th century.
Immediately on 26 October they took control of the town of Pisco.
Peru has gone through periods of political unrest and internal conflict as well as periods of stability and economic upswing.
Even though many of the Inca traditions were lost or diluted, new customs, traditions and knowledge were added, creating a rich mixed Peruvian culture.
These movements led to the formation of the majority of modern-day countries of South America in the territories that at one point or another had constituted the Viceroyalty of Peru.
The Inca referred to their empire as ''Tawantinsuyu'' which can be translated as "The Four Regions" or "The Four United Provinces."
In the mountain region, rain is frequent in summer, and temperature and humidity diminish with altitude up to the frozen peaks of the Andes.
Peru's distinct geographical regions are mirrored in a language divide between the coast where Spanish is more predominant over the Amerindian languages, and the more diverse traditional Andean cultures of the mountains and highlands.
After independence, Costumbrism and Romanticism became the most common literary genres, as exemplified in the works of Ricardo Palma.
Congress is unicameral with 130 members elected for five-year terms.
After the decline of the Chavin culture around the beginning of the Christian millennium, a series of localized and specialized cultures rose and fell, both on the coast and in the highlands, during the next thousand years.
After fighting for the independence of the Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata, José de San Martín created the Army of the Andes and crossed the Andes in 21 days, a great accomplishment in military history.
* Tariffs that do not cover the investment and operational costs, as well as the maintenance of services;
After independence, there has been gradual immigration from England, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain.
The coastal region has moderate temperatures, low precipitations, and high humidity, except for its warmer, wetter northern reaches.
At the same time, however, civil rights were severely restricted and corruption was rampant throughout his régime.
In the 15th century, the Incas emerged as a powerful state which, in the span of a century, formed the largest empire in pre-Columbian America with their capital in Cusco.
In a military coup on 29 October 1948, Gen. Manuel A. Odria became president.
Peru engaged in a brief successful conflict with Ecuador in the Paquisha War as a result of territorial dispute between the two countries.
After the country experienced chronic inflation, the Peruvian currency, the sol, was replaced by the ''Inti'' in mid-1985, which itself was replaced by the nuevo sol in July 1991, at which time the new sol had a cumulative value of one billion old soles.
He created the first Peruvian flag.
African contributions to Peruvian music include its rhythms and the ''cajón'', a percussion instrument.
In 1879, Peru entered the War of the Pacific which lasted until 1884.
Faced with opposition to his reform efforts, Fujimori dissolved Congress in the ''auto-golpe'' ("self-coup") of 5 April 1992.
Inti Raymi, which is an old Inca festival, is still celebrated.
An alternative history is provided by the contemporary writer Inca Garcilasco de la Vega, son of an Inca princess and a conquistador.
Momentarily pleasing the oligarchy and all others on the right, but followed a populist course that won him great favor with the poor and lower classes.
In spite of human rights progress since the time of insurgency, many problems are still visible and show the continued marginalization of those who suffered through the violence of the Peruvian conflict.
Most Peruvian rivers originate in the peaks of the Andes and drain into one of three basins.
Its demographic growth rate declined from 2.6% to 1.6% between 1950 and 2000; population is expected to reach approximately 42 million in 2050. , 75.9% lived in urban areas and 24.1% in rural areas.
The economy of Peru is classified as ''upper middle income'' by the World Bank and is the 39th largest in the world.
After the battle of Ayacucho, three years after proclamation,  Peru ensured its independence.
Peruvian artistic traditions date back to the elaborate pottery, textiles, jewelry, and sculpture of Pre-Inca cultures.
Congress is currently composed of Gana Perú (47 seats), Fuerza 2011 (37 seats), Alianza  (20 seats), Alianza por el Gran Cambio (12 seats), Solidaridad Nacional (8 seats) and Concertación  (6 seats).
Historically, the country's economic performance has been tied to exports, which provide hard currency to finance imports and external debt payments.
The Peruvian armed forces report through the Ministry of Defense, while the National Police of Peru reports through the Ministry of Interior.
In November 2000, Fujimori resigned from office and went into a self-imposed exile, avoiding prosecution for human rights violations and corruption charges by the new Peruvian authorities.
The Mochica, who reached their apogee in the first millennium AD, were renowned for their irrigation system which fertilized their arid terrain, their sophisticated ceramic pottery, their lofty buildings, and clever metalwork.
After years of preliminary exploration and military conflicts, it was the first step in a long campaign that took decades of fighting but ended in Spanish victory and colonization of the region known as the Viceroyalty of Peru with its capital at Lima, which became known as "The City of Kings".
Under Spanish rule, the country adopted the denomination Viceroyalty of Peru, which became Republic of Peru after independence.
Bolivia invoked its alliance with Peru against Chile.
Peru is a Presidential representative democratic republic with a multi-party system.
The economic crises, the loss of power of Spain in Europe, the war of independence in North America and native uprisings all contributed to a favorable climate to the development of emancipating ideas among the ''criollo'' population in South America.
Subsequently, the country has undergone changes in government from oligarchic to democratic systems.
Catholic festivities like Corpus Christi, holy week and Christmas sometimes blend with Amerindian traditions.
Originally Chile committed to a referendum for the cities of Arica and Tacna to be held years later, in order to self determine their national affiliation.
With the conquest started the spread of Christianity in South America; most people were forcefully converted to Catholicism, taking only a generation to convert the population.
Chinese and Japanese arrived in the 1850s as a replacement for slave workers and have since become a major influence in Peruvian society.
By the 18th century, declining silver production and economic diversification greatly diminished royal income.
Fujimori implemented drastic measures that caused inflation to drop from 7,650% in 1990 to 139% in 1991.
Eventually, the viceroyalty would dissolve, as with much of the Spanish empire, when challenged by national independence movements at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
A thriving economy allowed him to indulge in expensive but crowd-pleasing social policies.
Services account for 53% of Peruvian gross domestic product, followed by manufacturing (22.3%), extractive industries (15%), and taxes (9.7%).
Major cities include the Lima Metropolitan Area (home to over 9.8 million people), Arequipa, Trujillo, Chiclayo, Piura, Iquitos, Cusco, Chimbote, and Huancayo; all reported more than 250,000 inhabitants in the 2007 census.
Spanish is used by the government and is the mainstream language of the country, which is used by the media and in educational systems and commerce.
According to a 2015 genealogical DNA testing, the average Peruvian is estimated to be 79.1% Native American, 19.8% European, and 1.1% Sub-Saharan African overall.
Javier Pérez de Cuéllar served as UN Secretary General from 1981 to 1991.
Peruvian national identity was forged during this period, as Bolivarian projects for a Latin American Confederation floundered and a union with Bolivia proved ephemeral.
During this period, most art focused on religious subjects; the numerous churches of the era and the paintings of the Cuzco School are representative.
Peruvian cuisine blends Amerindian and Spanish food with strong influences from Chinese, African, Arab, Italian, and Japanese cooking.
The Viceroy of Peru, Joaquin de la Pazuela named Jose de la Serna commander-in-chief of the loyalist army to protect Lima from the threatened invasion of San Martin.
The newly founded Peruvian Congress named Bolivar dictator of Peru giving him the power to organize the military.
Amerindian festivities which were celebrated since pre-Columbian times are also widespread throughout the nation.
The conquest of the Inca Empire led to spin-off campaigns throughout the viceroyalty as well as expeditions towards the Amazon Basin as in the case of Spanish efforts to quell Amerindian resistance.
The expansion of a colonial administrative apparatus and bureaucracy paralleled the economic reorganization.
Pachacuti also promulgated a comprehensive code of laws to govern his far-flung empire, while consolidating his absolute temporal and spiritual authority as the God of the Sun who ruled from a magnificently rebuilt Cusco.
Amerindian religious traditions also play a major role in the beliefs of Peruvians.
The Great Depression caused the downfall of Leguía, renewed political turmoil, and the emergence of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA).
Peruvian economic policy has varied widely over the past decades.
The judiciary is nominally independent, though political intervention into judicial matters has been common throughout history and arguably continues today.
Although they have provided substantial revenue, self-sustained growth and a more egalitarian distribution of income have proven elusive.
Peru is an active member of several regional blocs and one of the founders of the Andean Community of Nations.
Peru's longest rivers are the Ucayali, the Marañón, the Putumayo, the Yavarí, the Huallaga, the Urubamba, the Mantaro, and the Amazon.
Spaniards introduced new instruments, such as the guitar and the harp, which led to the development of crossbred instruments like the ''charango''.
The official language of the empire was Quechua, although hundreds of local languages and dialects were spoken.
Trade is expected to increase further after the implementation of a free trade agreement with the United States signed on 12 April 2006.
The main spoken language is Spanish, although a significant number of Peruvians speak Quechua or other native languages.
Viceroy Francisco de Toledo reorganized the country in the 1570s with gold and silver mining as its main economic activity and Amerindian forced labor as its primary workforce.
De la Serna abandoned the city and on 12 July 1821 San Martin occupied Lima and declared Peruvian independence on 28 July 1821.
César Vallejo wrote modernist and often politically engaged verse.
In order to avoid a military confrontation San Martin met the newly appointed viceroy, Jose de la Serna, and proposed to create a constitutional monarchy, a proposal that was turned down.
Gradually, as early as the thirteenth century, they began to expand and incorporate their neighbors.
The Peruvian Armed Forces are the military services of Peru, comprising independent Army, Navy and Air Force components.
On 7 September 1820, a fleet of eight warships arrived in the port of Paracas under the command of general Jose de San Martin and Thomas Cochrane, who was serving in the Chilean Navy.
In the Peruvian Amazon, numerous indigenous languages are spoken, including Asháninka, Bora, and Aguaruna.
With the discovery of the great silver and gold lodes at Potosí (present-day Bolivia) and Huancavelica, the viceroyalty flourished as an important provider of mineral resources.
It borders Ecuador and Colombia to the north, Brazil to the east, Bolivia to the southeast, Chile to the south, and the Pacific Ocean to the west.
The 1968–1975 government of Juan Velasco Alvarado introduced radical reforms, which included agrarian reform, the expropriation of foreign companies, the introduction of an economic planning system, and the creation of a large state-owned sector.
On the coast, these included the civilizations of the Paracas, Nazca, Wari, and the more outstanding Chimu and Mochica.
Conscription was abolished in 1999 and replaced by voluntary military service.
Chile declared war on 5 April 1879.
He then revised the constitution; called new congressional elections; and implemented substantial economic reform, including privatization of numerous state-owned companies, creation of an investment-friendly climate, and sound management of the economy.
Peru's main exports are copper, gold, zinc, textiles, and fish meal; its major trade partners are the United States, China, Brazil, and Chile.
Those incidents subsequently came to symbolize the human rights violations committed in the last years of violence.
The Chavín culture that developed from 1500 to 300 BC was probably more of a religious than a political phenomenon, with their religious centre in Chavin de Huantar.
Jose de San Martin was declared Protector of Peru.
Despite these results, most reforms were not reversed until the 1990s, when the liberalizing government of Alberto Fujimori ended price controls, protectionism, restrictions on foreign direct investment, and most state ownership of companies.
Between 1932 and 1933, Peru was engulfed in a year-long war with Colombia over a territorial dispute involving the Amazonas department and its capital Leticia.
Simon Bolivar launched his campaign from the north liberating the Viceroyalty of New Granada in the Battles of Carabobo in 1821 and Pichincha a year later.
Peru is an  extremely biodiverse country with habitats ranging from the arid plains of the Pacific coastal region in the west to the peaks of the Andes mountains vertically extending from the north to the southeast of the country to the tropical Amazon Basin rainforest in the east with the Amazon river.
Peruvian culture is primarily rooted in Amerindian and Spanish traditions, though it has also been influenced by various Asian, African, and other European ethnic groups.
Thus, when Francisco Pizarro explored the regions farther south, they came to be designated ''Birú'' or ''Perú''.
It is bordered in the north by Ecuador and Colombia, in the east by Brazil, in the southeast by Bolivia, in the south by Chile, and in the west by the Pacific Ocean.
Ideas of political autonomy later spread throughout Spanish America and Peru gained its independence, which was formally proclaimed in 1821.
The Treaty of Tordesillas was rendered meaningless between 1580 and 1640 while Spain controlled Portugal.
The Chimu were the great city builders of pre-Inca civilization; as loose confederation of cities scattered along the coast of northern Peru and southern Ecuador, the Chimu flourished from about 1150 to 1450.
* Deficient sustainability of built systems;
When his possessions were visited by Spanish explorers in 1522, they were the southernmost part of the New World yet known to Europeans.
In this endeavor, the church came to play an important role in the acculturation of the natives, drawing them into the cultural orbit of the Spanish settlers.
Amerindians who live in the Andean highlands speak Quechua and Aymara and are ethnically distinct from the diverse indigenous groups who live on the eastern side of the Andes and in the tropical lowlands adjacent to the Amazon basin.
These measures failed to achieve their objectives of income redistribution and the end of economic dependence on developed nations.
However, by the 1870s, these resources had been depleted, the country was heavily indebted, and political in-fighting was again on the rise.
Peru covers  of western South America.
There are 15 uncontacted Amerindian tribes in Peru.
Recent economic growth has been fueled by macroeconomic stability, improved terms of trade, and rising investment and consumption.
In May 2008, Peru became a member of the Union of South American Nations.
Two outstanding military leaders throughout the war were Francisco Bolognesi and Miguel Grau.
With the help of Antonio José de Sucre they defeated the larger Spanish army in the Battle of Junín on 6 August 1824 and the decisive Battle of Ayacucho on 9 December of the same year, consolidating the independence of Peru and Alto Peru.
Recently, Peru disputed its maritime limits with Chile in the Pacific Ocean.
Peruvian Catholicism follows the syncretism found in many Latin American countries, in which religious native rituals have been integrated with Christian celebrations.
He sent representatives to Lima urging the Viceroy that Peru be granted independence, however all negotiations proved unsuccessful.
Spaniards and Africans arrived in large numbers under colonial rule, mixing widely with each other and with indigenous peoples.
Literacy was estimated at 92.9% in 2007; this rate is lower in rural areas (80.3%) than in urban areas (96.3%).
The early 20th century's ''Indigenismo'' movement was led by such writers as Ciro Alegría and José María Arguedas.
Peru is, , one of the world's fastest-growing economies owing to the economic boom experienced during the 2000s.
* Institutional and financial weakness; and,
The Peruvian Amazon is characterized by heavy rainfall and high temperatures, except for its southernmost part, which has cold winters and seasonal rainfall.
San Martin settled in Huacho on 12 November, where he established his headquarters while Cochrane sailed north blockading the port of Callao in Lima.
The conquest and colony brought a mix of cultures and ethnicities that did not exist before the Spanish conquered the Peruvian territory.
The Spanish Empire conquered the region in the 16th century and established a Viceroyalty with its capital in Lima, which included most of its South American colonies.
Common dishes include ''anticuchos'', ''ceviche'', and ''pachamanca''.
This internal power struggle contributed to the success of the liberating army.
After achieving independence, the country remained in recession and kept a low military profile until an economic rise based on the extraction of raw and maritime materials struck the country, which ended shortly before the war of the Pacific.
It has a high Human Development Index of .752 based on 2011 data.
Its main economic activities include mining, manufacturing, agriculture and fishing.
Peruvian literature is rooted in the oral traditions of pre-Columbian civilizations.
Later, in 1941, Peru  became involved in the Ecuadorian-Peruvian War, after which the Rio Protocol sought to formalize the boundary between those two countries.
The Andes mountains run parallel to the Pacific Ocean; they define the three regions traditionally used to describe the country geographically.
Rivers that drain into Lake Titicaca are generally short and have a large flow.
Alvarado's regime undertook radical reforms aimed at fostering development, but failed to gain widespread support.
The Spanish Crown gave the name legal status with the 1529 ''Capitulación de Toledo'', which designated the newly encountered Inca Empire as the province of Peru.
Under his rule and that of his son, Topa Inca Yupanqui, the Incas came to control most of the Andean region, with a population of 9 to 16 million inhabitants under their rule.
In response, the Crown enacted the Bourbon Reforms, a series of edicts that increased taxes and partitioned the Viceroyalty.
The Incas considered their King, the Sapa Inca, to be the "child of the sun."
Alto Peru (Bolivia) remained as a Spanish stronghold until the army of Simón Bolívar liberated it three years later.
On 29 January, de la Serna organized a coup against de la Pazuela which was recognized by Spain and he was named Viceroy of Peru.
The National Police of Peru is often classified as a part of the armed forces.
