This two-CD spoken-word work was conceived of and produced by noted percussionist  Jeff Haynes and presents Pete Seeger telling the stories of his life against a background of music performed by more than 40 musicians of varied genres.
''Back Where I Come From'' was unique in having a racially integrated cast, which made news when it performed in March 1941 at a command performance at the White House organized by Eleanor Roosevelt called "An Evening of Songs for American Soldiers," before an audience that included the Secretaries of War, Treasury, and the Navy, among other notables.
The two searched out a local panyard director Isaiah, and proceeded to film the construction, tuning and playing of the then new, national instrument of Trinidad-Tobago.
Pete's father, the Harvard-trained composer and musicologist Charles Louis Seeger, Jr., was born in Mexico City, Mexico, to American parents.
Seeger's refusal to answer questions that violated his fundamental Constitutional rights led to a March 26, 1957, indictment for contempt of Congress; for some years, he had to keep the federal government apprised of where he was going any time he left the Southern District of New York.
The festival took place in a covered baseball field.
Among his guests were Johnny Cash, June Carter, Reverend Gary Davis, Mississippi John Hurt, Doc Watson, the Stanley Brothers, Elizabeth Cotten, Patrick Sky, Buffy Sainte-Marie, Tom Paxton, Judy Collins, Donovan, Richard Fariña and Mimi Fariña, Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee, Mamou Cajun Band, Bernice Johnson Reagon, The Beers Family, Roscoe Holcomb, Malvina Reynolds, and Shawn Phillips.
Who should my granddaughter Moraya apologize to?
Deeply interested in folk music, Ruth had contributed musical arrangements to Carl Sandburg's extremely influential folk song anthology the ''American Songbag'' (1927) and later created significant original settings for eight of Sandburg's poems.
Other Weaver hits included "Dusty Old Dust" ("So Long It's Been Good to Know You" by Woody Guthrie), "Kisses Sweeter Than Wine" (by Hays, Seeger, and Lead Belly) and the South African Zulu song by Solomon Linda, "Wimoweh" (about Shaka), among others.
/ He ruled with an iron hand.
"If I Had a Hammer" was a hit for Peter, Paul & Mary (1962) and Trini Lopez (1963), while the Byrds had a number one hit with "Turn!
Seeger also was closely associated with the Civil Rights Movement and in 1963 helped organize a landmark Carnegie Hall concert, featuring the youthful Freedom Singers, as a benefit for the Highlander Folk School in Tennessee.
Because I think God is everything.
Kitama Jackson is a documentary filmmaker who was associate producer of the PBS documentary ''Pete Seeger: The Power of Song''.
They did benefits for strikers at which they sang songs such as 'Talking Union', about the struggles for unionisation of industrial workers such as miners and auto mobile workers.
But I was at fault.
Inspired by Woody Guthrie, whose guitar was labeled "This machine kills fascists",photo Seeger's banjo was emblazoned with the motto "This Machine Surrounds Hate and Forces It to Surrender."
I used to say I was an atheist.
One summer has convinced us that a minimum of organized effort on the part of city organizations—unions, consumers' bodies, the American Labor Party and similar groups—can not only reach the farmers but weld them into a pretty solid front with city folks that will be one of the best guarantees for progress.
The song was accompanied by a letter to Radosh, in which Seeger stated, "I think you're right, I should have asked to see the gulags when I was in U.S.S.R in 1965."
To describe the new crop of politically committed folk singers, he coined the phrase "Woody's children", alluding to his associate and traveling companion, Woody Guthrie, who by this time had become a legendary figure.
This event and Martin Luther King's March on Washington in August of that year brought the Civil Rights anthem "We Shall Overcome" to wide audiences where he sang it on the 50-mile walk from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. along with 1,000 other marchers.
Seeger's benefit concerts helped raise funds for groups so they could continue to educate and spread environmental awareness.
He dreamed of a career in journalism and took courses in art, as well.
Peggy Seeger, a well-known performer in her own right, married British folk singer and activist Ewan MacColl.
/ He had a chance to make / A brand new start for the human race.
Pete never saw him.
Copies of ''Songs for John Doe'' were removed from sale, and the remaining inventory destroyed, though a few copies may exist in the hands of private collectors.
The lyrics could be interpreted as an allegory of Johnson as the "big fool" and the Vietnam War as the foreseeable danger.
Response and reaction to Seeger's death quickly poured in.
They could sing, fiddle, pick the banjos, and guitars with traditional grace and style found nowhere else but deep in the mountains.
Upon their return, Constance taught violin and Charles taught composition at the New York Institute of Musical Art (later Juilliard), whose president, family friend Frank Damrosch, was Constance's adoptive "uncle".
Two days earlier there had been a scuffle and brief exchange of blows between Grossman and Alan Lomax; and the Board, in an emergency session, had voted to ban Grossman from the grounds, but had backed off when George Wein pointed out that Grossman also managed highly popular draws Odetta and Peter, Paul, and Mary.
In his autobiography ''Where Have All the Flowers Gone'' (1993, 1997, reissued in 2009), Seeger wrote, "Should I apologize for all this?
The teenage Seeger also sometimes accompanied his parents to regular Saturday evening gatherings at the Greenwich Village loft of painter and art teacher Thomas Hart Benton and his wife Rita.
In 1935, Pete attended Camp Rising Sun, an international leadership camp held every summer in upstate New York that influenced his life's work.
He also recorded as many as five albums a year for Moe Asch's Folkways Records label.
In 1982, Seeger performed at a benefit concert for Poland's Solidarity resistance movement.
Folk clubs sprung up all over the nation, folk performers were accepted in established venues, and Australian performers singing Australian folk songs – many of their own composing – emerged in concerts and festivals, on television, and on recordings, and overseas performers were encouraged to tour Australia.
They felt the need of this more strongly than ever before, and the support of the CIO in their milk strike has given them a new understanding and a new respect for the power that lies in solidarity.
/ Keep your mouth shut or you will die fast.
/ I know it ain't perfect, but it will be someday, / Just give us a little time.
Seeger died at New York-Presbyterian Hospital on January 27, 2014, at the age of 94.
Seeger was born on May 3, 1919 at the French Hospital, Midtown Manhattan.
How could Hitler have been stopped?
There are multiple versions of what went on, some fanciful.
On September 19, 2009, Seeger made his first appearance at the 52nd Monterey Jazz Festival, which was particularly notable because the festival does not normally feature folk artists.
I said "Damn it, if I had an axe, I'd cut the cable right now."
Consistent with Seeger's long-time advocacy for environmental concerns, the proceeds from the event benefited the Hudson River Sloop Clearwater, a non-profit organization founded by Seeger in 1966, to defend and restore the Hudson River.
Charles and Constance divorced when Pete was seven, and in 1932 Charles married his composition student and assistant, Ruth Crawford, now considered by many to be one of the most important modernist composers of the 20th century.
The Smothers Brothers ended Seeger's national blacklisting by broadcasting him singing "Waist Deep in the Big Muddy" on their CBS variety show on February 25, 1968, after his similar performance in September 1967 was censored by CBS.
The Weavers on occasion performed in tuxedos (unlike the Almanacs, who had dressed informally) and their managers refused to let them perform at political venues.
Seeger toured Australia in 1963.
In support of this view, he quoted lines from the Almanac Singers' May 1941 ''Songs for John Doe'', contrasting them darkly with lines supporting the war from ''Dear Mr. President'', issued in 1942, after the United States and the Soviet Union had entered the war.
Charles established the first musicology curriculum in the U.S. at the University of California in 1913, helped found the American Musicological Society, and was a key founder of the academic discipline of ethnomusicology.
He dropped out of college in 1938.
"In the farmers' homes they talked about politics and the farmers’ problems, about antisemitism and Unionism, about war and peace and social security—"and always," the puppeteers report, "the farmers wanted to know what can be done to create a stronger unity between themselves and city workers.
(co-written with Joe Hickerson), "Turn!
Beginning in 1936, Charles held various administrative positions in the federal government's Farm Resettlement program, the WPA's Federal Music Project (1938–1940), and the wartime Pan American Union.
In 1960, this collection was re-issued by Moe Asch as one side of a Folkways LP called ''Songs of the Lincoln and International Brigades''.
On September 21, 2013, Pete Seeger performed at Farm Aid at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, New York.
In 1949, Seeger worked as the vocal instructor for the progressive City and Country School in Greenwich Village, New York.
Pete was deeply affected and, after learning basic strokes from Lunsford, spent much of the next four years trying to master the five-string banjo.
As Lunsford's daughter would later recall, those country people "held the riches that Dad had discovered.
In 1977 Seeger appeared at a fundraiser in Homestead, Pennsylvania.
"They fed us too well," the girls reported.
As a self-described "split tenor" (between an alto and a tenor), Pete Seeger was a founding member of two highly influential folk groups: The Almanac Singers and the Weavers.
He was convicted in a jury trial of contempt of Congress in March 1961, and sentenced to ten 1-year terms in jail (to be served simultaneously), but in May 1962 an appeals court ruled the indictment to be flawed and overturned his conviction.
He hollered back, "This is the way they want it."
On October 21, 2011, at age 92, Pete Seeger was part of a solidarity march with Occupy Wall Street to Columbus Circle in New York City.
/ What is important is what we got to do, / We got to lick Mr. Hitler, and until we do, / Other things can wait.//
Being a supporter of progressive labor unions, Seeger had supported Ed Sadlowski in his bid for the presidency of the United Steelworkers of America.
In 1948, Seeger wrote the first version of his now-classic ''How to Play the Five-String Banjo'', a book that many banjo players credit with starting them off on the instrument.
From the late 1950s on, Seeger also accompanied himself on the 12-string guitar, an instrument of Mexican origin that had been associated with Lead Belly, who had styled himself "the King of the 12-String Guitar".
The Weavers' string of major hits began with "On Top of Old Smoky" and an arrangement of Lead Belly's signature waltz, "Goodnight, Irene", which topped the charts for 13 weeks in 1950 and was covered by many other pop singers.
This anti-war/anti-draft tone reflected the Communist Party line after the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, which maintained the war was "phony" and a mere pretext for big American corporations to get Hitler to attack Soviet Russia.
He went on to invent the ''Long Neck'' or ''Seeger'' banjo.
Seeger enrolled at Harvard College on a partial scholarship, but as he became increasingly involved with politics and folk music, his grades suffered and he lost his scholarship.
In the late 1950s, the Kingston Trio was formed in direct imitation of (and homage to) the Weavers, covering much of the latter's repertoire, though with a more buttoned-down, uncontroversial, and mainstream collegiate persona.
After World War II, he taught ethnomusicology at the University of California and Yale University.
A fixture on nationwide radio in the 1940s, he also had a string of hit records during the early 1950s as a member of the Weavers, most notably their recording of Lead Belly's "Goodnight, Irene", which topped the charts for 13 weeks in 1950.
On August 18, 1955, Seeger was subpoenaed to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).
Seeger's voice carried over the crowd, interspersing phrases like, "Are you listening, Nixon?"
", adapted from the Book of Ecclesiastes, and "The Bells of Rhymney" by the Welsh poet Idris Davies (1957), gained wide currency.
At thirteen, Seeger enrolled in the Avon Old Farms School in Avon, Connecticut from which he graduated in 1936.
Beyond Chandler's lyrics, Seeger said that "Mrs. Jay's little son Alby" had "beans in his ears," which, as the lyrics imply, ensures that a person does not hear what is said to them.
Almost 50 years later, in February 2009, the San Diego School District officially extended an apology to Seeger for the actions of their predecessors.
They briefly returned to the stage, however, at a sold-out reunion at Carnegie Hall in 1955 and in a subsequent reunion tour, which produced a hit version of Merle Travis's "Sixteen Tons" as well as LPs of their concert performances.
Pete's eldest brother, Charles Seeger III, was a radio astronomer, and his next older brother, John Seeger, taught in the 1950s at the Dalton School in Manhattan and was the principal from 1960 to 1976 at Fieldston Lower School in the Bronx.
The Almanac Singers' ''Talking Union'' album, on the other hand, was reissued as an LP by Folkways (FH 5285A) in 1955 and is still available.
He and Toshi purchased their land in 1949 and lived there first in a trailer, then in a log cabin they built themselves.
Seeger's critics, however, continued to bring up the Almanacs' repudiated ''Songs for John Doe''.
This pollution caused a range of harmful effects to wildlife and people who eat fish from the river or drink the water.
Though nominally members of the Popular Front, which was allied with Roosevelt and more moderate liberals, the YCL's members still smarted from Roosevelt and Churchill's arms embargo to Loyalist Spain (which Roosevelt later called a mistake), and the alliance frayed in the confusing welter of events.
In the PBS ''American Masters'' episode "Pete Seeger: The Power of Song", Seeger stated it was he who changed the lyric from the traditional "We will overcome" to the more singable "We shall overcome".
On August 9, 2013, one month widowed, Seeger was in New York City for the 400-year commemoration of the Two Row Wampum Treaty between the Iroquois and the Dutch.
They wandered among the crowds who camped out at the edge of the field, hearing music being made there as well.
In the 1960s, he re-emerged on the public scene as a prominent singer of protest music in support of international disarmament, civil rights, counterculture and environmental causes.
An article in the October 2, 1939, ''Daily Worker'' reported on the Puppeteers' six-week tour this way:During the entire trip the group never ate once in a restaurant.
(lyrics adapted from Ecclesiastes), which have been recorded by many artists both in and outside the folk revival movement and are sung throughout the world.
Now, as I think of our great land .
In the late 1980s Seeger also expressed disapproval of violent revolutions, remarking to an interviewer that he was really in favor of incremental change and that "the most lasting revolutions are those that take place over a period of time."
Its personnel included, at various times: Woody Guthrie, Bess Lomax Hawes, Sis Cunningham, Josh White, and Sam Gary.
Folksinger and fellow activist Billy Bragg wrote that: "Pete believed that music could make a difference.
A June 16, 1941, review in ''Time'' magazine, which under its owner, Henry Luce, had become very interventionist, denounced the Almanacs' ''John Doe'', accusing it of scrupulously echoing what it called "the mendacious Moscow tune" that "Franklin Roosevelt is leading an unwilling people into a J. P. Morgan war."
In the documentary film ''Pete Seeger: The Power of Song'' (2007), Seeger states that he resigned from the Weavers when the three other band members agreed to perform a jingle for a cigarette commercial.
Litvinov, the Soviet delegate to the League of Nations in '36, proposed a worldwide quarantine but got no takers.
between the choruses of protesters singing, "All we are saying ... is give peace a chance".
For reminding us where we come from and showing us where we need to go, we will always be grateful to Pete Seeger."
Their politics were informed by the same ideologies of nationalism, populism, and criticism of big business.
Now, Mr. President, / We haven't always agreed in the past, I know, / But that ain't at all important now.
In 1978, Seeger joined American folk, blues, and jazz singer Barbara Dane at a rally in New York for striking coal miners.
/ I got the Big Joe Blues.
During 1966 Seeger and Malvina Reynolds took part in environmental activism.
In 2007, in response to criticism from a historian Ron Radosh, a former Trotskyite who now writes for the conservative ''National Review''—Seeger wrote a song condemning Stalin, "Big Joe Blues": "''I'm singing about old Joe, cruel Joe.
/ I got the Big Joe Blues.''"
Tao is a folk musician in his own right, who sings and plays guitar, banjo, and harmonica with the Mammals.
The following year the Almanacs issued ''Dear Mr. President'', an album in support of Roosevelt and the war effort.
In the documentary film ''The Power of Song'', Seeger mentions that he and his family visited North Vietnam in 1972.
(The ''Little Red Song Book'' had been a favorite of Woody Guthrie's, who was known to carry it around.)
When asked about his religious or spiritual views, Seeger replied: "I feel most spiritual when I’m out in the woods.
/ No, it's just the opposite: I'm fightin' because / I want a better America, and better laws, / And better homes, and jobs, and schools, / And no more Jim Crow, and no more rules like / "You can't ride on this train 'cause you're a Negro," / "You can't live here 'cause you're a Jew,"/ "You can't work here 'cause you're a union man.
"Kumbaya", a Gullah black spiritual dating from slavery days, was also introduced to wide audiences by Pete Seeger and the Weavers (in 1959), becoming a staple of Boy and Girl Scout campfires.
Alone among the many witnesses after the 1950 conviction and imprisonment of the Hollywood Ten for contempt of Congress, Seeger refused to plead the Fifth Amendment (which would have asserted that his testimony might be self incriminating) and instead, as the Hollywood Ten had done, refused to name personal and political associations on the grounds that this would violate his First Amendment rights: "I am not going to answer any questions as to my association, my philosophical or religious beliefs or my political beliefs, or how I voted in any election, or any of these private affairs.
Roosevelt's order came three days after Hitler broke the non-aggression pact and invaded the Soviet Union, at which time the Communist Party quickly directed its members to get behind the draft and forbade participation in strikes for the duration of the war (angering some leftists).
After returning from service, Seeger and others established People's Songs, conceived as a nationwide organization with branches on both coasts and designed to "Create, promote and distribute songs of labor and the American People" With Pete Seeger as its director, People's Songs worked for the 1948 presidential campaign of Roosevelt's former Secretary of Agriculture and Vice President, Henry A. Wallace, who ran as a third-party candidate on the Progressive Party ticket.
A prolific songwriter, his best-known songs include "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?"
He went on to put his thinking in context:
The show was a success but was not picked up by commercial sponsors for nationwide broadcasting because of its integrated cast.
/ I got the Big Joe Blues.
Europeans could apologize for worldwide conquests, Mongolians for Genghis Khan.
According to the New York ''World Telegram'' (February 14, 1942), Carl Friedrich's 1941 article "The Poison in Our System" was printed up as a pamphlet and distributed by the Council for Democracy (an organization that Friedrich and Henry Luce's right-hand man, C. D. Jackson, Vice President of ''Time'' magazine, had founded "...to combat all the nazi, fascist, communist, pacifist..." antiwar groups in the United States).
The march began with Seeger and fellow musicians exiting Symphony Space (95th and Broadway), where they had performed as part of a benefit for Seeger's Clearwater organization.
It was a great song, "Maggie's Farm," and the sound was distorted.
The album ''God Bless the Grass'' was released on January of that year and became the first album in history wholly dedicated to songs about environmental issues.
In 1950, the Almanacs were reconstituted as the Weavers, named after the title of an 1892 play by Gerhart Hauptmann about a workers' strike (which contained the lines, "We'll stand it no more, come what may!").
More alarmist was the reaction of eminent German-born Harvard Professor of Government Carl Joachim Friedrich, an adviser on domestic propaganda to the United States military.
This included such songs as "There's a Valley in Spain called Jarama", and "Viva la Quince Brigada".
The group reprised its act in October in New York City.
President Barack Obama noted that Seeger had been called "America's tuning fork" and that he believed in "the power of song" to bring social change, "Over the years, Pete used his voice and his hammer to strike blows for workers' rights and civil rights; world peace and environmental conservation, and he always invited us to sing along.
He polished his performance skills during a summer stint of touring New York State with The Vagabond Puppeteers (Jerry Oberwager, 22; Mary Wallace, 22; and Harriet Holtzman, 23), a traveling puppet theater "inspired by rural education campaigns of post-revolutionary Mexico".
The activism led to the site being designated as one of the superfund sites.
The march, which many regard as the first manifestation of the Civil Rights Movement, was canceled after President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802 (The Fair Employment Act) of June 25, 1941, barring discrimination in hiring by companies holding federal contracts for defense work.
To those opposed to continuing the Vietnam War, the phrase implied that "Alby Jay", a loose pronunciation of Johnson's nickname "LBJ," did not listen to anti-war protests as he too had "beans in his ears".
Lomax also encouraged Seeger's folk singing vocation, and Seeger was soon appearing as a regular performer on Alan Lomax and Nicholas Ray's weekly Columbia Broadcasting show ''Back Where I Come From'' (1940–41) alongside of Josh White, Burl Ives, Lead Belly, and Woody Guthrie (whom he had first met at Will Geer's Grapes of Wrath benefit concert for migrant workers on March 3, 1940).
On his own, the otherwise bookish and withdrawn boy gravitated to the ukulele, becoming adept at entertaining his classmates with it, while laying the basis for his subsequent remarkable audience rapport.
His biographer David Dunaway considers this the first public manifestation of Seeger's decades-long personal dislike of communism in its Soviet form.
Benton, a lover of Americana, played "Cindy" and "Old Joe Clark" with his students Charlie and Jackson Pollock; friends from the "hillbilly" recording industry; as well as avant-garde composers Carl Ruggles and Henry Cowell.
At that point, the U.S. had not yet entered the war but was energetically re-arming.
The long television blacklist of Seeger began to end in the mid-1960s, when he hosted a regionally broadcast, educational, folk-music television show, ''Rainbow Quest''.
'''Peter''' "'''Pete'''" '''Seeger''' (May 3, 1919&nbsp;– January 27, 2014) was an American folk singer and social activist.
Mike Seeger was a founder of the New Lost City Ramblers, one of whose members, John Cohen, married Pete's half-sister Penny – also a talented singer who died young.
I feel part of nature.
Cuban singer-songwriter Silvio Rodríguez was also invited to appear but his visa was not approved in time by the United States government.
Whenever I'm listening to something I'm listening to God.".
Seeger had been a fervent supporter of the Republican forces in the Spanish Civil War.
Seeger wrote the music and selected the words from poems written by Tibbs.
Seeger has said he believed this line of argument at the time—as did many fellow members of the Young Communist League (YCL).
Seeger's job was to help Lomax sift through commercial "race" and "hillbilly" music and select recordings that best represented American folk music, a project funded by the music division of the Pan American Union (later the Organization of American States), of whose music division his father, Charles Seeger, was head (1938–53).
When baby Pete was eighteen months old they set out with him and his two older brothers in a homemade trailer to bring musical uplift to the working people in the American South.
Civil rights leader A. J. Muste and Black union leaders A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin began planning a huge march on Washington to protest racial discrimination in war industries and to urge desegregation of the armed forces.
Career and money tensions led to quarrels and reconciliations, but when Charles discovered Constance had opened a secret bank account in her own name, they separated, and Charles took custody of their three sons.
African Americans were barred from working in defense plants, a situation that greatly angered both African Americans and white progressives.
The couple remained married until Toshi's death in July 2013.
In 1956, then "Peter" Seeger (see film credits) and his wife, Toshi, traveled to Port of Spain, Trinidad, to seek out information on the steelpan, steel drum or "Ping-Pong" as it was sometimes called.
He was selected to attend Camp Rising Sun, the George E. Jonas Foundation's international summer leadership program.
I think these are very improper questions for any American to be asked, especially under such compulsion as this."
It contained lines such as, "It wouldn't be much thrill to die for Du Pont in Brazil," that were sharply critical of Roosevelt's unprecedented peacetime draft (enacted in September 1940).
The title song, "Dear Mr. President", was a solo by Pete Seeger, and its lines expressed his lifelong credo:
(with Joe Hickerson), "If I Had a Hammer (The Hammer Song)" (with Lee Hays of the Weavers), and "Turn!
Seeger's distinctive custom-made guitars had a triangular soundhole.
To earn money during the blacklist period of the late 1950s and early 1960s, Seeger worked gigs as a music teacher in schools and summer camps, and traveled the college campus circuit.
but when asked in 2001 about how he recalled his "objections" to the electric style, he said:
With its lyrics about a platoon being led into danger by an ignorant captain, the song's anti-war message was obvious- the line "the big fool said to push on" is repeated several times.
In 1960, the San Diego school board told him that he could not play a scheduled concert at a high school unless he signed an oath pledging that the concert would not be used to promote a communist agenda or an overthrow of the government.
Eleanor Roosevelt, a fan of folk music, reportedly found the album "in bad taste," though President Roosevelt, when the album was shown to him, merely observed, correctly as it turned out, that few people would ever hear it.
Bruce Springsteen said of Seeger's death, "I lost a great friend and a great hero last night, Pete Seeger", before performing "We Shall Overcome" while on tour in South Africa.
"Flowers" was a hit recording for the Kingston Trio (1962); Marlene Dietrich, who recorded it in English, German and French (1962); and Johnny Rivers (1965).
Seeger also supported the Jewish Camping Movement.
White people in the U.S.A. ought to apologize for stealing land from Native Americans and enslaving blacks.
Seeger and the Almanacs cut several albums of 78s on Keynote and other labels, ''Songs for John Doe'' (recorded in late February or March and released in May 1941), the ''Talking Union'', and an album each of sea chanteys and pioneer songs.
As the nuclear disarmament movement picked up steam in the late 1950s and early 1960s, Seeger's anti-war songs, such as, "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?"
Seeger has been portrayed as a folk "purist" who was one of the main opponents to Dylan's "going electric".
Although the performance was cut from the September 1967 show, after wide publicity it was broadcast when Seeger appeared again on the Smothers' Brothers show in the following January.
He visited it most recently in 2012.
That fall Seeger took a job in Washington, D.C., assisting Alan Lomax, a friend of his father's, at the Archive of American Folk Song of the Library of Congress.
I can still hear those haunting melodies drift over the ball park."
On an interview he gave that day to Democracy Now!, Seeger sang "I Come and Stand at Every Door" as it was also the 68th anniversary of bombing of Nagasaki.
He came to Surprise Lake Camp in Cold Spring, New York, over the summer many times.
I guess anyone who calls himself a Christian should be prepared to apologize for the Inquisition, the burning of heretics by Protestants, the slaughter of Jews and Muslims by Crusaders.
The Weavers' performing career was abruptly derailed in 1953 at the peak of their popularity when blacklisting prompted radio stations to refuse to play their records and all their bookings were canceled.
Or looking up at the stars.
He was a member of a Unitarian Universalist Church in New York.
The launch of the audiobook was held at the Dia:Beacon on April 11, 2013 to an enthusiastic audience of around two hundred people, and featured many of the musicians from the project (among them Samite, Dar Williams, Dave Eggar and  Richie Stearns of the Horse Flies and Natalie Merchant) performing live under the direction of producer and percussionist  Haynes.
Pete's uncle, Alan Seeger, a noted poet ("I Have a Rendezvous with Death"), had been one of the first American soldiers to be killed in World War I.
Pete Seeger was one of the earliest backers of Bob Dylan and was responsible for urging A&R man John Hammond to produce Dylan's first LP on Columbia, and for inviting him to perform at the Newport Folk Festival, of which Seeger was a board member.
By this time, Seeger was a senior figure in the 1960s folk revival centered in Greenwich Village, as a longtime columnist in ''Sing Out!
On May 3, 2009, at the Clearwater Concert, dozens of musicians gathered in New York at Madison Square Garden to celebrate Seeger's 90th birthday (which was later televised on PBS during the summer), ranging from Dave Matthews, John Mellencamp, Billy Bragg, Bruce Springsteen, Tom Morello, Eric Weissberg, Ani DiFranco and Roger McGuinn to Joan Baez, Richie Havens, Joanne Shenandoah, R. Carlos Nakai, Bill Miller, Joseph Fire Crow, Margo Thunderbird, Tom Paxton, Ramblin' Jack Elliott and Arlo Guthrie.
Seeger's 90th Birthday was also celebrated at The College of Staten Island on May 4.
