The director asked Sellers to play four roles: US President Merkin Muffley, Dr. Strangelove, Group Captain Lionel Mandrake of the RAF and Major T. J.
His tour also included Ceylon and Burma, although the duration of his stay in Asia is unknown, and Sellers may have exaggerated its length.
Kubrick later commented that the idea of having Sellers in so many of the film's key roles was that "everywhere you turn there is some version of Peter Sellers holding the fate of the world in his hands".
'', Charles Feldman again brought together Sellers and Woody Allen for his next project, ''Casino Royale'', which also starred Orson Welles; Sellers signed a $1&nbsp;million contract for the film ($ in  dollars).
Spike Milligan appealed to her on behalf of Sellers's three children, but she refused to increase the amount.
As a result, by 1974 he agreed to accept salaries of £100,000 and 10 per cent of the gross to appear in TV productions and advertisements, well below the £1 million he had once commanded per film.
Sellers portrayed an ex-schoolmaster in a small French town who turns to a life of crime to obtain wealth.
As a result, he made his television debut on 18 March 1948 in ''New To You''.
In his personal life, Sellers struggled with depression and insecurities.
Later in 1957 Sellers portrayed a television star with a talent for disguises in Mario Zampi's offbeat black comedy ''The Naked Truth'', opposite Terry-Thomas, Peggy Mount, Shirley Eaton and Dennis Price.
The film starred David Niven in the principal role, with two other actors—Capucine and Claudia Cardinale—having more prominent roles than Sellers.
Before the release of that film, the Boultings, along with Sellers and Thomas in the cast, started filming ''I'm All Right Jack'', which became the highest grossing film at the British box office in 1960.
The performance was a major landmark in Sellers's career and became his first contact with the Hollywood film industry.
Sellers wrote to the BBC in 1948, and was subsequently auditioned.
Sellers attempted to have De Sica fired, causing tensions on the set.
In March 1948 Sellers gained a six-week run at the Windmill Theatre in London, which predominantly staged revue acts: he provided the comedy turns in between the nude shows on offer.
On the day of the dinner, Sellers took lunch in his hotel suite and shortly afterwards collapsed from a heart attack.
The production of the film was troublesome before filming started, with two directors—Richard Quine and John Avildsen—fired before the script had been completed.
Sellers's only son, Michael, died of a heart attack at 52 during surgery on 24 July 2006, twenty-six years to the day after his father's death.
English filmmakers the Boulting brothers described Sellers as "the greatest comic genius this country has produced since Charles Chaplin."
David Schwimmer is another whose approach was influenced by Sellers: "he could do anything, from Dr Strangelove to Inspector Clouseau.
I won't tell you what I think of you.
He first worked as a drummer and toured around England as a member of the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA).
In 1959 Sellers released his second album, ''Songs For Swinging Sellers'', which—like his first record—reached number three in the UK Albums Chart.
Sellers's performance was universally lauded by critics and is considered by critic Danny Smith to be the "crowning triumph of Peter Sellers's remarkable career".
The film was widely criticised for its slapstick cinematic adaption, and director Guillermin himself considered the film an "amateurish" effort.
His illness forced him to withdraw from the filming of ''Kiss Me, Stupid'' and he was replaced by Ray Walston.
After practising with Southern's recording, Sellers got sufficient control of the accent, and started shooting the scenes in the aeroplane.
Sarah, to keep the peace, said, 'I love you both equally'.
Sellers played Muffley as a bland, placid intellectual in the mould of Adlai Stevenson; he played Mandrake as an unflappable Englishman; and Dr. Strangelove, a character influenced by pre-war German cinema, as a wheelchair-bound fanatic.
He portrayed three roles, including King Rudolf IV and King Rudolf V—rulers of the fictional small nation of Ruritania—and Syd Frewin, Rudolf V's half-brother.
Kubrick had seen Sellers in ''The Battle of the Sexes'' and listened to the album ''The Best of Sellers'', and was impressed by the range of characters he could portray.
After the war, Sellers made his radio debut in ''ShowTime'', and eventually became a regular performer on various BBC radio shows.
For them, he is assured of a place in the history of art as entertainment."
It must be obvious.
Michael later said that "it marked the beginning of an all-too-brief closeness between us".
Sellers's agent, Dennis Selinger, recalled his first meeting with Peg and Peter Sellers, noting that "Sellers was an immensely shy young man, inclined to be dominated by his mother, but without resentment or objection".
Steven Bach, the senior vice-president and head of worldwide productions for United Artists, who worked with Sellers on ''Revenge of the Pink Panther'', considered that Sellers was "deeply unbalanced, if not committable: that was the source of his genius and his truly quite terrifying aspects as manipulator and hysteric".
Upon its release in late June 1964, Bosley Crowther noted the "joyously free and facile way" in which Sellers had developed his comedy technique.
The following year Sellers appeared in a further three television series based on ''The Goons'', which aired on Britain's new ITV network.
The film was a commercial success and is now thought of as a minor classic of British screen comedy in the post-war era.
Edwards later recalled his feelings as "desperately unhappy and ready to kill, but as fate would have it, I got Mr.
In 1974, Sellers again claimed to have communicated with the long-dead music hall comic Dan Leno, who advised him to return to the role of Clouseau.
A feature of the characterisations undertaken by Sellers is that, regardless of how clumsy or idiotic they are, he ensured that they always retain their dignity.
Sellers pursued a film career and took a number of small roles such as a police inspector in ''John and Julie'' (1955).
With declining physical health, Sellers could at times be unbearable on set.
Ekland later stated that the marriage was "an atrocious sham" at this stage.
Sellers too had become tired of the role, saying after production, "I've honestly had enough of Clouseau—I've got nothing more to give".
Following Sellers's death, fellow actor Richard Attenborough said that Sellers "had the genius comparable to Chaplin", while the Boulting brothers considered Sellers as "a man of enormous gifts; and these gifts he gave to the world.
Despite the views of the critics, the film was one of the top ten grossing films of the year.
Roger Greenspun of ''The New York Times'' believed that the film was of variable quality and summarised it as a "brutal satire".
In March 1976 Sellers began dating actress Lynne Frederick, whom he married on 18 February 1977.
On 3 February 1951, he made a trial tape entitled ''The Goons'', and sent it to the BBC producer Pat Dixon, who eventually accepted it.
She died within days, without Sellers having seen her.
When he was told he could come on as someone else, he appeared dressed as a member of the Gestapo.
Sellers had been concerned that his heart attacks may have caused brain damage and that he would be unable to remember his lines, but he was reassured that his memory and abilities were unimpaired after the experience of filming.
Vincent Canby of ''The New York Times'' said of the Pink Panther films, "I'm not sure why Mr.
Julian Upton expressed the view that the strain behind the scenes began to manifest itself in the sluggish pace of the film, describing it as a "laboured, stunt-heavy hotchpotch of half-baked ideas and rehashed gags."
In 1946, Sellers made his final show with ENSA starring in the pantomime ''Jack and the Beanstalk'' at the Théâtre Marigny in Paris.
This prompted Sellers to throw both children out, saying that he never wanted to see them again.
He was certifiable."
The couple married on 24 August 1970, despite Sellers's private doubts—expressed to his agent, Dennis Selinger—about his decision to re-marry.
In May 1973, with his third marriage failing, Sellers went to the theatre to watch Liza Minnelli perform.
Frederick sued, claiming the use of the clips was a breach of contract; the court awarded her $1million ($ million today), plus 3.15 per cent of the film's profits and 1.36 per cent of its gross revenue.
Sellers's versatility enabled him to portray a wide range of comic characters using different accents and guises, and he would often assume multiple roles within the same film, frequently with contrasting temperaments and styles.
In 1973, he appeared in a Benson & Hedges cinema commercial; in 1975, he appeared in a series of advertisements for Trans World Airlines, in which he played several eccentric characters, including Thrifty McTravel, Jeremy 'Piggy' Peak Thyme and an Italian singer, Vito.
Satire and black humour were major features of many of his films, and his performances had a strong influence on a number of later comedians.
When Kermit the Frog told Sellers he could relax and be himself, Sellers replied:
His parents were Yorkshire-born William "Bill" Sellers (1900–62) and Agnes Doreen "Peg" (née Marks, 1892–1967).
On 20 April 1972, Sellers reunited with Milligan and Harry Secombe to record ''The Last Goon Show of All'', which was broadcast on 5 October.
To make matters worse, according to Ekland, Sellers was "so insecure, he won't trust anyone".
According to some accounts, Sellers was also invited to play the part of General Buck Turgidson, but turned it down because it was too physically demanding.
I said, 'No, I love my mum.'"
Strangelove'' (1964), ''What's New, Pussycat?''
Sellers was nominated three times for an Academy Award, twice for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performances in ''Dr.
(1965), ''Casino Royale'' (1967), ''The Party'' (1968), ''Being There'' (1979) and the five films of the ''Pink Panther'' series (1963–78).
Sellers began his film career during the 1950s.
Sellers's final performances were a series of advertisements for Barclays Bank.
The film earned Sellers a Best Actor award at the 51st National Board of Review Awards; the London Critics Circle Film Awards Special Achievement Award, the Best Actor award at the 45th New York Film Critics Circle Awards; and the Best Actor&nbsp;– Musical or Comedy award at the 37th Golden Globe Awards.
By the end of 1948, the BBC Third Programme began to broadcast the comedy series ''Third Division'', which starred, among others, Harry Secombe, Michael Bentine and Sellers.
The play later transferred to New York in December 2010.
This was echoed by Sellers's biographer, Peter Evans, who notes that out of nine films in the period, three were never released and five had flopped, while only ''There's a Girl in My Soup'' had been a success.
Kubrick requested screenwriter Terry Southern to record in his natural accent a tape of Kong's lines.
Seven screenwriters worked on the project, and filming was chaotic.
Sellers recalled that a teacher scolded the other boys for not studying, saying: "The Jewish boy knows his catechism better than the rest of you!"
In September 1943, he joined the Royal Air Force, although it is unclear whether he volunteered or was conscripted; his mother unsuccessfully tried to have him deferred on medical grounds.
He also served in Germany and France after the war.
Shortly after the wedding, Sellers started filming on location in Twentynine Palms, California for Billy Wilder's ''Kiss Me, Stupid'', opposite Dean Martin and Kim Novak.
Sellers and ''The Goon Show'' were a strong influence on the Monty Python performers, as well as on Peter Cook, who described Sellers as "the best comic actor in the world".
Sellers's last film was ''The Fiendish Plot of Dr. Fu Manchu'', a comedic re-imagining of the eponymous adventure novels by Sax Rohmer; Sellers played both police inspector Nayland Smith and Fu Manchu, alongside Helen Mirren and David Tomlinson.
On the night of 5 April 1964, prior to having sex with Ekland, Sellers took amyl nitrites (poppers) as a sexual stimulant in his search for "the ultimate orgasm", and suffered a series of eight heart attacks over the course of three hours as a result.
However, Sellers won the San Sebastián International Film Festival Award for Best Actor and a BAFTA award nomination for his performance, and it was well received by the critics.
The film inspired the George Martin-produced novelty hit single "Goodness Gracious Me", with Sellers and Loren, which reached number four in the UK Singles Chart in November 1960.
During filming, Sellers's relationship with Edwards became strained; the two would often stop speaking to each other during filming, communicating only by the passing of notes.
Peter Evans mentioned that Sellers was a "volatile and perplexing character who left a trail of misery in his private life".
Roger Ebert of the ''Chicago Sun-Times'' gave the film three stars, remarking that Sellers was "back doing what he does best", although he also said that in Sellers's previous films he had "been at his worst recently".
In the midst of filming ''The Bobo'', Sellers's mother had a heart attack; Parrish asked Sellers if he wanted to visit her in hospital, but Sellers remained on set.
The critic Irv Slifkin remarked that the film was a reflection of the cynicism of Peter Sellers, describing the film as a "proto-Pythonesque adaption of Terry Southern's semi-free-form short novel", and "one of the strangest films to be shown at a gala premiere for Britain's royal family."
However, Philip French, for ''The Observer'', was unimpressed by the film, describing it as "a mess of porridge" and stating that "Sellers reveals that he cannot draw the line between the sincere and the sentimental".
A follow-up single by the duo, ''Bangers and Mash'', reached number 22 in the UK chart.
Sellers's difficulties in getting his film career to take off, and increasing problems in his personal life, prompted him to seek periodic consultations with astrologer Maurice Woodruff, who held considerable sway over his later career.
In 1969 Sellers starred opposite Ringo Starr in the Joseph McGrath-directed film ''The Magic Christian''.
The stage play ''Being Sellers'' premiered in Australia in 1998, three years after the release of the biography by Roger Lewis, ''The Life and Death of Peter Sellers''.
In 1949, Sellers started to date Anne Howe, an Australian actress who lived in London.
He died as a result of a heart attack in 1980, aged 54.
Secombe later declared to journalists "Bluebottle is deaded now".
Peg Sellers was related to the pugilist Daniel Mendoza (1764–1836), whom Sellers greatly revered, and whose engraving later hung in his office.
In 1935 the Sellers family moved to North London and settled in Muswell Hill.
Academic Cynthia Baron observed that Sellers's external characterisations led to doubt with reviewers as to whether Sellers's work was "true" acting.
The four would meet up at Grafton's public house near Victoria, owned by Jimmy Grafton, who was also a BBC script writer.
It won the award for best fiction short in the latter festival, and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Short Subject (Live Action).
He was deeply affected by her death and remorseful at not having returned to London to see her.
Starting with 370,000 listeners, the show eventually reached up to seven million people in Britain, and was described by one newspaper as "probably the most influential comedy show of all time".
He was the complete contradiction."
Social historian Sam Wasson notes the complexity in Sellers's performances in the ''Pink Panther'' films, which has the effect of alienating Clouseau from his environment.
Sellers found the part and the director, Anatole Litvak, uninspiring; the producers brought in Blake Edwards to replace Litvak.
Arguments between Sellers and director Piers Haggard led to Haggard's firing at Sellers's instigation and Sellers took over direction, using his long-time friend David Lodge to direct some sequences.
In 1951 the Goons made their feature film debut in ''Penny Points to Paradise''.
Although Bill Sellers was Protestant and Peg was Jewish, Sellers attended the North London Roman Catholic school St. Aloysius College, run by the Brothers of Our Lady of Mercy.
Turner Classic Movies calls Sellers "one of the most accomplished comic actors of the late 20th century."
On his playing of Clouseau, Sellers said: "I set out to play Clouseau with great dignity because I feel that he thinks he is probably one of the greatest detectives in the world.
Roger Lewis observed that Sellers immersed himself completely in the characters he enacted during productions, that "he'd play a role as an Indian doctor, and for the next six months, he'd be an Indian in his real daily life."
On resuming his theatrical career, Sellers could get only sporadic work.
Although christened Richard Henry, his parents called him Peter, after his elder stillborn brother.
Although the bulk of his work was comedic-based, often parodying characters of authority such as military officers or policemen, he also performed in other film genres and roles.
On 20 January 1965, Sellers and Ekland announced the birth of a daughter, Victoria.
During his next film, ''The Bobo'', which again co-starred Ekland, the couple's marital problems worsened.
I'd be the 'straight man', the 'feed',&nbsp;...
and ''I'm All Right Jack'', Sellers starred in ''The Mouse That Roared'', a film in which Jean Seberg also appeared, and was directed by Jack Arnold.
In 1976, he followed it with ''The Pink Panther Strikes Again''.
His biographer, Ed Sikov, notes that because of this retained dignity, Sellers is "the master of playing men who have no idea how ridiculous they are."
His body was cremated and his ashes were interred at Golders Green Crematorium in London.
In his private life, he had been seeing the twenty-three-year-old model Miranda Quarry.
In 1980 he won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor&nbsp;– Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for his role in ''Being There'', and also earned three other Golden Globe nominations in the same category.
Tom Shales of ''The Washington Post'' described the film as "an indefensibly inept comedy", adding that "it is hard to name another good actor who ever made so many bad movies as Sellers, a comedian of great gifts but ferociously faulty judgment.
His act was largely based on impressions, was well received, and he returned the following week.
Sellers's last film of the fifties was ''The Battle of the Sexes''; a comedy directed by Charles Crichton.
Sellers was again ill in Cannes, returning to his residence in Gstaad to work on the script for his next project, ''Romance of the Pink Panther''.
During the filming from February to June 1976, the already fraught relationship between Sellers and Blake Edwards had seriously deteriorated.
Strangelove'' and ''Being There'', and once for the Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film for ''The Running Jumping & Standing Still Film'' (1960).
Sellers left the film before his part was complete.
Academics Maria Pramaggiore and Tom Wallis remarked that Sellers fits the mould of a technical actor because he displays a mastery of physical characterisation, such as accent or physical trait.
Films demonstrating his artistic range include ''I'm All Right Jack'' (1959), Stanley Kubrick's ''Lolita'' (1962) and ''Dr.
The role earned him a BAFTA, and the critic for ''The Manchester Guardian'' believed it was Sellers's best screen performance to date.
Next, Sellers featured with Terry-Thomas as one of a pair of comic villains in George Pal's ''tom thumb'' (1958), a musical fantasy film, opposite Russ Tamblyn, Jessie Matthews and Peter Butterworth.
Topaze'', in which he also starred.
The instrument greatly suited Sellers's temperament and artistic skills.
The film was the first screenwriting and acting credit for Woody Allen, and featured Sellers in a love triangle.
Sellers also became unhappy with his wife's performance, straining their relationship and triggering open arguments during one of which Sellers threw a chair at Ekland.
Snowdon shared a love of women, photography, fine wine and fast cars with Sellers; both were also prone to bouts of depression.
One evening, Sellers and Bentine visited the Hackney Empire, where Secombe was performing, and Bentine introduced Sellers to Spike Milligan.
He became entranced with Minnelli and the couple became engaged three days later, despite Minnelli's current betrothal to Desi Arnaz, Jr., and Sellers still being married.
Sellers's fourth marriage to Frederick collapsed soon after.
In preparation for his role as Fred Kite, Sellers watched footage of union officials.
Sellers was initially hesitant about taking on these divergent characters, but Kubrick prevailed.
Over the course of two weekends, he took his 16mm cine-camera to Totteridge Lane in London and filmed himself, Spike Milligan, Mario Fabrizi, Leo McKern and Richard Lester.
Sellers and Loren developed a close relationship during filming, culminating in Sellers declaring his love for her in front of his wife.
Born in Portsmouth, Sellers made his stage debut at the Kings Theatre, Southsea, when he was two weeks old.
Spike Milligan later considered that Sellers's heart condition had lasted fifteen years and had "made life difficult for him and had a debilitating effect on his personality".
After his father's death in October 1962, Sellers decided to leave England and was approached by director Blake Edwards who offered him the role of Inspector Clouseau in ''The Pink Panther'', after Peter Ustinov had backed out of the film.
In 1963, Stanley Kubrick cast Sellers to appear in ''Dr.
Sellers soon showed signs of insecurity and paranoia; he would become highly anxious and jealous, for example, when Ekland starred opposite attractive men.
A further agent's part was then written for Terence Cooper, to cover Sellers's departure.
Author Aaron Sultanik observed that in Sellers's early films, such as ''I'm Alright Jack'', he displays "deft, technical interpretations that pinpoint the mechanical nature of his comic characterization", which "...&nbsp;reduces each of his characters to a series of gross, awkward tics."
However, Sellers's next films, including Rodney Amateau's ''Where Does It Hurt?''
The family constantly toured, causing much upheaval and unhappiness in the young Sellers's life.
However, Sellers's performance is regarded as being on par with that of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, according to biographer Peter Evans.
After two days in care—and against the advice of his doctors—he travelled to the Cannes Film Festival, where ''Being There'' was in competition.
He was also offered some small acting parts.
On 20 March 1977, Sellers suffered a second major heart attack during a flight from Paris to London; he was subsequently fitted with a pacemaker.
The British actor Stephen Mangan stated that Sellers was a large influence, as did the comedians Alan Carr and Rob Brydon.
Director Blake Edwards thought that "Peter was brilliant.
The songs were included on an album released by the couple, ''Peter & Sophia'', which reached number five in the UK Albums Chart.
Burt Kwouk, who appeared as Cato in the ''Pink Panther'' films stated that "Peter was a well-loved actor in Britain&nbsp;... the day he died, it seemed that the whole country came to a stop.
He refused to seek professional help for his mental issues.
But then I said, 'You looked like a little fat old man'.&nbsp;... he went mad.
The film was shot on a budget of £3 million and earned $33 million at the box office upon release in May 1975, reinvigorating Sellers's career as an A-list film star and restoring his millionaire status.
He was steadily promoted, becoming a box office clerk, usher, assistant stage manager and lighting operator.
Andrew Spicer, writing for the British Film Institute's Screenonline, considers that although Sellers favoured playing romantic roles, he "was always more successful in parts that sent up his own vanities and pretensions, as with the TV presenter and narcissistic lothario  he played in ''There's a Girl in My Soup''".
Kubrick then re-cast Slim Pickens as Kong.
Sellers would claim that he had no personality and was almost unnoticeable, which meant that he "needed a strongly defined character to play".
In a 2005 poll to find "The Comedian's Comedian", Sellers was voted 14 in the list of the top 20 greatest comedians by fellow comics and comedy insiders.
While at St Aloysius College, Sellers began to develop his improvisational skills.
Despite these conflicts, the script was praised for its wit.
Because of Sellers's poor health, producer Charles K. Feldman insured him at a cost of $360,000 ($ in  dollars).
The film was directed by Vittorio De Sica, whose English Sellers struggled to understand.
The critic for ''The Times'' wrote that the film includes, "three remarkable performances from Mr. Peter Sellers, masterly as the President, diverting as a revue-sketch ex-Nazi US Scientist&nbsp;... and acceptable as an RAF officer, although the critic from ''The Guardian'' thought his portrayal of the RAF officer alone was, "worth the price of an admission ticket".
Irv Slifkin said that the most prominent albeit ever-changing face in comedies of the sixties was Sellers who "changed like a chameleon throughout the era, dazzling audiences".
The family was not rich, but Peg insisted on an expensive private schooling for her son.
To practice his voice, Sellers purchased a reel-to-reel tape recorder.
During his backstage theatre job, Sellers began practising on a set of drums that belonged to the band Joe Daniels and his Hot Shots.
In 1957 film producer Michael Relph became impressed with Sellers's portrayal of an elderly character in ''Idiot Weekly'', and cast the 32-year-old actor as a 68-year-old projectionist in Basil Dearden's ''The Smallest Show on Earth'', supporting Bill Travers, Virginia McKenna and Margaret Rutherford.
He was posted back to England shortly afterwards to work at the Air Ministry, and demobilised later that year.
He checked into the Dorchester hotel, before visiting Golders Green Crematorium for the first time to see the location of his parents' ashes.
In between ''Carlton-Browne of the F.O.''
Guest later claimed that he had written and directed the film as a vehicle for Sellers, and thus had started Sellers's film career.
His behaviour was often erratic and compulsive, and he frequently clashed with his directors and co-stars, especially in the mid-1970s when his physical and mental health, together with his alcohol and drug problems, were at their worst.
Both were variety entertainers; Peg was in the Ray Sisters troupe.
In October 1948, Sellers was a regular radio performer, appearing in ''Starlight Hour'', ''The Gang Show'', ''Henry Hall's Guest Night'' and ''It's Fine To Be Young''.
According to Milligan, Sellers held a guilt complex about being Jewish and recalls that Sellers was once moved to tears when he presented him with a candlestick from a synagogue for Christmas, believing the gesture to be an anti-Jewish slur.
