An autopsy revealed his bladder to be infected with gangrene.
When she learned of his designs, Sophia conspired with the leaders of the Streltsy, who continually aroused disorder and dissent.
It was a council of ten clergymen.
A large hole was cut in the back of the dual-seated throne used by Ivan and Peter.
Therefore, on 28 February 1714, he issued a decree calling for compulsory education, which dictated that all Russian 10- to 15-year-old children of the nobility, government clerks, and lesser-ranked officials, must learn basic mathematics and geometry, and should be tested on it at the end of their studies.
Peter also sought to end arranged marriages, which were the norm among the Russian nobility, because he thought such a practice was barbaric and led to domestic violence, since the partners usually resented each other.
In turn, Russia paid two million Riksdaler and surrendered most of Finland.
He was fifty-two years, seven months old when he died, having reigned forty-two years.
Peter attempted to acquire control of the Black Sea; to do so he would have to expel the Tatars from the surrounding areas.
His eldest child and heir, Alexei, was suspected of being involved in a plot to overthrow the Emperor.
However, 9 and 12 years later all territories would be ceded back to Persia, now led by the charismatic and military genius Nader Shah, as part of the Treaties of Resht and Ganja respectively, and the Russo-Persian alliance against the Ottoman Empire, which was the common enemy of both.
Peter remained bedridden until late autumn.
Heavily influenced by his advisors from Western Europe, Peter reorganized the Russian army along modern lines and dreamed of making Russia a maritime power.
On 16 January 1698 Peter organized a farewell party and invited Johan Huydecoper van Maarsseveen, who had to sit between Lefort and the Tsar and drink.
Alexey Nikolayevich Tolstoy wrote a biographical historical novel about him, named ''Pëtr I'', in the 1930s.
Peter implemented sweeping reforms aimed at modernizing Russia.
By this same time, the once powerful Persian Safavid Empire to its neighbouring south was heavily declining.
Peter knew that Russia could not face the Ottoman Empire alone.
Traditionally, the years were reckoned from the purported creation of the World, but after Peter's reforms, they were to be counted from the birth of Christ.
In return, the Sultan expelled Charles XII.
*Peter was played by Jan Niklas and Maximilian Schell in the 1986 NBC miniseries ''Peter the Great''.
The Embassy next went to Leipzig, Dresden, and Vienna.
In 1722 Peter created a new order of precedence known as the Table of Ranks.
Peter was not particularly concerned that others ruled in his name.
The new agencies were originally nine in number: Foreign affairs, war, navy, expense, income, justice, inspection.
In England Peter met with King William III, visited Greenwich and Oxford, was painted by Sir Godfrey Kneller, and saw a Royal Navy Fleet Review at Deptford.
The "Grand Embassy", although failing to complete the mission of creating an anti-Ottoman alliance, continued.
He sought to acquire control of the Baltic Sea, which had been taken by the Swedish Empire a half-century earlier.
Sophia Alekseyevna, one of Alexis' daughters from his first marriage, led a rebellion of the Streltsy (Russia's elite military corps) in April–May 1682.
Later others were added.
Peter's other half-brother, Ivan V, was next in line for the throne, but he was chronically ill and of infirm mind.
Thanks to the mediation of Nicolaas Witsen, mayor of Amsterdam and expert on Russia, the Tsar was given the opportunity to gain practical experience in the largest shipyard in the world, belonging to the Dutch East India Company, for a period of four months.
Peter preferred to rely on groups of individuals who would keep check on one another.
Peter returned to Moscow in November 1695 and began building a large navy.
*Peter was portrayed on BBC Radio 4 by Isaac Rouse as a boy, Will Howard as a young adult and Elliot Cowan as an adult in the radio plays ''Peter the Great: The Gamblers'' and ''Peter the Great: The Queen of Spades'', written by Mike Walker and which were the last two plays in the first series of ''Tsar''.
Charles XII refused to retreat to Poland or back to Sweden, instead invading Ukraine.
Formally, Ivan V remained a co-ruler with Peter, although he was ineffective.
Peter's northern armies took the Swedish province of Livonia (the northern half of modern Latvia, and the southern half of modern Estonia), driving the Swedes into Finland.
Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter I and Ivan V continuing to act as co-tsars.
27 April) 1682 until his death, jointly ruling before 1696 with his elder half-brother, Ivan V. Through a number of successful wars he expanded the Tsardom into a much larger empire that became a major European power.
In 1697 he traveled incognito to Europe on an 18-month journey with a large Russian delegation–the so-called "Grand Embassy".
This was done to prevent fighting between the stronger noble houses and to bring in fresh blood to the family.
In the minds of many, the word ''emperor'' connoted superiority or pre-eminence over kings.
The rebellion was, however, easily crushed before Peter returned home from England; of the Tsar's troops, only one was killed.
He abolished the land tax and household tax, and replaced them with a poll tax.
Sheremetev investigated the possibility of future joint ventures with the Knights, including action against the Turks and the possibility of a future Russian naval base.
The Streltsy were disbanded, and the individual they sought to put on the Throne—Peter's half-sister Sophia—was forced to become a nun.
After considerable successes and the capture of many provinces and cities in the Caucasus and northern mainland Persia, the Safavids were forced to hand over their territories to Russia, comprising Derbent, Shirvan, Gilan, Mazandaran, Baku, and Astrabad.
He engaged in such pastimes as shipbuilding and sailing, as well as mock battles with his toy army.
It was only when Nataliya died in 1694 that Peter became an independent sovereign.
He was forced to dismantle the province's government.
On 29 January 1676, Tsar Alexis died, leaving the sovereignty to Peter's elder half-brother, the weak and sickly Feodor III.
Peter has been featured in many books, plays, films, and games, including the poems ''The Bronze Horseman'', ''Poltava'' and the unfinished novel ''Peter the Great's Negro'', all by Alexander Pushkin.
His only outlet at the time was the White Sea at Arkhangelsk.
Peter withdrew his army southward, destroying along the way any property that could assist the Swedes.
Swedish king Charles XII turned his attention to Russia, invading it in 1708.
He faced much opposition to these policies at home, but brutally suppressed any and all rebellions against his authority: Streltsy, Bashkirs, Astrakhan, and the greatest civil uprising of his reign, the Bulavin Rebellion.
The Tsaritsa had borne Peter three children, although only one, the Tsarevich Alexei, had survived past his childhood.
The traditional leader of the Church was the Patriarch of Moscow.
Over 1,200 of the rebels were tortured and executed, and Peter ordered that their bodies be publicly exhibited as a warning to future conspirators.
'''Peter the Great''' (), '''Peter I''' () or '''Peter Alexeyevich''' (; &nbsp;– ) ruled the Tsardom of Russia and later the Russian Empire from 7 May (O.S.
In 1724 Peter had his second wife, Catherine, crowned as Empress, although he remained Russia's actual ruler.
Power was instead exercised by his mother, Natalya Naryshkina.
Peter, overestimating the support he would receive from his Balkan allies, attacked the Ottoman Empire, initiating the Russo-Turkish War of 1710.
To deprive the Boyars of their high positions, Peter directed that precedence should be determined by merit and service to the Emperor.
Peter forced Sophia to enter a convent, where she gave up her name and her position as a member of the royal family.
Peter introduced new taxes to fund improvements in Saint Petersburg.
Peter implemented a law that stipulated that no Russian man could join a monastery before the age of 50.
Deprived of local supplies, the Swedish army was forced to halt its advance in the winter of 1708–1709.
*The 2007 film ''The Sovereign's Servant'' depicts the unsavoury brutal side of Peter during the campaign.
After 1718, Peter established colleges in place of the old central agencies of government.
The taxes on land and on households were payable only by individuals who owned property or maintained families; the new head taxes, however, were payable by serfs and paupers.
Added to this were Peter's noticeable facial tics, and he may have suffered from ''petit mal'', a form of epilepsy.
The monks in the monasteries had a slightly higher status; they were not allowed to marry.
In the summer of 1695 Peter organized the Azov campaigns to take the fortress, but his attempts ended in failure.
This throne can be seen in the Kremlin Armoury in Moscow.
Sophia would sit behind the throne and listen as Peter conversed with nobles, while feeding him information and giving him responses to questions and problems.
He studied shipbuilding in Zaandam (the house he lived in is now a museum, the Czar Peter House) and Amsterdam, where he visited, among others, the upper-class de Wilde family.
The former dealt with a The Bronze Horseman, an equestrian statue raised in Peter's honour.
Peter's last years were marked by further reform in Russia.
* The 1937-1938 Soviet Union (Russia) film ''Peter the First''
Peter's reforms made a lasting impact on Russia and many institutions of Russian government trace their origins to his reign.
Jacob de Wilde, a collector-general with the Admiralty of Amsterdam, had a well-known collection of art and coins, and de Wilde's daughter Maria de Wilde made an engraving of the meeting between Peter and her father, providing visual evidence of "the beginning of the West European classical tradition in Russia".
The Senate was founded as the highest state institution to supervise all judicial, financial and administrative affairs.
In 1718 Peter investigated why the ex Swedish province of Livonia was so orderly.
*The 1976 film ''Skaz pro to, kak tsar Pyotr arapa zhenil'' (''How Tsar Peter the Great Married Off His Moor''), starring Aleksey Petrenko as Peter, and Vladimir Vysotsky as Abram Petrovich Gannibal, shows Peter's attempt to build the Baltic Fleet.
The Tsar retained some Finnish lands close to Saint Petersburg, which he had made his capital in 1712.
In 1714 the Russian fleet won the Battle of Gangut.
Peter decided that all of the children of the nobility should have some early education, especially in the areas of sciences.
Peter grew to be extremely tall as an adult, especially for the time period.
The sentence could be carried out only with Peter's signed authorization, and Alexei died in prison, as Peter hesitated before making the decision.
Peter's visit was cut short in 1698, when he was forced to rush home by a rebellion of the Streltsy.
On 22 October 1721, soon after peace was made with Sweden, he was officially proclaimed ''Emperor of All Russia''.
Peter valued Catherine and married her again (this time officially) at Saint Isaac's Cathedral in Saint Petersburg on 9 February 1712.
He also had a mistress from Germany, Anna Mons.
Peter, however, lacked the overall proportional heft and bulk generally found in a man that size.
According to Roger Tavernier, Peter the Great later acquired de Wilde's collection.
Thus, in the year 7207 of the old Russian calendar, Peter proclaimed that the Julian Calendar was in effect and the year was 1700.
He divorced the Tsaritsa and forced her into joining a convent.
Alexei's death most likely resulted from injuries suffered during his torture.
Peter's visits to the West impressed upon him the notion that European customs were in several respects superior to Russian traditions.
Peterhof (Dutch for "Peter's Court") was a grand residence, becoming known as the "Russian Versailles".
In the summer of 1724 a team of doctors performed surgery releasing upwards of four pounds of blocked urine.
The Baltic Sea was at the time controlled by Sweden in the north, while the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea were controlled by the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire respectively in the south.
Alexei's mother Eudoxia had also been punished; she was dragged from her home and tried on false charges of adultery.
Standing at 6&nbsp;ft 8&nbsp;in (203&nbsp;cm) in height, the Russian tsar was literally head and shoulders above his contemporaries both in Russia and throughout Europe.
A clerical career was not a route chosen by upper-class society.
This was consistent with previous Romanov tradition by choosing a daughter of a minor noble.
He led a cultural revolution that replaced some of the traditionalist and medieval social and political systems with ones that were modern, scientific, westernized, and based on The Enlightenment.
Peter later put his knowledge of shipbuilding to use in helping build Russia's navy.
According to legend, in November, at Lakhta along the Finnish Gulf to inspect some ironworks, Peter saw a group of soldiers drowning near shore and, wading out into near-waist deep water, came to their rescue.
Alexei was tried and confessed under torture during questioning conducted by a secular court.
Peter the Great had two wives, with whom he had fourteen children; three of them survived to adulthood.
Peter is one of many supporting characters in Neal Stephenson's ''Baroque Cycle'' – mainly featuring in the third novel, ''The System of the World''.
Peter declared war on Sweden, which was at the time led by King Charles XII.
Peter died between four and five in the morning 8 February 1725.
Originally established only for the time of the monarch's absence, the Senate became a permanent body after his return.
He was convicted and sentenced to be executed.
The Tsar helped with the construction of an East Indiaman especially laid down for him: ''Peter and Paul''.
Peter's primary objective became the capture of the Ottoman fortress of Azov, near the Don River.
This position changed when Feodor died in 1682.
The Streltsy made it possible for Sophia, the Miloslavskys (the clan of Ivan) and their allies, to insist that Peter and Ivan be proclaimed joint Tsars, with Ivan being acclaimed as the senior.
The battle was a decisive defeat for the Swedish forces, ending Charles' campaign in Ukraine and forcing him into exile in the Ottoman Empire.
In the winter of 1723, Peter, whose overall health was never robust, began having problems with his urinary tract and bladder.
During his stay the Tsar engaged many skilled workers such as builders of locks, fortresses, shipwrights, and seamen—including Cornelis Cruys, a vice-admiral who became, under Franz Lefort, the Tsar's advisor in maritime affairs.
The Tsar's navy was so powerful that the Russians could penetrate Sweden.
In 1725 the construction of Peterhof, a palace near Saint Petersburg, was completed.
A special high official the Ober-Procurator, served as the link between the ruler and the senate and acted, in Peter own words, as "the sovereign's eye".
From an early age, Peter's education (commissioned by his father, Tsar Alexis I) was put in the hands of several tutors, most notably Nikita Zotov, Patrick Gordon, and Paul Menesius.
This icy water rescue is said to have exacerbated Peter's bladder problems and caused his death.
The marriage was a failure, and ten years later Peter forced his wife to become a nun and thus freed himself from the union.
Some foreigners were included in various colleges but not as president.
This, plus the interval of time between these actions and Peter's death seems to preclude any direct link.
Most of Finland was occupied by the Russians.
Peter was not religious and had a low regard for the Church, so he put it under tight governmental control.
Peter, warned by the Streltsy, escaped in the middle of the night to the impenetrable monastery of Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra; there he slowly gathered adherents who perceived he would win the power struggle.
By the summer of 1689, Peter planned to take power from his half-sister Sophia, whose position had been weakened by two unsuccessful Crimean campaigns.
In 1698 Peter sent a delegation to Malta under boyar Boris Sheremetev, to observe the training and abilities of the Knights of Malta and their fleet.
In the Battle of Lesnaya, Charles suffered his first loss after Peter crushed a group of Swedish reinforcements marching from Riga.
Upon his return from his European tour in 1698, Peter sought to end his unhappy marriage.
Peter, however, mistrusted the boyars; he instead abolished the Duma and created a Senate of ten members.
In 1721 the Treaty of Nystad ended what became known as the Great Northern War.
Following several defeats, the Polish King August II abdicated in 1706.
While visiting the Netherlands, Peter learned much about life in Western Europe.
After the battle near Åland, Sweden made peace with all powers but Russia by 1720.
Decisions depended on the majority vote, Peter believed he did not have enough loyal and talented persons to put them in full charge of the different departments.
Consequently, the Boyar Duma (a council of Russian nobles) chose the 10-year-old Peter to become Tsar with his mother as regent.
In the conflict, the forces of Charles XII used a blinding snowstorm to their advantage.
In Poland, August II was restored as King.
Both Peter's hands and feet were small, and his shoulders were narrow for his height; likewise, his head was small for his tall body.
Martha converted to the Russian Orthodox Church and took the name Catherine.
Deprived of this aid, Charles was forced to abandon his proposed march on Moscow.
, which he had captured) in 1703.
He launched about thirty ships against the Ottomans in 1696, capturing Azov in July of that year.
Most parish priests were sons of priests, were very poorly educated, and very poorly paid.
Russia acquired Ingria, Estonia, Livonia, and a substantial portion of Karelia.
Peter nevertheless acted ruthlessly towards the mutineers.
Peter also obtained the assistance of the Electorate of Hanover and the Kingdom of Prussia.
Peter made a temporary peace with the Ottoman Empire that allowed him to keep the captured fort of Azov, and turned his attention to Russian maritime supremacy.
Peter could not tolerate the thought that a patriarch could have power superior to the Tsar, as indeed had happened in the case of Philaret (1619–33) and Nikon (1652-66).
All of Peter's male children had died.
Making advantage of the profitable situation, Peter launched the Russo-Persian War of 1722-1723 otherwise known as "The Persian Expedition of Peter the Great" by the Russian histographers, in order to drastically increase Russian influence for the first genuine time in the Caucasus and Caspian Sea, as well as to prevent the Ottoman Empire from making territorial gains in the region at the expense of declining Safavid Iran.
The Table of Ranks continued to remain in effect until the Russian monarchy was overthrown in 1917.
Peter's imperial title was recognized by Augustus II of Poland, Frederick William I of Prussia, and Frederick I of Sweden, but not by the other European monarchs.
He felt that too many able Russian men were being wasted on clerical work when they could be joining his new and improved army.
After the battle, Charles XII decided to concentrate his forces against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, which gave Peter time to reorganize the Russian army.
In the summer of 1709, they resumed their efforts to capture Ukraine, culminating in the Battle of Poltava on 27 June.
After crossing into Russia, Charles defeated Peter at Golovchin in July.
Ludolf Bakhuysen, a painter of seascapes and Jan van der Heyden the inventor of the fire hose, received Peter, who was keen to learn and pass on his knowledge to his countrymen.
In early January 1725, Peter was struck once again with uremia.
* The 1922 German silent film ''Peter the Great'' directed by Dimitri Buchowetzki and starring Emil Jannings as Peter
One means of achieving this end was the introduction of taxes for long beards and robes in September 1698.
In 1721 Peter followed the advice of Feofan Prokopovich in designing the Holy Synod.
In 1699 Peter changed the date of the celebration of the new year from 1 September to 1 January.
Politically, the church was impotent.
The story, however, has been viewed with skepticism by some historians, pointing out that the German chronicler Jacob von Stählin is the only source for the story, and it seems unlikely that no one else would have documented such an act of heroism.
Normally, the Boyar Duma would have exercised power during his absence.
Without his signature no Senate decision could go into effect; the Senate became one of the most important institutions of Imperial Russia.
Several rulers feared that Peter would claim authority over them, just as the Holy Roman Emperor had claimed suzerainty over all Christian nations.
Peter's mother selected his first wife, Eudoxia Lopukhina, with the advice of other nobles in 1689.
The plays were broadcast on 25 September and 2 October 2016.
He continued his travel to the Austrian Netherlands and France.
A similar fate befell Peter's mistress, Anna Mons, in 1704.
In 1700, when the office fell vacant, Peter refused to name a replacement, allowing the Patriarch's Coadjutor (or deputy) to discharge the duties of the office.
He travelled to the city of Manchester to learn the techniques of city-building he would later use to great effect at Saint Petersburg.
He forbade the building of stone edifices outside Saint Petersburg, which he intended to become Russia's capital, so that all stonemasons could participate in the construction of the new city.
Legend has it that before lapsing into unconsciousness Peter asked for a paper and pen and scrawled an unfinished note that read: ''"Leave all to&nbsp;..."'' and then, exhausted by the effort, asked for his daughter Anna to be summoned.
He commanded all of his courtiers and officials to wear European clothing and cut off their long beards, causing his Boyars, who were very fond of their beards, great upset.
Some proposed that he take the title ''Emperor of the East'', but he refused.
Peter's campaign in the Ottoman Empire was disastrous, and in the ensuing peace treaty (Treaty of Pruth), Peter was forced to return the Black Sea ports he had seized in 1697.
In the first week of October, restless and certain he was cured, Peter began a lengthy inspection tour of various projects.
Peter, furthermore, had chosen the most inopportune moment; the Europeans at the time were more concerned about who would succeed the childless Spanish King Charles II than about fighting the Ottoman Sultan.
In 1716 and 1717, the Tsar revisited the Netherlands, and went to see Herman Boerhaave.
For seven years, she ruled as an autocrat.
Peter's mother sought to force him to adopt a more conventional approach, and arranged his marriage to Eudoxia Lopukhina in 1689.
To improve his nation's position on the seas, Peter sought to gain more maritime outlets.
As part of an agreement with Poland which ceded Kiev to Russia, Peter was forced to wage war against the Crimean Khan and against the Khan's overlord, the Ottoman Sultan.
Peter's hopes were dashed; France was a traditional ally of the Ottoman Sultan, and Austria was eager to maintain peace in the east while conducting its own wars in the west.
Sophia acted as regent during the minority of the sovereigns and exercised all power.
Each college consisted of a president, a vice-president and a number of councilors, assessors in addition to one procurator.
