Over time, these "primary" methods become less effective and "secondary" production methods may be used.
:2&nbsp;(''l'') + 25&nbsp;(''g'') → 16&nbsp;(''g'') + 18&nbsp;(''g'') (ΔH = −5.51 MJ/mol of octane)
In some reservoirs, such as in the Middle East, the natural pressure is sufficient over a long time.
The natural pressure in most reservoirs, however, eventually dissipates.
When hydrocarbons are concentrated in a trap, an oil field forms, from which the liquid can be extracted by drilling and pumping.
Because of this melt, more oil reserves have been revealed.
More than 4000 years ago, according to Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, asphalt was used in the construction of the walls and towers of Babylon; there were oil pits near Ardericca (near Babylon), and a pitch spring on Zacynthus.
This unresolved complex mixture (UCM) of hydrocarbons is particularly apparent when analysing weathered oils and extracts from tissues of organisms exposed to oil.
In the mid-2000s, widespread fears of an imminent peak led to the "peak oil movement," in which over one hundred thousand Americans prepared, individually and collectively, for the "post-carbon" future.
File:World oil consumption 1980 to 2007 by region.svg|Oil consumption 1980 to 2007 by region
where the temperature ''t'' is in Celsius and ''d'' is the specific gravity at 15&nbsp;°C.
Thus, Canada's oil sands are not expected to provide more than a few million barrels per day in the foreseeable future.
It is refined and separated, most easily by distillation, into a large number of consumer products, from  gasoline (petrol) and kerosene to asphalt and chemical reagents used to make plastics and pharmaceuticals.
Along with the burning of coal, petroleum combustion may be the largest contributor to the increase in atmospheric CO2.
Liquified under pressure slightly above atmospheric, it is best known for powering cigarette lighters, but it is also a main fuel source for many developing countries.
As further layers settled to the sea or lake bed, intense heat and pressure build up in the lower regions.
The mythological origins of the oil fields at Yenangyaung, and its hereditary monopoly control by 24 families, indicate very ancient origins.
The first commercial oil well in Canada became operational in 1858 at Oil Springs, Ontario (then Canada West).
It is difficult to predict the oil peak in any given region, due to the lack of knowledge and/or transparency in accounting of global oil reserves.
The dropping of bombs and incendiary devices from aircraft on the  wreck produced poor results; modern techniques would include pumping the oil from the wreck, like in the Prestige oil spill or the Erika oil spill.
The 2008 economic crisis seems to have had some impact on the sales of such vehicles; still, the 2008 oil consumption shows a small increase.
* Western Canadian Select  the benchmark crude oil for emerging heavy, high TAN (acidic) crudes.
The ''cycloalkanes'', also known as ''naphthenes'', are saturated hydrocarbons which have one or more carbon rings to which hydrogen atoms are attached according to the formula CnH2n.
Certain rock strata contain hydrocarbons but have low permeability and are not thick from a vertical perspective.
Businessman James Miller Williams dug several wells between 1855 and 1858 before discovering a rich reserve of oil four metres below ground.
In 2013, the United States will produce an average of 11.4 million barrels a day, which would make it the second largest producer of hydrocarbons, and is expected to overtake Saudi Arabia before 2020.
Drilling is carried out after studies of structural geology (at the reservoir scale), sedimentary basin analysis, and reservoir characterization (mainly in terms of the porosity and permeability of geologic reservoir structures) have been completed.
Some are carcinogenic.
The hydrocarbons in crude oil are mostly alkanes, cycloalkanes and various aromatic hydrocarbons, while the other organic compounds contain nitrogen, oxygen and sulfur, and trace amounts of metals such as iron, nickel, copper and vanadium.
The oil constant, a insider pun in the German industry refers to that effect.
Phenomena such as seeps and tar pits are examples of areas that petroleum affects without man's involvement.
Control of oil spills is difficult, requires ad hoc methods, and often a large amount of manpower.
Due to the increase of the value of the crude oil during the last 30 years, the share of the shipping cost on the final cost of the delivered commodity was less than 3% in 2010.
The reach of available petroleum ressources has always been around 35 years or even less since the start of the modern exploration.
* Brent Blend, consisting of 15 oils from fields in the Brent and Ninian systems in the East Shetland Basin of the North Sea.
This non-profit trade association was founded in 1907, and is the oldest petroleum trade association in the United States.
The latter set is regularly used in petrochemical plants and oil refineries.
Romania is the first country in the world to have had its annual crude oil output officially recorded in international statistics: 275 tonnes for 1857.
Eventually "tertiary" or "enhanced" oil recovery methods may be used to increase the oil's flow characteristics by injecting steam, carbon dioxide and other gases or chemicals into the reservoir.
They are the petroleum gases.
where the temperature ''t'' is in Celsius and ''d'' is the specific gravity at 15&nbsp;°C.
Advances in drilling continued into 1862 when local driller Shaw reached a depth of 62 metres using the spring-pole drilling method.
Petroleum has mostly been recovered by oil drilling (natural petroleum springs are rare).
When burned, petroleum releases carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas.
An early commercial well was hand dug in Poland in 1853, and another in nearby Romania in 1857.
Depending on demand and the cost of recovery, these gases are either flared off, sold as liquefied petroleum gas under pressure, or used to power the refinery's own burners.
The word ''petroleum'' comes from  for rocks and  for oil.
Geologists often refer to the temperature range in which oil forms as an "oil window"—below the minimum temperature oil remains trapped in the form of kerogen, and above the maximum temperature the oil is converted to natural gas through the process of thermal cracking.
The peak of oil discoveries was in 1965, and oil production per year has surpassed oil discoveries every year since 1980.
Analysts expect that $150 billion will be spent on further developing North American tight oil fields in 2015.
By 347 AD, oil was produced from bamboo-drilled wells in China.
While significant volumes of oil are extracted from oil sands, particularly in Canada, logistical and technical hurdles remain, as oil extraction requires large amounts of heat and water, making its net energy content quite low relative to conventional crude oil.
Oil is often recovered as a water-in-oil emulsion, and specialty chemicals called demulsifiers are used to separate the oil from water.
A group directed by Major Alexeyev of the Bakinskii Corps of Mining Engineers hand-drilled a well in the Baku region in 1848.
In fact, 24 percent of the oil consumed in 2004 went to the United States alone, though by 2007 this had dropped to 21 percent of world oil consumed.
Viability of the oil commodity is controlled by several key parameters, number of vehicles in the world competing for fuel, quantity of oil exported to the world market (Export Land Model), Net Energy Gain (economically useful energy provided minus energy consumed), political stability of oil exporting nations and ability to defend oil supply lines.
for medical purposes.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) said in 2010 that production of conventional crude oil had peaked in 2006 at 70 MBBL/d, then flattened at 68 or 69 thereafter.
However, in an underground oil reservoir the proportions of gas, liquid, and solid depend on subsurface conditions and on the phase diagram of the petroleum mixture.
During the winter, butane (C4H10), is blended into the gasoline pool at high rates, because its high vapor pressure assists with cold starts.
An oil well produces predominantly crude oil, with some natural gas dissolved in it.
In oil producing countries with little refinery capacity, oil is sometimes burned to produce electricity.
Early British explorers to Myanmar documented a flourishing oil extraction industry based in Yenangyaung that, in 1795, had hundreds of hand-dug wells under production.
These compounds have a very high water solubility, and thus tend to dissolve and move with water.
Because most hydrocarbons are less dense than rock or water, they often migrate upward through adjacent rock layers until either reaching the surface or becoming trapped within porous rocks (known as reservoirs) by impermeable rocks above.
Their composition can be used to identify their sources of origin, and tarballs themselves may be dispersed over long distances by deep sea currents.
About 80 percent of the world's readily accessible reserves are located in the Middle East, with 62.5 percent coming from the Arab 5: Saudi Arabia, UAE, Iraq, Qatar and Kuwait.
gasoline, diesel, jet fuel), 24 percent by industry (e.g.
Oil extraction is simply the removal of oil from the reservoir (oil pool).
Since virtually all economic sectors rely heavily on petroleum, peak oil, if it were to occur, could lead to a "partial or complete failure of markets".
'''Petroleum''' (from : "rock" + ''oleum'': "oil".)
Pechelbronn (Pitch fountain) is said to be the first European site where petroleum has been explored and used.
In the long term, uncertainties linger; the OPEC believes that the OECD countries will push low consumption policies at some point in the future; when that happens, it will definitely curb oil sales, and both OPEC and EIA kept lowering their 2020 consumption estimates during the past 5 years.
However, the process is influenced by underground water flows, causing oil to migrate hundreds of kilometres horizontally or even short distances downward before becoming trapped in a reservoir.
The top three oil producing countries are Russia, Saudi Arabia and the United States.
Williams's well became commercially viable a year before Drake's Pennsylvania operation and could be argued to be the first commercial oil well in North America.
Alkanes with more than 16 carbon atoms can be refined into fuel oil and lubricating oil.
In 2016 however Goldman Sachs predicts lower demand due to emerging economies concerns, especially China.
The Athabasca Oil Sands are one example of this.
3 (1.2 trillion (short scale) barrels) without oil sands, or 595&nbsp;km3 (3.74 trillion barrels) with oil sands.
Drake's well is probably singled out because it was drilled, not dug; because it used a steam engine; because there was a company associated with it; and because it touched off a major boom.
* Minas (from Indonesia, used as a reference for heavy Far East oil)
Renewable energy technologies such as solar power, wind power, micro hydro, biomass and biofuels are used, but the primary alternatives remain large-scale hydroelectricity, nuclear and coal-fired generation.
Peak oil is the projection that future petroleum production (whether for individual oil wells, entire oil fields, whole countries, or worldwide production) will eventually peak and then decline at a similar rate to the rate of increase before the peak as these reserves are exhausted.
Total world production/consumption (as of 2005) is approximately .
Oil accounts for a large percentage of the world's energy consumption, ranging from a low of 32 percent for Europe and Asia, up to a high of 53 percent for the Middle East, South and Central America (44%), Africa (41%), and North America (40%).
Both in Pechelbronn as in Wietze, the coal industry dominated the petroleum technologies.
Crude oil may be considered ''light'' if it has low density or ''heavy'' if it has high density; and it may be referred to as sweet if it contains relatively little sulfur or ''sour'' if it contains substantial amounts of sulfur.
Incomplete combustion of petroleum or gasoline results in production of toxic byproducts.
Ancient Persian tablets indicate the medicinal and lighting uses of petroleum in the upper levels of their society.
However, this does not mean that potential oil production has surpassed oil demand.
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) techniques (example: DaQing, China ) will continue to play a major role in increasing the world's recoverable oil.
Petroleum is vital to many industries, and is of importance to the maintenance of industrialized civilization itself, and thus is a critical concern to many nations.
The still active Erdpechquelle, a spring where petroleum appears mixed with water has been used since 1498, e.g.
These two countries have the world's largest deposits of oil sands.
Offshore exploration and extraction of oil disturbs the surrounding marine environment.
Under surface pressure and temperature conditions, lighter hydrocarbons methane, ethane, propane and butane occur as gases, while pentane and heavier hydrocarbons are in the form of liquids or solids.
On January 16, 1862, after an explosion of natural gas Canada's first oil gusher came into production, shooting into the air at a recorded rate of 3,000 barrels per day.
Because petroleum is a naturally occurring substance, its presence in the environment need not be the result of human causes such as accidents and routine activities (seismic exploration, drilling, extraction, refining and combustion).
The use of fossil fuels, such as petroleum, has a negative impact on Earth's biosphere, damaging ecosystems through events such as oil spills and releasing a range of pollutants into the air including ground-level ozone and sulfur dioxide from sulfur impurities in fossil fuels.
The lighter fractions of the crude oil are destroyed first, resulting in reservoirs containing an extremely heavy form of crude oil, called crude bitumen in Canada, or extra-heavy crude oil in Venezuela.
The calculus for peak oil has changed with the introduction of unconventional production methods.
Barrels from an area in which the crude oil's molecular characteristics have been determined and the oil has been classified are used as pricing references throughout the world.
Due to the large number of co-eluted hydrocarbons within oil, many cannot be resolved by traditional gas chromatography and typically appear as a hump in the chromatogram.
''Light'' crude oil is more desirable than ''heavy'' oil since it produces a higher yield of gasoline, while ''sweet'' oil commands a higher price than ''sour'' oil because it has fewer environmental problems and requires less refining to meet sulfur standards imposed on fuels in consuming countries.
This prediction was based on data available at the time of his publication in 1956.
Regardless of source, petroleum's effects when released into the environment are similar.
Midstream operations are usually included in the downstream category.
The shortest molecules, those with four or fewer carbon atoms, are in a gaseous state at room temperature.
On the other hand, oil shales are source rocks that have not been exposed to heat or pressure long enough to convert their trapped hydrocarbons into crude oil.
Sometimes, oil formed at extreme depths may migrate and become trapped at a much shallower level.
The method has been known for centuries and was patented in 1694 under British Crown Patent No.
Because of this, petroleum may be taken to oil refineries and the hydrocarbon chemicals separated by distillation and treated by other chemical processes, to be used for a variety of purposes.
The immediate outlook still hints upwards.
In the United States, primary production methods account for less than 40 percent of the oil produced on a daily basis, secondary methods account for about half, and tertiary recovery the remaining 10 percent.
330 covering, "A way to extract and make great quantities of pitch, tar, and oil out of a sort of stone."
Already 1858 Georg Christian Konrad Hunäus had found a significant amount of petroleum while drilling for lignite 1858 in Wietze, Germany.
An alternative mechanism was proposed by Russian scientists in the mid-1850s, the hypothesis of abiogenic petroleum origin, but this is contradicted by geological and geochemical evidence.
Formation of petroleum occurs from hydrocarbon pyrolysis in a variety of mainly endothermic reactions at high temperature and/or pressure.
Oil sands are reservoirs of partially biodegraded oil still in the process of escaping and being biodegraded, but they contain so much migrating oil that, although most of it has escaped, vast amounts are still present—more than can be found in conventional oil reservoirs.
The largest volume products of the industry are fuel oil and gasoline.
This resulted in large masses of organic material being buried under subsequent deposits such as shale formed from mud.
The kerogen in the rock can be converted into crude oil using heat and pressure to simulate natural processes.
There are declining amounts of these benchmark oils being produced each year, so other oils are more commonly what is actually delivered.
It is estimated by the International Energy Agency that about 13 percent of the world's undiscovered oil resides in the Arctic.
First adopted by PEMEX in 1986, market-linked pricing was widely accepted, and by 1988 became and still is the main method for pricing crude oil in international trade.
Extracting oil (or "bitumen") from oil/tar sand and oil shale deposits requires mining the sand or shale and heating it in a vessel or retort, or using "in-situ" methods of injecting heated liquids into the deposit and then pumping out the oil-saturated liquid.
Petroleum is used in manufacturing a wide variety of materials, and it is estimated that the world consumes about 95 million barrels each day.
The petroleum industry is involved in the global processes of exploration, extraction, refining, transporting (often with oil tankers and pipelines), and marketing petroleum products.
The name ''petroleum'' covers both naturally occurring unprocessed '''crude oil''' and petroleum products that are made up  of refined crude oil.
In its strictest sense, petroleum includes only crude oil, but in common usage it includes all liquid, gaseous and solid hydrocarbons.
Their concentration and features have been used to assess the extent of oil spills.
Petroleum is a fossil fuel derived from ancient fossilized organic materials, such as zooplankton and algae.
This can kill sea birds, mammals, shellfish and other organisms it coats.
The total cost of a plant is about 9 billion dollars per plant.
This massive organic deposit later became heated and transformed under pressure into oil.
Consumption is currently around  per day, or 4.9&nbsp;km3 per year, yielding a remaining oil supply of only about 120 years, if current demand remains static.
The burning of fossil fuels plays the major role in the current episode of global warming.
The chemical structure of petroleum is heterogeneous, composed of hydrocarbon chains of different lengths.
Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides.
Petroleum also makes up 40 percent of total energy consumption in the United States, but is responsible for only 1 percent of electricity generation.
Hydraulic fracturing creates greater permeability and increases hydrocarbon flow to the wellbore.
Oil sands have been mined since the 18th century.
In 1850 Young & Meldrum and Edward William Binney entered into partnership under the title of E.W.
A gas well produces predominantly natural gas.
The world at large consumes 30 billion barrels (4.8&nbsp;km³) of oil per year, and the top oil consumers largely consist of developed nations.
They tend to burn with a sooty flame, and many have a sweet aroma.
The BRICS (Brasil, Russia, India, China, South Africa) countries might also kick in, as China briefly was the first automobile market in December 2009.
In the 19th century, the term ''petroleum'' was often used to refer to mineral oils produced by distillation from mined organic solids such as cannel coal (and later oil shale), and refined oils produced from them; in the United Kingdom, storage (and later transport) of these oils were regulated by a series of Petroleum Acts, from the ''Petroleum Act 1863'' onwards.
Vast quantities of these remains settled to sea or lake bottoms, mixing with sediments and being buried under anoxic conditions.
production of plastics), 5 percent for residential and commercial uses, and 2 percent for electricity production.
The term was found (in the spelling "petraoleum") in 10th-century Old English sources.
In particular, the combination of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing has resulted in a significant increase in production from previously uneconomic plays.
Then the oil must be extracted using "artificial lift" means.
Components of petroleum are separated using a technique called fractional distillation.
The world's first oil refinery was built in 1856 by Ignacy Łukasiewicz.
The German invasion of the Soviet Union included the goal to capture the Baku oilfields, as it would provide much needed oil-supplies for the German military which was suffering from blockades.
The alkanes from pentane (C5H12) to octane (C8H18) are refined into gasoline, the ones from nonane (C9H20) to hexadecane (C16H34) into diesel fuel, kerosene and jet fuel.
The proportion of light hydrocarbons in the petroleum mixture varies greatly among different oil fields, ranging from as much as 97 percent by weight in the lighter oils to as little as 50 percent in the heavier oils and bitumens.
* West Texas Intermediate (WTI), a very high-quality, sweet, light oil delivered at Cushing, Oklahoma for North American oil
Hydroelectric energy could also be used instead of gasoline for cars, reducing the amount of oil needed for the world.
Great quantities of it were found on the banks of the river Issus, one of the tributaries of the Euphrates.
Oil spills on land are more readily containable if a makeshift earth dam can be rapidly bulldozed around the spill site before most of the oil escapes, and land animals can avoid the oil more easily.
At around the same time the world's first, small, oil refinery was opened at Jasło in Poland, with a larger one opened at Ploiești in Romania shortly after.
By the end of the 19th century the Russian Empire, particularly the Branobel company in Azerbaijan, had taken the lead in production.
2 This country is not a major oil producer
Today, about 90 percent of vehicular fuel needs are met by oil.
Cycloalkanes have similar properties to alkanes but have higher boiling points.
* Dubai-Oman, used as benchmark for Middle East sour crude oil flowing to the Asia-Pacific region
The exact molecular composition of crude oil varies widely from formation to formation but the proportion of chemical elements varies over fairly narrow limits as follows:
Oil production from Europe, Africa and Middle Eastern oil flowing West tends to be priced off this oil, which forms a benchmark
Just as the 1971 U.S. peak in oil production was only clearly recognized after the fact, a peak in world production will be difficult to discern until production clearly drops off.
The current reference, or pricing markers, are Brent, WTI, and Dubai/Oman.
Oil-eating bacteria biodegrade oil that has escaped to the surface.
The industry is usually divided into three major components: upstream, midstream and downstream.
* The OPEC Reference Basket, a weighted average of oil blends from various OPEC (The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) countries
The petroleum industry generally classifies crude oil by the geographic location it is produced in (e.g.
Certain naturally occurring bacteria, such as Micrococcus, Arthrobacter, and Rhodococcus have been shown to degrade these contaminants.
In the United States in 2007 about 70 percent of petroleum was used for transportation (e.g.
Within these reservoirs, fluids will typically organize themselves like a three-layer cake with a layer of water below the oil layer and a layer of gas above it, although the different layers vary in size between reservoirs.
The geographic location is important because it affects transportation costs to the refinery.
It consists of hydrocarbons of various molecular weights and other organic compounds.
A large portion of the world's total oil exists as unconventional sources, such as bitumen in Canada and extra heavy oil in Venezuela.
While the reference price may be for West Texas Intermediate delivered at Cushing, the actual oil being traded may be a discounted Canadian heavy oil—Western Canadian Select— delivered at Hardisty, Alberta, and for a Brent Blend delivered at Shetland, it may be a discounted Russian Export Blend delivered at the port of Primorsk.
Another, is the electric powered cars currently in production.
Oil products are more and more in competition with alternative sources, mainly coal and natural gas, both cheaper sources.
James S. Robbins has argued that the advent of petroleum-refined kerosene saved some species of great whales from extinction by providing an inexpensive substitute for whale oil, thus eliminating the economic imperative for open-boat whaling.
Subsalt reservoirs such as Tupi were unknown in the twentieth century, mainly because the industry was unable to probe them.
Wietze later provided about 80% of the German consumption in the Wilhelminian Era.
However, because the underground temperature and pressure are higher than at the surface, the gas may contain heavier hydrocarbons such as pentane, hexane, and heptane in the gaseous state.
For example, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane (isooctane), widely used in gasoline, has a chemical formula of C8H18 and it reacts with oxygen exothermically:
Outside of the US, a higher proportion of petroleum tends to be used for electricity.
Some of these predictions date from before the recession of the early 1980s, and the consequent reduction in global consumption, the effect of which was to delay the date of any peak by several years.
Due to the high temperatures and high pressures involved, exhaust gases from gasoline combustion in car engines usually include nitrogen oxides which are responsible for creation of photochemical smog.
Edwin Drake's  1859 well near Titusville, Pennsylvania, is popularly considered the first modern well.
In the 1950s, shipping costs made up 33 percent of the price of oil transported from the Persian Gulf to USA, but due to the development of supertankers in the 1970s, the cost of shipping dropped to only 5 percent of the price of Persian oil in USA.
Binney & Co. at Bathgate in West Lothian and E. Meldrum & Co. at Glasgow; their works at Bathgate were completed in 1851 and became the first truly commercial oil-works in the world with the first modern oil refinery, using oil extracted from locally mined torbanite, shale, and bituminous coal to manufacture naphtha and lubricating oils; paraffin for fuel use and solid paraffin were not sold until 1856.
The controversy is over how much they contribute to Earth's overall reserves and how much time and effort geologists should devote to seeking them out.
A fossil fuel, petroleum is formed when large quantities of dead organisms, usually zooplankton and algae, are buried underneath sedimentary rock and subjected to both intense heat and pressure.
Conventional vertical wells would be unable to economically retrieve these hydrocarbons.
