State-owned land, federal land controlled by the Bureau of Land Management, and private land, much of it used for cattle ranching, adjoin the other borders.
Average summer daytime temperatures range in the mid- to high 90s Fahrenheit.
They like grasslands, riparian corridors, and developed areas.
About 60&nbsp;million years ago, tectonic movements of Earth’s crust began to uplift the Colorado Plateau, of which the Painted Desert is part.
Around 150&nbsp;BCE, they began to grow corn in the area.
There they built about 100 one-story rooms around an open plaza.
Tiger salamanders, found in grassland and near major drainages, are the only salamander species known in Arizona.
Eight other sites within the park are also on the National Register, including the Painted Desert Inn and associated cabins, the Agate House Pueblo, the Painted Desert Petroglyphs and Ruins Archeological District, Newspaper Rock Petroglyphs Archeological District, Puerco Ruins and Petroglyphs, the Flattops Site (an archeological site), the Twin Buttes Archeological District, and the 35th Parallel Route (also known as the Beale Camel Trail).
Plant groups represented in the park include lycopods, ferns, cycads, conifers, ginkgoes, as well as unclassified forms.
January is the coldest month, when highs average  and lows average .
These hares are known for their bursts of speed, long leaps, and zigzag routes, all of which protect them from being eaten by golden eagles and other predators.
July is the warmest month, with an average high of  and an average low of .
The Petrified Forest is known for its fossils, especially fallen trees that lived in the Late Triassic Period, about 225&nbsp;million years ago.
Horseback riding is allowed in the wilderness areas; water for horses is available at the service station near the Painted Desert Visitor Center.
In the late 19th&nbsp;century, settlers and private stagecoach companies followed similar east–west routes.
Most of the park's intermittent streams—including Lithodendron Wash, Dead Wash, Ninemile Wash, and Dry Wash—empty into the Puerco River.
Trees and shrubs grow in riparian zones along the park's washes.
August is generally the wettest month.
Professional archeological work in the park began in the early 20th&nbsp;century when Walter Hough conducted excavations at Puerco Ruin and other sites.
The blood vessels in the huge, thin-walled ears of the jackrabbits act as heat exchangers.
In addition to petrified logs, fossils found in the park have included Late Triassic ferns, cycads, ginkgoes, and many other plants as well as fauna including giant reptiles called phytosaurs, large amphibians, and early dinosaurs.
Paleontologists have been unearthing and studying the park's fossils since the early 20th&nbsp;century.
About 800,000 people visit the park each year and take part in activities including sightseeing, photography, hiking, and backpacking.
In the southern part of the park, Cottonwood Wash and Jim Camp Wash flow into the Little Colorado River.
Two Folsom-type spear points, the earliest artifacts of Paleo-Indians found in the park, are at least that old.
Like Route&nbsp;66, it has deteriorated and is closed.
The sediments containing the fossil logs are part of the widespread and colorful Chinle Formation, from which the Painted Desert gets its name.
Protected from development and overgrazing for many years, the park has some of the best grassland in northeastern Arizona.
During the Quaternary Period (2.6&nbsp;million years ago up to today), deposits of windblown sand and alluvium covered much of the Chinle and Bidahochi.
Western pipistrelle bats feast on insects, and pallid bats eat beetles, centipedes, cicadas, praying mantises, scorpions, and other arthropods.
The Rainbow Forest Museum complex  north of the park's south entrance offers services including information and "Timeless Impressions" showings once every half-hour.
Anna's hummingbird, which can hover and fly backwards as well as forwards, is among the smallest birds in the park.
Averaging about  in elevation, the park has a dry windy climate with temperatures that vary from summer highs of about  to winter lows well below freezing.
Research in paleontology and archeology continues at the park in the 21st&nbsp;century.
Adamana, a ghost town, is about  west of the park along the BNSF tracks.
At Puerco Pueblo and many other sites within the park, petroglyphs—images, symbols, or designs—have been scratched, pecked, carved, or incised on rock surfaces, often on a patina known as desert varnish.
The visitor center, which is near the north entrance to the park, offers visitor information and shows a 20-minute orientation movie, "Timeless Impressions", once every half-hour.
The collared lizard, which occurs in every habitat, is the largest and most often seen., the only venomous snake found in the park, prefers grasslands and shrub areas.
Pets are allowed on these trails if kept on a leash, but bicycles are not.
Bisecting the park north–south is Park Road, which runs between I-40 near park headquarters on the north and U.S. Route 180 on the south.
More than 60 BNSF trains, mostly carrying freight, pass through the park every day.
Interstate&nbsp;40, which crosses the park, replaced the older highway.
Theft of petrified wood is still a problem.
All of the park's rock layers above the Chinle, except geologically recent ones found in parts of the park, have been removed by wind and water.
It consists of a variety of sedimentary rocks including beds of soft, fine-grained mudstone, siltstone, and claystone—much of which is bentonite—as well as harder sandstone and conglomerate, and limestone.
The Chinle, considered one of the richest Late Triassic fossil-plant deposits in the world, contains more than 200 fossil plant taxa.
Over the years, the line changed hands, becoming the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway, and then the BNSF.
Willows and cottonwoods are the larger plants, joined by rushes and sedges.
Most of the petroglyphs in Petrified Forest National Park are thought to be between 650 and 2,000 years old.
Bobcats and bullsnakes hunt smaller animals, such as deer mice and white-tailed antelope squirrels in the park's riparian zones.
Although this first attempt failed, in 1906 the Antiquities Act signed by President Theodore Roosevelt was used to create the Petrified Forest National Monument.
Red-spotted toads, most active in the rainy season, July through September, are found in rocky areas near streams and in canyons.
Raptors, songbirds, and ground birds are found in the park's grassland, while the Puerco River's riparian corridor is a good place for year-round residents as well as migrants such as warblers, vireos, avocets, and killdeer.
Over time, however, a persistently dry climate led to out-migration, and the last residents abandoned Puerco Pueblo in about 1380&nbsp;CE.
Here the invasive Eurasian tamarisk, also known as saltcedar, threatens native plants by crowding, using most of the available water, and increasing soil salinity by exuding salt through its leaves.
A National Park Service resurvey of the Petrified Forest in the early 1940s identified most of the large sites with stone ruins, and subsequent surveys since 1978 have identified a total of more than 600 artifact sites, many of them small.
Most backpackers enter the wilderness at the north end of the park, where parking and an access trail are available at Painted Desert Inn.
They occupied pit houses at fewer than 100 sites, at first on mesas or other vantage points and later at the base of bluffs and in lowlands, where the soil was better.
Birds commonly seen in the park include the common raven and the western meadowlark, known for its charming song.
What later became northeastern Arizona was a low plain flanked by mountains to the south and southeast and a sea to the west.
The Pueblo Builders constructed two of these large pueblos, one called Stone Axe, about  east of the park, and the other at Puerco Pueblo, which overlooks the Puerco River near the middle of the park.
The rooms had no windows or doors but each could be entered by climbing a ladder and descending through a hole in the roof.
Rather than below-ground pits, the Pueblo Builders constructed above-ground houses and storerooms that may have been capable of storing food for more than one year.
The park has many other kinds of fossils besides trees.
Pronghorns, the fastest land animals in North America, are capable of  sprints.
Increasing tourist and commercial interest in petrified wood during the late 19th&nbsp;century began to alarm residents of the region.
Hikers and backpackers may also visit the park's wilderness areas.
In the 16th&nbsp;century, Spanish explorers visited the area, and by the mid-19th&nbsp;century a U.S. team had surveyed an east–west route through the area where the park is now located and noted the petrified wood.
Despite a guard force of seven National Park Service rangers, fences, warning signs, and the threat of a $325&nbsp;fine, an estimated  of the fossil wood is stolen from the Petrified Forest every year.
After the Southwest became part of the U.S., explorers continued to look for good east–west routes along the 35th&nbsp;parallel.
About half of the park is designated wilderness.
During the Late Triassic, downed trees accumulating in river channels in what became the park were buried periodically by sediment containing volcanic ash.
Homesteaders who stayed in the area developed cattle ranches on the grasslands, and cattle grazed in the Petrified Forest until the mid-20th&nbsp;century.
Summer breezes are lighter, but the  average wind causes frequent sandstorms and dust devils, some of which reach altitudes of several thousand feet.
Petrified Forest National Park is known for its fossils, especially of fallen trees that lived in the Late Triassic period of the Mesozoic era, about 225&nbsp;million years ago.
In 2010, it and its Painted Desert Visitor Center and Rainbow Forest Museum were open from 7&nbsp;a.m. to 7&nbsp;p.m. from May&nbsp;9 through September&nbsp;6 but opened as early as 8&nbsp;a.m. and closed as late as 5&nbsp;p.m. during other parts of the year.
The site, the northern part of which extends into the Painted Desert, was declared a national monument in 1906 and a national park in 1962.
It has a bookstore, fossil exhibits, an interactive Triassic Virtual Tour, limited food service, a gift shop, and public restrooms.
The dominant plants in the park include more than 100 grass species, many native to the region.
A 2005 survey found that 447 species of flora, of which 57 species are invasive, occur in the park.
In the 1930s, the Civil Works Administration funded research in the park by archeologists H.P.
The older (lower) layers of the formation consist of fluvial and lacustrine (lake-related) deposits of silt, sand, and clay.
Beginning about 60&nbsp;million years ago, the Colorado Plateau, of which the park is part, was pushed upward by tectonic forces and exposed to increased erosion.
Visitors could stop at the Adamana train station, book a hotel room, and take a tour of what was then called the Chalcedony Forest.
The largest is the golden eagle, with a wingspan of up to .
The younger (upper) Bidahochi contains ash and lava from volcanoes that erupted nearby and as far away as southwestern Nevada.
Theft of petrified wood remains a problem in the 21st&nbsp;century.
In 2004, President George W. Bush signed a bill authorizing the eventual expansion of the park from 93,353&nbsp;acres (about 146&nbsp;mi2 or 378&nbsp;km2) to 218,533&nbsp;acres (about 341&nbsp;mi2 or 884&nbsp;km2).
It has a bookstore, museum exhibits (including the building itself), and public restrooms.
U.S. Route&nbsp;66, a former transcontinental auto highway developed in 1926 from part of the National Old Trails Road, ran parallel to the railroad tracks until it was decommissioned in 1985.
The average relative humidity of the area is well below 50&nbsp;percent and at times less than 15&nbsp;percent.
Sightseeing is available by private automobile, motorcycle, commercial tour, bicycle, and hiking.
More than 400 species of plants, dominated by grasses such as bunchgrass, blue grama, and sacaton, are found in the park.
Between 6000&nbsp;BCE and 1&nbsp;CE, the Archaic–Early Basketmaker Era, nomadic groups established seasonal camps in the Petrified Forest from which they hunted small game such as rabbits, pronghorn antelope, and deer and harvested seeds from Indian ricegrass and other wild plants.
Although the park is known for its fossils and eroded badlands, its main environment is semi-desert shrub steppe.
An unconformity (break in the rock record) of about 200&nbsp;million years occurs within the park, where erosion has removed all the rock layers above the Chinle except geologically recent ones.
Occasional shorebirds and eastern birds also visit the park.
In contrast to the relatively bare badlands below, the rim is covered with shrubs, small trees, grasses, and herbs.
The Painted Desert Inn,  north of the Painted Desert Visitor Center, offers visitor information.
With a few exceptions such as unpaved Old Highway 66, bicycles must stay on paved roads such as the  main park road and stay off trails and unpaved surfaces.
Growing among the grasses are flowering species such as evening primrose, mariposa lily, and blue flax, and shrubs such as sagebrush, saltbush, and rabbitbrush.
Woodhouse’s toads, which are seldom seen, are the largest toads in the park.
The park is open every day except Christmas (December 25) on a schedule that varies slightly with the seasons.
For students and teachers, the rangers offer educational materials and field-trip talks.
In the northern part of the park, the volcanic soils of the Bidahochi Formation support abundant plant life along the Painted Desert rim.
Rain is heaviest from July through September, when about half of the park's annual average precipitation falls during short, violent thunderstorms.
More than 200 pueblo-builder sites have been identified in the park at a wide variety of locations—at the mouths of washes, near seeps, and on moisture-holding sand dunes.
During the period of the Bidahochi deposition, a large lake basin covered much of northeastern Arizona.
Seven kinds of amphibians, which drink no water but absorb it through their permeable skins, have been identified in Petrified Forest National Park.
Named for its large deposits of petrified wood, the fee area of the park covers about , encompassing semi-desert shrub steppe as well as highly eroded and colorful badlands.
The park road, parking lots, and turn-outs are big enough to accommodate large recreational vehicles.
At the same time, climatic conditions changed again, this time for the better, between 900 and 1275&nbsp;CE.
Thirty-five species live in the park only during the summer and 11 species only during the winter.
By about 2,000 years ago, they were growing corn in the area and shortly thereafter building pit houses in what would become the park.
Regularly scheduled events include a Painted Desert Inn tour, a Triassic program at the Rainbow Forest Museum sunroom, a talk or walk along the Giant Logs Trail behind the museum, and a Puerco Pueblo guided walk.
Six years after the signing of the Wilderness Act in 1964 by President Lyndon B. Johnson, wilderness areas (where human activity is limited), were designated in the park.
The fee area of the park covers about .
The Painted Desert Visitor Center, designed by modernist architect Richard Neutra, is part of the Painted Desert Community Complex Historic District and is on the National Register of Historic Places.
Its bentonite clay, which swells when wet and shrinks while drying, causes surface movement and cracking that discourages plant growth.
Much of the park’s petrified wood is from ''Araucarioxylon arizonicum'' trees, while some found in the northern part of the park is from ''Woodworthia arizonica'' and ''Schilderia adamanica'' trees.
The highest recorded temperature was  in 1998, and the lowest was  in 1971.
Other organic matter—typically leaves, seeds, cones, pollen grains, spores, small stems, and fish, insect, and animal remains—have been preserved in the park as compression fossils, flattened by the weight of the sediments above until only a thin film remains in the rock.
However, the park's oldest Spanish inscriptions, left by descendants of the region's early Spanish colonists, date only to the late 19th&nbsp;century.
Later inhabitants built above-ground dwellings called pueblos.
As climatic conditions worsened for farming between 750 and 900&nbsp;CE, the settlements changed with the Pueblo I Era.
Riders and hikers are asked to travel along dry washes as much as possible to reduce the impact on fragile desert soils.
The Navajo Nation borders the park on the north and northeast.
Holbrook, about  west of park headquarters along I-40, is the nearest city.
Overnight parking is not allowed except in the case of backpackers with wilderness hiking permits.
Exposed to wind and water, the Chinle usually erodes differentially into badlands made up of cliffs, gullies, mesas, buttes, and rounded hills.
Eventually parts of the plateau rose to  above sea level.
Free permits are required for overnight stays; they are issued from the Painted Desert Visitor Center, Painted Desert Inn, and Rainbow Forest Museum.
It has a bookstore, exhibits, a restaurant open from 8&nbsp;a.m. to 3&nbsp;p.m., a gift shop, a gas station, a post office open from 11&nbsp;a.m. to 1&nbsp;p.m. Monday through Friday, a postal drop box, and public restrooms.
More than 16 kinds of lizards and snakes live in various habitats in the park and consume large quantities of insects, spiders, scorpions, other reptiles, and small mammals.
Coyotes dine largely on rodents but also eat fruits, reptiles, insects, small mammals, birds, and carrion.
Later, roads and a railway followed similar routes and gave rise to tourism and, before the park was protected, to large-scale removal of fossils.
In 1921, Annie Alexander, founder of the museum, visited Blue Mesa to collect more of the phytosaur and other specimens; this led to further excavations by paleontologist Charles Camp.
Rangers offer a variety of programs about the park.
Although much of the Bidahochi has since eroded, a small part of it outcrops in the northern part of the park—on Pilot Rock in the park’s wilderness section and along the rim of the Painted Desert between Pintado and Tawa points.
In 1853, a crew led by U.S. Army Lieutenant Amiel Whipple surveyed along a sandy wash in the northern part of the Petrified Forest.
Also close to the 35th&nbsp;parallel was the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad.
Of those, 33 species breed within the park, 6 other species probably do, and 18 species live in the park year-round.
Park clocks are always set to Mountain Standard Time, as Arizona does not observe Daylight Saving Time.
The Bidahochi Formation, laid down only 8 to 4&nbsp;million years ago, rests directly atop the Chinle, and rocks laid down in the Jurassic, Cretaceous, and much of the Tertiary are absent.
Jessee Walter Fewkes, the first archeologist to visit Puerco Ruin, predicted in the late 19th&nbsp;century that it would yield many artifacts.
At an elevation of more than , Petrified Forest National Park has a chance of light snow from October through March, although snow cover rarely persists.
Although a changing climate caused the last of the park's pueblos to be abandoned by about 1400&nbsp;CE, more than 600 archeological sites, including petroglyphs, have been discovered in the park.
'''Petrified Forest National Park''' is a United States national park in Navajo and Apache counties in northeastern Arizona.
The park has preserved within its boundaries a small grassy section of the road.
A survey conducted in 2006 identified 216 species of birds known to have occurred in Petrified Forest National Park since the park became a protected area in 1906.
No campgrounds or overnight lodging are available in the park, although nearby communities such as Holbrook offer motels and other accommodations.
Some of the larger animals roaming the grasslands include pronghorns, black-tailed jackrabbits (hares), Gunnison's prairie dogs, coyotes, bobcats and foxes.
Group camping is limited to eight people.
Within the park, the sediments containing the fossil logs for which the park is named are part of the Chinle Formation.
These named trails are Painted Desert Rim, Puerco Pueblo, Blue Mesa, Crystal Forest, Giant Logs, Long Logs, and Agate House.
By 1&nbsp;CE, as their farming techniques improved, some built houses in the Petrified Forest and began to stay there year-round.
Between 1934 and 1942, the federal Civilian Conservation Corps built road, trails, and structures in the monument, and the government acquired additional land in the Painted Desert section.
Streams flowing across the plain from the highlands deposited inorganic sediment and organic matter, including trees as well as other plants and animals that had entered or fallen into the water.
Although most organic matter decays rapidly or is eaten by other organisms, some is buried so quickly that it remains intact and may become fossilized.
Among the wide variety of grasses are native perennial bunchgrass, blue grama, sacaton, sideoats grama, bearded sprangletop, and bush muhly.
In 1895, the Arizona Territorial Legislature asked the U.S. Congress to create a petrified forest national park.
So impressed was Whipple by the petrified wood along the banks of the arroyo that he named it Lithodendron Creek (Stone Tree Creek).
Its opening in the early 1880s led to the founding of towns like Holbrook and Adamana.
Historic Highway&nbsp;180, an earlier alignment of the modern route, crosses the southern edge of the park.
Conservationist John Muir conducted the first excavations of the ruin in 1905–06.
This warping of Earth’s surface led to the gradual and continuing destruction of the plateau by erosion.
The greatest diversity of birds occurs during fall and winter migrations.
At its peak, perhaps 200 people lived in this pueblo.
The terrain varies from gentle hills and major petrified wood deposits in the south to eroded badlands in the north.
Invasive species that crowd out slower-spreading natives include annual lovegrass and brome (cheat grass).
The park hosts special events related to Earth Science Week and National American Indian Heritage Month.
On Saturdays from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day at the Painted Desert Inn, artisans from the region give cultural demonstrations related to ancient peoples, intertribal relationships, and European-descent cultures.
The park's earliest human inhabitants arrived at least 8,000 years ago.
During this period, the region that is now the park was near the equator on the southwestern edge of the supercontinent Pangaea, and its climate was humid and sub-tropical.
Off-road vehicle travel, including by mountain bike, is not allowed.
The park's headquarters is about  east of Holbrook along Interstate 40 (I-40), which parallels the BNSF Railway's Southern Transcon, the Puerco River, and historic U.S. Route 66, all crossing the park roughly east–west.
The Great Plains toad, the most common toad in the park, prefers grasslands.
Exposed by erosion of the Bidahochi are volcanic landforms called maars (flat-bottomed, roughly circular volcanic craters of explosive origin).
From the 16th through the 18th&nbsp;centuries, explorers looking for routes between Spanish colonies along the Rio Grande to the southeast and other Spanish colonies on the Pacific coast to the west passed near or through the area, which they called ''El Desierto Pintado'', the Painted Desert.
A slightly later route along the parallel was a wagon road, built between 1857 and 1860, that involved experimental use of camels as transport.
During the Pueblo I Era, most sites were single-family homes, but as soils became exhausted many sites were abandoned by 1250&nbsp;CE in favor of very large multi-room pueblos close to more dependable sources of water.
The prairie dogs live in large colonies or "towns", near which many other species find food and shelter.
The park's seven maintained hiking trails, some paved, vary in length from less than  to nearly .
Groundwater dissolved silica (silicon dioxide) from the ash and carried it into the logs, where it formed quartz crystals that gradually replaced the organic matter.
At least nine species of fossil trees from the park have been identified; all are extinct.
Resident spadefoot toads include the New Mexico, plains, and Couch's varieties.
More than 600 archeological sites have been found inside the boundaries of Petrified Forest National Park.
However, a small fraction of the logs and most of the park’s petrified animal bones have cells and other spaces that are mineral-filled but still retain much of their original organic structure.
With these permineralized fossils, it is possible to study the cellular make-up of the original organisms with the aid of a microscope.
The monument became a national park in 1962.
Developed areas around the visitor center and museum attract western tanagers, hermit warblers, house finches, and others.
The park’s elevation above sea level varies from a low of  along the Puerco River to a high of  at Pilot Rock; the average elevation is about .
The Painted Desert Inn was upgraded to a National Historic Landmark in 1987.
Lack of plant cover makes the Chinle especially susceptible to weathering.
Older dunes range in age from 500,000&nbsp;years at higher elevations in the northern part of the park to about 10,000&nbsp;years in sandy drainage areas such as Lithodendron Wash. Stabilized by grasses and other vegetation, young dunes of about 1,000&nbsp;years old are found throughout the park.
Because the clear skies of the park allow for rapid cooling at night, summer lows are sometimes  below the daily highs.
Winter winds can reach .
Evidence suggests that the earliest inhabitants of the park arrived at least 8,000 years ago.
Many unpaved maintenance roads, closed to the public, intersect Park Road at various points.
In Petrified Forest National Park, most of the logs in the park retained their original external form during petrification but lost their internal structure.
