This was quite an important feature of the shield, especially for the hoplites that remained in the latter ranks.
It was also reconsidered by the Confederate Army at the time of the American Civil War and some were even manufactured but these were probably never issued.
The phalanx therefore presented a shield wall and a mass of spear points to the enemy, making frontal assaults against it very difficult.
The Macedonian phalanx now was used to pin the centre of the enemy line, while cavalry and more mobile infantry struck at the foe's flanks.
A meaningful comparison can be made between the Classical phalanx and late medieval pike formations.
It spanned from chin to knee and was very heavy (8–15&nbsp;kg).
''Doratismos'': Repeated, rapid spear thrusts in order to disrupt the enemy formation.
Pikes were again manufactured for a short time during World War Two, and became known as "Croft's Pikes".
The Macedonian Phalanx had weaknesses similar to its hoplitic predecessor.
Such arguments have led to a wave of counter-criticism to physical shoving theorists.
Homer used the term to differentiate the formation-based combat from the individual duels so often found in his poems.
Rough terrain or hilly regions would have made it difficult to maintain a steady line and would have defeated the purpose of employing the use of a phalanx.
Many historians believe that this innovation was precipitated by their desire to minimize their losses from Persian archery.
Rome would eventually conquer most of the Macedonian successor states, and the various Greek city-states and leagues.
The decline of the ''diadochi'' and the phalanx was inextricably linked with the rise of Rome and the Roman legion, from the 3rd century BC.
Historians have not arrived at a consensus about the relationship between the Greek formation and these predecessors of the hoplites.
Cavalry would be used at this point to mop up the scattered enemy.
As weaponry and armour advanced through the years in different city-states, the phalanx became complex and effective.
These short swords were usually used to slice the enemy's throat during close combat.
When enemy infantry was approaching, a rapid switch to the ''pycne'' (spelled also ''pucne'') formation (dense or tight formation) was necessary.
The principles of shield wall and spear hedge were almost universally known among the armies of major civilizations throughout history, and so the similarities may be related to convergent evolution instead of diffusion.
The short sword was a secondary weapon, used if the dory was broken or lost.
Four to a maximum of 32 ''enomotiæ'' (depending on the era in question or the city) were forming a ''lochos'' led by a ''lochagos'', who in this way was in command of initially 100 hoplites to a maximum of ca.
An example of this would be the Battle of Lechaeum, where an Athenian contingent led by Iphicrates routed an entire Spartan mora (a unit of anywhere from 500 to 900 hoplites).
In that case, each man's space was halved ( in width) and the formation depth returned to normal.
The speed at which this would occur would also end the battle very quickly, instead of prolonged battles lasting hours.
The ancient Greek historian Polybius goes into some detail about the effectiveness of the Roman legion against the Phalanx.
''Pararrhexis'': "Breaching" the opposing phalanx, the enemy formation shatters and the battle ends.
The word has come into use in common English to describe ''"a group of people standing, or moving forward closely together"''; c.f.
Phillip's phalangites were the first force of professional soldiers seen in Ancient Greece apart from Sparta.
It is tempting to suggest that Swiss military authorities had read Classical sources and were consciously copying Hellenistic practices.
On return to his homeland, he raised a revolutionary new infantry force, which was to change the face of the Greek world.
The Greek term for "push" was used in the same metaphorical manner as the English word is (for example it was also used to describe the process of rhetorical arguments) and so cannot be said to necessarily describe a literal, physical, push of the enemy, although it is possible that it did.
An even denser formation, the ''synaspismos'' or ''sunaspismos'' (ultra tight or locked shields formation), was used when the phalanx was expected to experience extra pressure, intense missile volleys or frontal cavalry charges.
Thus a phalanx does not have a standard combat strength or composition but includes the total number of infantry, which is or will be deployed in action in a single phalanx formation.
Before the battle of the Caudine Forks, where the clumsiness of the Roman phalanx was displayed by the Samnites, the Romans had originally employed the phalanx themselves, but gradually evolved more flexible tactics resulting in the three-line Roman legion of the middle period of the Roman Republic.
Too hard prodding could get a spear stuck in a shield, which would necessitate someone in the back to lend his to the now-disarmed man.
''Othismos'': Literally "pushing" after most spears have been broken, the hoplites begin to push with their spears and spear shafts against their opponents' shields.
This would suggest that the Greek phalanx was rather the culmination and perfection of a slowly developed idea that originated many years earlier.
The earliest known depiction of a phalanx-like formation occurs in a Sumerian stele from the 25th century BC.
Facing the much larger army of Darius I, the Athenians thinned out their phalanx and consequently lengthened their front, to avoid being outflanked.
Many spear-armed troops historically fought in what might be termed phalanx-like formations.
This makes it at least , but  appears more likely.
The Swiss were also copied by German Landsknechts leading to bitterness and rivalry between competing mercenary units.
The phalanx continued to be employed by the Romans as a tactic for their third military line or ''triarii'' of veteran reserve troops armed with the hastae or spear.
Here, it has to be noted that the military manuals of Asclepiodotus and Aelian use the term lochos to denote a file in the phalanx.
The ''sarissa'' was the pike used by the Ancient Macedonian army.
Finally, most of the phalanx-centric armies tended to lack supporting echelons behind the main line of battle.
Rather, many times, the two opposing sides would find the most suitable piece of land where the conflict could be settled.
In some of the major battles between the Roman Army and Hellenistic phalanxes, Pydna (168 BC), Cynoscephalae (197 BC) and Magnesia (190 BC), the phalanx performed relatively well against the Roman army, initially driving back the Roman infantry.
Spear-armed troops continued to be important elements in many armies until the advent of reliable firearms, but did not necessarily fight in the manner of a phalanx.
They were armed with longer spears (the sarissa) and were drilled more thoroughly in more evolved, complicated tactics and manoeuvres.
The word phalanx is derived from the Greek word ''phalangos'', meaning finger.
Throughout the hoplite era, the standard hoplite armour went through many cyclical changes.
Military historians have also suggested that the Scots, particularly under William Wallace and Robert the Bruce, consciously imitated the Hellenistic phalanx to produce the Scots 'hedgehog' or schiltron.
It is unlikely that this strategy worked very often, as it is not mentioned frequently in ancient Greek literature.
The crush of men would also prevent the formation from withdrawing or retreating, which would result in much higher casualties than is recorded.
A ''taxis'' (''mora'' for the Spartans) was the greatest standard hoplitic formation of 500 to 1500 men, led by a ''strategos'' (general).
While the phalanx was in march, an ''eis bathos'' formation (loose, meaning literally "in depth") was adopted in order to move more freely and maintain order.
Herodotus states, of the Greeks at the Battle of Marathon, that "They were the first Greeks we know of to charge their enemy at a run".
The primary hoplite weapon was a spear around  in length called a ''dory''.
In the instants before impact, war cries (''alalagmœ'', sing.
Practical difficulties with this theory also include the fact that, in a shoving match, an 8-foot spear is too long to fight effectively or even parry attacks.
He deduces that the Romans refused to fight the phalanx where the phalanx was most effective and offered battle only when they felt that they could exploit the clumsiness and immobility of the phalanx.
Pike and shot became a military standard in the 16th and 17th century.
These changes reflected the balancing of mobility with protection, especially as cavalry became more prominent in the Peloponnesian War and the need to combat light troops, which were increasingly used to negate the hoplites role as the primary force in battle.
With the extra spear length, up to five rows of phalangites could project their weapon beyond the front rank—keeping the enemy troops at a greater distance.
Swiss pike phalanxes of the Burgundian Wars were dynamic and aggressive resulting in the destruction of the 'modern' Burgundian army and the death of Charles the Bold.
This medium-sized shield (and indeed, large for the time) was made possible partly by its dish-like shape, which allowed it to be supported with the rim on the shoulder.
Adrian Goldsworthy, in his article "The Othismos, Myths and Heresies: The nature of Hoplite Battle" argues that the physical pushing match model does not fit with the average casualty figures of hoplite warfare, nor the practical realities of moving large formations of men in battle.
Thus, by localising the attacking power of the hoplites, Epaminondas was able to defeat an enemy previously thought invincible.
But the circular shield was not without its disadvantages.
While these soldiers continued to help press forward, they did not have the added burden of holding up their shield.
Thus, a phalanx facing non-phalangite formations required some sort of protection on its flanks—lighter or at least more mobile infantry, cavalry, etc.
The phalanx of the Ancient Macedonian kingdom and the later Hellenistic successor states was a development of the hoplite phalanx.
Each individual hoplite carried his shield on the left arm, protecting not only himself but the soldier to the left.
Two of the basic strategies seen in earlier warfare include the principle of cohesion and the use of large groups of soldiers.
For instance, at Delium in 424 the Athenian left flank, a formation eight men deep, held off a formation of Thebans twenty-five deep without immediate collapse.
This was a common problem, especially for soldiers who were involved with the initial clash with the enemy.
In the numerous wars of the Successor states the expense of the supporting arms and cavalry, and widespread use of mercenaries, caused the Diadochi to rely on phalanx vs. phalanx tactics.
However, this battle found the Scots pitted against effective light artillery and advancing over bad ground, which disorganised the Scottish phalanxes and left them easy prey to English longbow shooting and attacks by shorter but more effective English polearms called bills.
The commander-in-chief was usually called a ''polemarchos'' or a ''strategos autocrator''.
The more disciplined and courageous the army, the more likely it was to win – often engagements between the various city-states of Greece would be resolved by one side fleeing before the battle.
The ''promachœ'' (the front-liners) had to be physically and psychologically fit and disciplined to avoid wavering, and were often veterans who had proven themselves in battle before .
Battles between two phalanxes usually took place in open, flat plains where it was easier to advance and stay in formation.
It is perhaps more likely that the formation was devised in the 7th century BC after the introduction of the aspis by the city of Argos, which would have made the formation possible.
In this case, the phalanx would sacrifice its left side, which typically consisted of allied troops, in an effort to overtake the enemy from the flank.
The term is particularly (and originally) used to describe the use of this formation in Ancient Greek warfare, although the ancient Greek writers used it to also describe any massed infantry formation, regardless of its equipment, as does Arrian in his ''Array against the Alans'' when he refers to his legions.
Since the ''sarissa'' was wielded two-handed, phalangites carried much smaller shields that were strapped to their arms.
Hoplites carried a circular shield called a ''hoplon'' (often referred to as an ''aspis'') made from wood and covered in bronze, measuring roughly  in diameter.
The entire army, a total of several ''taxeis'' or ''moræ'' was led by a generals' council.
The basic combat element of the Greek armies was either the ''stichos'' (meaning "file"; usually 8-16 men strong) or the ''enomotia'' (meaning "sworn" and made up by 2-4 ''stichœ;'' totaling up to 32 men), both led by a ''dimœrites'' who was assisted by a ''decadarchos'' and two ''decasterœ'' (sing.
The opposing sides would collide, possibly severing many of the spears of the row in front and killing the front part of the enemy army due to the bone breaking collision of the start of the battle.
The 'phalangites' were armed with much longer spears (the ''sarissa''; see below), and less heavily armoured.
Particular parallels can be seen in the Middle Ages and Renaissance city-states of the Low Countries (modern Holland and Belgium), the cantons of Switzerland and the city-states of Northern Italy.
A few pikes or half pikes and a few halberds were retained among regimental colour guards but even these were fast disappearing by the time of Napoleon.
Ancient Egyptian infantry were known to have employed similar formations.
It was held one-handed, with the other hand holding the hoplite's shield (called Aspis).
In addition, the last 6-18 ranks of soldiers held their spears in the air over the front ranks, making an effective barrier against missiles .
The early history of the phalanx is largely one of combat between hoplite armies from competing Greek city-states.
It also allowed a higher proportion of the soldiers to be actively engaged in combat at a given time (rather than just those in the front rank).
There, the Theban general Epaminondas thinned out the right flank and centre of his phalanx, and deepened his left flank to an unheard-of 50 men deep.
The combined arms tactics used by Alexander and his father were gradually replaced by a return to the simpler frontal charge tactics of the hoplite phalanx.
These gaps left parts of the hoplite exposed to potentially lethal spear thrusts and were a persistent vulnerability for hoplites controlling the front lines.
A collapsible pike was invented but never issued.
(The cavalry ''xyston'' was  by comparison.)
More importantly, though, Phillip's phalanx was part of a multi-faceted, combined force that included a variety of skirmishers and cavalry, most notably the famous Companion cavalry.
Notable war cries were the Athenian (''elelelelef!
Traditionally, historians date the origin of the hoplite phalanx of ancient Greece to the 8th century BC in Sparta, but this is under revision.
This could be the longest phase.
The phalanx depth could vary depending on the needs of the moment and plans of the general.
The most experienced hoplites were often placed on the right side of the phalanx, to avoid these problems.
''Ephodos'': The hoplites stop singing their ''pæanes'' (battle hymns) and move towards the enemy, gradually picking up pace and momentum.
The Swiss first used the halberd in the 14th century but—outreached by Austrian cavalry armed with lances—the Swiss gradually adopted pikes in the later 15th century.
Philip II of Macedon spent several years in Thebes as a hostage, and paid attention to Epaminondas' innovations.
This allowed the Thebans to assault in strength the elite Spartan troops on the right flank of the opposing phalanx.
It was also used as a secondary weapon if the main shaft snapped or to kill enemies lying on the ground as the formation passed over.
The prodding could also open up a man to allow a comrade to spear him.
One of the main reasons for this slow approach was to maintain formation.
Yet, it should be noted that no Greek art ever depicts anything like a phalanx pushing match and this hypothesis is a product of educated speculation rather than explicit testimony from contemporary sources.
With the development of the bayonet the last major use of pike was the early 18th century with the weapon rapidly disappearing in Western European armies by the time of the Battle of Blenheim.
Because the strength of a phalanx depended on the ability of the hoplites to maintain their frontline, it was crucial that a phalanx be able to quickly and efficiently replace fallen soldiers in the front ranks.
After reaching its zenith in the conquests of Alexander the Great, the phalanx as a military formation began a slow decline, mirrored by the decline in the Macedonian successor states themselves.
Some Italian states raised their own pike units as well as employing Swiss mercenary pikemen in the 15th and 16th century.
Once the Spartan right had been routed by the Theban left, the remainder of the Spartan line also broke.
Instead, the phalangites strapped a smaller ''pelte'' shield (usually reserved for light skirmishers – peltasts) to their left forearm.
The pike was briefly reconsidered as a weapon by European armies in the late 18th and early 19th century as protection for riflemen, whose slower rate of fire made them vulnerable.
It is possible that long spear tactics (also found in North Wales) were an established part of more irregular warfare in parts of Britain prior to 1066.
The term itself, as used today, does not refer to a distinctive military unit or division (e.g., the Roman legion or the contemporary Western-type battalion), but to the general formation of an army's troops.
Theoretically indestructible from the front, its flanks and rear were very vulnerable, and once engaged it may not easily disengage or redeploy to face a threat from those directions.
the battles of Thermopylae and Plataea).
However, the phalanx did not disappear as a military tactic altogether.
Throughout the Greco-Persian Wars the hoplite phalanx was to prove superior to the Persian infantry (e.g.
This debate has yet to be resolved amongst scholars.
''alalagmos'') would be made.
Although accounts of its length vary, it is usually now believed to have been seven to nine feet long (~2.1–2.7 m).
Despite its mobility, protective curve, and double straps the circular shape created gaps in the shield wall at both its top and bottom.
This is further evidenced by the Chigi vase, dated to 650 BC, identifying hoplites armed with aspis, spear and panoply.
For this reason, the formation was deliberately organized to group friends and family closely together, thus providing a psychological incentive to support one's fellows, and a disincentive through shame to panic or attempt to flee.
In classical Greek dialect, there is no word for swordsmen; yet hoplites also carried a short sword, called a ''xiphos''.
Although this reduced the shield wall, the extreme length of the spear prevented most enemies from closing, as the pikes of the first three to five ranks could all be brought to bear in front of the front row.
The use of long spears would keep enemies apart as well as allow men in a row to assist their comrades next to them.
The Scots certainly used imported French pikes and dynamic tactics at the Battle of Flodden.
A pushing match would put enemies so close together that a quick stabbing with a knife would kill the front row almost instantly.
The hoplites would lock their shields together, and the first few ranks of soldiers would project their spears out over the first rank of shields.
The great length of the pike was balanced by a counterweight at the rear end, which also functions as a butt-spike, allowing the ''sarissa'' to be planted into the ground.
Despite the snapping of the spear, Hoplites could easily switch to the sauroter without great consequence.
It would also be very hard to remove a ''sarissa'' from anything it stuck in (the earth, shields, and soldiers of the opposition) if it were thrust downwards, due to its length.
The phalanx is thus an example of a military formation in which the individualistic elements of battle were suppressed for the good of the whole.
The phalanx usually advanced at a walking pace, although it is possible that they picked up speed during the last several yards.
The rear ranks used the secondary end to finish off fallen opponents as the phalanx advanced over them.
The first usage of the term ''phalanx'' comes from Homer's "(φαλαγξ)", used to describe hoplites fighting in an organized battle line.
Meanwhile, the centre and right flank of the Theban line were echeloned back, from the opposing phalanx, keeping the weakened parts of the formation from being engaged.
800–350 BC) was a formation in which the hoplites would line up in ranks in close order.
Some groups, such as the Spartans at Nemea, tried to use this phenomenon to their advantage.
However, there are numerous examples of shallow phalanxes holding off an opponent.
It also meant that, in battle, a phalanx would tend to drift to the right (as hoplites sought to remain behind the shield of their neighbour).
After routing the Persian wings, the hoplites on the Athenian wings wheeled inwards, destroying the elite troop at the Persian centre, resulting in a crushing victory for Athens.
Armies of the Low Countries were first armed with spears, then pikes, and were defeating French and Burgundian forces by the 14th century.
However, at Cynoscephalae and Magnesia, failure to defend the flanks of the Phalanx led to defeat; whilst at Pydna, the loss of cohesion of the Phalanx when pursuing retreating Roman soldiers allowed the Romans to penetrate the formation, where the latter's close combat skills proved decisive.
The hoplite phalanx of the Archaic and Classical periods in Greece (ca.
If the hoplites of the phalanx were to pick up speed toward the latter part of the advance it would have been for the purpose of gaining momentum against the enemy in the initial collision.
The Macedonian phalanx was much less able to form a shield wall, but the lengthened spears would have compensated for this.
The '''phalanx''' (, ; plural '''phalanxes''' or '''phalanges'''; Ancient and Modern Greek: ) was a rectangular mass military formation, usually composed entirely of heavy infantry armed with spears, pikes, sarissas, or similar weapons.
and the Macedonian (''alalalalai!
There was a leader in each row of a phalanx, and a rear rank officer, the ''ouragos'' (meaning tail-leader), who kept order in the rear.
This then implies that the hoplites ranks closer to the front must be mentally prepared to replace their fallen comrade and adapt to his new position without disrupting the structure of the frontline.
These territories were incorporated into the Roman Republic, and as these Hellenic states had ceased to exist, so did the armies which had used the traditional phalanx formation.
"a phalanx of police".
For instance, if ''Othismos'' were to accurately describe a physical pushing match, it would be logical to state that the deeper phalanx would always win an engagement, since the physical strength of individuals would not compensate for even one additional rank on the enemy side.
Yet bronze armour remained in some form until the end of the hoplite era.
Some have interpreted contemporary sources as describing the bills cutting off the heads of Scots pikes.
Spears enable a formation of men to keep their enemies at a distance, parry attacks aimed at them and their comrades, and give the necessary reach to strike multiple men in the opposite formation.
The hoplites had to trust their neighbours to protect them, and be willing to protect their neighbours; a phalanx was thus only as strong as its weakest elements.
This article focuses on the use of the military phalanx formation in Ancient Greece, the Hellenistic world, and other ancient states heavily influenced by Greek civilization.
500 in the late Hellenistic armies.
The spearhead was usually a curved leaf shape, while the rear of the spear had a spike called a ''sauroter'' ('lizard-killer') which was used to stand the spear in the ground (hence the name).
In doing so, Epaminondas reversed the convention by which the right flank of the phalanx was strongest.
In synaspismos, the rank depth was half that of a normal phalanx and the width each man occupied was as small as .
The actual length of the ''sarissa'' is now unknown, but apparently it was twice as long as the ''dory''.
Another possible theory as to the birth of Greek phalanx warfare stems from the idea that some of the basic aspects of the phalanx were present in earlier times yet were not fully developed due to the lack of appropriate technology.
The usual result was rather identical, inflexible formations pushing against each other until one broke.
''Krousis'': The opposing phalanxes meet each other almost simultaneously along their front.
In short, the hypothesis is far from being academically resolved.
The Greek word ''dynamis'', the "will to fight", expresses the drive that kept hoplites in formation.
When in combat, the whole formation would consistently press forward trying to break the enemy formation; thus when two phalanx formations engaged, the struggle essentially became a pushing match.
This meant that the ''aspis'' was no longer a practical defence.
The potential of the phalanx to achieve something more was demonstrated at Battle of Marathon (490 BC).
Eventually, even greaves became less commonly used, although degrees of heavier armour remained, as attested by Xenophon as late as 401 BC.
It is difficult with the physical pushing model to imagine eight men withstanding the pushing force of twenty-five opponents for a matter of seconds, let alone half the battle.
Such a phalanx formation also reduces the likelihood that battles would degenerate into a pushing match.
Perhaps the most prominent example of the phalanx's evolution was the oblique advance, made famous in the Battle of Leuctra.
An Archaic hoplite typically wore a bronze breastplate, a bronze helmet with cheekplates, as well as greaves and other armour.
This was also the initial battle formation as, in addition, it permitted friendly units to pass through whether assaulting or retreating.
Here the troops seem to have been equipped with spears, helmets, and large shields covering the whole body.
Because of its great length, weight and differing balance, a ''sarissa'' was wielded two-handed.
The battle would then rely on the valour of the men in the front line; whilst those in the rear maintained forward pressure on the front ranks with their shields.
Each hoplite provided his own equipment.
Its supremacy over the more static armies fielded by the Greek city-states was shown at the Battle of Chaeronea, where Philip II's army crushed the allied Theban and Athenian phalanxes.
Therefore, although a Macedonian phalanx would have formed up in a similar manner to the hoplite phalanx, it possessed very different tactical properties.
