degree before they are eligible to sit for the North American Pharmacist Licensure Examination (NAPLEX) to enter into pharmacy practice.
*promoting public health by administering immunizations
Job security and increase in wages with regards to CPI could be unlikely.
One of the most important roles that pharmacists are currently taking on is one of pharmaceutical care.
Pharmacy school is four years of graduate school (accelerated Pharmacy Schools go January to January and are only 3 years), which include at least one year of practical experience.
In ancient Japan, the men who fulfilled roles similar to pharmacists were respected.
The wages for pharmacists, at about CAD $95,000, have been said to be slightly better than Australia but not as good as in the USA.
1800 hours in some states), passing the NAPLEX, and passing a Multi-state Pharmacy Jurisprudence Exam MPJE.
This likely depends on what parts of Canada and or the USA are compared.
Only three universities in the whole of Sweden offer a pharmacy education, Uppsala University, where the Faculty of Pharmacy is located, the University of Gothenburg, and Umeå University.
At pharmacies in Sweden, pharmacists work together with another class of legislated health care professionals called ''Receptarier'', in English so-called ''prescriptionists'', who have completed studies equal to a bachelor of science in pharmacy, i.e., three years of university.
Most pharmacists in Poland are pharmacy managers and are responsible for pharmacy marketing in addition to traditional activities.
The Australian Pharmacy Council is the independent accreditation agency for Australian pharmacists.
These are comprehensive on-site evaluations of the programs.
The Royal Commission on the National Health Service in 1979 reported that there were nearly 3,000 pharmacists employed in the hospital and community health service in the UK at that time.
Arkansas, California, and Virginia have their own exams instead of the MPJE and pharmacists must pass the Arkansas Jurisprudence Exam, California Jurisprudence Exam, and Virginia Law Exam, respectively.
These roles may include, but are not limited to:
The Polish name for the Master of Pharmacy Degree (M.
School pupils study in a college of pharmacy or a vocational school of pharmacy.
*providing pharmaceutical information
In order for new graduates to remain competitive, employers generally favor residency trained applicants for clinical positions.
In most countries, pharmacists must obtain a university degree at a pharmacy school or related institution, and/or satisfy other national/local credentialing requirements.
Due to the large admittance requirements and highly competitive nature of the field, most pharmacy students complete a bachelor's degree before entry to pharmacy school.
Pharmacists interpret and communicate this specialized knowledge to patients, physicians, and other health care providers.
*provision of non-prescription or over-the-counter drugs
All graduating pharmacists must now obtain the Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm.D.)
Contemporary practice of clinical pharmacists in Japan (as evaluated in September 2000) focuses on dispensing of drugs, consultation with patients, supplying drug information, advising on prescription changes and amending prescriptions.
*specialized monitoring of disease states, such as dosing drugs in kidney and liver failure
By 2024 that number is projected to grow by 3%.
Those working in private retail pharmacies were 23%, and the rest were mostly working for private wholesalers, pharmaceutical manufacturers, in academia/teaching, or with faith-based or non-governmental facilities.
Passing the exam they continue studying to gain 3-year bachelor's degrees or 4-year bachelor's degrees.
The profession is moving toward resident-trained pharmacists who wish to provide direct patient care clinical services.
*ensuring correctness of all medication labels including auxiliary labels
In some jurisdictions, pharmacists have prescriptive authority to either independently prescribe under their own authority or in collaboration with a primary care physician through an agreed upon protocol.
The graduates of a Candidate program are the same as those of fully accredited programs.
A residency gives licensed pharmacists decades of clinical experience in an extremely condensed timeframe of only a few short years.
Pharmacists may practice compounding; however, many medicines are now produced by pharmaceutical companies in a standard dosage and drug delivery form.
*providing patients with health monitoring and advice, including advice and treatment of common ailments and disease states
It now includes extensive didactic clinical preparation, a full year of hands-on practice experience in a wider array of healthcare settings, and a greater emphasis on clinical pharmacy practice pertaining to pharmacotherapy optimization.
The place of pharmacists in society was settled in the Taihō Code (701) and re-stated in the Yōrō Code (718).
Most pharmacists do earn above the award wage; the average male pharmacist earns $65,000, a female pharmacist averages $56,500.
degree curriculum is considerably different from that of the prior BS in pharmacy.
To major in pharmaceutical studies takes at least five years.
After attending the school or college they go to work.
These are on math, chemistry, and physics or biology.
*oversight of dispensing medicines on prescription
Pharmacists are educated in pharmacology, pharmacognosy, chemistry, organic chemistry, biochemistry, pharmaceutical chemistry, microbiology, pharmacy practice (including drug interactions, medicine monitoring, medication management), pharmaceutics, pharmacy law, physiology, anatomy, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, drug delivery, pharmaceutical care, nephrology, hepatology, and compounding of medications.
As of 1997, 46 universities of pharmacy in Japan graduated about 8000 students annually.
The Ministry of Health salary scale for medical doctors was considerably higher than that of pharmacists despite having a difference of only one year of training.
Today, many pharmacists work as employees in public pharmacies.
In 1990, the American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy (AACP) required the new professional degree.
Wages being significantly higher in Canada than the prospect for most developing countries, recruitment of pharmacists from South Africa and other countries with acute health workforce shortages to work in private franchise chains is subject to controversy.
All Polish pharmacies are obliged to produce compound medicines.
In many contexts, students must first complete pre-professional (undergraduate) coursework, followed by about four years of professional academic studies to obtain a degree in pharmacy (such as Doctorate of Pharmacy).
The public sector including public retail pharmacies and faith based organizations paid much less.
The role of pharmacy education, pharmacist licensing, and continuing education vary from country to country and between regions/localities within countries.
Pharmacists must be registered with the Alberta College of Pharmacists in order to practice in Alberta.
Graduates from a PharmD program may also elect to do a fellowship that is geared toward research.
Since 1975, ACPE has also been the accrediting body for continuing pharmacy education.
Canadian graduates of the pharmacy programme can sit the qualifying exam directly without the evaluating exam.
Once qualified, a pharmacist independent prescriber can prescribe any licensed medicine for any medical condition within their competence.
is ''magister farmacji'' (mgr farm).
Students spend their last year as interns in a pharmacy combined with courses at the university, with focus on the validation of prescriptions and the manufacturing of pharmaceutical formulations.
For BS Pharmacy graduates currently licensed in US, there are 10 Universities offering non-traditional doctorate degree programs via part-time, weekend or on-line programs.
Or they are university pharmacists (university pharmacist to discriminate between college pharmacist or vocational pharmacist in some countries of the world these pharmacist are call pharmacist assistants).
The Profession is Regulated by a Government Statutory body called the Pharmacists Council of Nigeria.
The West African Post Graduate College of Pharmacy runs post-registration courses on advanced-level practice in various fields of pharmacy.
Graduates receive a Doctorate of Pharmacy (PharmD) upon graduation.
In 2004 the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan and the Pharmacy Council of Pakistan revised the syllabus and changed the 4-year B.Pharmacy (Bachelor of Pharmacy) Program to a 5-year Pharm.D.
'''Pharmacists''', also known as '''chemists''' (Commonwealth English) or '''druggists''' (North American and, archaically, Commonwealth English), are healthcare professionals who practice in pharmacy, the field of health sciences focusing on safe and effective medication use.
A Pharmacist must be registered with the College of Pharmacists of British Columbia to practice in this province.
Not only pharmacists, but also pharmaceutical technicians are allowed to dispense prescription medicines, except for narcotics, psychotropics and very potent medicines.
Pharmaceutical technicians have to complete 2-years post-secondary occupational school and 2-years pharmacy training afterwards.
Pharmacists undergo university-level education to understand the biochemical mechanisms and actions of drugs, drug uses, therapeutic roles, side effects, potential drug interactions, and monitoring parameters.
About 22% work in hospitals, and the rest mainly in mail-order or Internet pharmacies, pharmaceutical wholesalers, practises of physicians, and the Federal Government.
The salaries of pharmacists varied significantly depending on the place of work.
Additional evaluations may be conducted at the discretion of ACPE in the interim between comprehensive evaluations.
To become a pharmacy manager in Poland, a pharmacist is expected to have at least 5-years professional experience.
Some institutions still offer 6 year accelerated PharmD programs (similar to 6 year MD programs), though in both cases the issuance of a doctoral degree in less than 8 years is controversial.
According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics – ''Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2016–17 Edition'', Median annual wages of wage and salary pharmacists in May 2015 were $121,500.
Pharmaceutical care involves taking direct responsibility for patients and their disease states, medications, and management of each to improve outcomes.
Full accreditation is granted to a program once they have demonstrated they comply with the standards set forth by ACPE.
transferring a license from another country) is the only degree accepted by the National Associate of Boards of Pharmacy NABP to be eligible to "sit" for the North American Pharmacist Licensure Examination (NAPLEX).
School students must take a national exam to enter a university of pharmacy or the pharmacy department of a university of medicine and pharmacy.
Once a school has enrolled students, but has not yet had a graduating class, they may be granted Candidate status.
A pharmacist is a member of the health care team directly involved with patient care.
Pharmacists can undertake additional training to allow them to prescribe medicines for specific conditions.
It conducts examinations on behalf of the Pharmacy Board of Australia towards eligibility for registration.
This status indicates that the school of pharmacy has developed its program in accordance with the ACPE standards and guidelines.
ACPE publishes standards that schools of pharmacy must comply with to gain accreditation.
The vast majority (80%) of Canada's licensed pharmacists work in community pharmacies, another 15 percent in hospital or institutional pharmacies, and the remainder work in situations that may not legally require licensed pharmacists such as associations, pharmaceutical companies, and consulting firms.
Prescriptionists also have dispensing rights in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Iceland.
Polish pharmacists have to complete a 5-and-a-half-years Master of Pharmacy Programme at medical university and obtain the Right to Practice as a Pharmacist in Poland from District Pharmaceutical Council.
Legal requirements in the US to becoming a pharmacist include: graduating from an accredited PharmD program, conducting a specified number of internship hours under a licensed pharmacist (i.e.
*assessment of patients with undiagnosed or diagnosed conditions, and ascertaining clinical medication management needs
This exam is easier than the national one.
On graduation, pharmacists are licensed, either nationally or regionally, to dispense medication of various types in the areas they have trained for.
There are thousands of Nigerian-trained Pharmacists registered and Practicing in countries such as the US, the UK, Canada etc., due to the relatively poor public sector salaries in Nigeria.
Residency is an option for post-graduates that is typically 1–2 years in length.
*Chemical engineering
Depending on the legal scope of practice, pharmacists may contribute to prescribing (also referred to as "pharmacist prescriber") and administering certain medications (e.g., immunizations) in some jurisdictions.
To be admitted to pharmacy studies, students must complete a minimum of three years of gymnasium, similar to high school (school for about 15–20-year-old students) program in natural science after elementary school (6–16-year-olds).
Since all public health professions are regulated by the government it is also necessary to acquire a federal diploma in order to work in a pharmacy.
Among other licensing requirements, different countries require pharmacists to hold either a Bachelor of Pharmacy, Master of Pharmacy, or Doctor of Pharmacy degree.
Increased numbers of drug therapies, ageing but more knowledgeable and demanding populations, and deficiencies in other areas of the health care system seem to be driving increased demand for the clinical counselling skills of the pharmacist.
The expectations of a Candidate program are that they continue to mature in accordance with stated plans.
:'''British Columbia'''
Ranked positions in the pre-Heian Imperial court were established; and this organizational structure remained largely intact until the Meiji Restoration (1868).
The Pharmacy Degree in Nigeria is unclassified i.e.
In most countries, the profession is subject to professional regulation.
A dispensing chemist usually operates from a pharmacy or chemist's shop (also called a "drug store" elsewhere), and is allowed to fulfil medical prescriptions and sell over-the-counter drugs and other health-related goods.
awarded without first class, second class upper, etc., however graduates could be awarded Pass with Distinctions in specific fields such as Pharmaceutics, Pharmacology, medicinal chemistry etc.
After being trained in the university students receive a 5-year bachelor's degree in pharmacy.
By international standards, the density of pharmacists is very low, with a mean of 0.18 per 10,000 population.
In Sweden, the national board of health and welfare regulates the practice of all legislated health care professionals, and is also responsible for registration of pharmacists in the country.
The most common pharmacist positions are that of a ''community pharmacist'' (also referred to as a ''retail pharmacist'', ''first-line pharmacist'' or ''dispensing chemist''), or a ''hospital pharmacist'', where they instruct and counsel on the proper use and adverse effects of medically prescribed drugs and medicines.
Pharmaceutical care has many benefits that may include but are not limited to: decreased medication errors; increased patient compliance in medication regimen; better chronic disease state management, including hypertension and other cardiovascular disease risk factors; strong pharmacist–patient relationship; and decreased long-term costs of medical care.
*education and counseling for patients and other health care providers on optimal use of medicines (e.g., proper use, avoidance of overmedication)
The ACPE board of directors are appointed by the American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy (AACP), the American Pharmacists Association (APhA), the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) (three appointments each), and the American Council on Education (one appointment).
Pharmacist graduates are the lowest paid university graduates most years.
In the Imperial household, the pharmacist was even ranked above the two personal physicians of the Emperor.
The Programme includes 6-months pharmacy training.
Over recent years, wages have stagnated, and even gone backwards.
Pharmacists work alongside ''pharma assistants'', an apprenticeship that takes three years to complete.
A Pharmacy school pursuing accreditation must first apply and be granted Pre-candidate status.
The education to become a licensed pharmacist is regulated by the European Union, and states that minimum educational requirements are five years of university studies in a pharmacy program, of which six months must be a pharmacy internship.
It is a college jointly  funded by a number of Countries in the West Africa sub-region.
And with two years of practice they could take an exam to enter university of pharmacy or the pharmacy department of a university of medicine and pharmacy.
This is mated to anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology.
The Australian College of Pharmacy provides continuing education programs for pharmacists.
There are more graduates expected in the next few years making it even harder to get a job.
A contract pharmacist is self-employed and often called a locum; these pharmacists may be hired for one shift or for a longer period of time.
Historically, the fundamental role of pharmacists as a healthcare practitioner was to check and distribute drugs to doctors for medication that had been prescribed to patients.
(Doctor of Pharmacy) degree is a graduate-level professional doctorate degree.
In 2014 the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics revealed that there were 297,100 American pharmacist jobs.
This includes controlled drugs except schedule 1 and prescribing certain drugs for the treatment of addiction (cocaine, heroin and dipipanone).
Pharmacists are often the first point-of-contact for patients with health inquiries.
Some may undergo further specialized training, such as in cardiology or oncology.
In this highly stable hierarchy, the pharmacists — and even pharmacist assistants — were assigned status superior to all others in health-related fields such as physicians and acupuncturists.
Training to become a registered Pharmacist in Nigeria involves a five-year course after six years of secondary/high school or four years after eight years of secondary/high school (i.e.
Three Swiss universities offer a major in pharmaceutical studies, the University of Basel, the University of Lausanne and the ETH Zurich.
This is due to the large numbers of pharmacy graduates in recent years, and government desire to lower PBS costs.
About 5–7% of students can pass the exam.
Acceptance into a doctorate of pharmacy program depends upon completing specific prerequisites or obtaining a transferable bachelor's degree.
(Doctor of Pharmacy) program.
There are 3 aspects to the exam.
Thus pharmacists have a significant role in assessing medication management in patients, and in referring patients to physicians.
Most schools require students to take a Pharmacy College Admissions Test PCAT and complete 90 credit hours of university coursework in the sciences, mathematics, composition, and humanities before entry into the PharmD program.
*clinical medication management, including reviewing and monitoring of medication regimens
Estimated timeline: 4 years undergraduate + 4 years doctorate + 1–2 years residency + 1–3 years fellowship = 8–13 years
Twenty-one universities are registered with the Pharmacy Council of Pakistan for imparting Pharmacy courses.
Professional associations include the College of Pharmacists of British Columbia and the British Columbia Pharmacy Association.
The Degree awarded by most Pharmacy Schools presently is a  Bachelor of Pharmacy Degree (B.Pharm.)
The Ontario College of Pharmacists grants licenses to practise as a Pharmacist in the province of Ontario.
ACPE is recognized for the accreditation of professional degree programs by the United States Department of Education (USDE) and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA).
This degree is considered equivalent to a 5-year bachelor's degree.
The University of Alberta is the only institution in the province awarding pharmacy degrees, offering both Bachelor of Pharmacy and Doctor of Pharmacy programs.
They will be paid according to the labour agreement of Adexa and employer associations.
All 21 universities have started the 5-year Pharm.D Program.
Pharmacists approve prescriptions fulfilled by pharmaceutical technicians subsequently.
The University of Benin has started the Pharm.D programme with other pharmacy schools planning to start soon.
Pharmacists monitor the health and progress of patients to ensure the safe and effective use of medication.
International graduates of pharmacy must successfully complete the Pharmacist Evaluating Exam and Pharmacist Qualifying Exam along with a Studentship and Internship to be registered as a Pharmacist in Ontario.
The majority of pharmacists are found in urban areas, with some underserved regions having only 2 pharmacists per region.
Possible prerequisites:
Pharmacists are eligible to prescribe medicines in exceptional circumstances.
Contract and casual work is becoming more common.
To obtain licensure in the United States, applicants for the North American Pharmacist Licensure Examination (NAPLEX) must graduate from an ACPE accredited school of pharmacy.
Wages for pharmacists in Australia appear to have stagnated.
In 2011 the Pharmacy Council of Pakistan approved the awarding of a Doctor of Pharmacy degree, a five-year programme at the Department of Pharmacy, University of Peshawar.
*supervising pharmacy technicians and other staff
There are currently 30 standards organized within six major categories of 1) mission, planning, and evaluation, 2) organization and administration, 3) curriculum, 4) students, 5) faculty and staff, 6) facilities and resources.
In the United Kingdom, most pharmacists working in the National Health Service practice in hospital pharmacy or community pharmacy.
According to 2007–2009 data, the largest group of pharmacists was employed in the public sector (44%).
Pharmacists can further specialise in various fields, which is organized by PharmaSuisse the pharmacists association of Switzerland.
Previously the United States had a 5-year bachelor's degree in pharmacy.
These schools have met all the requirements for accreditation, but have not yet enrolled any students.
In more modern times, pharmacists advise patients and health care providers on the selection, dosages, interactions, and side effects of medications, and act as a learned intermediary between a prescriber and a patient.
*Physical chemistry
*compounding medicines
In British English (and to some extent Australian English), the professional title known as "pharmacist" is also known as '''"dispensing chemist"''' or, more commonly, '''"chemist"'''.
It is not unusual for pharmaceutical studies majors to work in other fields such as the pharmaceutical industry or in hospitals.
In Sweden, pharmacists are called ''Apotekare''.
They were enthusiastic about the idea that pharmacists might develop their role of giving advice to the public.
A doctorate of pharmacy (except non-traditional, i.e.
The University of British Columbia is the only institution in the province that trains pharmacists.
Besides taking classes, additional requirements before graduating may include a certain number of hours for community service, e.g., working in hospitals, clinics, and retail.
An alternative method of obtaining a bachelor's degree is as follows.
Fellowships can varying in length but last 1–3 years depending on the program and usually require 1 year of residency at minimum.
The award wages for a pharmacist is $812 a week.
Additional curriculum may cover diagnosis with emphasis on laboratory tests, disease state management, therapeutics and prescribing (selecting the most appropriate medication for a given patient).
Those who worked in the academia were the highest paid followed by those who worked in the multilateral non-governmental organizations.
Pharmacists may also practice in a variety of other settings, including industry, wholesaling, research, academia, military, and government.
In Switzerland, the federal office of public health regulates pharmacy practice.
The new professional role for pharmacist as prescriber has been recognized in the UK since May 2006, called the "Pharmacist Independent Prescriber".
In Tanzania, pharmacy practice is regulated by the national Pharmacy Board, which is also responsible for registration of pharmacists in the country.
The customary review cycle for established accredited programs is six years, whereas for programs achieving their initial accreditation this cycle is two years.
*referrals to other health professionals if necessary
However, in the near future, all schools will offer a 6-year first Degree course leading to the award of a Pharm.D (Doctor of Pharmacy Degree).
after 2 years of Advanced-level studies in  accredited Universities).
