In the 1970s, Philadelphia soul influenced the music of that and later eras.
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board).
The city's inhabitants did not follow Penn's plans, as they crowded by the Delaware River, the port, and subdivided and resold their lots.
—Non-Hispanic White
During the 18th century, the cityscape was dominated by Georgian architecture, including Independence Hall and Christ Church.
A number of important philosophical societies were formed, which were centers of the city's intellectual life: the Philadelphia Society for Promoting Agriculture (1785), the Pennsylvania Society for the Encouragement of Manufactures and the Useful Arts (1787), the Academy of Natural Sciences (1812), and the Franklin Institute (1824).
Philadelphia will host the 2016 Democratic National Convention.
Obama's win was even greater in 2012, capturing 85% of the vote.
In 1655, a Dutch military campaign led by New Netherland Director-General Peter Stuyvesant took control of the Swedish colony, ending its claim to independence, although the Swedish and Finnish settlers continued to have their own militia, religion, and court, and to enjoy substantial autonomy under the Dutch.
Philadelphia has more murals than any other U.S. city, thanks in part to the 1984 creation of the Department of Recreation's Mural Arts Program, which seeks to beautify neighborhoods and provide an outlet for graffiti artists.
Major-sport professional sports teams that originated in Philadelphia but ultimately moved to other cities include the Golden State Warriors basketball team and the Oakland Athletics baseball team.
A variety of row houses are found throughout the city, from Victorian-style homes in North Philadelphia to twin row houses in West Philadelphia.
The racial breakdown of Philadelphia's Hispanic/Latino population was 63,636 (33.9%) White, 17,552 (9.4%) African American, 3,498 (1.9%) Native American, 884 (0.47%) Asian, 287 (0.15%) Pacific Islander, 86,626 (46.2%) from other races, and 15,128 (8.1%) from two or more races.
Twentieth-century black newcomers were part of the Great Migration out of the rural South to northern and midwestern industrial cities.
The Collegiate Rugby Championship is played every June at Talen Energy Stadium; the CRC is broadcast live on NBC and regularly draws attendances of 18,000.
Philadelphia is the only World Heritage City in the United States.
Penn planned a city on the Delaware River to serve as a port and place for government.
In the American Lung Association 2015 State of the Air report, Philadelphia County received an ozone grade of F and a 24-hour particle pollution rating of C. The county passed the annual particle pollution rating.
Education in Philadelphia is provided by many private and public institutions.
, the Spinners play in the newer MLU at various stadiums through the city and surrounding southern suburbs.
*Community College of Philadelphia
There is a higher proportion of Muslims in the Black American population than most cities in America.
Philadelphia is also home to a significant gay and lesbian population.
Philadelphia hosts numerous local and collegiate rowing clubs and competitions, including the annual Dad Vail Regatta, the largest intercollegiate rowing event in the U.S, the Stotesbury Cup Regatta, and the Head of the Schuylkill Regatta, all of which are held on the Schuylkill River.
The Philadelphia skyline is growing, with several nationally prominent skyscrapers.
Philadelphia's history attracts many tourists, with the Independence National Historical Park (which includes the Liberty Bell, Independence Hall, and other historical sites) receiving over 3.6 million visitors in 2014.
July averages , although heat waves accompanied by high humidity and heat indices are frequent; highs reach or exceed  on 27 days of the year.
Thanks to over a century of linguistics data collected by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, the Philadelphia dialect under sociolinguist William Labov has been one of the best-studied forms of American English.
The city's professional teams went without a championship from 1983, when the 76ers won the NBA Championship, until 2008, when the Phillies won the World Series.
Hospitals, universities, and higher education research institutions in Philadelphia's four congressional districts received more than $252 million in National Institutes of Health grants in 2015.
The city has played a major role in the development and support of American rock music and rap music.
Philadelphia Flyers
The city has remained loyally Democratic in every presidential election since.
The Fort Washington Expressway (Route 309) extends north from the city's northern border, serving Montgomery County and Bucks County.
Bodies of water include the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers, and Cobbs, Wissahickon, and Pennypack creeks.
Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence was signed, and the Liberty Bell are the city's most famous attractions.
In 2013, the percentage of women who gave birth in the previous 12 months who were unmarried was 56 percent.
Philadelphia has dedicated landmarks to its sister cities.
Chinatown and the Northeast have the largest Asian presences, with a large Korean community in Olney, Philadelphia.
Iroquois people occasionally fought the Lenape.
Philadelphia is served by three major non-commercial public radio stations, WHYY-FM (NPR), WRTI (jazz, classical), and WXPN-FM (adult alternative music), as well as several smaller stations.
With a gross domestic product of $388&nbsp;billion, Philadelphia ranks ninth among world cities and fourth in the nation.
Philadelphia has the third-largest student concentration on the East Coast, with over 120,000 college and university students enrolled within the city and nearly 300,000 in the metropolitan area.
The Kensington section, Port Richmond, and Fishtown have historically been heavily Irish and Polish.
In 1871, construction began on the Second Empire-style Philadelphia City Hall.
Port Richmond is well known in particular as the center of the Polish immigrant and Polish-American community in Philadelphia, and it remains a common destination for Polish immigrants.
In the 21st century, most Lenape now reside in the US state of Oklahoma, with some communities living also in Wisconsin, Ontario (Canada) and in their traditional homelands.
Early fall and late winter are generally dry; February's average of  makes it the area's driest month.
Lenape communities were weakened by newly introduced diseases, mainly smallpox, and violent conflict with Europeans.
The move makes Philadelphia the largest city in the United States to decriminalize pot.
Philadelphia's architectural history dates back to Colonial times and includes a wide range of styles.
Hip-hop/Rap artists such as The Roots, DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince, The Goats, Freeway, Schoolly D, Eve, and Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes hail from the city.
The Philadelphia Housing Authority is the largest landlord in Pennsylvania.
According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Philadelphia area had a total gross metropolitan product of $347&nbsp;billion in 2010, the seventh-largest metropolitan economy in the United States.
Dedicated in June 1976, the Sister Cities Plaza, a site of  located at 18th and Benjamin Franklin Parkway, honors Philadelphia's relationships with Tel Aviv and Florence which were its first sister cities.
In 2005, the district-run schools scored an average of 37.4% on math and 35.5% on reading.
From the 1960s up until 2006, the city's population declined year after year.
Revitalization began in the late 1990s, with gentrification turning around many neighborhoods and reversing its decades-long trend of population loss.
*Messiah College Philadelphia Campus
It meets the Pennsylvania Turnpike at King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, providing access to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and points west.
During the 2014 school year, the city spent an average of $12,570 per pupil, below the average among comparable urban school districts.
Graduation rates among district-run schools, meanwhile, have steadily increased in the last ten years.
The murder count dropped in 2002 to 288, then rose four years later to 406 in 2006 and 392 in 2007.
The Philadelphia School District is the eighth largest school district in the United States with 142,266 students in 218 public schools and 86 charter schools .
Unlike the Baltimore dialect, however, the Philadelphia accent also shares many similarities with the New York accent.
Philadelphia is the center of economic activity in Pennsylvania and is home to seven Fortune 1000 companies.
Philadelphia Eagles
And in 2014, there were 248 homicides, up by one since 2013.
In 2014, about 8,800 jobs were added to the city's economy.
In 2013, 12.7 percent of residents were foreign-born, just shy of the national average, 13.1 percent.
The city hosted the First Continental Congress before the American Revolutionary War; the Second Continental Congress, which signed the United States Declaration of Independence, during the war; and the Constitutional Convention (1787) after the war.
The city had 22,018 births in 2013, down from a peak 23,689 births in 2008.
In 2010, 24.9 percent of households reported having children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.3 percent were married couples living together and 22.5 percent had a female householder with no husband present, 6.0 percent had a male householder with no wife present, and 43.2 percent were non-families.
Between 1880 and 1930, the African-American population of Philadelphia increased from 31,699 to 219,559.
Philadelphia's importance and central location in the colonies made it a natural center for America's revolutionaries.
In 2013, Philadelphia International Airport was the 15th busiest airport in the world measured by traffic movements (i.e.
Other historic sites include homes for Edgar Allan Poe, Betsy Ross, and Thaddeus Kosciuszko, early government buildings like the First and Second Banks of the United States, Fort Mifflin, and the Gloria Dei (Old Swedes') Church.
Frank Furness is considered Philadelphia's greatest architect of the second half of the 19th century, but his contemporaries included John McArthur, Jr., Addison Hutton, Wilson Eyre, the Wilson Brothers, and Horace Trumbauer.
The Philadelphia Historical Commission was created in 1955 to preserve the cultural and architectural history of the city.
Dr. Robert G. Hamilton, founder of the choir, is a notable native Philadelphian.
Philadelphia is home to the world-renowned Philadelphia Boys Choir & Chorale, which has performed its music all over the world.
Snowfall is highly variable, with some winters bringing only light snow and others bringing several major snowstorms, with the normal seasonal snowfall standing at ; snow in November or April is rare, and a sustained snow cover is rare.
The  City Hall remained the tallest building in the city until 1987 when One Liberty Place was constructed.
In addition, consolidation in several American industries (retailing, financial services and health care in particular) reduced the number of companies headquartered in Philadelphia.
The Big 5 are Saint Joseph's University, University of Pennsylvania, La Salle University, Temple University, and Villanova University.
During the same time period, the enrollment in charter schools has increased from 33,995 students in 2010 to 62,358 students in 2015.
The Greater Philadelphia region was visited by 39 million people in 2013 generating $10 billion in economic impact.
Its long flight of steps to the main entrance became famous after the film ''Rocky'' (1976).
A study done by the city projected that the population would increase to about 1,630,000 residents by 2035, an increase of about 100,000 from 2010.
In 2013, the city reported having 668,247 total housing units, down slightly from 670,171 housing units in 2010. , 87 percent of housing units were occupied, while 13 percent were vacant, a slight change from 2010 where 89.5 percent of units were occupied, or 599,736 and 10.5 percent were vacant, or 70,435.
The Delaware River and Schuylkill Rivers served as early boundaries between which the city's early street plan was kept within.
In addition, Penn planned the creation of five public parks in the city which were renamed in 1824 (in parenthesis): Centre Square, North East Publick Square (Franklin Square), Northwest Square (Logan Square), Southwest Square (Rittenhouse Square), and Southeast Square (Washington Square).
Philadelphia's major science museums include the Franklin Institute, which contains the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial; the Academy of Natural Sciences; the Mütter Museum; and the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
However, as a result of the city's declining population, it now has only four: the 1st district, represented by Bob Brady; the 2nd, represented by Chaka Fattah; the 8th, represented by Mike Fitzpatrick; and the 13th, represented by Brendan Boyle.
The current council president is Darrell Clarke.
Several projects have been proposed to extend rail service back to these areas, but lack of funding has again been the chief obstacle to implementation.
The English conquered the New Netherland colony in 1664, but the situation did not really change until 1682, when the area was included in William Penn's charter for Pennsylvania.
*The University of the Arts
It serves over 500,000 homes and businesses in the Philadelphia area.
In the 1930s, the experimental station W3XE, owned by Philco, became the first television station in Philadelphia; it became NBC's first affiliate in 1939, and later became KYW-TV (CBS).
Philadelphia's Gayborhood, which is located near Washington Square, is home to a large concentration of gay and lesbian friendly businesses, restaurants, and bars.
These immigrants were largely responsible for the first general strike in North America in 1835, in which workers in the city won the ten-hour workday.
The public wastewater system consists of three water pollution control plants, 21 pumping stations, and about 3,657 miles of sewers.
*Philadelphia University
PWD draws about 57 percent of its drinking water from the Delaware River and the balance from the Schuylkill River.
The city reprised this role for the Live 8 concert, bringing some 700,000 people to the Ben Franklin Parkway on July 2, 2005.
The Comcast Innovation and Technology Center is under construction in Center City and is planned to reach a height of 1,121 feet (342 meters); upon completion, the tower is expected to be the tallest skyscraper in the United States outside of New York City and Chicago.
Annual events include film festivals and parades, the most famous being the New Year's Day Mummers Parade.
The sports fans of Philadelphia are known for being referred to as the "Meanest Fans in America".
30th Street also serves as a major station for services via the Pennsylvania Railroad's former Pennsylvania Main Line to Chicago.
History museums include the National Constitution Center, the Atwater Kent Museum of Philadelphia History, the National Museum of American Jewish History, the African American Museum in Philadelphia, the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons in the state of Pennsylvania and The Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania and Eastern State Penitentiary.
The first major reform came in 1917 when outrage over the election-year murder of a police officer led to the shrinking of the Philadelphia City Council from two houses to just one.
By the 20th century, Philadelphia had become known as "corrupt and contented", with a complacent population and an entrenched Republican political machine.
The Dutch considered the entire Delaware River valley to be part of their New Netherland colony.
After many of the old manufacturers and businesses left Philadelphia or shut down, the city started attracting service businesses and began to more aggressively market itself as a tourist destination.
The city's wealth disparity is evident when neighborhoods are compared.
Another factor attributing to the population increase is Philadelphia's immigration rate.
In addition, the Triangle contains the Copernicus monument.
The city campaigned against an Associated Press report that the high levels of I-131 were the results of local gas drilling in the Upper Delaware River.
The program, which has funded more than 200 pieces of public art, is administered by the Philadelphia Office of Arts and Culture, the city's art agency.
In 2013, there were 246 murders, which is a decrease of over 25% from the previous year, and a decrease of over 44% since 2007.
It is funded and operated largely by city resources and employees.
The Swedes responded by building Fort Nya Korsholm, named New Korsholm after a town that is now in Finland.
Major sporting events in the city include the Penn Relays, Philadelphia Marathon, Broad Street Run, and the Philadelphia International Championship bicycle race.
The School District of Philadelphia runs the city's public schools.
Philadelphia has hosted various national conventions, including in 1848 (Whig), 1856 (Republican), 1872 (Republican), 1900 (Republican), 1936 (Democratic), 1940 (Republican), 1948 (Republican), 1948 (Progressive), and 2000 (Republican).
Each court has a prothonotary's office in Philadelphia as well.
WBEB is the city's Adult Contemporary station, while WZMP ("Wired 96.5") is the major Rhythmic Top 40 station.
In 2014, the Philadelphia City Council refused to conduct hearings on a $1.86 billion sale of PGW, part of a two-year effort that was proposed by the mayor.
Surviving Lenape moved west into the upper Ohio River basin.
Independence National Historical Park is the center of these historical landmarks being one of the country's 22 UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
The Puerto Rican population in Philadelphia is the second-largest after New York City, and the second fastest-growing after Orlando.
The Black American population in Philadelphia is the third-largest in the country, after New York City and Chicago.
The record low maximum is  on February 10, 1899 and December 30, 1880, while the record high minimum is  on July 23, 2011 and July 24, 2010.
For much of Philadelphia's history, the typical home has been the row house.
Center City is structured with long straight streets running east-west and north-south forming a grid pattern.
In 2000, the city's population pyramid had a largely stationary shape.
Philadelphia's central city was created in the 17th century following the plan by William Penn's surveyor Thomas Holme.
In 1793, the largest yellow fever epidemics in U.S. history killed at least 4,000 and up to 5,000 people in Philadelphia, roughly 10% of the city's population.
The zoning changes were intended to rectify incorrect zoning mapping that would streamline future community preferences and development, which the city forecasts an additional 100,000 residents and 40,000 jobs to be added to Philadelphia in 2035.
In 2012, Philadelphia had the fourth-highest homicide rate among the country's most populous cities.
In the latter half of the century, immigrants from Russia, Eastern Europe and Italy; and African Americans from the southern U.S. settled in the city.
The city's 25- to 29-year-old age group was the city's largest age cohort.
Another landmark, the Toruń Triangle, honoring the sister city relationship with Toruń, Poland, was constructed in 1976, west of the United Way building at 18th Street and the Benjamin Franklin Parkway.
They established a network of Catholic churches and schools, and dominated the Catholic clergy for decades.
Based on the rate of violent crimes per 1,000 residents in American cities with 25,000 people or more, Philadelphia was ranked as the 54th most dangerous city in 2015.
The city reported 34.1 percent of all households were made up of individuals while 10.5 percent had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
This tolerance, far more than afforded by most other colonies, led to better relations with the local Native tribes and fostered Philadelphia's rapid growth into America's most important city.
The regattas are hosted and organized by the Schuylkill Navy, an association of area rowing clubs that has produced numerous Olympic rowers.
The largest tract of Fairmount Park is on the west side of the city along the Schuylkill River and Wissahickon Creek and includes the Philadelphia Zoo.
All but Fitzpatrick are Democrats.
The City Planning Commission, tasked with guiding growth and development of the city, has divided the city into 18 planning districts as part of the ''Philadelphia2035'' physical development plan.
A Republican represented a significant portion of Philadelphia in the House as late as 1983, and Sam Katz ran competitive mayoral races as the Republican nominee in both 1999 and 2003.
Philadelphia is at 39° 57′ north latitude and 75° 10′ west longitude, and the 40th parallel north passes through the northern parts of the city.
The great age of the homes has created numerous problems, including blight and vacant lots in many parts of the city, while other neighborhoods such as Society Hill, which has the largest concentration of 18th-century architecture in the United States, have been rehabilitated and gentrified.
White (includes White Hispanics)
The city is also home to five schools of medicine: Drexel University College of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, and the Thomas Jefferson University.
A 2007 investigation by the Environmental Protection Agency found elevated levels of Iodine-131 in the city's potable water.
*Holy Family University
Each of these large areas contains numerous neighborhoods, some of whose boundaries derive from the boroughs, townships, and other communities that made up Philadelphia County before their absorption into the city.
Philadelphia is the center of economic activity in Pennsylvania with the headquarters of seven Fortune 1000 companies located within city limits.
Philadelphia's economic sectors include information technology, manufacturing, oil refining, food processing, health care, biotechnology, tourism, and financial services.
Financial activities account for the largest sector of the metropolitan area's economy, and it is one of the largest health education and research centers in the United States.
Philadelphia, once home to more than 4,000 trolleys on 65 lines, is one of the few North American cities to maintain streetcar lines.
The city encompasses , of which  is land and , or 5.29%, is water.
The city's largest private school by number of students is Temple University, followed by Drexel University.
There are large Puerto Rican and Dominican populations in North Philadelphia and the Northeast, as well as a significant Mexican population in South Philadelphia.
In total, 20.88% (293,544) of Philadelphia's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.
Philadelphia has the second-largest Irish and Italian populations in the United States, after New York City.
In 2013, its budget was $371&nbsp;million.
A study commissioned by the city's government projected 40,000 jobs to be added to the city by 2035, raising the city's 2010 number of jobs from 675,000 total to an estimated 715,000 jobs.
The city is home to the Philadelphia Sketch Club, one of the country's oldest artists' clubs, and The Plastic Club, started by women excluded from the Sketch Club.
Benjamin Franklin, a leading citizen, helped improve city services and founded new ones, such as fire protection, a library, and one of the American colonies' first hospitals.
Boathouse Row is a symbol of Philadelphia's rich rowing history, and each Big Five member has its own boathouse.
In September 2007, Philadelphia approved a Public-access television cable TV channel.
Other services include Megabus and Bolt Bus.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Philadelphia falls in the northern periphery of the humid subtropical climate zone (Köppen ''Cfa'').
In the 19th century, Philadelphia became a major industrial center and railroad hub that grew from an influx of European immigrants.
Both newspapers were purchased from The McClatchy Company (after buying out Knight Ridder) in 2006 by Philadelphia Media Holdings and operated by the group until the organization declared bankruptcy in 2010.
Philadelphia played an instrumental role in the American Revolution as a meeting place for the Founding Fathers of the United States, who signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776 and the Constitution in 1787.
The dewpoint in the summer averages between  to .
Like many American cities, Philadelphia saw a gradual yet pronounced rise in crime in the years following World War II.
*La Salle University
, 79.12% (1,112,441) of Philadelphia residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 9.72% (136,688) spoke Spanish, 1.64% (23,075) Chinese, 0.89% (12,499) Vietnamese, 0.77% (10,885) Russian, 0.66% (9,240) French, 0.61% (8,639) other Asian languages, 0.58% (8,217) African languages, 0.56% (7,933) Cambodian (Mon-Khmer), and Italian was spoken as a main language by 0.55% (7,773) of the population over the age of five.
Four urban stations (WUSL ("Power 99"), WPHI ("Hot 107.9"), WDAS and WRNB ("Old School 100.3")) are popular choices on the FM dial.
30th Street is Amtrak's third-busiest station in numbers of passengers as of fiscal year 2013.
The free black community also established many schools for its children, with the help of Quakers.
In 1909, Water Works was decommissioned as the city transitioned to modern sand filtration methods.
Philadelphia has more outdoor sculptures and murals than any other American city, and Fairmount Park is the largest landscaped urban park in the world.
These worked to develop and finance new industries and attract skilled and knowledgeable immigrants from Europe.
In 1644, New Sweden supported the Susquehannocks in their military defeat of the English colony of Maryland.
Roosevelt Boulevard and the Roosevelt Expressway (U.S. 1) connect Northeast Philadelphia with Center City.
The two companies also operated competing commuter rail systems in the area, known collectively as the Regional Rail system.
The median age was 33.5 years.
The Union play their home games at Talen Energy Stadium, a soccer-specific stadium in Chester, Pennsylvania.
Philadelphia artists have had a prominent national role in popular music.
Penn named the city Philadelphia, which is Greek for brotherly love (from ''philos'', "love" or "friendship", and ''adelphos'', "brother").
The company has over 500 power substations and 29,000 miles of distribution of transmission lines in its service making it the largest combination utility in the state.
In 1952, WFIL (now WPVI) premiered the television show ''Bandstand'', which later became the nationally broadcast ''American Bandstand'' hosted by Dick Clark.
The city's major art museum, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, is one of the largest art museums in the United States.
