After the start of the War on Terror, the Philippines was part of the coalition that gave support to the United States in Iraq.
With an estimated 13,500 plant species in the country, 3,200 of which are unique to the islands, Philippine rainforests boast an array of flora, including many rare types of orchids and rafflesia.
Trade introduced foodstuff such as maize, tomatoes, potatoes, chili peppers, chocolate and pineapples from Mexico and Peru.
Multiple ethnicities and cultures are found throughout the islands.
Not all notable geographic features are so violent or destructive.
Other Philippine languages, including various Visayan languages are also used, especially in radio due to its ability to reach remote rural locations that might otherwise not be serviced by other kinds of media.
The economy is heavily reliant upon remittances from overseas filipinos, which surpass foreign direct investment as a source of foreign currency.
The Philippines has a democratic government in the form of a constitutional republic with a presidential system.
Filipino instruments are made from indigenous Philippine wood; plectrums, or picks, are made from tortoise-shell.
Camarines Sur representative Leni Robredo won the vice presidency.
Languages not indigenous to the islands are also taught in select schools.
Expressways and highways are mostly located on the island of Luzon including the Pan-Philippine Highway, connecting the islands of Luzon, Samar, Leyte, and Mindanao, the North Luzon Expressway, South Luzon Expressway, and the Subic–Clark–Tarlac Expressway.
The average annual temperature of Baguio at an elevation of  above sea level is , making it a popular destination during hot summers.
Health expenditure represented about 6.1% of total government spending.
The Philippines has a sophisticated cellular phone industry and a high concentration of users.
While in most of the world the popularity of formal female beauty contests has diminished, they remain both popular and widespread in the Philippines.
Early in his presidency he initiated numerous infrastructure projects but was accused of massive corruption and embezzling billions of dollars in public funds.
The travel and tourism sector is a major contributor to the economy, contributing 7.1% to the Philippine GDP in 2013  and providing 1,226,500 jobs or 3.2 percent of total employment.
Average annual GDP growth per capita for the period 1966–2007 still stands at 1.45% in comparison to an average of 5.96% for the East Asia and the Pacific region as a whole.
This state became powerful due to the local goldsmith industry and also maintained commercial ties and a diplomatic rivalry with the Champa civilization.
Remittances peaked in 2010 at 10.4% of the national GDP, and were 8.6% in 2012 and in 2014, Philippines total worth of foreign exchange remittances was US$28 billion.
Nineteen regional languages act as auxiliary official languages used as mediums of instruction: Aklanon, Bikol, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Kinaray-a, Maguindanao, Maranao, Pangasinan, Sambal, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, Waray, and Yakan.
The Manila galleons were accompanied with a large naval escort as it traveled to and fro Manila and Acapulco.
In 2007 there were an estimated 12&nbsp;million Filipinos living overseas.
Catholicism's historic dominance is steadily declining, with about 9% of adherents considering leaving their church.
The Philippines is the world's second-biggest geothermal producer behind the United States, with 18% of the country's electricity needs being met by geothermal power.
Negritos were also among the archipelago's earliest inhabitants, but their first settlement in the Philippines has not been reliably dated.
The Philippines has a functional literacy rate of 86.45%, with 84.2% for males and 88.7% for females in 2008.
Marcos was proclaimed the winner, but the results were widely regarded as fraudulent, leading to the People Power Revolution.
Disgruntled remnants of the communist Hukbalahap continued to roam the countryside but were put down by President Elpidio Quirino's successor Ramon Magsaysay.
On November 8, 2013, Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) struck and heavily devastated the country, especially in the Visayas.
Temperatures usually range from  to  although it can get cooler or hotter depending on the season.
As attempts at reform met with resistance, Andrés Bonifacio in 1892 established the secret society called the Katipunan, who sought independence from Spain through armed revolt.
In the middle of ongoing conflict with the Abu Sayyaf,  and and accusations of alleged corruption, and a stalled impeachment process, Estrada's administration was overthrown by the 2001 EDSA Revolution and succeeded by his Vice President, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo on January 20, 2001.
This date was chosen because it corresponds to the U.S.
This was largely due to the fiscal conservatism of the government, partly as a result of decades of monitoring and fiscal supervision from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in comparison to the massive spending of its neighbors on the rapid acceleration of economic growth.
Spanish architecture has left an imprint in the Philippines in the way many towns were designed around a central square or ''plaza mayor'', but many of the buildings bearing its influence were demolished during World War II.
In addition to membership in the United Nations, the Philippines is also a founding and active member of ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations), an organization designed to strengthen relations and promote economic and cultural growth among states in the Southeast Asian region.
Filipino taste buds tend to favor robust flavors, but the cuisine is not as spicy as those of its neighbors.
It is located between 116°&nbsp;40', and 126°&nbsp;34' E longitude and 4°&nbsp;40' and 21°&nbsp;10' N latitude and is bordered by the Philippine Sea to the east, the South China Sea to the west, and the Celebes Sea to the south.
The daily income for 45% of the population of the Philippines remains less than $2.
During the American colonialism, worshippers of faith were not discouraged to sculpt in order to adorn churches.
Altitude usually has more of an impact.
Whether in the extreme north, south, east, or west of the country, temperatures at sea level tend to be in the same range.
The budget allocation for Healthcare in 2010 was ₱28&nbsp;billion (about USD597&nbsp;million) or ₱310 ($7) per person but had an increase in budget in 2014 with a record high in the collection of taxes from the House Bill 5727 (commonly known as Sin tax Bill).
In addition, Section 2 of Republic Act No.&nbsp;5446 asserts that the definition of the territorial sea around the Philippine archipelago does not affect the claim over the eastern part of Sabah.
After World War II, the Philippines was for a time regarded as the second wealthiest in East Asia, next only to Japan.
Most practice Sunni Islam under the Shafi'i school.
However, due to the various Filipino restaurants that introduced Filipino food to people of other nationalities as well as to Filipino urbanites, kamayan fast became popular.
The Philippines has pursued efforts to improve the field of science and technology.
Eventually the name ''Las Islas Filipinas'' would be used to cover all the islands of the archipelago.
The longest river is the Cagayan River in northern Luzon.
Before the Spanish conquest of the islands, most music was reminiscent of, or heavily influenced by, nature.
These artifacts are said to be evidence of long range communication between prehistoric Southeast Asian societies.
In the 1960s its economic performance started being overtaken.
A few transportation systems are currently under development: DOST-MIRDC and UP are implementing pre-feasibility studies on Automated Guideway Transit.
However, as education progressed and wealth increased, more and more artists started to shift from the traditional religious motifs to a more secular pattern of imagery.
Marcos eventually called snap presidential elections in 1986.
The Philippines values its relations with the United States.
The Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines manages airports and implementation of policies regarding safe air travel with 85 public airports currently operational.
Boracay has glaring white sand beaches and was named as the best island in the world by Travel + Leisure in 2012.
It is estimated that half of the population resides on the island of Luzon.
F. Landa Jocano theorizes that the ancestors of the Filipinos evolved locally.
The beginnings of this sculpture type started with the Islamization of Sulu.
Aside from the period of Japanese occupation, the United States retained sovereignty over the islands until after World War II, when the Philippines was recognized as an independent nation.
Nowadays, American pop culture has a heavy hold on the Filipinos that evolved from the Spanish times when the American occupation happened.
In northern Luzon, the Huangdom of Pangasinan under Huang Taymey, exported horses and silver to China, the Kingdom of Ryukyu and Japan.
Cagua - ZooKeys-266-001-g007.jpg|''Sierra Madre mountain range''
Rizal was eventually executed on December 30, 1896, on charges of rebellion.
As an archipelago consisting of about 7,500 islands, the Philippines has numerous beaches, caves and other rock formations.
Although historical tensions still exist on issues such as the plight of comfort women, much of the animosity inspired by memories of World War II has faded.
In the last quarter of the 19th century Spain conquered portions of Mindanao and Moro Muslims in the Sulu Sultanate on Sulu formally recognised Spanish sovereignty.
While remaining loyal to the United States, many Filipinos hoped and believed that liberation from the Japanese would bring them freedom and their already-promised independence.
The Austronesian Expansion Theory postulates that Malayo-Polynesians coming from Taiwan began migrating to the Philippines around 4000&nbsp;BC, displacing earlier arrivals.
French, German, Japanese, Korean, Spanish are taught with the help of foreign linguistic institutions.
The Spanish also decreed the introduction of free public schooling in 1863.
The official name of the Philippines has changed several times in the course of its history.
The Debt-to-GDP ratio continues to decline to 38.1% as of March 2014 from a record high of 78% in 2004.
This period of his rule was characterized by political repression, censorship, and human rights violations but the US were steadfast in their support.
One of the earliest forms are the ''bulols'' by the Ifugao peoples which serve as an assurance for bountiful harvests.
Just like the evolution of Philippine music, dance as well has been in constant change.
28, shifting it to June 12, the date of Emilio Aguinaldo's proclamation.
Internationally, the Philippines has been well documented for its successes in beauty pageants.
Prior to colonial rule, the Philippines has a wide array of ethnic dances from different tribal groups.
The president is elected by popular vote for a single six-year term, during which he or she appoints and presides over the cabinet.
Mahjong is played in some Philippine communities.
The National Telecommunications Commission is the agency responsible for the supervision, adjudication and control over all telecommunications services throughout the country.
Bonifacio and the Katipunan started the Philippine Revolution in 1896.
The war resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of combatants as well as a couple of hundred thousand civilians, mostly from a cholera epidemic.
The 1300s saw the arrival and eventual spread of Islam in the Philippine archipelago.
The country is an active participant in the Human Rights Council as well as in peacekeeping missions, particularly in East Timor.
The San Juanico Strait separates the islands of Samar and Leyte but it is traversed by the San Juanico Bridge.
Forest cover declined from 70% of the Philippines's total land area in 1900 to about 18.3% in 1999.
Including suburbs in the adjacent provinces (Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna, and Rizal) of Greater Manila, the population is around 21 million.
The Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company commonly known as PLDT is the leading telecommunications provider.
In 1935, the Philippines was granted Commonwealth status with Manuel Quezon as president.
Both Filipino and English are used in government, education, print, broadcast media, and business.
Many atrocities and war crimes were committed during the war such as the Bataan Death March and the Manila massacre that culminated during the Battle of Manila.
Ramos' successor, Joseph Estrada assumed office in June 1998 and managed to regain the economy from −0.6% growth to 3.4% by 1999 amidst the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
The most widely accepted theory, based on linguistic and archeological evidence, is the "Out-of-Taiwan" model, which hypothesizes that Austronesians from Taiwan, who were themselves descended from the neolithic civilizations of the Yangtze river such as the Liangzhu culture, began migrating to the Philippines around 4000&nbsp;BC, displacing earlier arrivals.
Descendants of mixed couples are known as mestizos.
Philippine mythology mostly consists of creation stories or stories about supernatural creatures, such as the ''aswang'', the ''manananggal'', the ''diwata/engkanto'', and nature.
Protestants are 1.8% of the total population.
The Philippines has an area of approximately , and a population of more than 100 million with faster growth than any other east Asian country.
Its unit of currency is the Philippine peso (₱ or PHP).
Nevertheless, states like the animist Igorot, Malay Madja-as, Sinified Ma-i, and Indianized Butuan still maintained their cultures.
The Philippines became part of the Spanish Empire for more than 300 years.
Philippine Airlines, Asia's oldest commercial airline still operating under its original name, and Cebu Pacific, the leading low-cost airline, are the major airlines serving most domestic and international destinations.
Bases Extension Treaty, and leading to the official transfer of Clark Air Base in November 1991 and Subic Bay to the government in December 1992.
In 2011 Manila ranked as the 28th wealthiest urban agglomeration in the world and the 2nd in Southeast Asia.
His depiction of the injustices of Spanish rule, and his death by firing squad, inspired other Philippine revolutionaries to seek independence.
Aquino signed the Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013, commonly known as K–12 program in May 15, 2013 aiming to enhance the educational system in the country.
Some examples of this tribal music is ''Koyu No Tebulul'' of the T'boli and Ambo Hato of the Ifugao.
Many of these examples can be seen in statues all over the country especially in public parks and spaces.
The Spanish colonization of the country did not hinder Filipinos creating sculptures for objects of adoration.
Independence Day, which was observed in the Philippines as '''''Independence Day''''' until May 12, 1962, when President Diosdado Macapagal issued Presidential Proclamation No.
The original function of these sculptures are related to the ceremonies and beliefs of the tribes who created them.
Aguinaldo declared Philippine independence from Spain in Kawit, Cavite on June 12, 1898, and the First Philippine Republic was established in the Barasoain Church in the following year.
''Ethnologue'' lists 186 individual languages in the Philippines, 182 of which are living languages, while 4 no longer have any known speakers.
The access to improved sanitation was reported to be similar for the urban and rural population.
Some examples remain, mainly among the country's churches, government buildings, and universities.
The Benham Plateau to the east in the Philippine Sea is an undersea region active in tectonic subduction.
The trench is located in the Philippine Sea.
The industrial sector employs around 14% of the workforce and accounts for 30% of GDP.
The Philippines has a tropical maritime climate that is usually hot and humid.
The Philippines bought its first satellite in 1996.
''Criollo'' dissatisfaction resulted in the 1872 Cavite Mutiny that was a precursor to the Philippine Revolution.
Plans for independence over the next decade were interrupted by World War II when the Japanese Empire invaded and the Second Philippine Republic of José P. Laurel was established as a collaborator state.
Meanwhile, due to lower charges in basic necessities, the inflation rate eases to 3.7% in November.
This was granted to them by the Ming Dynasty.
The main sanction against diverging from these values are the concepts of "''Hiya''", roughly translated as 'a sense of shame', and "''Amor propio''" or 'self-esteem'.
It is also rich in nickel, chromite, and zinc.
They also founded schools, a university, hospitals and churches which were built along the Earthquake Baroque architectural style.
The remaining  population is divided between a number of religious groups, including Hindus, Jews, and Baha'is.
As it became increasingly clear the United States would not recognize the nascent First Philippine Republic, the Philippine–American War broke out, the First Republic was defeated, and the archipelago was administered under an Insular Government.
The Muslim population of the Philippines was reported as % of the total population according to census returns in 2010, although a 2012 report by the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos estimates it at 11%.
The Tubbataha Reef in the Sulu Sea was declared a World Heritage Site in 1993.
The island of Borneo is located a few hundred kilometers southwest and Taiwan is located directly to the north.
It has contributed to the ready acceptance and influence of American pop cultural trends.
It has hosted several summits and is an active contributor to the direction and policies of the bloc.
The Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) administers the post-secondary middle-level education training and development.
During the previous years, The Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed on October 15, 2012, as the first step of the creation of an autonomous political entity named Bangsamoro.
A 6-year elementary and 4-year high school education is mandatory with an additional two years being added in 2013.
The Philippines' rainforests and its extensive coastlines make it home to a diverse range of birds, plants, animals, and sea creatures.
The Commission on Higher Education (CHED) lists 2,180 higher education institutions, 607 of which are public and 1,573 private.
On July 12, 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration ruled in favor of the Philippines in its case against China's claims in the South China Sea.
There have been signs of progress since.
Deforestation, often the result of illegal logging, is an acute problem in the Philippines.
Education spending accounts for 16.11%  in the proposed 2015 national budget.
The administration also faced a series of natural disasters, including the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June 1991.
Various sports and pastimes are popular in the Philippines including basketball, boxing, cockfighting, volleyball, football (soccer), American football, both codes of Rugby football, badminton, karate, taekwondo, billiards, ten-pin bowling, chess, and sipa.
Despite issues such as domestic abuse and war affecting overseas Filipino workers, relations with Middle Eastern countries are friendly as seen in the continuous employment of more than two million overseas Filipinos living there.
It is also the largest company in the country.
Ninoy Aquino International Airport (NAIA) serves the Greater Manila Area together with Clark International Airport.
Fast food outlets are found on many street corners.
After introducing a constitution that limited presidents to a single term, Aquino did not stand for re-election.
New towns were also created and Roman Catholic missionaries converted most of the lowland inhabitants to Christianity.
Nowadays, in the Modern and Post-Modern time periods, dances vary from the delicate ballet up to the more street-oriented styles of breakdancing to name a few.
The 1997 Asian Financial Crisis affected the economy, resulting in a lingering decline of the value of the peso and falls in the stock market.
Manila Bay, upon the shore of which the capital city of Manila lies, is connected to Laguna de Bay, the largest lake in the Philippines, by the Pasig River.
Before that became commonplace, other names such as ''Islas del Poniente'' (Islands of the West) and Magellan's name for the islands ''San Lázaro'' were also used by the Spanish to refer to the islands.
The Manila galleons, the largest wooden ships ever built, were constructed in Bicol and Cavite.
The average yearly temperature is around .
Issues involving Taiwan, the Spratly Islands, and concerns of expanding Chinese influence, however, still encourage a degree of caution.
The Philippines was named in honor of King Philip&nbsp;II of Spain.
Idjangs or Ivatan castles were the primary shelter of the people prior to the Spanish conquest of the whole Philippines.
The dominant television networks ABS-CBN, GMA and TV5 also have extensive radio presence.
Despite the increase of HIV/AIDS cases from 12,000 in 2005 to 17,450 as of April 2014 with 5,965 people that were under anti-retroviral therapy, the country is still a low-HIV-prevalence country with less than 0.1% of the adult population estimated to be HIV-positive.
Rail transport in the Philippines only plays a role in transporting passengers within Metro Manila.
However, Spanish loanwords are still present today in many of the indigenous Philippine languages.
They also defeated the Chinese-warlord Limahong.
The largest crocodile in captivity, known locally as Lolong, was captured in the southern island of Mindanao.
The Philippines is a member of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Asian Development Bank which is headquartered in Mandaluyong, the Colombo Plan, the G-77 and the G-24 among other groups and institutions.
By the end of the war it is estimated that over a million Filipinos had died.
However, the revival of Spanish-influence folk music has been done due to the different choir groups in and out of the country like the Philippine Madrigal Singers.
This recent trend also sometimes incorporates the "Boodle Fight" concept (as popularized and coined by the Philippine Army), wherein banana leaves are used as giant plates on top of which rice portions and Filipino viands are placed all together for a filial, friendly and/or communal ''kamayan'' feasting.
Card games are popular during festivities, with some, including ''pusoy'' and ''tong-its'', being used as a form of illegal gambling.
Some traditions, however, are changing or gradually being forgotten due to modernization.
Allied troops defeated the Japanese in 1945.
The Galathea Depth in the Philippine Trench is the deepest point in the country and the third deepest in the world.
Around this time, the people of Luzon were collectively called Lucoes and they rose to prominence by participating in trading ventures and military campaigns in Myanmar, Malacca and East Timor where they were employed as traders and mercenaries.
Philippine waters also sustain the cultivation of pearls, crabs, and seaweeds.
The end displays the paired bamboo poles crossing each other.
Among these are mostly anthropomorphic earthenware jars dating from c. 5&nbsp;BC to 225&nbsp;AD.
It is one of the ten most biologically megadiverse countries.
Malaysia and Thailand were estimated to spend 1.5%, China 2.1%, Vietnam 2.2% and South Korea 2.6%.
Colonization began when Spanish explorer Miguel López de Legazpi arrived from Mexico in 1565 and formed the first Hispanic settlements in Cebu.
Around 1,100 land vertebrate species can be found in the Philippines including over 100 mammal species and 170 bird species not thought to exist elsewhere.
''Sungka'' is a traditional native Philippine board game.
It is governed as a unitary state with the exception of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) which is largely free from the national government.
Vigan in Ilocos Sur is also known for the many Hispanic-style houses and buildings preserved there.
In the modern period, the integration of architecture in the Art Deco style happened.
From 1565 to 1821, the Philippines was governed as a territory of the Viceroyalty of New Spain and then was administered directly from Madrid after the Mexican War of Independence.
Other more militant groups like the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the communist New People's Army, and the Abu Sayyaf have previously kidnapped foreigners for ransom, particularly on the southern island of Mindanao.
The Philippines is the biggest supplier of nurses for export.
Benigno Aquino III won the 2010 national elections and served as the 15th President of the Philippines.
However, most people outside cities do not speak much English.
Filipino values are, for the most part, centered around maintaining social harmony, motivated primarily by the desire to be accepted within a group.
vehicle_code                = RP
Other important non-indigenous minorities include Indians, Anglo-Americans, Britons, and Japanese people.
