In the beginning of male anthesis, the fertile male flowers complete the process of producing the pollen and the female flowers become unreceptive to further pollination.
Possible symptoms include increased salivation, a sensation of burning of the mouth, swelling of the tongue, stomatitis, dysphagia, an inability to speak, and edema.
Also, the pheromones have a sweet, fruity smell in many species and no noticeable smell for others.
In general, feeder roots tend to show both positive hydrotropic and negative heliotropic behaviors.
One possible trigger is the height of the plant.
Philodendron species can be found in many diverse habitats in the tropical Americas and the West Indies.
These philodendrons have their roots in the ground early in their lives.
cordatum'', but instead of oral administration of the dose, it was injected intraperitoneally using 3 g of plant extract from either the leaves or stems.
Philodendrons can be grown outdoors in mild climates in shady spots.
In milder climates, they can be grown in pots of soil or in the case of ''Philodendron oxycardium'' in containers of water.
Other smaller types of beetles in the genus'' Neelia'' visit the inflorescences, as well, but they are not believed to be involved in pollinating philodendrons.
The beetles have also been observed to be selective to the height of the plant they pollinate, which would serve as an additional preventive measure to make hybrids less likely.
As a result, the male beetles benefit from this relationship with the philodendrons because they do not have to produce pheromones to attract females, since the philodendrons do it for them.
Hybrids in nature are only rarely reported.
Once female anthesis is nearing its end and the female flowers have been pollinated, the spathe will be fully open and male anthesis begins.
Later in the philodendron's life, it starts producing adult leaves, a process called metamorphosis.
It also appears to distribute the pheromones into the air.
The genus ''Philodendron'' could be classified further by means of differentiating them based on the pattern of thermogenesis observed, although this is not currently used.
The thermogenesis coincides with the arrival of the beetles and appears to increase their presence.
However, some aspects of making crosses can make philodendron hybridization more difficult.
Contact with philodendron oils or fluids with the eyes have also been known to result in conjunctivitis.
The spathe will enlarge to hold the maturing berries.
For example, it is rare for more than one philodendron species to be flowering at the same time or to be pollinated by the same species of beetles.
Eight rats were injected with the stem extract and two of them died.
This process, female anthesis, is followed by male anthesis, in which the pollen is produced.
Once their roots have reached the ground below, the plant will begin taking up nutrients from the soil, of which it had been previously deprived.
The male beetles will stay overnight in the spathe, eating and mating throughout the night due to the benefits provided by the spathe and spadix.
Others can show a combination of these growth habits depending on the environment.
Some philodendrons are also used for ceremonial purposes.
Yet another use of philodendrons is for catching fish.
cordatum'' stems on three mice and none of them died.
In some species, they can even be rather succulent.
To attract the beetles, the sterile male flowers give off pheromones to attract the male beetles, usually at dusk.
The nectar attracts ants, with which the plant enjoys a protective symbiotic relationship.
Philodendrons that produce orange berries tend to be members of the section ''Calostigma''.
Typically, five to 12 beetles will be within the spathe throughout the night.
Artificial pollination is usually achieved by first mixing the pollen with water.
Six rats were injected with the leaf extract and five of them died.
One would expect the beetles to stay indefinitely if they could due to the very favorable conditions the inflorescence provides.
Another interesting feature of this symbiotic relationship, less well understood, is the series of events in which the spadix begins to heat up prior to the spathe opening up for the beetles.
The cataphylls will remain attached, drying out and becoming nothing more than fibers attached at the nodes.
Interestingly, pheromones produced by the philodendrons may be similar to those produced by female beetles when they wish to attract males to mate.
A sticky resin is also produced in drops attached to the spadix which help to keep the pollen attached to the beetles.
The plant then grows as an epiphyte.
This trait is called scototropism.
However, in another study, three cats were tube fed ''Philodendron cordatum'' and showed no signs of acute poisoning.
The thermogenic reaction is triggered when concentrations of acetosalicytic acid form in the sterile zone.
Among the Kubeo tribe, native to Colombia, ''Philodendron insigne'' is used by witch doctors  to treat ill patients.
Because of these outside barriers, philodendrons may not have had to evolve physical mechanisms to prevent cross-pollination.
This barrier of sterile male flowers ensures  fertile male flowers do not fertilize the female flowers.
Philodendrons usually distinguish themselves in their environment by their large numbers compared to other plants, making them a highly noticeable component of the ecosystems in which they are found.
Compared to other genera of the family Araceae, philodendrons have an extremely diverse array of growth methods.
The genus was first spelled as 'Philodendrum', but in 1832, Schott published a system for classifying plants in the family Araceae titled ''Meletemata Botanica'' in which he provided a method of classifying philodendrons based on flowering characteristics.
Taxonomically, the genus ''Philodendron'' is still poorly known, with many undescribed species.
During the rooting, cuttings should be kept out of direct sunlight.
In one study, 72 cases of cat poisonings were examined, of which 37 resulted in the death of the cat.
In four to five weeks, the plant should develop roots and can be transferred to pots.
In this study, two adult cats and one kitten were fed a puréed leaf and water mixture, observed afterward, then euthanized, and finally a necropsy was performed.
Regardless of number of species, the genus is the second-largest member of the arum family.
The acid sets off the mitochondria in the cells that make up the sterile zone to switch to an electron transport chain called the cyanide-resistant pathway, which results in the production of heat.
Once they reach a sufficient height, they begin developing adult type leaves.
Necropsies showed nothing that would suggest toxicity.
Some philodendrons are, however, known to be toxic to mice and rats.
Sexual reproduction is achieved by means of beetles, with many philodendron species requiring the presence of a specific beetle species to achieve pollination.
A deciduous cataphyll curls away from the leaf once it has formed, eventually turning brown and drying out, and finally falling off the plant, leaving a scar on the stem where it was attached.
These pots are placed in greenhouses with bottom heat of 21-24&nbsp;°C.
Still others will produce berries that start off white, but then change to another color with time.
In this study, 127 cases of children ingesting philodendrons were studied, and they found only one child showed symptoms; a 10-month-old had minor upper lip swelling when he chewed on a philodendron leaf.
Plants in pots with good root systems will benefit from a weak fertilizer solution every other week.
Botanically, the fruit produced is a berry.
These same beetles could also pollinate other genera outside of philodendron, as well as outside of the family Araceae.
The leaves are borne alternately on the stem.
If the inflorescence has not been fertilized, it will fall off, usually within a few weeks.
Wiping the leaves off with water  will remove any dust and insects.
A few species will show three peaks in temperature during the flowering.
Cuttings then can be rooted in pots of sand and peat moss mixtures.
Once they reach the forest floor, nutrients can be obtained directly from the soil.
They are also found throughout the diverse range of elevations from sea level to over 2000 m above sea level.
Most occur in humid tropical forests, but can also be found in swamps and on river banks, roadsides and rock outcrops.
Most philodendrons go through metamorphosis gradually; there is no immediately distinct difference between juvenile and adult leaves.
Species of this genus are often found clambering over other plants, or climbing the trunks of trees with the aid of aerial roots.
Also, some evidence suggests the thermogenesis triggers the beetles to mate.
In some species, the temperature of the spadix will peak on the arrival of the beetles, then decrease, and finally increase reaching a maximum once again when the philodendron is ready for the beetles to leave.
Dosages of 2.8, 5.6, and 9.1 g/kg were used, with the highest dose administered being considerably more than any house cat could consume.
The leaves are usually large and imposing, often lobed or deeply cut, and may be more or less pinnate.
The risk of death, if even possible, is extremely low if ingested by an average adult, although its consumption is generally considered unhealthy.
Secondary hemiepiphytes start off on the dark forest floor and climb their way up a tree, displaying their juvenile type leaves along the way.
At this time in history, the names of the philodendrons they were discovering were being published with the genus name ''Arum'', since most aroids were considered to belong to this same genus.
In general, the calcium oxalate crystals have a very mild effect on humans, and large quantities have to be consumed for symptoms to even appear.
Other species, though, only show a maximum temperature on the arrival of the beetles, which remains roughly constant for about a day, and then steadily decreases.
Philodendrons exhibit extremely few physical reproductive barriers to prevent hybridization, but very few natural hybrids are found in nature.
The forced feeding study may have failed to show signs of philodendron toxicity because the tube feeding bypassed the mouth and hence minimized the typical signs of irritation.
Insects also may be responsible for dispersing seeds, as beetles and wasps have been seen feeding on philodendron berries.
Early in the life of the plant, but after it has matured past the seedling stage, the leaves will have acquired the typical juvenile leaf's shape and size.
The beetles may be using scent to find the inflorescence when they are far away, but once within range, they find it by means of the infrared radiation.
During female anthesis, the spadix will project forward at roughly 45° relative to the spathe.
Crosses between two philodendrons in different sections can occur successfully.
Cataphylls are usually green, leaf-like, and rigid while they are protecting the leaf.
In some philodendrons, the cataphylls build up over time and eventually form a wet mass at the nodes.
The upper portion of the spathe is called the limb or blade, while the lower portion is called the convolute tube or chamber due to its tubular structure at the base.
The berries often give off odors to attract animals to eat and disperse them.
The philodendron, in turn, obtains nutrients from the surrounding ant nest, and the aggressive nature of the ants serves to protect the plant from other insects which would eat it.
For these philodendrons, the plant will grow with long internodes along the ground until a tree is found.
Additionally, male beetles benefit because they are ensured of mating with only sexually receptive females, which is not necessarily certain otherwise.
Cases of mild dermatitis due to contact with the leaves have also been reported, with symptoms including vesiculation and erythema.
Aerial roots serve two primary purposes.
The time dependence of the temperature can vary from species to species.
Hemiepiphytic philodendrons can be classified into two types: primary and secondary hemiepiphytes.
In some philodendrons, the colour of the base of the spathe contrasts in colour with the upper part, and in others, the inner and outer surfaces of the spathe differ in coloration.
The leaves and stems are mixed with the bark of ''Vochysia ferruginea'' and with some parts of a species in the genus ''Strychnos''.
After male anthesis, the males will go off and find another philodendron undergoing female anthesis, so will pollinate the female flowers with the pollen it had collected from its previous night of mating.
Chalcid wasps also seek out philodendrons, and are known to lay their eggs in the ovaries of many philodendron species, resulting in galled inflorescences.
Once it has reached a sufficient size and age, it will begin producing aerial roots that grow toward the forest floor.
Philodendrons consume oxygen during thermogenesis.
Philodendrons have both aerial and subterranean roots.
They then begin climbing up a tree and eventually may become completely epithytic, doing away with their subterranean roots.
Hybridizing philodendrons is quite easy if flowering plants are available, because they have very few barriers to prevent hybridization.
In some philodendrons, an additional region of sterile male flowers is found at the very top of the spadix.
Fatal poisonings are extremely rare; one case of an infant eating small quantities of a philodendron resulting in hospitalization and death has been reported.
Once the fruit are mature, the spathe will begin to open again, but this time it will break off at the base and fall to the forest floor.
Philodendrons can also be found in Australia, some Pacific islands, Africa and Asia, although they are not indigenous and were introduced or accidentally escaped.
Rarely, cases of 200 beetles at a time have been observed and almost always the beetles are of the same species.
Its color can be red, orange, yellow, or colorless when it is first produced.
Typically, the inflorescence is of great importance in determining the species of a given philodendron, since it tends to be less variable than the leaves.
Nectaries can be found in a variety of locations on the plant, including the stalks, sheaths, lower surfaces of the leaves, and spathes.
Deciduous cataphylls are typically found on vining philodendrons, whereas persistent cataphylls are typical of epiphytic philodendrons or appressed climbers.
A similar experiment was done on rats with the leaves and stems of ''P.
Although the toxicity of ''Philodendron craspedodromum'' is not fully known, active ingredients in the poisoning of the fish possibly are coumarins formed during the fermentation process.
They can also be oval, spear-shaped, or in many other possible shape variations.
Underneath the epidermis is a unique layer of cells in a pattern of long cells followed by short cells.
A primary hemiepiphytic philodendron starts life high up in the canopy where the seed initially sprouts.
In doing so, the philodendron controls when the beetles come and when they leave and forces them to rub against the top of the spadix where the pollen is located as they exit, thus ensuring they are well-coated with pollen.
Heinrich Wilhelm Schott addressed the problem of providing improved taxonomy and created the genus ''Philodendron'' and described it in 1829.
In some cases, the amount of nectar produced can be quite extensive, resulting in the surface becoming entirely covered with it.
The symptoms of the poisoned cats included excitability, spasms, seizures, renal failure, and encephalitis.
Philodendrons also produce cataphylls, which are modified leaves that surround and protect the newly forming leaves.
The leaves of philodendrons are also known to be eaten by Venezuelan red howler monkeys, making up 3.1% of all the leaves they eat.
In this manner, the plant's strategy is to obtain light early in its life at the expense of nutrients.
These feeder roots tend to attach flush with the substrate to which the philodendron is attached, and make their way directly downwards in search of soil.
As it heats up, carbohydrates are used, but once the spadix has reached its maximum temperature, lipids are oxidized.
Some primary epiphytic species have a symbiotic relationship with ants.
The bundles are crushed and added to the water into which the poison will dissipate.
Once rooted, the plants can be transplanted to larger pots or directly outside in milder climates.
Some produce orange berries and others yellow berries, though.
The aerial roots occur in many shapes and sizes and originate from most of the plant's nodes or occasionally from an internode.
If this were the case, then such studies would be incorrectly attributing the sickness of the cats to the philodendrons.
Secondary hemiepiphytes start life on the ground or on part of a tree trunk very close to the ground, where the seeds sprout.
For example, ''Philodendron alliodorum'' berries are known to emit an odor similar to that of garlic.
The trigger for the transformation to adult leaves can vary considerably.
Another possible trigger occurs in primary hemiepiphytes.
By the time the spathe is open and the beetles have arrived, the spadix is usually quite hot; up to around 46&nbsp;°C in some species, but usually around 35&nbsp;°C.
This process is known as thermogenesis.
An interesting quality of philodendrons is that they do not have a single type of leaf on the same plant.
Since then, many exploration attempts have been made to collect new species by others.
Another interesting quality of philodendrons leaves is they are often quite different in shape and size even between two plants of the same species.
Though they contain calcium oxalate crystals, the berries of some species are eaten by the locals.
The entire spathe is then covered in a plastic bag so the water-pollen mixture does not dry out; the bag is removed a few days later.
The genus ''Philodendron'' had not yet been created.
Some philodendrons have extrafloral nectaries (nectar-producing glands found outside of the flowers).
Throughout the late 17th, 18th century, and early 19th centuries, many plants were removed from the genus'' Arum'' and placed into newly created genera in an attempt to improve the classification.
Three mice were used for each of the leaves and flowers; none of the mice died.
The spathe tends to be waxy and is usually bicolored.
The spathe provides a safe breeding area for the beetles.
The size and number of aerial roots per node depends on the presence of a suitable substrate for the roots to attach themselves.
Contained within the berries are the seeds which are extremely small compared to other members of the Araceae family.
The fertile female flowers are often not receptive to fertilization when the fertile males are producing pollen, which again prevents self-pollination.
The name derives from the Greek words ''philo-'' or "love, affection" and ''dendron'' or "tree".
The habits of growth can be epiphytic, hemiepiphytic, or rarely terrestrially.
In philodendrons, cataphylls typically fall into two categories: deciduous and persistent types.
This may be because philodendrons have many geographic and time barriers to prevent any such cross pollination.
In one study, 100&nbsp;mg of ''Philodendron cordatum'' leaves suspended in distilled water were fed to six mice.
As a result of all these different possible leaf shapes, it is often difficult to differentiate natural variations from morphogenesis.
Secondly, the sterile male flowers consumed by the beetles are rich in lipids.
As to the toxicity of philodendrons in cats, the evidence is conflicting.
The spadix is more often than not white and shorter than the spathe.
Secondary hemiepiphytes do not always start their lives close to a tree.
When found, these hybrids often can show remarkable genetic relationships.
The part of the spadix that heats up is the sterile zone.
As the beetles home in on the inflorescence, they first move in a zig-zag pattern until they get reasonably close, when they switch to a straight-line path.
They are commonly called by their generic name.
To add the poison to the water, the leaves are cut into pieces and tied together to form bundles, which are allowed to ferment for a few days.
In fact, considerable taxonomic difficulty has occurred in the past due to these differences, causing juvenile and adult plants to mistakenly be classified as different species.
This would account for the two different types of paths the beetles follow.
Also, in the making of a particular recipe for curare by the Amazonian Taiwanos, the leaves and stems of an unknown philodendron species are used.
Philodendrons can contain as much as 0.7% of oxalates in the form of calcium oxalate crystals as raphides.
Three of the mice died.
They thrive in moist soils with high organic matter.
Yet, over time, it will turn brown as it is exposed to air.
For example, ''Philodendron bipinnatifidum'' white sweet berries are known to be used.
Oxidizing stored carbohydrates and lipids has been found to be the energy source for thermogenesis.
The pollen life can be extended to a few weeks by storing it in film canisters in a refrigerator.
The color of the berries can vary depending on the species, but most produce a white berry with slight tones of green.
Aerial roots used for attaching to trees tend to be shorter, more numerous, and sometimes have a layer of root hairs attached; those used for collecting water and nutrients tend to be thicker and longer.
A window is then cut into the spathe and the water-pollen mixture is rubbed on the fertile female flowers.
This one case study, however, was found to be inconsistent with the findings from a second study.
Leaves and flowers of ''Philodendron sagittifolium'' were also orally administered in 100-mg doses to the mice.
The arrangement tends to be vertical, with fertile male flowers at the top of the spadix followed by sterile male flowers, and fertile female flowers very close to the bottom in the region known as the spathe tube or chamber.
A tribe in the Colombian Amazon is known to use ''Philodendron craspedodromum'' to add poison to the water, temporarily stunning the fish, which rise up to the surface, where they can be easily scooped up.
The animals that distribute the seeds depends on the species, but some possible dispersers include bats and monkeys.
The chemical derivatives of alkenyl resorcinol are believed to be responsible for the dermatitis in some people.
