Eventually, three more Armadas were assembled; two were sent to England in 1596 and 1597, but both also failed; the third (1599) was diverted to the Azores and Canary Islands to fend off raids.
She was also a distant relation of Philip-she was descended from their mutual ancestor Alfonso VII of León and Castile.
He commenced settlements in the Philippines, which were named after him, and established the first trans-Pacific trade route between America and Asia.
These principles of Charles were gradually assimilated by his son, who would grow up to become grave, self-possessed and cautious.
The Spanish Empire was not a single monarchy with one legal system but a federation of separate realms, each jealously guarding its own rights against those of the House of Habsburg.
** Grand Master of the Order of Calatrava: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
For many years Philip maintained peace with England, and even defended Elizabeth from the Pope's threat of excommunication.
Count of Charolais since 21 September 1558.
He succeeded in increasing the importation of silver in the face of English, Dutch, and French privateers, overcoming multiple financial crises and consolidating Spain's overseas empire.
Lord of Frisia, Salins, Mechelen, the cities, towns & lands of Utrecht, Overyssel, Groningen.
Philip II of Spain was crowned ''Philip I'' of Portugal in 1581 (recognised as king by the Portuguese Cortes of Tomar) and a sixty-year personal union under the rule of the Philippine Dynasty began.
This series of conflicts lasted for the rest of his life.
Philip II's reign can hardly be characterised by its failures.
** Knight of the Golden Fleece: 1531 – 13 September 1598
Philip, who had previously been made the Duke of Milan in 1540, began governing the most extensive empire in the world at the young age of sixteen.
The troops commanded by the 3rd Duke of Alba imposed subjection to Philip before entering Lisbon, where he seized an immense treasure.
Philip's third wife was Elisabeth of Valois, the eldest daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de' Medici.
Their children were:
However, the Turks soon rebuilt their fleet and in 1574 Uluç Ali Reis managed to recapture Tunis with a force of 250 galleys and a siege which lasted 40 days.
According to Philip II, he was doing it for the benefit of the Church.
Under Philip II, Spain reached the peak of its power.
Under harsh occupation, the Dutch finally rebelled and wrested independence after an 80-year war, the strain of which did Philip's realm little good.
He considered himself the chief defender of Catholic Europe, both against the Ottoman Turks and against the forces of the Protestant Reformation.
Spanish-speaking historians tend to assess his political and military achievements, sometimes deliberately avoiding issues such as the king's lukewarmness (or even support) toward Catholic fanaticism.
English-speaking historians tend to show Philip II as a fanatical, despotical, criminal, imperialist monster, minimising his military victories (Battle of Lepanto, Battle of Saint Quentin, etc.)
Philip was described by the Venetian ambassador Paolo Fagolo in 1563 as "slight of stature and round-faced, with pale blue eyes, somewhat prominent lip, and pink skin, but his overall appearance is very attractive."
Even in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip II.
But the war continued for the next sixteen years, in a complex series of struggles that included France, Ireland and the main battle zone, the Low Countries.
King's County and Philipstown in Ireland were named after Philip as King of Ireland in 1556.
* Miscarried daughter (3 October 1568).
A ceremony was held before the bishop of Pamplona (22 November), but its customary procedure and terms were altered.
Following the Revolt of the Netherlands in 1568, Philip waged a campaign against Dutch heresy and secession.
Elisabeth died a few hours after the loss of her last child.
The couple's joint royal style after Philip ascended the Spanish throne in 1556 was: ''Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, Jerusalem, both the Sicilies and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tirol''.
Following the Spanish capture of Amiens in March 1597 the French crown laid siege to it until it managed to reconquer Amiens from the overstretched Spanish forces in September 1597.
Philip appealed to the Pope and other powers in Europe to bring an end to the rising Ottoman threat.
In other words, Philip was to co-reign with his wife.
Despite being also a German archduke from the House of Habsburg, Philip was seen as a foreigner in the Holy Roman Empire.
Indeed, when his health began failing, he worked from his quarters in the Palace-Monastery-Pantheon of El Escorial he had built.
The expression, "the empire on which the sun never sets," was coined during Philip's time to reflect the extent of his dominion.
Despite its immense dominions, Spain was a country with a sparse population that yielded a limited income to the crown (in contrast to France, for example, which was much more heavily populated).
** King of Portugal and the Algarves of either side of the sea in Africa, Lord of Guinea and of Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, etc.
Ultimately, Elizabeth allied England with the Protestant rebels in the Netherlands.
* Catherine Michelle (10 October 1567 – 6 November 1597), married Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, and had issue.
However, the couple had no children.
** Prince of Swabia
While the invasion had been averted, England was unable to take advantage of this success.
** Count of Barcelona, of Roussillon, of Cerdanya.
The execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587 ended Philip's hopes of placing a Catholic on the English throne.
Personally, Philip spoke softly, and had an icy self-mastery; in the words of one of his ministers, "he had a smile that cut like a sword."
He also successfully secured his succession to the throne of Portugal.
From 1555, he was lord of the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands.
* Carlos, Prince of Asturias (8 July 1545 – 24 July 1568), died unmarried and without issue.
He was tutored by Juan Martínez Siliceo – the future Archbishop of Toledo.
Their marriage at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting.
Instead, with the traditional Royal and Primacy seat of Toledo now essentially obsolete, Philip moved his Court to the Castilian stronghold of Madrid.
The States General of the northern provinces, united in the 1579 Union of Utrecht, passed an Act of Abjuration declaring that they no longer recognised Philip as their king.
The marriage treaty also provided that England would not be obliged to provide military support to Philip's father in any war.
* Diego, Prince of Asturias (15 August 1575 – 21 November 1582), died young.
Philip, though he had good command over Latin, Spanish and Portuguese, never managed to equal his father, Charles V, as a polyglot.
This happened because the lenders had no power over the king and could not force him to repay his loans.
With her death, Philip lost his rights to the English throne (including the ancient English claims to the French throne) and ceased to be King of England, Ireland and (as claimed by them) France.
He mainly directed state affairs, even when not at Court.
António was acclaimed King of Portugal in many cities and towns throughout the country, but members of the Council of Governors of Portugal who had supported Philip escaped to Spain and declared him to be the legal successor of Henry.
By the end of the wars in 1559, Habsburg Spain had been established as the premier power of Europe, to the detriment of France.
A fleet sent by Philip, again commanded by Don John, reconquered Tunis from the Ottomans in 1573.
Martín de Azpilcueta, highly honoured at Rome by several popes and looked on as an oracle of learning, published his ''Manuale sive Enchiridion Confessariorum et Poenitentium'' (Rome, 1568), long a classical text in the schools and in ecclesiastical practice.
Spanish control of Italy would last until the early eighteenth century.
On 13 September 1557, Cardinal Carlo Carafa signed a peace agreement, accepting all of the duke's conditions.
By this marriage, Philip became ''jure uxoris'' King of England and Ireland, although the couple was apart more than together as they ruled their respective countries.
Philip prohibited any biographical account of his life to be published while he was alive, and he ordered that all his private correspondence be burned shortly before he died.
The last straw for Philip was the Treaty of Nonsuch signed by Elizabeth in 1585 – promising troops and supplies to the rebels.
However the ''Parlement de Paris'', in power of the Catholic party, gave verdict that Isabella Clara Eugenia was "the legitimate sovereign" of France.
Philip financed the Catholic League during the French Wars of Religion.
Philip's first wife was his first cousin, Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal.
Except for a brief period under Philip III, Madrid has remained the capital of Spain to the present day.
Even before his death in 1598, his supporters had started presenting him as an archetypical gentleman, full of piety and Christian virtues, whereas his enemies depicted him as a fanatical and despotic monster, keen in inhuman cruelties and barbarism.
Upon Mary's death, the throne went to Elizabeth I. Philip had no wish to sever his tie with England, and had sent a proposal of marriage to Elizabeth.
The coat of arms of England was impaled with Philip's to denote their joint reign.
Luis de Molina published his ''De liberi arbitrii cum gratiae donis, divina praescientia, praedestinatione et reprobatione concordia'' (1588), wherein he put forth the doctrine attempting to reconcile the omniscience of God with human free will that came to be known as Molinism, thereby contributing to what was one of the most important intellectual debates of the time; Molinism became the ''de facto'' Jesuit doctrine on the aforementioned matters, and is still advocated today by William Lane Craig and Alvin Plantinga, among others.
In France, Henry II was fatally wounded in a joust held during the celebrations of the peace.
* Philip III of Spain (3 April 1578 – 31 March 1621).
For a while, he ruled England jointly with Queen Mary Tudor, and a reconciliation with the Catholic Church followed.
The Privy Council instructed that Philip and Mary should be joint signatories of royal documents, and this was enacted by an Act of Parliament, which gave him the title of king and stated that he "shall aid her Highness ... in the happy administration of her Grace’s realms and dominions."
Philip's view of the affair was entirely political.
The flow of income from the New World proved vital to his militant foreign policy, but nonetheless his exchequer several times faced bankruptcy.
This was largely influenced by the growing strength of the bureaucracy during Philip's reign.
This Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) would be fought to a grinding end, but not until both Philip II (d. 1598) and Elizabeth I (d. 1603) were dead.
In 1584, William the Silent was assassinated by Balthasar Gérard, after Philip had offered a reward of 25,000 crowns to anyone who killed him, calling him a "pest on the whole of Christianity and the enemy of the human race".
A medal struck in 1583 bore the inscriptions "PHILIPP II HISP ET NOVI ORBIS REX" ("Philip II, King of Spain and the New World") and "NON SUFFICIT ORBIS" ("The world is not enough").
The grave threat posed by the increasing Ottoman domination of the Mediterranean was reversed in one of history's most decisive battles, with the destruction of nearly the entire Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, by the Holy League under the command of Philip's half brother, Don Juan of Austria.
* Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias (4 December 1571 – 18 October 1578), died young.
His greatest battlefield accomplishment was the defeat of the Ottoman fleet at Lepanto, which turned the tide against Turkish aggression.
Philip signed the Treaty of Vaucelles with Henry II of France in 1556.
In a more recent example of popular culture, Philip II's portrayal in ''Fire Over England'' (1937) is not entirely unsympathetic; he is shown as a very hardworking, intelligent, religious, somewhat paranoid ruler whose prime concern is his country, but who had no understanding of the English, despite his former co-monarchy there.
However, the French nobility under Francis I opposed the arrangement, and successfully ended the prospects of marriage between the heirs of Habsburg and Albret in 1541.
Charles left Philip with experienced advisors—notably the secretary Francisco de los Cobos and the general Duke of Alba.
French victory at the Battle of Fontaine-Française marked an end to the Catholic League in France.
Mary died in 1558 before the union could revitalise the Roman Catholic Church in England.
In 1593, Henry agreed to convert to Catholicism; weary of war, most French Catholics switched to his side against the hardline core of the Catholic League, who were portrayed by Henry's propagandists as puppets of a foreign monarch, Philip.
The war, known as the Eighty Years' War, only came to an end in 1648, when the Dutch Republic was recognised by Spain as independent.
** Grand Master of the Order of the Golden Fleece: 23 October 1555 – 13 September 1598
As he strove to enforce Catholic orthodoxy through an intensification of the Inquisition, students were barred from studying elsewhere, and books printed by Spaniards outside the kingdom were banned.
War across Navarre continued until 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai).
But Philip did not enjoy the supremacy that Louis XIV of France would in the next century, nor was such a rule necessarily possible at his time.
The French naval contingent was the largest French force sent overseas before the age of Louis XIV.
Philip's foreign policies were determined by a combination of Catholic fervour and dynastic objectives.
Spain was subject to different assemblies: the Cortes in Castile along with the assembly in Navarre and one each for the three regions of Aragon, which preserved traditional rights and laws from the time when they were separate kingdoms.
However, in spite of the great and increasing quantities of gold and silver flowing into his coffers from the American mines, the riches of the Portuguese spice trade, and the enthusiastic support of the Habsburg dominions for the Counter-Reformation, he would never succeed in suppressing Protestantism or defeating the Dutch rebellion.
After living in the Netherlands in the early years of his reign, Philip II decided to return to Spain.
In 1560, Philip II organised a ''Holy League'' between Spain and the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, the Papal States, the Duchy of Savoy and the Knights of Malta.
In 1566, Protestant preachers sparked anti-clerical riots known as the Iconoclast Fury; in response to growing Protestant influence, the Duke of Alba's army went on the offensive, further alienating the local aristocracy.
The resulting Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 1559 secured Piedmont, Savoy, and Corsica for the Spanish allied states, the Duchy of Savoy, and the Republic of Genoa.
Aside from reducing state revenues for overseas expeditions, the domestic policies of Philip II further burdened Spain, and would, in the following century, contribute to its decline, as maintained by some historians.
However, the treaty was broken shortly afterwards.
Philip displayed reasonable aptitude in arms and letters alike.
A year later, Philip remarked:
He played groups against each other, leading to a system of checks and balances that managed affairs inefficiently, even to the extent of damaging state business, as in the Perez affair.
Following a fire in Valladolid in 1561, he resisted calls to move his Court to Lisbon, an act that could have curbed centralisation and bureaucracy domestically as well as relaxed rule in the Empire.
These men would serve Philip throughout their lives, as would Antonio Pérez, his secretary from 1541.
He secured the Portuguese kingdom and empire.
** Grand Master of the Order of Santiago: 16 January 1556 – 13 September 1598
The southern Netherlands (what is now Belgium and Luxembourg) remained under Spanish rule.
He never relented from his fight against heresy, defending the Catholic faith and limiting freedom of worship within his territories.
France recognised Spanish control over the Franche-Comté, but, more importantly, the treaty also confirmed the direct control of Philip over Milan, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and the State of Presidi, and indirectly (through his dominance of the rulers of Tuscany, Genoa, and other minor states) of all Italy.
Philip's constant involvement in European wars took a significant toll on the treasury and played a huge role in leading the Crown into economic difficulties and even bankruptcies.
Philip's rule in the seventeen separate provinces known collectively as the Netherlands faced many difficulties; this led to open warfare in 1568.
Pope Paul IV charged a seven-member commission with preparing a peace agreement.
He directly intervened in the final phases of the wars (1589–1598), ordering the Duke of Parma into France in an effort to unseat Henry IV, and perhaps dreaming of placing his favourite daughter, Isabel Clara Eugenia, on the French throne.
Philip's wife had succeeded to the Kingdom of Ireland, but the title of King of Ireland had been created in 1542 by Henry VIII after he was excommunicated, and so it was not recognised by Catholic monarchs.
This union was deemed illegitimate by English Catholics, who disputed the validity of both the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon and of his subsequent marriage to Boleyn, and hence claimed that Mary, Queen of Scots, the Catholic great granddaughter of Henry VII, was the legitimate heir to the throne.
The lack of a viable supreme assembly led to power defaulting into Philip's hands, especially as manager and final arbiter of the constant conflict between different authorities.
In November 1592, the Parliament (''Cortes'') of Aragón revolted against another breach of the realm specific laws, so the Attorney General (''Justicia'') of the kingdom Juan de Lanuza was executed on Philip II's orders, with his secretary Antonio Perez taking to exile in France.
Philip was present at the Siege of Perpignan in 1542, but did not see action as the Spanish army under Alba decisively defeated the besieging French forces under the Dauphin of France.
Elizabeth of Valois, Philip's third wife and Isabella's mother, had already ceded any claim to the French Crown with her marriage to Philip.
Charles V abdicated the throne of Naples to Philip on 25 July 1554, and the young king was invested with the kingdom (officially called "Naples and Sicily") on 2 October by Pope Julius III.
Philip was also close to his two sisters, María and Juana, and to his two pages, the Portuguese nobleman Rui Gomes da Silva and Luis de Requesens, the son of his governor Juan de Zúñiga.
Philip and Mary appeared on coins together, with a single crown suspended between them as a symbol of joint reign.
The military interventions in France thus ended in an ironic fashion for Philip: they had failed to oust Henry from the throne or suppress Protestantism in France and yet they had played a decisive part in helping the French Catholic cause gain the conversion of Henry, ensuring that Catholicism would remain France's official and majority faith – matters of paramount importance for the devoutly Catholic Spanish king.
In 1565 the Ottomans sent a large expedition to Malta, which laid siege to several forts on the island, taking some of them.
File:Maria Tudor1.jpg|center|Queen Mary Tudor of England
The Spanish victory at Terceira was followed by the Battle of the Azores between the Portuguese loyal to the claimant António, supported by French and English troops, and the Spanish-Portuguese forces loyal to Philip commanded by the admiral Don Álvaro de Bazán.
Charles V proposed to end hostilities with King Henry II of Navarre—the legitimate monarch of Navarre—by marrying his son Philip to the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne III of Navarre.
Earlier, however, after several setbacks in his reign and especially that of his father, Philip did achieve a decisive victory against the Turks at the Lepanto in 1571, with the allied fleet of the Holy League, which he had put under the command of his illegitimate brother, John of Austria.
Philip's martial training was undertaken by his governor, Juan de Zúñiga, a Castilian nobleman who served as the commendador mayor of Castile.
The Holy League lost 60 ships (30 galleys) and 20,000 men, and Giovanni Andrea Doria was barely able to escape with a small vessel.
This marriage produced four sons and one daughter.
However, Lepanto marked a permanent reversal in the balance of naval power in the Mediterranean and the end of the threat of Ottoman control.
Moreover, Philip did nothing to defend himself after being betrayed by his ambitious secretary Antonio Perez, who published incredible calumnies against his former master; this allowed Perez's tales to spread all around Europe unchallenged.
This means that many histories depict Philip from deeply prejudiced points of view, usually negative.
Defender of the Faith.
An attempt to use her newfound advantage at sea with a counter armada the following year failed disastrously.
He was able to finance his military campaigns only by taxing and exploiting the local resources of his empire.
The 1598 Treaty of Vervins was largely a restatement of the 1559 Peace of Câteau-Cambrésis and Spanish forces and subsidies were withdrawn; meanwhile, Henry issued the Edict of Nantes, which offered a high degree of religious toleration for French Protestants.
Mary Tudor's death in 1558 enabled Philip to seal the treaty by marrying Henry II's daughter, Elisabeth of Valois, later giving him a claim to the throne of France on behalf of his daughter by Elisabeth, Isabel Clara Eugenia.
Even a highly respected churchman like Archbishop Carranza of Toledo was jailed by the Inquisition for 17 years, for publishing ideas that seemed sympathetic in some degree with Protestantism.
File:Portrait of Philip II of Spain by Sofonisba Anguissola - 002b.jpg|center|King Phillip II by Sofonisba Anguissola
The marriage would provide a dynastic solution to instability in Navarre, it would make him king of all Navarre and prince of independent Béarn, as well as lord of a large part of southern France.
Early in his reign, the Dutch might have laid down their weapons if he had desisted in trying to suppress Protestantism, but his devotion to Catholicism would not permit him to do so.
The culture and courtly life of Spain were an important influence in his early life.
Margrave of Oristano.
Victory in Azores completed the incorporation of Portugal into the Spanish Empire.
The war was only drawn to an official close, however, after the Edict of Nantes, with the Peace of Vervins in May 1598.
It would not end until all the leading protagonists, including himself, had died.
These surveys helped the Spanish monarchy to govern these overseas conquests more effectively.
Later he would study with more illustrious tutors, including the humanist Juan Cristóbal Calvete de Estrella.
Known in Spain as "Felipe el Prudente" ('"Philip the Prudent'"), his empire included territories on every continent then known to Europeans, including his namesake the Philippine Islands.
Henry then negotiated a peace with Spain.
**Lord of the Netherlands: 25 October 1555 – 13 September 1598
Further, English ships began a policy of piracy against Spanish trade and threatened to plunder the great Spanish treasure ships coming from the new world.
Philip's interventions in the fighting – sending the Duke of Parma, to end Henry IV's siege of Paris in 1590 – and the siege of Rouen in 1592 contributed in saving the French Catholic Leagues's cause against a Protestant monarchy.
However, the operation had little chance of success from the beginning, because of lengthy delays, lack of communication between Philip II and his two commanders and the lack of a deep bay for the fleet.
The myth of "Turkish invincibility" was becoming a popular story, causing fear and panic among the people.
The defeat of Protestantism was always keen in Philip's mind.
The Ottomans retook the Fortress of Djerba, whose Spanish commander, D. Álvaro de Sande attempted to escape with a ship but was followed and eventually captured by Turgut Reis.
Charles V had left Philip with a debt of about 36 million ducats and an annual deficit of 1 million ducats.
The storm that smashed the Armada was seen by many of Philip's enemies as a sign of the will of God.
Many Spaniards blamed the admiral of the Armada for its failure, but Philip, despite his complaint that he had sent his ships to fight the English, not the elements, was not among them.
That way, the popular image of the king that survives to today was created on the eve of his death, at a time when many European princes and religious leaders were turned against Spain as a pillar of the Counter-Reformation.
** Archduke of Austria.
His death led to the accession of his 15-year-old son Francis II, who in turn soon died.
Philip faced major difficulties in raising taxes, the collection of which was largely farmed out to local lords.
Elizabeth I was the Protestant daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn.
** King of Navarre.
Heresy trials were reestablished and hundreds of Protestants burned at the stake.
England and Philip parted ways after the death of his Queen, nicknamed "Bloody Mary".
Although sometimes described as an absolute monarch, Philip faced many constitutional constraints on his authority.
English ships went so far as to attack a Spanish port.
When Philip left for Madrid in 1583, he made his nephew Albert of Austria his viceroy in Lisbon.
Upon his inheritance of Spain in 1556, they became "Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol".
* Imperial and Habsburg patrimonial titles:
Spain launched a concerted offensive in 1595, taking Doullens, Cambrai and Le Catelet and in the spring of 1596 capturing Calais by April.
A measure of the character of Philip can be gathered by the fact that he personally saw to it that the wounded men of the Armada were treated and received pensions, and that the families of those who died were compensated for their loss, which was highly unusual for the time.
Because Philip II was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict, evaluating both his reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject.
These defaults were just the beginning of Spain's economic troubles as Spain's kings would default six more times in the next 65 years.
This sparked mounting tension not only with King Henry II of Navarre and Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, but with the Parliament of the Spanish Navarre (''Cortes'', ''The Three States'') and the ''Diputación'' for breach of the realm specific laws (fueros)—violation of the ''pactum subjectionis'' as ratified by Ferdinand.
He was a devout Catholic and exhibited the typical 16th century disdain for religious heterodoxy; he said, "Before suffering the slightest damage to religion in the service of God, I would lose all of my estates and a hundred lives, if I had them, because I do not wish nor do I desire to be the ruler of heretics."
In 1572 a prominent exiled member of the Dutch aristocracy, William the Silent (Prince of Orange), invaded the Netherlands with a Protestant army, but he only succeeded in holding two provinces, Holland and Zeeland.
**King of England, France (titular).
By contemporary accounts, this was a convivial and satisfactory marriage (1570–1580) for both Philip and Anna.
