"Talking machine" was the comprehensive generic term, but in the early 20th century the general public was increasingly applying the word "phonograph" indiscriminately to both cylinder and disc machines and to the records they played.
The machine, although made in 1886, was a duplicate of one made earlier but taken to Europe by Chichester Bell.
(Sometimes a separate spring or smaller weight provides fine tuning.)
After the 1956 season had ended, Philco decided to discontinue both models, for transistors were too expensive compared to vacuum tubes.
Before settling on that standard, there were many different equalizations in use, including EMI, HMV, Columbia, Decca FFRR, NAB, Ortho, BBC transcription, etc.
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the phonograph, Edison recounted reciting ''Mary Had a Little Lamb'' to test his first machine.
In 1916, in the face of a wartime steel shortage, Victor introduced their "Tungs-Tone" brand extra-long-playing needle which was advertised to play between 100 and 300 records.
This jukebox-like phonograph was invented by Louis T. Glass and William S. Arnold.
Long experience proved that there were great drawbacks found generally before they could be got commercial; but here was something there was no doubt of."
By the 1960s, cheaper portable record players and record changers which played stacks of records in wooden console cabinets were popular, usually with heavy and crude tonearms in the portables.
A rubber disc would be secured to the top of the stamping to provide traction for the record, as well as a small amount of vibration isolation.
Bass response down to 0&nbsp;Hz is possible.
The spindle bearing usually consisted of a bronze bushing.
The zinc disc was then immersed in a bath of chromic acid; this etched a groove into the disc where the stylus had removed the coating, after which the recording could be played.
Other than the Edison and European Pathé disc machines, early disc players, both external horn and internal horn "Victrola" style models, normally used very short-lived disposable needles.
The quality of available record players, tonearms, and cartridges has continued to improve, despite diminishing demand, allowing turntables to remain competitive in the high-end audio market.
Steel needles needed to be replaced frequently, preferably after each use, due to their very rapid wear from bearing down heavily on the mildly abrasive shellac record.
After a number of years, the protective jelly often deteriorated or leaked from the cartridge case and the full unit needed replacement.
In more modern usage, the playback device is often called a "turntable", "record player", or "record changer".
A stylus tip mass as low as 0.3 milligram is the result and full tracking only requires 1&nbsp;gram of stylus force, reducing record wear even further.
I had to keep my mouth about six inches away from the horn and remember not to make my voice too loud if I wanted anything approximating to a clear reproduction; that was all.
As the tonearm tracks the groove, the stylus exerts a frictional force tangent to the arc of the groove, and since this force does not intersect the tone arm pivot, a clockwise rotational force (moment) occurs and a reaction ''skating force'' is exerted on the stylus by the record groove wall away from center of the disc.
On the early phonograph's reproductive capabilities he writes "It sounded to my ear like someone singing about half a mile away, or talking at the other end of a big hall; but the effect was rather pleasant, save for a peculiar nasal quality wholly due to the mechanism, though there was little of the scratching which later was a prominent feature of the flat disc.
Steel needles were inexpensive, e.g., a box of 500 for 50 US cents, and were widely sold in packets and small tins.
I was never so taken aback in my life.
On the other hand, even some cheaper arms could be of professional quality: the "All Balance" arm, made by the now-defunct Dutch company Acoustical, was only €30 equivalent.
*Being non-magnetic, the cartridge is immune to "hum" induced by stray magnetic fields (same advantage shared with ceramic cartridges).
The third type is used mainly in cartridges designed for DJ use and it has a standard round headshell connector.
Usage of terminology is not uniform across the English-speaking world (see below).
Technical measurements show that similarly low flutter (0.025% WRMS) and rumble (-78&nbsp;dB weighed) figures are possible for high quality turntables, be they belt drive or direct drive.
The earliest electronic record players, introduced at the end of 1925, had massive electromagnetic pickups that contained a horseshoe magnet, used disposable steel needles, and weighed several ounces.
This significantly reduced breakage during transport.
These were more sensitive, and offered greater ''compliance'', that is, lack of resistance to movement and so increased ability to follow the undulations of the groove without gross distorting or jumping out of the groove.
The laser turntable uses a laser as the pickup instead of a stylus in physical contact with the disk.
(Shellac records were heavier and more brittle.)
A 1970s design from Revox harkened back to the 1950s attempts (and, record lathes), positioning the track directly over the record.
Everybody was astonished.
But it was then considered strictly incorrect to apply it to Emile Berliner's upstart Gramophone, a very different machine which played discs.
Scott's phonautograph was intended purely for the visual study and analysis of the tracings.
From the mid-1980s on, phonograph use on a standard record player declined sharply because of the rise of the cassette tape,  compact disc and other digital recording formats.
A sketch was made, and the piece-work price, $18, was marked on the sketch.
However, some vintage preamplifiers, such as the LEAK varislope series, are still obtainable and can be refurbished.
Alexander Graham Bell's Volta Laboratory made several improvements in the 1880s, including the use of wax-coated cardboard cylinders, and a cutting stylus that moved from side to side in a "zig zag" groove around the record.
Some record players were even tried in automobiles, but were quickly displaced by 8-track and cassette tapes.
After that the tempo and pitch increase towards the end as the contact point comes closer to the linear path again.
Furthermore, the angle of the stylus, which used to be always sloping backwards, was changed into the forward direction, in line with the slope the original cutting stylus possessed.
The result, a much smoother frequency curve extended the lifetime for this popular and very cheap type.
The mechanical governor was, however, still employed in some toy phonographs (such as those found in talking dolls) until they were replaced by digital sound generators in the late 20th century.
The term "phonograph" was usually restricted to machines that used cylinder records.
Another problem is the hygroscopic nature of the crystal itself: it absorbs moisture from the air and may dissolve.
He had died in 1888 at the age of 45.
In early acoustic phonographs, the stylus vibrated a diaphragm which produced sound waves which were coupled to the open air through a flaring horn, or directly to the listener's ears through stethoscope-type earphones.
His "gramophone record" was the first disc record to be offered to the public.
*The electrical connection from the cartridge to the preamplifier is immune to cable capacitance issues.
A high-end strain-gauge cartridge is currently sold by an audiophile company, with special preamplifiers available.
"I was experimenting," he said, "on an automatic method of recording telegraph messages on a disk of paper laid on a revolving platen, exactly the same as the disk talking-machine of to-day.
Rock music played on 45s became the soundtrack to the 1960s as people bought the same songs that were played free of charge on the radio.
385886 for it on July 10, 1888.
The Sony PS-F5/F9 (1983) uses a similar, miniaturized design, and can operate in a vertical or horizontal orientation.
However, it was finished, the foil was put on; I then shouted 'Mary had a little lamb', etc.
Edison's 1877 tinfoil recording of ''Mary Had a Little Lamb'', not preserved, has been called the first instance of recorded verse.
The term ''phonograph'' ("sound writing") was derived from the Greek words  (''phonē'', "sound" or "voice") and  (''graphē'', "writing").
Experiments were also to be conducted on the transmission of sound by light, which resulted in the selenium-celled Photophone.
The most common type is attached using two small screws to a headshell which then plugs into the tonearm, while another is a standardized "P-mount" or "T4P" cartridge (invented by Technics in 1980 and adopted by other manufacturers) that plugs directly into the tonearm.
Anecdotes indicate this low-cost arm was the only one capable of keeping the needle firmly in the groove during heavy storms at sea.
The tone arms were rudimentary and remained so even after lighter crystal pickups appeared about ten years later.
Thus, the cartridge "modulates" an external voltage supplied by the (special) preamplifier.
Thomas Edison introduced the use of sapphire in 1892 and the use of diamond in 1910 for his cylinder phonographs.
Records also continue to be manufactured and sold today, albeit in smaller quantities than in the disc phonograph's heyday.
By 1881, the Volta associates had succeeded in improving an Edison tinfoil machine to some extent.
A stylus responding to sound vibrations produced an up and down or hill-and-dale groove in the foil.
An "extended play" version of the 45 was also available, designated 45 EP, which provided capacity for longer musical selections, or for two regular-length songs per side.
In hip hop music and occasionally in other genres, the turntable is used as a musical instrument by DJs, who use turntables along with a DJ mixer to create unique rhythmic sounds.
Playback was accomplished by exactly repeating the recording procedure, the only difference being that the recorded foil now served to vibrate the stylus, which transmitted its vibrations to the diaphragm and onward into the air as audible sound.
In British English, "gramophone" may refer to any sound-reproducing machine using disc records, which were introduced and popularized in the UK by the Gramophone Company.
Costlier turntables made from heavy aluminium castings have greater balanced mass and inertia, helping minimize vibration at the stylus, and maintaining constant speed without wow or flutter, even if the motor exhibits cogging effects.
There are three primary types of cartridge mounts.
The oldest surviving example is a copper electrotype of a recording cut into a wax disc in 1881.
It was conceived of in the late 1980s, although early prototypes were not of usable audio quality.
Most systems today, if they accept input from a turntable at all, are configured for use only with magnetic cartridges.
According to Sumner Tainter, it was through Gardiner Green Hubbard that Bell took up the phonograph challenge.
Reproduction of the recorded sound was not possible with the original phonautograph.
However, even some higher-end turntables, such as the Lenco, Garrard, EMT, and Dual turntables, used idler-wheel drive.
The next development was the ''ceramic'' cartridge, a piezoelectric device that used newer, and better, materials.
A well-maintained record would have very little surface noise, though it was difficult to keep records completely free from scratches, which produced popping noises.
Earlier designs used a rubberized idler-wheel drive system.
At the end of the motor shaft there was a stepped driving capstan; to obtain different speeds, the rubber idler wheel was moved to contact different steps of this capstan.
The design of the belt drive turntable allows for a less expensive motor than the direct-drive turntable to be used.
The main disadvantage is the need of a special preamplifier that supplies a steady current (typically 5mA) to the semiconductor elements and handles a special equalization than the one needed for magnetic cartridges.
Vinyl enthusiasts are often committed to the refurbishment and sometimes tweaking of vintage systems.
The cartridge's position is usually regulated by an electronic servomechanism or mechanical interface, moving the stylus properly over the groove as the record plays, or for song selection.
Examples include Souther Engineering (U.S.A.), Clearaudio (Germany), and Aura (Czech Republic).
Several inventors devised machines to record sound prior to Thomas Edison's phonograph, Edison being the first to produce a device that could both record and reproduce sound.
Both problems were attacked together: by polishing the diamond in a certain way that it could be made doubly elliptic.
Edison for many years used the "hill-and-dale" method on both his cylinders and Diamond Disc records, and Emile Berliner is credited with the invention of the lateral cut, acid-etched Gramophone record in 1887.
The upforce of this brush, and its added drag require compensation of both tracking force (add 1&nbsp;gram) and anti-skating adjustment values (see next paragraph for description).
From the earliest phonograph designs, many of which were powered by spring-wound mechanisms, a speed governor was essential.
Even pharmacies stocked 45 rpm records at their front counters.
In 1885, when the Volta Associates were sure that they had a number of practical inventions, they filed patent applications and began to seek out investors.
With this approach a number of irregularities were eliminated.
Elektrostatic cartridges were marketed by Stax in the 1950 and 1960 years.
I didn't have much faith that it would work, expecting that I might possibly hear a word or so that would give hope of a future for the idea.
As the master was originally cut in a linear motion from the edge towards the center, but the stylus on the pivoted arm always draws an arc, this causes a timing drift that is most significant when digitizing music and beat mapping the data for synchronization with other songs in a DAW or DJ software unless the software allows building a non-linear beat map.
By 1890, record manufacturers had begun using a rudimentary duplication process to mass-produce their product.
One peculiar consequence was that it was possible to overdub additional sound onto a recording being played back.
Some of the most sophisticated and expensive tonearms and turntable units ever made are linear trackers, from companies such as Rockport and Clearaudio.
These were eclipsed by more successful implementations of the concept from the late 1960s through the early 1980s.
If the arm is not pivoted, but instead carries the stylus along a radius of the disc, there is no skating force and little to no cartridge angle error.
The Volta Graphophone Company of Alexandria, Virginia, was created on January 6, 1886 and incorporated on February 3, 1886.
The Volta associates, however, had been experimenting with both formats and directions of groove modulation as early as 1881.
I told him I was going to record talking, and then have the machine talk back.
The diaphragm was linked to the recording stylus in a way that caused it to vibrate laterally (side to side) as it traced a spiral onto a zinc disc very thinly coated with a compound of beeswax.
In May 1889, the first "phonograph parlor" opened in San Francisco.
In combination with a steel to nylon turntable bearing (with molybdenum disulfide inside for lifelong lubrication) very low wow, flutter and rumble figures were achieved.
The platen had a spiral groove on its surface, like the disk.
The following was the text of one of their recordings: "There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamed of in your philosophy.
Some combination systems include a basic turntable, a CD player, a cassette deck.
The well-known and extremely popular high-end S-type SME arm of the 1970-1980 era not only had a complicated design, it was also very costly.
These antique tinfoil recordings, which have typically been stored folded, are too fragile to be played back with a stylus without seriously damaging them.
Technics (Matsuhita Electric) marketed a line of strain-gauge (labeled "semiconductor") cartridges especially intended for Compatible Discrete 4 quadraphonic records, requiring such high frequency response.
These models positioned the track outside the platter's edge, as did turntables by Harman Kardon, Mitsubishi, Pioneer, Yamaha, Sony, etc.
This can be somewhat reduced by a curved arm pivoted so that the end point of the arc stays farther from the linear path than the starting point, or by a long straight arm that pivots perpendicularly to the linear path in the middle of the record.
In 2008, LP sales grew by 90% over 2007, with 1.9 million records sold.
Nevertheless, there is some increase in interest; many big-box media stores carry turntables, as do professional DJ equipment stores.
In these units, the magnet itself sits behind the four coils and magnetises the cores of all four coils.
One interesting exception was a horizontal seven inch turntable.
The pivoted arm produces yet another problem which is unlikely to be significant to the audiophile, though.
Most of these employed some type of flywheel-friction disc to control the speed of the rotating cylinder or turntable; as the speed increased, centrifugal force caused a brake—often a felt pad—to rub against a smooth metal surface, slowing rotation.
Meanwhile, Bell, a scientist and experimenter at heart, was looking for new worlds to conquer after his invention of the telephone.
Customers would sit at a desk where they could speak through a tube, and order a selection for one nickel.
However, this "no wear" advantage is debatable, since vinyl records have been tested to withstand even 1200 plays with no significant audio degradation, provided that it is played with a high quality cartridge and that the surfaces are clean.
After the Volta Associates gave several demonstrations in the City of Washington, businessmen from Philadelphia created the American Graphophone Company on March 28, 1887, in order to produce and sell the machines for the budding phonograph marketplace.
These demands are contradictory and impossible to realize (massless arms and zero-friction bearings do not exist in the real world), so tone arm designs require engineering compromises.
With some later improvements the flat discs of Berliner could be produced in large quantities at much lower cost than the cylinders of Edison's system.
Edison presented his own account of inventing the phonograph.
Their circuitry used three Philco germanium PNP alloy-fused junction audio frequency transistors.
Another common type of phonograph parlor featured a machine that would start or would be windable when a coin would be inserted.
Also, the needle started its life touching the groove on a very small surface, giving extra wear on the walls.
Maximum distortion (2nd harmonic) fell below 0.6%.
Wax was put in the grooves of the heavy iron cylinder, and no tinfoil was used.
On the other end of the cantilever is mounted a tiny permanent magnet (moving magnet type) or a set of tiny wound coils (moving coil type).
Also in 1895 Berliner replaced the hard rubber used to make the discs with a shellac compound.
These variations lead to voltage variations as described above.
Other advanced stylus shapes appeared following the same goal of increasing contact surface, improving on the Shibata.
The phonograph was invented in 1877 by Thomas Edison.
In the early 1890s Lippincott fell victim to the unit's mechanical problems and also to resistance from stenographers.
After perfectly balancing the arm, the dial itself is "zeroed"; the stylus force can then be dialed in by screwing the counterweight towards the fulcrum.
Stylus forces of 10 to 20 mN (1 to 2 grams-force) are typical for modern consumer turntables, while forces of up to 50&nbsp;mN (5&nbsp;grams) are common for the tougher environmental demands of party deejaying or turntablism.
The author of this article called the device a "phonographe", but Cros himself favored the word "paleophone", sometimes rendered in French as "voix du passé" (voice of the past) but more literally meaning "ancient sound", which accorded well with his vision of his invention's potential for creating an archive of sound recordings that would be available to listeners in the distant future.
Early developments in linear turntables were from Rek-O-Kut (portable lathe/phonograph) and Ortho-Sonic in the 1950s, and Acoustical in the early 1960s.
Modern arms provide an ''anti-skate'' mechanism, using springs, hanging weights, or magnets to produce an offsetting counter-clockwise force at the pivot, making the net lateral force on the groove walls near zero.
While recording or playing, the record not only rotated, but moved laterally under the stylus, which thus described a spiral, recording 150 grooves to the inch.
A phono input of an amplifier incorporates such equalization as well as amplification to suit the very low level output from a modern cartridge.
The work of the Volta Associates laid the foundation for the successful use of dictating machines in business, because their wax recording process was practical and their machines were durable.
The magnet is close to a set of fixed pick-up coils, or the moving coils are held within a magnetic field generated by fixed permanent magnets.
Manufacturers, however, typically advertised such combinations as "radio-phonographs".
The sound vibrations were recorded as undulations or other irregularities in the traced line.
Edison's patent specified that the audio recording be embossed, and it was not until 1886 that vertically modulated engraved recordings using wax coated cylinders was patented by Chichester Bell and Charles Sumner Tainter.
The styli for vinyl records were also made out of sapphire or diamond.
By the early 1980s, some companies started producing very inexpensive turntables that displaced the products of companies like BSR.
*The combination of electrical and mechanical advantages, plus the absence of magnetic yoke high-frequency losses, make them especially suitable to reproducing frequencies up to 50&nbsp;kHz.
This requires a stylus with a narrow side radius, such as 5&nbsp;µm (or 0.2 mil).
An enclosed bridge-like assembly is swung into place from the platter's right edge to its middle.
A keel-shaped diamond stylus appeared as a byproduct of the invention of the CED Videodisc.
Depending upon the amplifier design, a phono-preamplifier may be necessary.
Although Edison had invented the phonograph in 1877 the fame bestowed on him for this invention was not due to its efficiency.
Experimentation is in progress in retrieving the audio from old records by scanning the disc and analysing the scanned image, rather than using any sort of turntable.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, "Phonograph", "Gramophone", "Graphophone", "Zonophone" and the like were still brand names specific to various makers of sometimes very different (i.e.
Some designs (Burne-Jones, and Garrard "Zero" series) use dual arms in a parallelogram arrangement, pivoting the cartridge head to maintain a constant angle as it moves across the record.
Many modern players have platters with a continuous series of strobe markings machined or printed around their edge.
The crystal was protected by embedding it in other materials, without hindering the movement of the pickup mechanism itself.
The sound vibration waveforms are recorded as corresponding physical deviations of a spiral groove engraved, etched, incised, or impressed into the surface of a rotating cylinder or disc, called a "record".
Although largely replaced since the introduction of the compact disc in 1982, record albums still sell in small numbers and are available through numerous sources.
A stylus linked to a diaphragm would be made to ride in the groove or on the ridge so that the stylus would be moved back and forth in accordance with the recorded vibrations.
In most moving magnet designs, the stylus itself is detachable from the rest of the cartridge so it can easily be replaced.
Strain gauge or "semiconductor" cartridges do not generate a voltage, but act like a variable resistor, whose resistance directly depends on the movement of the stylus.
Audiophile grade turntables start at a few hundred dollars and range upwards of $100,000, depending on the complexity and quality of design and manufacture.
This gives the stylus the freedom to move in any direction.
Recordings made using these other equalization schemes will typically sound odd if they are played through a RIAA-equalized preamplifier.
In either type, the stylus itself, usually of diamond, is mounted on a tiny metal strut called a cantilever, which is suspended using a collar of highly compliant plastic.
Thus when the record was played multiple times, different recordings would play, seemingly at random.
Commonly found in all-in-one stereos from assorted far-east brands, they used a thin plastic table set in a plastic plinth, no mats, belt drive, weak motors, and often, plastic tonearms with no counterweight.
In the mid-1950s these were joined by a new generation of magnetic cartridges that bore little resemblance to their crude ancestors.
Although Edison's very first experimental tinfoil phonograph used separate and somewhat different recording and playback assemblies, in subsequent machines a single diaphragm and stylus served both purposes.
Berliner's early records had poor sound quality, however.
The Shibata-designed stylus offers a greater contact surface with the groove, which in turn means less pressure over the vinyl surface and thus less wear.
An amateur attempt using a flatbed scanner lacked satisfactory fidelity.
The "Acoustical professional" turntable (earlier marketed under Dutch ''"Jobo prof"'') of the 1960s however possessed an expensive German drive motor, the ''"Pabst Aussenläufer"'' ("Pabst outrunner").
It also allowed ceramic stereo cartridges to be made.
Their full weight rested on the record, providing ample ''tracking force'' to overcome their low compliance but causing rapid record wear.
33s and 45s were, however, made exclusively of vinyl, with the exception of some 45s manufactured out of polystyrene.
So, the "turntable" emerged triumphant and retained its position to the end of the 20th century and beyond.
The basic distinction between the Edison's first phonograph patent and the Bell and Tainter patent of 1886 was the method of recording.
In either case, the movement of the stylus as it tracks the grooves of a record causes a fluctuating magnetic field which causes a small electric current to be induced in the coils.
Most hi-fi amplifiers made between the 1950s and the 1990s and virtually all DJ mixers are so equipped.
Crystal pickups are relatively robust, and produce a substantial signal level which requires only a modest amount of further amplification.
He thought it absurd.
A recording made on a sheet of tinfoil at an 1878 demonstration of Edison's phonograph in St. Louis, Missouri, has been played back by optical scanning and digital analysis.
Manufacturers of high-end systems often have in-built moving coil amplifier circuitry, or outboard head-amplifiers supporting either moving magnet or moving coil cartridges that can be plugged into the line stage.
At the seeming end of the market lifespan of ceramic cartridges, someone accidentally discovered that by terminating a specific ceramic mono cartridge (the Ronette TX88) not with the prescribed 47 kΩ resistance, but with approx.
