As an element, phosphorus exists in two major forms—white phosphorus and red phosphorus—but because it is highly reactive, phosphorus is never found as a free element on Earth.
For this reason, red and white phosphorus were designated by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration as List I precursor chemicals under 21 CFR 1310.02 effective on November 17, 2001.
Similar reactions occur for phosphorus oxychloride, affording triphenylphosphate:
Particles often can be located by their emission of smoke when air strikes them, or by their phosphorescence in the dark.
A well-fed adult in the industrialised world consumes and excretes about 1–3&nbsp;grams of phosphorus per day, with consumption in the form of inorganic phosphate and phosphorus-containing biomolecules such as nucleic acids and phospholipids; and excretion almost exclusively in the form of phosphate ions such as  and .
Water fluoridation enhances the resistance of teeth to decay by the partial conversion of this mineral to the still harder material called fluoroapatite:
For example, the industrially important trisodium triphosphate (also known as sodium tripolyphosphate, STPP) is produced industrially on by the megatonne by this condensation reaction:
Inorganic phosphate rock, which is partially made of apatite (an impure tri-calcium phosphate mineral), is today the chief commercial source of this element.
Large deposits of apatite are located in China, Russia, Morocco, Florida, Idaho,  Tennessee, Utah, and elsewhere.
Other applications include the role of organophosphorus compounds in detergents, pesticides, and nerve agents.
These solids are polymeric, featuring P-O-M linkages.
Artificial phosphate fertilisation is necessary because phosphorus is essential to all life organisms, natural phosphorus-bearing compounds are mostly insoluble and inaccessible to plants, and the natural cycle of phosphorus is very slow.
Urine contains most (94% according to Wolgast) of the NPK nutrients excreted by the human body.
Hydroxyapatite is the main component of tooth enamel.
The international Berne Convention, ratified in 1906, prohibited the use of white phosphorus in matches.
Phosphorus is not found free in nature, but it is widely distributed in many minerals, mainly phosphates.
The strip contains red phosphorus that heats up upon striking, reacts with the oxygen-releasing compound in the head, and ignites the flammable material of the head.
Recent reports suggest that production of phosphorus may have peaked, leading to the possibility of global shortages by 2040.
See the article on peak phosphorus for more information on the history and present state of phosphate mining.
White phosphorus is widely used to make organophosphorus compounds through intermediate phosphorus chlorides and two phosphorus sulfides, phosphorus pentasulfide, and phosphorus sesquisulfide.
This waxy white solid reacts vigorously with water.
People can be exposed to phosphorus in the workplace by inhalation, ingestion, skin contact, and eye contact.
The term "phosphorescence", meaning glow after illumination, originally derives from this property of phosphorus, although this word has since been used for a different physical process that produces a glow.
The method started by roasting bones, then employed the use of clay retorts encased in a very hot brick furnace to distill out the highly toxic elemental phosphorus product.
The alkali metals (group 1) and alkaline earth metals can form ionic compounds containing the phosphide ion, P3−.
:PCl3 + 3 C6H5OH → P(OC6H5)3 + 3 HCl
Production in several countries was banned between 1872 and 1925.
The half-integer nuclear spin and high abundance of 31P make phosphorus-31 NMR spectroscopy a very useful analytical tool in studies of phosphorus-containing samples.
Therefore, this form is sometimes known as "Hittorf's phosphorus" (or violet or α-metallic phosphorus).
Animal food additive, toothpowder
This gave Boyle a valuable clue, so that he, too, managed to make phosphorus, and published the method of its manufacture.
At levels of 5&nbsp;mg/m3, phosphorus is immediately dangerous to life and health.
Mixed oxyhalides and oxyhydrides of phosphorus(III) are almost unknown.
These compounds react with water to form phosphine.
When a safe process for manufacturing red phosphorus was discovered, with its far lower flammability and toxicity, laws were enacted, under the Berne Convention (1906), requiring its adoption as a safer alternative for match manufacture.
Although the term phosphorescence was originally coined as a term by analogy with the glow from oxidation of elemental phosphorus, it is now reserved for another fundamentally different process—re-emission of light after illumination.
However, copper sulfate is toxic and its use will be discontinued.
More problematic is a "mud" containing significant amounts of white phosphorus.
Low phosphate levels are an important limit to growth in some aquatic systems.
:Ca3(PO4)2 + 2 H2SO4 → Ca(H2PO4)2 + 2 CaSO4
Production of white phosphorus is conducted in large facilities in part because it is energy intensive.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the phosphorus exposure limit (Permissible exposure limit) in the workplace at 0.1&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
Phosphate is needed to replace the phosphorus that plants remove from the soil, and its annual demand is rising nearly twice as fast as the growth of the human population.
This compound softens the water to enhance the performance of the detergents and to prevent pipe/boiler tube corrosion.
When ignited to a white heat with charcoal, calcium metaphosphate yields two-thirds of its weight of white phosphorus while one-third of the phosphorus remains in the residue as calcium orthophosphate:
Even under water, white phosphorus is slowly converted to the more stable red phosphorus allotrope.
Sodium tripolyphosphate made from phosphoric acid is used in laundry detergents in some countries, but banned for this use in others.
The Allies used phosphorus incendiary bombs in World War II to destroy Hamburg, the place where the "miraculous bearer of light" was first discovered.
The fluoride is sometimes recovered for use in water fluoridation.
Phosphorus can reduce elemental iodine to hydroiodic acid, which is a reagent effective for reducing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to methamphetamine.
Phosphorus is also an important component in steel production, in the making of phosphor bronze, and in many other related products.
Other phophines are known which contain chains of up to nine phosphorus atoms and have the formula PnHn+2.
Inorganic phosphorus in the form of the phosphate  is required for all known forms of life.
Upon further heating, this material crystallises.
* , a beta-emitter (1.71 MeV) with a half-life of 14.3 days, which is used routinely in life-science laboratories, primarily to produce radiolabeled DNA and RNA probes, ''e.g.''
With the transition metals as well as the monophosphides there are metal rich phosphides, which are generally hard refractory compounds with a metallic lustre, and phosphorus rich phosphides which are less stable and include semiconductors.
Murders, suicides and accidental poisonings resulted from its use.
White phosphorus gradually changes to red phosphorus.
Shielding requires special consideration.
With few exceptions, minerals containing phosphorus are in the maximally oxidised state as inorganic phosphate rocks.
Phosphorus was the 13th element to be discovered.
Some major accidents have occurred during transportation; train derailments at Brownston, Nebraska and Miamisburg, Ohio led to large fires.
Phosphorus is essential for life.
Every living cell is encased in a membrane that separates it from its surroundings.
Side products from this process include ferrophosphorus, a crude form of Fe2P, resulting from iron impurities in the mineral precursors.
The dimeric unit contains a triple bond and is analogous to N2.
At 0.099%, phosphorus is the most abundant pnictogen in the Earth's crust.
Alternately, precipitated phosphates could be made from ground-up bones that had been de-greased and treated with strong acids.
This species is not stable as a solid or liquid.
:HPO42− + H2O  H3O+ + &nbsp;PO43− &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ''K''a3= 3.98×10−13
In the past, external exposure to elemental phosphorus was treated by washing the affected area with 2% copper sulfate solution to form harmless compounds that are then washed away.
Many polyphosphates are known, including ATP.
Manufacture of plasticiser
Historically-important but limited commercial sources were organic, such as bone ash and (in the latter 19th century) guano.
Burning phosphorus is difficult to extinguish and if it splashes onto human skin it has horrific effects.
Robert Boyle in the 1680s ascribed it to "debilitation" of the air; in fact, it is oxygen being consumed.
They were poisonous to the workers in manufacture, sensitive to storage conditions, toxic if ingested, and hazardous when accidentally ignited on a rough surface.
Phosphorus is an essential macromineral for plants, which is studied extensively in edaphology to understand plant uptake from soil systems.
Phosphoric acid produced from white phosphorus is relatively pure and is the main route for the production of phosphates for all purposes, including detergent production.
The PCl3 serves as a source of P3+ in routes to organophosphorus(III) compounds.
For this reason, white phosphorus that is aged or otherwise impure (e.g.
:PCl3 + 6 Na + 3 C6H5Cl → P(C6H5)3 + 6 NaCl
The worst incident in recent times was an environmental contamination in 1968 when the sea was polluted from spillage and/or inadequately treated sewage from a white phosphorus plant at Placentia Bay, Newfoundland.
His process originally involved letting urine stand for days until it gave off a terrible smell.
triphenylphosphite:
Presently, about  of elemental phosphorus is produced annually.
For example, it is the precursor to triphenylphosphine:
The white phosphorus is transported in molten form.
Only about 0.1% of body phosphate circulates in the blood, paralleling the amount of phosphate available to soft tissue cells.
For this reason, and also due to its use in explosives, poisons and nerve agents, it is sometimes referred to as "the Devil's element".
The toxicity of white phosphorus led to discontinuation of its use in matches.
Calcium phosphate salts assist in stiffening bones.
ATP is also important for phosphorylation, a key regulatory event in cells.
It can also be generated as a transient intermediate in solution by thermolysis of organophosphorus precursor reagents.
The PN molecule is considered unstable, but is a product of crystalline Phosphorus nitride decomposition at 1100 K. Similarly, H2PN is considered unstable, and phosphorus nitride halogens like F2PN, Cl2PN, Br2PN, and I2PN oligomerise into cyclic Polyphosphazenes.
Thermolysis (cracking) of P4 at 1100&nbsp;kelvin gives diphosphorus, P2.
PCl5 is a colourless solid which has an ionic formulation of PCl4+ PCl6−, but adopts the trigonal bypramidal geometry when molten or in the vapour phase.
All four symmetrical trihalides are well known: gaseous PF3, the yellowish liquids PCl3 and PBr3, and the solid PI3.
Fluorophosphate esters are among the most potent neurotoxins known.
Instead, he obtained a white, waxy substance that glowed in the dark.
After the depletion of world guano sources about the same time, mineral phosphates became the major source of phosphate fertiliser production.
Phosphorus is an essential plant nutrient (often the limiting nutrient), and the bulk of all phosphorus production is in concentrated phosphoric acids for agriculture fertilisers, containing as much as 70% to 75% P2O5.
The more general limitations to using urine as fertiliser depend mainly on the potential for buildup of excess nitrogen (due to the high ratio of that macronutrient), and inorganic salts such as sodium chloride, which are also part of the wastes excreted by the renal system.
Brand experimented with urine, which contains considerable quantities of dissolved phosphates from normal metabolism.
It is used in life-science laboratories in applications in which lower energy beta emissions are advantageous such as DNA sequencing.
The two most common allotropes are '''white phosphorus''' and '''red phosphorus'''.
PF3 is toxic because it binds to haemoglobin.
At high-temperatures the α form is predominant.
All are characterised by hypophosphatemia, which is a condition of low levels of soluble phosphate levels in the blood serum and inside the cells.
Phosphides arise by reaction of metals with red phosphorus.
Early matches used white phosphorus in their composition, which was dangerous due to its toxicity.
White phosphorus was first made commercially in the 19th century for the match industry.
Carbon monoxide and other flammable gases produced during the reduction process were burnt off in a flare stack.
By the 18th century, it was known that in pure oxygen, phosphorus does not glow at all; there is only a range of partial pressure at which it does.
: 4  + 2  + 10 C → 2  + 10 CO +
In 1974, the glow was explained by R. J. van Zee and A. U. Khan.
Too much phosphate can lead to diarrhoea and calcification (hardening) of organs and soft tissue, and can interfere with the body's ability to use iron, calcium, magnesium, and zinc.
The word '''phosphorous''' is the adjectival form of the P3+ valence: so, just as sulfur forms sulfur'''ous''' and sulfur'''ic''' compounds, phosphor'''us''' forms phosphor'''ous''' compounds (e.g., phosphorous acid) and P5+ valence phosphor'''ic''' compounds (e.g., phosphoric acids and phosphates).
Processing phosphate minerals with sulfuric acid for obtaining fertiliser is so important to the global economy that this is the primary industrial market for sulfuric acid and the greatest industrial use of elemental sulfur.
An average adult human contains about 0.7&nbsp;kg of phosphorus, about 85–90% in bones and teeth in the form of apatite, and the remainder in soft tissues and extracellular fluids (~1%).
Baking powder and fertilisers
The phosphorus content increases from about 0.5 weight% in infancy to 0.65–1.1 weight% in adults.
White phosphorus is toxic, causing severe liver damage on ingestion.
The highly flammable gas diphosphine (P2H4) is an analogue of hydrazine.
Phosphates (compounds containing the phosphate ion, PO4−3) are a component of DNA, RNA, ATP, and the phospholipids, which form all cell membranes.
Fertiliser is often in the form of superphosphate of lime, a mixture of calcium dihydrogen phosphate (Ca(H2PO4)2), and calcium sulfate dihydrate (CaSO4·2H2O) produced reacting sulfuric acid and water with calcium phosphate.
Chronic white phosphorus poisoning leads to necrosis of the jaw called "phossy jaw".
The other process utilises white phosphorus, which may be produced by reaction and distillation from very low grade phosphate sources.
Violet phosphorus is a form of phosphorus that can be produced by day-long annealing of red phosphorus above 550&nbsp;°C.
Calcium phosphate (phosphate rock), mostly mined in Florida and North Africa, can be heated to 1,200–1,500&nbsp;°C with sand, which is mostly , and coke (refined coal) to produce vaporised .
According to the recent ''US Navy's Treatment of Chemical Agent Casualties and Conventional Military Chemical Injuries: FM8-285: Part 2 Conventional Military Chemical Injuries'', "Cupric (copper(II)) sulfate has been used by U.S. personnel in the past and is still being used by some nations.
For this purpose, phosphate minerals are converted to phosphoric acid.
Phospholipids are the main structural components of all cellular membranes.
Such matches are difficult to ignite on any surface other than a special strip.
for use in Northern blots or Southern blots.
This  tetrahedron is also present in liquid and gaseous phosphorus up to the temperature of  when it starts decomposing to  molecules.
Phosphorus plays a major role in the structural framework of DNA and RNA.
Thus far, source separation, or urine diversion and on-site treatment, has been implemented in South Africa, China, and Sweden among other countries, with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation provided some of the funding implementations.
The discovery of phosphorus is credited to the German alchemist Hennig Brand in 1669, although other chemists might have discovered phosphorus around the same time.
They are widely used commercially.
Later scientists discovered that fresh urine yielded the same amount of phosphorus.
Phosphorus(III) oxide, P4O6 (also called tetraphosphorus hexoxide) is the anhydride of P(OH)3, the minor tautomer of phosphorous acid.
Other phosphides, for example Na3P7, are known for these reactive metals.
Later he improved Brand's process by using sand in the reaction (still using urine as base material),
Bone ash was the major source of phosphorus until the 1840s.
DO NOT apply oily-based ointments until it is certain that all WP has been removed.
:P4 + 6 Cl2 → 4 PCl3
Brand had discovered phosphorus.
Phosphate rock remains a feedstock in the fertiliser industry, where it is treated with sulfuric acid to produce various "superphosphate" fertiliser products.
Living cells use phosphate to transport cellular energy with adenosine triphosphate (ATP), necessary for every cellular process that uses energy.
In World War I it was used in incendiaries, smoke screens and tracer bullets.
In addition, exposure to the vapours gave match workers a severe necrosis of the bones of the jaw, the infamous "phossy jaw".
"Urine management" is a relatively new way to view closing the cycle of agricultural nutrient flows and reducing sewage treatment costs and ecological consequences such as eutrophication resulting from the influx of nutrient rich effluent into aquatic or marine ecosystems.
While the quantities were essentially correct (it took about  of urine to make about 60&nbsp;g of phosphorus), it was unnecessary to allow the urine to rot.
Global demand for fertilisers led to large increase in phosphate (PO43−) production in the second half of the 20th century.
Ingestion of white phosphorus may cause the medical condition known as "Smoking Stool Syndrome".
It can be viewed as a derivative of P4 wherein one P-P bond is broken, and one additional bond is formed with the neighbouring tetrahedron resulting in a chain-like structure.
The silicate slag is a useful construction material.
Phosphorus has an oxidation number of -3 in phosphine.
Albright and Wilson in the UK and their Niagara Falls plant, for instance, were using phosphate rock in the 1890s and 1900s from Tennessee, Florida, and the Îles du Connétable (guano island sources of phosphate); by 1950 they were using phosphate rock mainly from Tennessee and North Africa.
The degree to which these factors impact the effectiveness depends on the term of use, salinity tolerance of the plant, soil composition, addition of other fertilising compounds, and quantity of rainfall or other irrigation.
Phosphorus after this treatment is amorphous.
It consists of tetrahedral  molecules, in which each atom is bound to the other three atoms by a single bond.
In 1769 Johan Gottlieb Gahn and Carl Wilhelm Scheele showed that calcium phosphate () is found in bones, and they obtained elemental phosphorus from bone ash.
The most prevalent compounds of phosphorus are derivatives of phosphate (PO43−), a tetrahedral anion.
In the early 1990s Albright and Wilson's purified wet phosphoric acid business was being adversely affected by phosphate rock sales by China and the entry of their long-standing Moroccan phosphate suppliers into the purified wet phosphoric acid business.
Manufacture of phosphate fertilisers
Monocalcium phosphate is then dehydrated to the corresponding metaphosphate:
In consequence, the 'strike-anywhere' matches were gradually replaced by 'safety matches', wherein the white phosphorus was replaced by phosphorus sesquisulfide (P4S3), sulfur, or antimony sulfide.
Symptoms of hypophosphatemia include neurological dysfunction and disruption of muscle and blood cells due to lack of ATP.
Phosphorus is added to metallic copper during its smelting process to react with oxygen present as an impurity in copper and to produce phosphorus-containing copper (CuOFP) alloys with a higher hydrogen embrittlement resistance than normal copper.
Phosphorus is a limiting factor in many ecosystems; that is, the scarcity of phosphorus limits the rate of organism growth.
When exposed to oxygen, white phosphorus glows in the dark with a very faint tinge of green and blue.
Computer modeling of molecular orbital theory indicates that this bonding involves only s- and p-orbitals.
The bone-ash process became obsolete when the submerged-arc furnace for phosphorus production was introduced to reduce phosphate rock.
:2 Ca3(PO4)2 + 6 SiO2 + 10 C → 6 CaSiO3 + 10 CO + P4
The chemical equation for this process when starting with fluoroapatite, a common phosphate mineral, is:
:Ca(H2PO4)2 → Ca(PO3)2 + 2 H2O
Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, authors of the textbook, ''Chemistry of the Elements,'' however, phosphorus comprises about 0.1% by mass of the average rock, and consequently the Earth's supply is vast, although dilute.
When the metal cation has a charge of 2+ or 3+, the salts are generally insoluble, hence they exist as common minerals.
PCl5 and PF5 are common compounds.
These materials are moisture sensitive, hydrolysing to give phosphorous acid.
Red phosphorus is polymeric in structure.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.1&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
P4S10 and P4O10 have analogous structures.
Together with nitrogen, arsenic, and antimony, phosphorus is classified as a pnictogen.
From the perspective of applications and chemical literature, the most important form of elemental phosphorus is white phosphorus, often abbreviated as '''WP'''.
In the 1840s, world phosphate production turned to the mining of tropical island deposits formed from bird and bat guano (see also Guano Islands Act).
:4 Ca5(PO4)3F + 18 SiO2 + 30 C → 3 P4 + 30 CO + 18 CaSiO3 + 2 CaF2
Following complete removal of the particles, treat the lesions as thermal burns.''"
The main food sources for phosphorus are the same as those containing protein, although proteins do not contain phosphorus.
Boyle states that Krafft gave him no information as to the preparation of phosphorus other than that it was derived from "somewhat that belonged to the body of man".
Two radioactive isotopes of phosphorus have half lives suitable for biological scientific experiments.
White phosphorus is the least stable, the most reactive, the most volatile, the least dense, and the most toxic of the allotropes.
Another allotrope is diphosphorus; it contains a phosphorus dimer as a structural unit and is highly reactive.
Therefore, the radiation must be shielded with low density materials such as acrylic or other plastic, water, or (when transparency is not required), even wood.
Organic compounds of phosphorus form a wide class of materials; many are required for life, but some are extremely toxic.
Manufacture of POCl3 and pesticides
Phosphine (PH3) and its organic derivatives (PR3) are structural analogues with ammonia (NH3) but the bond angles at phosphorus are closer to 90° for phosphine and its organic derivatives.
Examples include catenated derivatives of phosphine and organophosphines.
