A longer lens or a wider aperture will result in "shallow" depth of field (i.e., only a small plane of the image will be in sharp focus).
The vantage points are overview, mid-range, and close up.
A negative image on film is traditionally used to photographically create a positive image on a paper base, known as a print, either by using an enlarger or by contact printing.
Before automatic exposure, correct exposure was accomplished with the use of a separate light metering device or by the photographer's knowledge and experience of gauging correct settings.
For example, dodging and burning controls are different between digital and film processes.
Sontag writes of her concern that the ability to censor pictures means the photographer has the ability to construct reality.
Meanwhile a British inventor, William Fox Talbot, had succeeded in making crude but reasonably light-fast silver images on paper as early as 1834 but had kept his work secret.
* Wildlife photography demonstrates the life of animals.
Sontag is concerned that "to photograph is to turn people into objects that can be symbolically possessed."
Synthesis photography is the application of analog and digital photography in digital space.
* Fashion and glamour photography usually incorporates models and is a form of advertising photography.
The effective aperture is expressed by an f-number or f-stop (derived from ''focal ratio''), which is proportional to the ratio of the focal length to the diameter of the aperture.
However, it has also been argued that there exists a "reverse gaze" through which indigenous photographees can position the tourist photographer as a shallow consumer of images.
There are many ongoing questions about different aspects of photography.
Aperture also has an effect on depth of field and diffraction&nbsp;– the higher the f-number, the smaller the opening, the less light, the greater the depth of field, and the more the diffraction blur.
Photograms are images produced by the shadows of objects cast on the photographic paper, without the use of a camera.
He was the first to use the terms "photography", "negative" and "positive".
As soon as photographic materials became "fast" (sensitive) enough for taking candid or surreptitious pictures, small "detective" cameras were made, some actually disguised as a book or handbag or pocket watch (the ''Ticka'' camera) or even worn hidden behind an Ascot necktie with a tie pin that was really the lens.
The news created an international sensation.
Almost all digital cameras have an option to shoot in monochrome, and almost all image editing software can combine or selectively discard RGB color channels to produce a monochrome image from one shot in color.
Measurement of exposure so that highlights and shadows are exposed according to the photographer's wishes.
The subject being photographed, however, must be illuminated.
These are usually assigned by the magazine and encompass fashion and glamour photography features.
Even after color film was readily available, black-and-white photography continued to dominate for decades, due to its lower cost and its "classic" photographic look.
Many Single-lens reflex cameras (SLR) feature multiple auto-focus points in the viewfinder.
A color print on paper could be produced by superimposing carbon prints of the three images made in their complementary colors, a subtractive method of color reproduction pioneered by Louis Ducos du Hauron in the late 1860s.
Besides the camera, other methods of forming images with light are available.
It means putting one's self into a certain relation to the world that feels like knowledge, and therefore like power."
Maxwell's idea was to take three separate black-and-white photographs through red, green and blue filters.
* Advertising photography: photographs made to illustrate and usually sell a service or product.
The first permanent color photograph was taken in 1861 using the three-color-separation principle first published by physicist James Clerk Maxwell in 1855.
Models in glamour photography sometimes work nude.
* Chemicals and process used during film development.
France soon agreed to pay Daguerre a pension in exchange for the right to present his invention to the world as the gift of France, which occurred when complete working instructions were unveiled on 19 August 1839.
Commercial photography is probably best defined as any photography for which the photographer is paid for images rather than works of art.
Clive Bell in his classic essay ''Art'' states that only "significant form" can distinguish art from what is not art.
The tones and contrast between light and dark areas define black-and-white photography.
In this light, money could be paid for the subject of the photograph or the photograph itself.
The f-stops that might be found on a typical lens include 2.8, 4, 5.6, 8, 11, 16, 22, 32, where going up "one stop" (using lower f-stop numbers) doubles the amount of light reaching the film, and stopping down one stop halves the amount of light.
In the 6th century CE, Byzantine mathematician Anthemius of Tralles used a type of camera obscura in his experiments, Both the Han Chinese polymath Shen Kuo (1031–95) and Arab physicist Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) (965–1040) independently invented the camera obscura and pinhole camera, Albertus Magnus (1193–1280) discovered silver nitrate, and Georg Fabricius (1516–71) discovered silver chloride.
The aperture and focal length of the lens determine the depth of field, which refers to the range of distances from the lens that will be in focus.
The fiction book ''Giphantie'', published in 1760, by French author Tiphaigne de la Roche, described what can be interpreted as photography.
Many artists argued that photography was the mechanical reproduction of an image.
It is important to note that monochromatic pictures are not necessarily composed of pure blacks, whites, and intermediate shades of gray, but can involve shades of one particular hue depending on the process.
With slide film, the developed film is just mounted for projection.
Print film requires the developed film negative to be printed onto photographic paper or transparency.
Photography is one of the new media forms that changes perception and changes the structure of society.
Photographers decide what to take a photo of, what elements to exclude and what angle to frame the photo, and these factors may reflect a particular socio-historical context.
However, recent changes of in-camera processing allows digital fingerprinting of photos to detect tampering for purposes of forensic photography.
The aesthetics of photography is a matter that continues to be discussed regularly, especially in artistic circles.
As explained by Michael Faraday in 1846, the "light field" is understood as 5-dimensional, with each point in 3-D space having attributes of two more angles that define the direction of each ray passing through that point.
This is accomplished through an intermittent mechanism.
Other printing modifications include:
More than 99% of photographs taken around the world are through digital cameras, increasingly through smartphones.
An amateur photographer is one who practices photography as a hobby / passion and not for profit.
Monochrome printing or electronic display can be used to salvage certain photographs taken in color which are unsatisfactory in their original form; sometimes when presented as black-and-white or single-color-toned images they are found to be more effective.
* Burning in&nbsp;– increases exposure of certain areas, resulting in darker areas
The camera has a long and distinguished history as a means of recording scientific phenomena from the first use by Daguerre and Fox-Talbot, such as astronomical events (eclipses for example), small creatures and plants when the camera was attached to the eyepiece of microscopes (in photomicroscopy) and for macro photography of larger specimens.
The commercial photographic world could include:
The camera obscura literally means "dark chamber" in Latin.
Without special film processing, the result would simply be three superimposed black-and-white images, but complementary cyan, magenta, and yellow dye images were created in those layers by adding color couplers during a complex processing procedure.
* '''Filters''' placed between the subject and the light recording material, either in front of or behind the lens
* Still life photography usually depicts inanimate subject matter, typically commonplace objects which may be either natural or man-made.
So the birth of photography was primarily concerned with inventing means to capture and keep the image produced by the camera obscura.
On mechanical, film-based cameras, this function is served by the operator's choice of film stock or with color correction filters.
However, for a subject that is in motion use a fast shutter speed.
For example, a wider aperture is used for lower light and a lower aperture for more light.
Leonardo da Vinci mentions natural camerae obscurae that are formed by dark caves on the edge of a sunlit valley.
Cameras can range from small to very large, a whole room that is kept dark while the object to be photographed is in another room where it is properly illuminated.
It is quite possible to have exposures from one up to several seconds, usually for still-life subjects, and for night scenes exposure times can be several hours.
For instance, a photocopy or xerography machine forms permanent images but uses the transfer of static electrical charges rather than photographic medium, hence the term electrophotography.
The distinctive "look" of film based photographs compared to digital images is likely due to a combination of factors, including: (1) differences in spectral and tonal sensitivity (S-shaped density-to-exposure (H&D curve) with film vs. linear response curve for digital CCD sensors)  (2) resolution and (3) continuity of tone.
'Although the camera is an observation station, the act of photographing is more than passive observing'.
Most printing controls have equivalent digital concepts, but some create different effects.
Renaissance painters used the camera obscura which, in fact, gives the optical rendering in color that dominates Western Art.
With very small apertures, such as pinholes, a wide range of distance can be brought into focus, but sharpness is severely degraded by diffraction with such small apertures.
The latter is now the most common form of film (non-digital) color photography owing to the introduction of automated photo printing equipment.
The cyanotype process, for example, produces an image composed of blue tones.
Autochrome plates were one of several varieties of additive color screen plates and films marketed between the 1890s and the 1950s.
The essential elements—a silver-plated surface sensitized by iodine vapor, developed by mercury vapor, and "fixed" with hot saturated salt water—were in place in 1837.
Many advances in photographic glass plates and printing were made during the rest of the 19th century.
With the characteristics of the real photography but not being constrained by the physical limits of real world, synthesis photography allows to get away from real photography.
Instant color film, used in a special camera which yielded a unique finished color print only a minute or two after the exposure, was introduced by Polaroid in 1963.
Daguerre's efforts culminated in what would later be named the daguerreotype process.
Glass plates were the medium for most original camera photography from the late 1850s until the general introduction of flexible plastic films during the 1890s.
Although its high cost precluded uses other than photojournalism and professional photography, commercial digital photography was born.
Photography is employed in many fields of science, manufacturing (e.g., photolithography) and business, as well as its more direct uses for art, film and video production, recreational purposes, hobby, and mass communication.
Implementation of color photography was hindered by the limited sensitivity of early photographic materials, which were mostly sensitive to blue, only slightly sensitive to green, and virtually insensitive to red.
* Inherent '''sensitivity''' of the medium to light intensity and color/wavelengths.
A hole in the cave wall will act as a pinhole camera and project a laterally reversed, upside down image on a piece of paper.
The chosen combination affects the final result.
Daguerre took the earliest confirmed photograph of a person in 1838 while capturing a view of a Paris street: unlike the other pedestrian and horse-drawn traffic on the busy boulevard, which appears deserted, one man having his boots polished stood sufficiently still throughout the several-minutes-long exposure to be visible.
Photographs, both monochrome and color, can be captured and displayed through two side-by-side images that emulate human stereoscopic vision.
The present system of f/numbers to give the effective aperture of a lens was standardized by an international convention in 1963, and is referred to as the British Standard (BS-1013).
The focal length divided by the f-number gives the effective aperture diameter.
Photo stock can be procured through traditional stock giants, such as Getty Images or Corbis; smaller microstock agencies, such as Fotolia; or web marketplaces, such as Cutcaster.
Image capture is only part of the image forming process.
* Contrast&nbsp;– changing the visual properties of objects in an image to make them distinguishable from other objects and the background
The albumen print process, first used more than  years ago, produces brownish tones.
Photographers control the camera and lens to "expose" the light-recording material to the required amount of light to form a "latent image" (on plate or film) or RAW file (in digital cameras) which, after appropriate processing, is converted to a usable image.
Digital imaging uses an electronic image sensor to record the image as a set of electronic data rather than as chemical changes on film.
On 14 February 2004, Sotheby's London sold the 2001 photograph ''99 Cent II Diptychon'' for an unprecedented $3,346,456 to an anonymous bidder, making it the most expensive at the time.
An important difference between digital and chemical photography is that chemical photography resists photo manipulation because it involves film and photographic paper, while digital imaging is a highly manipulative medium.
The controversy began with the earliest images "written with light"; Nicéphore Niépce, Louis Daguerre, and others among the very earliest photographers were met with acclaim, but some questioned if their work met the definitions and purposes of art.
In 1991, Kodak unveiled the DCS 100, the first commercially available digital single lens reflex camera.
Films remained the dominant form of photography until the early 21st century, when advances in digital photography drew consumers to digital formats.
The smaller the f/number, the larger the effective aperture.
Although cellulose acetate or "safety film" had been introduced by Kodak in 1908, at first it found only a few special applications as an alternative to the hazardous nitrate film, which had the advantages of being considerably tougher, slightly more transparent, and cheaper.
Currently available color films still employ a multi-layer emulsion and the same principles, most closely resembling Agfa's product.
Longer focal length  lenses will pass less light through the same aperture diameter due to the greater distance the light has to travel; shorter focal length lenses will transmit more light through the same diameter of aperture.
Film continues to be the preference of some photographers because of its distinctive "look".
In Alfred Hitchcock's ''Rear Window'' (1954), the camera is presented as promoting voyeurism.
In partnership with Louis Daguerre, he worked out post-exposure processing methods that produced visually superior results and replaced the bitumen with a more light-sensitive resin, but hours of exposure in the camera were still required.
The first transparent plastic roll film followed in 1889.
Color photography may form images as positive transparencies, which can be used in a slide projector, or as color negatives intended for use in creating positive color enlargements on specially coated paper.
The discovery of dye sensitization by photochemist Hermann Vogel in 1873 suddenly made it possible to add sensitivity to green, yellow and even red.
Further unease has been caused around cameras in regards to desensitization.
Magazines and newspapers, companies putting up Web sites, advertising agencies and other groups pay for photography.
Digital photography dominates the 21st century.
Conceptual photography turns a concept or idea into a photograph.
Film speed is usually measured via the ISO system.
Every type can then be produced as a hard copy on regular paper or photographic paper via a printer.
Organizations with a budget and a need for photography have several options: they can employ a photographer directly, organize a public competition, or obtain rights to stock photographs.
At first, like other pre-daguerreotype processes, Talbot's paper-based photography typically required hours-long exposures in the camera, but in 1840 he created the calotype process, which used the chemical development of a latent image to greatly reduce the exposure needed and compete with the daguerreotype.
Autochrome, the first commercially successful color process, was introduced by the Lumière brothers in 1907.
The method has been much extended by using other wavelengths, such as infrared photography and ultraviolet photography, as well as spectroscopy.
Conversely, a shorter lens, or a smaller aperture, will result in more of the image being in focus.
The result with photographic emulsion is an invisible latent image, which is later chemically "developed" into a visible image, either negative or positive depending on the purpose of the photographic material and the method of processing.
Both of these claims are now widely reported but apparently neither has ever been independently confirmed as beyond reasonable doubt.
Crime scene photos are taken from three vantage point.
The required exposure time was measured in minutes instead of hours.
The movie camera is a type of photographic camera which takes a rapid sequence of photographs on recording medium.
Charles Brooke a little later developed similar instruments for the Greenwich Observatory.
* Paper type&nbsp;– resin-coated (RC) or fiber-based (FB)
He made the first glass negative in late 1839.
File:Phone photography.jpg|Smartphone with built-in camera spreads private images globally, c. 2013
The higher the film speed number the greater the film sensitivity to light, whereas with a lower number, the film is less sensitive to light.
Autochrome plates incorporated a mosaic color filter layer made of dyed grains of potato starch, which allowed the three color components to be recorded as adjacent microscopic image fragments.
After reading about Daguerre's invention in January 1839, Talbot published his hitherto secret method and set about improving on it.
The duration of an exposure is referred to as shutter speed, often even in cameras that do not have a physical shutter, and is typically measured in fractions of a second.
Although the convenience of film greatly popularized amateur photography, early films were somewhat more expensive and of markedly lower optical quality than their glass plate equivalents, and until the late 1910s they were not available in the large formats preferred by most professional photographers, so the new medium did not immediately or completely replace the old.
After an Autochrome plate was reversal processed to produce a positive transparency, the starch grains served to illuminate each fragment with the correct color and the tiny colored points blended together in the eye, synthesizing the color of the subject by the additive method.
If a subject is in motion, then a high shutter speed may be needed.
In Brazil, Hercules Florence had apparently started working out a silver-salt-based paper process in 1832, later naming it ''Photographie''.
Glamour photography is popular in advertising and men's magazines.
In her writing "On Photography" (1977), Susan Sontag discusses concerns about the objectivity of photography.
Along these lines it can be argued that photography is a subjective form of representation.
Originally, all photography was monochrome, or ''black-and-white''.
* Pet photography involves several aspects that are similar to traditional studio portraits.
His uses of it in private correspondence prior to 25 February 1839 and at his Royal Society lecture on the subject in London on 14 March 1839 have long been amply documented and accepted as settled facts.
With an electronic image sensor, this produces an electrical charge at each pixel, which is electronically processed and stored in a digital image file for subsequent display or processing.
One of the practices through which photography constitutes society is tourism.
It was made from highly flammable nitrocellulose ("celluloid"), now usually called "nitrate film".
This post-production process allowed the photographer to further manipulate the final image beyond what had already been captured on the negative, adjusting the length of time the image was projected by the enlarger and the duration of both chemical baths to change the image's intensity, darkness, clarity, etc.
Camera controls are interrelated.
These images, such as packshots, are generally done with an advertising agency, design firm or with an in-house corporate design team.
After this, the paper was hung until dry enough to safely handle.
In addition to using white balance to register natural coloration of the image, photographers may employ white balance to aesthetic end, for example white balancing to a blue object in order to obtain a warm color temperature.
While the Mavica saved images to disk, the images were displayed on television, and the camera was not fully digital.
The methods used in analysing photographs for use in legal cases are collectively known as forensic photography.
These additional vector attributes can be captured optically through the use of microlenses at each pixel-point within the 2-dimensional image sensor.
In 1845 Francis Ronalds, the Honorary Director of the Kew Observatory, invented the first successful camera to make continuous recordings of meteorological and geomagnetic parameters.
Niépce was successful again in 1825.
Russian photographer Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii made extensive use of this color separation technique, employing a special camera which successively exposed the three color-filtered images on different parts of an oblong plate.
* Dodging&nbsp;– reduces exposure of certain print areas, resulting in lighter areas
The camera also proved useful in recording crime scenes and the scenes of accidents, such as the Wootton bridge collapse in 1861.
Adjustment of the speed (often expressed either as fractions of seconds or as an angle, with mechanical shutters) of the shutter to control the amount of time during which the imaging medium is exposed to light for each exposure.
Agfa's similarly structured Agfacolor Neu was introduced in 1936.
If photography is authentically art, then photography in the context of art would need redefinition, such as determining what component of a photograph makes it beautiful to the viewer.
Photographs made in this context are accepted as a documentation of a news story.
Generally, the highest degree of "sharpness" is achieved at an aperture near the middle of a lens's range (for example, f/8 for a lens with available apertures of f/2.8 to f/16).
Traditionally used to "tell the camera" the film speed of the selected film on film cameras, film speed numbers are employed on modern digital cameras as an indication of the system's ''gain'' from light to numerical output and to control the automatic exposure system.
Different (but related) settings of aperture and shutter speed enable photographs to be taken under various conditions of film or sensor speed, lighting and motion of subjects and/or camera, and desired depth of field.
He used paper or white leather treated with silver nitrate.
Photography has become ubiquitous in recording events and data in science and engineering, and at crime scenes or accident scenes.
His scientifically elegant and important but ultimately impractical invention earned him the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1908.
In both its original and calotype forms, Talbot's process, unlike Daguerre's, created a translucent negative which could be used to print multiple positive copies, this the basis of most modern chemical photography up to the present day, as Daguerreotypes could only be replicated by rephotographing them with a camera.
* Paparazzi is a form of photojournalism in which the photographer captures candid images of athletes, celebrities, politicians, and other prominent people.
In 1826 or 1827, he made the ''View from the Window at Le Gras'', the earliest surviving photograph from nature (i.e., of the image of a real-world scene, as formed in a camera obscura by a lens).
* Portrait and wedding photography: photographs made and sold directly to the end user of the images.
On some cameras, the selection of a point in the imaging frame upon which the auto-focus system will attempt to focus.
Protection of photographs is typically achieved through the granting of copyright or moral rights to the photographer.
In 1981, Sony unveiled the first consumer camera to use a charge-coupled device for imaging, eliminating the need for film: the Sony Mavica.
Because Niépce's camera photographs required an extremely long exposure (at least eight hours and probably several days), he sought to greatly improve his bitumen process or replace it with one that was more practical.
Particularly, photos of war and pornography are causing a stir.
Photography is the result of combining several technical discoveries.
Around the year 1800, British inventor Thomas Wedgwood made the first known attempt to capture the image in a camera obscura by means of a light-sensitive substance.
This process is still employed by both amateur and professional photographers, but the advent of digital imagery means that the vast majority of modern photographic work is captured digitally and rendered via printing processes that are no longer dependent on chemical reactions to light.
* Editorial photography illustrates a story or idea within the context of a magazine.
In reaction to that, Weston, Ansel Adams, and others formed the Group f/64 to advocate 'straight photography', the photograph as a (sharply focused) thing in itself and not an imitation of something else.
Objects can also be placed directly on the glass of an image scanner to produce digital pictures.
Such digital images may be uploaded to an image server (e.g., a photo-sharing web site), viewed on a television, or transferred to a computer or digital photo frame.
Many other elements of the imaging device itself may have a pronounced effect on the quality and/or aesthetic effect of a given photograph; among them are:
Several people may have coined the same new term from these roots independently.
Although he succeeded in capturing the shadows of objects placed on the surface in direct sunlight, and even made shadow-copies of paintings on glass, it was reported in 1802 that "the images formed by means of a camera obscura have been found too faint to produce, in any moderate time, an effect upon the nitrate of silver."
Every pixel of the final image is actually a selection from each sub-array located under each microlens, as identified by a post-image capture focus algorithm.
This provides the photographer with the three basic channels required to recreate a color image.
Fears that disturbing or explicit images are widely accessible to children and society at large have been raised.
Tourism and photography combine to create a "tourist gaze"
Digital imaging has raised ethical concerns because of the ease of manipulating digital photographs in post-processing.
