Machin reached 100 digits of  with this formula.
The constant  is the unique (positive) normalizing factor such that ''H'' defines a linear complex structure on the Hilbert space of square-integrable real-valued functions on the real line.
Any random sequence of digits contains arbitrarily long subsequences that appear non-random, by the infinite monkey theorem.
The cosine can be defined independently of geometry as a power series, or as the solution of a differential equation.
As mentioned above, it can be characterized via its role as the best constant in the isoperimetric inequality: the area  enclosed by a plane Jordan curve of perimeter  satisfies the inequality
New infinite series were discovered in the 1980s and 1990s that are as fast as iterative algorithms, yet are simpler and less memory intensive.
An iterative algorithm repeats a specific calculation, each iteration using the outputs from prior steps as its inputs, and produces a result in each step that converges to the desired value.
Still, fractions such as 22/7 and other rational numbers are commonly used to approximate .
First, the discovery of new iterative algorithms for computing , which were much faster than the infinite series; and second, the invention of fast multiplication algorithms that could multiply large numbers very rapidly.
Accounting for additional digits needed to compensate for computational round-off errors, Arndt concludes that a few hundred digits would suffice for any scientific application.
Dutch scientist Willebrord Snellius reached 34 digits in 1621, and Austrian astronomer Christoph Grienberger arrived at 38 digits in 1630 using 1040 sides, which remains the most accurate approximation manually achieved using polygonal algorithms.
An important application of digit extraction algorithms is to validate new claims of record  computations: After a new record is claimed, the decimal result is converted to hexadecimal, and then a digit extraction algorithm is used to calculate several random hexadecimal digits near the end; if they match, this provides a measure of confidence that the entire computation is correct.
An early example of a memorization aid, originally devised by English scientist James Jeans, is "How I want a drink, alcoholic of course, after the heavy lectures involving quantum mechanics."
Also,  is a transcendental number&nbsp;– a number that is not the root of any non-zero polynomial having rational coefficients.
The Chudnovsky formula developed in 1987 is
Infinite series for
Practically all scientific applications require no more than a few hundred digits of , and many substantially fewer, so the primary motivation for these computations is the human desire to break records.
A few authors have used the digits of  to establish a new form of constrained writing, where the word lengths are required to represent the digits of .
The constant  is the unique constant making the Jacobi theta function an automorphic form, which means that it transforms in a specific way.
The first infinite sequence discovered in Europe was an infinite product (rather than an infinite sum, which are more typically used in  calculations) found by French mathematician François Viète in 1593:
Ramanujan's formulae anticipated the modern algorithms developed by the Borwein brothers and the Chudnovsky brothers.
The ubiquity of  makes it one of the most widely known mathematical constants both inside and outside the scientific community: Several books devoted to it have been published, the number is celebrated on Pi Day and record-setting calculations of the digits of  often result in news headlines.
Furthermore,  is the surface area of the unit sphere, but we have not assumed that  is the sphere.
An example is the surface area of a sphere ''S'' of curvature 1 (so that its radius of curvature, which coincides with its radius, is also 1.)
The historically first exact formula for , based on infinite series, was not available until a millennium later, when in the 14th century the Madhava–Leibniz series was discovered in Indian mathematics.
During the 2011 auction for Nortel's portfolio of valuable technology patents, Google made a series of unusually specific bids based on mathematical and scientific constants, including .
The series are presented without proof, but proofs are presented in a later Indian work, ''Yuktibhāṣā'', from around 1530 AD.
The record, always relying on an arctan series, was broken repeatedly (7,480 digits in 1957; 10,000 digits in 1958; 100,000 digits in 1961) until 1 million digits were reached in 1973.
Further, it follows from the functional equation that
In the Palais de la Découverte (a science museum in Paris) there is a circular room known as the ''pi room''.
Each approximation generated in this way is a best rational approximation; that is, each is closer to  than any other fraction with the same or a smaller denominator.
Given the choice of two infinite series for , mathematicians will generally use the one that converges more rapidly because faster convergence reduces the amount of computation needed to calculate  to any given accuracy.
Piphilology is the practice of memorizing large numbers of digits of , and world-records are kept by the ''Guinness World Records''.
As a result, the constant  is the unique number such that the group '''T''', equipped with its Haar measure, is Pontrjagin dual to the lattice of integral multiples of 2.
This Monte Carlo method is independent of any relation to circles, and is a consequence of the central limit theorem, discussed above.
Pi Day in 2015 was particularly significant because the date and time 3/14/15 9:26:53 reflected many more digits of pi.
The approach was actually invented over 160 years earlier by Carl Friedrich Gauss, in what is now termed the arithmetic–geometric mean method (AGM method) or Gauss–Legendre algorithm.
The digits of  have also been incorporated into the lyrics of the song "Pi" from the album ''Aerial'' by Kate Bush.
Modern  calculators do not use iterative algorithms exclusively.
However, no other authors are known to use  in this way.
It had indeed been used earlier for geometric concepts.
The discovery of calculus, by English scientist Isaac Newton and German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in the 1660s, led to the development of many infinite series for approximating .
The gamma function is used to calculate the volume  of the ''n''-dimensional ball of radius ''r'' in Euclidean ''n''-dimensional space, and the surface area  of its boundary, the (''n''&minus;1)-dimensional sphere:
Squaring a circle was one of the important geometry problems of the classical antiquity.
An infinite series for  (published by Nilakantha in the 15th century) that converges more rapidly than the Gregory–Leibniz series is:
The gamma function extends the concept of factorial (normally defined only for non-negative integers) to all complex numbers, except the negative real integers.
In the United States, Pi Day falls on 14&nbsp;March (written 3/14 in the US style), and is popular among students.
By calculating the perimeters of these polygons, he proved that  (that is ).
As a special case,  appears as the optimal smallest eigenvalue of the Dirichlet energy, in dimensions 1 and 2, which thus characterizes the role of  in many physical phenomena as well, for example those of classical potential theory.
They are called spigot algorithms because, like water dripping from a spigot, they produce single digits of  that are not reused after they are calculated.
In 1596, Dutch mathematician Ludolph van Ceulen reached 20 digits, a record he later increased to 35 digits (as a result,  was called the "Ludolphian number" in Germany until the early 20th century).
The constant  also appears naturally in Fourier series of periodic functions.
The degree to which  can be approximated by rational numbers (called the irrationality measure) is not precisely known; estimates have established that the irrationality measure is larger than the measure of  or  but smaller than the measure of Liouville numbers.
The sinuosity is the ratio between the actual length and the straight-line distance from source to mouth.
He examined the behavior of the Mandelbrot set near the "neck" at (−0.75, 0).
Iterative methods were used by Japanese mathematician Yasumasa Kanada to set several records for computing  between 1995 and 2002.
The error was detected in 1946 and corrected in 1949.
where the sum is of the residues at the poles of .
For example, an idealized vibrating string can be modelled as the graph of a function  on the unit interval , with fixed ends .
and its digital representation are often used by self-described "math geeks" for inside jokes among mathematically and technologically minded groups.
One of his formulae, based on modular equations, is
Jones may have chosen  because it was the first letter in the Greek spelling of the word ''periphery''.
A consequence of the Gauss law is that the negative Laplacian of the potential  is equal to  times the Dirac delta function:
American mathematicians Stan Wagon and Stanley Rabinowitz produced a simple spigot algorithm in 1995.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, mathematicians and computer scientists discovered new approaches that, when combined with increasing computational power, extended the decimal representation of  to, as of 2015, over 13.3 trillion (1013) digits.
These Monte Carlo methods for approximating  are very slow compared to other methods, and do not provide any information on the exact number of digits that are obtained.
General modular forms and other theta functions also involve , once again because of the Stone–von Neumann theorem.
The factorial function  is the product of all of the positive integers through .
Lambert's proof exploited a continued-fraction representation of the tangent function.
The following table compares the convergence rates of these two series:
where  is the distribution function.
used infinite series to compute  to 15 digits, later writing "I am ashamed to tell you to how many figures I carried these computations".
In many applications it plays a distinguished role as an eigenvalue.
If points with coordinates (−0.75, ε) are considered, as ε tends to zero, the number of iterations until divergence for the point multiplied by ε converges to .
For example, if a circle has twice the diameter of another circle it will also have twice the circumference, preserving the ratio .
A consequence is that  can be obtained from the functional determinant of the harmonic oscillator.
Several college cheers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology include "3.14159".
A circle encloses the largest area that can be attained within a given perimeter.
For similar formulas, see also the Ramanujan–Sato series.
In the case of the Basel problem, it is the hyperbolic 3-manifold .
Common trigonometric functions have periods that are multiples of ; for example, sine and cosine have period 2, so for any angle  and any integer ,
where  is the Ricci curvature tensor,  is the scalar curvature,  is the metric tensor,  is the cosmological constant,  is Newton's gravitational constant,  is the speed of light in vacuum, and  is the stress–energy tensor.
Nilakantha attributes the series to an earlier Indian mathematician, Madhava of Sangamagrama, who lived c.&nbsp;1350&nbsp;– c.&nbsp;1425.
After five terms, the sum of the Gregory–Leibniz series is within 0.2 of the correct value of , whereas the sum of Nilakantha's series is within 0.002 of the correct value of .
Because of its special role as an eigenvalue,  appears in areas of mathematics and the sciences having little to do with the geometry of circles, such as number theory and statistics.
Equivalently,  is the unique constant making the Gaussian normal distribution  equal to its own Fourier transform.
This functional determinant can be computed via a product expansion, and is equivalent to the Wallis product formula.
The digits of  have no apparent pattern and have passed tests for statistical randomness, including tests for normality; a number of infinite length is called normal when all possible sequences of digits (of any given length) appear equally often.
It is standard to absorb this factor of  into the constant , but this argument shows why it must appear ''somewhere''.
plays an important role in angles measured in radians, which are defined so that a complete circle spans an angle of 2 radians.
There are several different conventions for the Fourier transform, all of which involve a factor of  that is placed ''somewhere''.
However, that loopiness eventually causes the river to double back on itself in places and "short-circuit", creating an ox-bow lake in the process.
In Babylon, a clay tablet dated 1900–1600&nbsp;BC has a geometrical statement that, by implication, treats  as &nbsp;=&nbsp;3.125.
and there is a unique positive real number  with this property.
The Cauchy distribution plays an important role in potential theory because it is the simplest Furstenberg measure, the classical Poisson kernel associated with a Brownian motion in a half-plane.
On its wall are inscribed 707 digits of .
The uncertainty principle gives a sharp lower bound on the extent to which it is possible to localize a function both in space and in frequency: with our conventions for the Fourier transform,
The symbol used by mathematicians to represent the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter is the lowercase Greek letter , sometimes spelled out as ''pi,'' and derived from the first letter of the Greek word ''perimetros,'' meaning circumference.
This effort may be partly ascribed to the human compulsion to break records, and such achievements with  often make headlines around the world.
In 2006, Akira Haraguchi, a retired Japanese engineer, claimed to have recited 100,000 decimal places, but the claim was not verified by Guinness World Records.
Around 150 AD, Greek-Roman scientist Ptolemy, in his ''Almagest'', gave a value for  of 3.1416, which he may have obtained from Archimedes or from Apollonius of Perga.
The energy satisfies an inequality, Wirtinger's inequality for functions, which states that if a function  is given such that  and  and  are both square integrable, then the inequality holds:
Being an irrational number,  cannot be expressed exactly as a fraction (equivalently, its decimal representation never ends and never settles into a permanent repeating pattern).
Although infinite series were exploited for  most notably by European mathematicians such as James Gregory and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the approach was first discovered in India sometime between 1400 and 1500 AD.
Setting  =  in Euler's formula results in Euler's identity, celebrated by mathematicians because it contains the five most important mathematical constants:
This series converges much more rapidly than most arctan series, including Machin's formula.
Euler's result leads to the number theory result that the probability of two random numbers being relatively prime (that is, having no shared factors) is equal to .
Hence the probability that two numbers are both divisible by this prime is , and the probability that at least one of them is not is .
Ultimately as a consequence of the isoperimetric inequality, the constant  is associated with best constants of the Poincaré inequality.
They include the Karatsuba algorithm, Toom–Cook multiplication, and Fourier transform-based methods.
The value  is in fact the ''least'' such eigenvalue, and is associated with the fundamental mode of vibration of the string.
Because  is closely related to the circle, it is found in many  formulae from the fields of geometry and trigonometry, particularly those concerning circles, spheres, or ellipses.
The constant  is the unique normalizing factor that makes this transformation unitary.
Celebrations of this number, because it approximately equals 6.28, by making 28&nbsp;June "Tau Day" and eating "twice the pie", have been reported in the media.
The iterative algorithms were independently published in 1975–1976 by American physicist Eugene Salamin and Australian scientist Richard Brent.
A more abstract variation on the same idea, making use of sophisticated mathematical concepts of topology and algebra, is the following theorem: there is a unique continuous isomorphism from the group '''R'''/'''Z''' of real numbers under addition modulo integers (the circle group) onto the multiplicative group of complex numbers of absolute value one.
Hardy and Wright states that "the proofs were afterwards modified and simplified by Hilbert, Hurwitz, and other writers".
Some infinite series for  converge faster than others.
According to Jörg Arndt and Christoph Haenel, thirty-nine digits are sufficient to perform most cosmological calculations, because that is the accuracy necessary to calculate the circumference of the observable universe with a precision of one atom.
French mathematician François Viète in 1579 achieved 9 digits with a polygon of 3×217 sides.
Other mathematicians created variants, now known as Machin-like formulae, that were used to set several successive records for calculating digits of .
Truncating the continued fraction at any point yields a rational approximation for ; the first four of these are 3, 22/7, 333/106, and 355/113.
As a geometrical application of Stirling's approximation, let  denote the standard simplex in ''n''-dimensional Euclidean space, and  denote the simplex having all of its sides scaled up by a factor of .
Archimedes computed upper and lower bounds of  by drawing a regular hexagon inside and outside a circle, and successively doubling the number of sides until he reached a 96-sided regular polygon.
The digits are large wooden characters attached to the dome-like ceiling.
The calculation can be recast in quantum mechanics, specifically the variational approach to the spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
The set of complex numbers at which  is equal to one is then an (imaginary) arithmetic progression of the form:
The digits appear to be randomly distributed.
In 1958 Albert Eagle proposed replacing  by  (tau), where  = /2, to simplify formulas.
employee used the company's Hadoop application on one thousand computers over a 23-day period to compute 256 bits of  at the two-quadrillionth (2×1015th) bit, which also happens to be zero.
There is a unique character on , up to complex conjugation, that is a group isomorphism.
This probability can be used in conjunction with a random number generator to approximate  using a Monte Carlo approach.
Swiss scientist Johann Heinrich Lambert in 1761 proved that  is irrational, meaning it is not equal to the quotient of any two whole numbers.
The balance between these two opposing factors leads to an average ratio of  between the actual length and the direct distance between source and mouth.
The Persian astronomer Jamshīd al-Kāshī produced 9 sexagesimal digits, roughly the equivalent of 16 decimal digits, in 1424 using a polygon with 3×228 sides, which stood as the world record for about 180 years.
The definition given above is the most canonical however, because it describes the unique unitary operator on  that is also an algebra homomorphism of  to .
Periodic functions are functions on the group  of fractional parts of real numbers.
Bill Gosper was the first to use it for advances in the calculation of , setting a record of 17 million digits in 1985.
Other branches of science, such as statistics, physics, Fourier analysis, and number theory, also include  in some of their important formulae.
In 1699, English mathematician Abraham Sharp used the Gregory–Leibniz series for  to compute  to 71 digits, breaking the previous record of 39 digits, which was set with a polygonal algorithm.
Furthermore, the derivative of the zeta function satisfies
William Oughtred used  and δ, the Greek letter equivalents of p and d, to express ratios of periphery and diameter in the 1647 and later editions of ''Clavis Mathematicae''.
explains that this is because in many modern treatments of calculus, differential calculus typically precedes integral calculus in the university curriculum, so it is desirable to have a definition of  that does not rely on the latter.
where  is  (Gelfond's constant),  is an odd number, and  are certain rational numbers that Plouffe computed.
It was calculated to seven digits, using geometrical techniques, in Chinese mathematics and to about five in Indian mathematics in the 5th century AD.
Since the advent of computers, a large number of digits of  have been available on which to perform statistical analysis.
Some people use a different value,  = 6.283185... = 2, arguing that , as the number of radians in one turn or as the ratio of a circle's circumference to its radius rather than its diameter, is more natural than  and simplifies many formulas.
Although the simple continued fraction for  (shown above) also does not exhibit any other obvious pattern, mathematicians have discovered several generalized continued fractions that do, such as:
The Fourier decomposition shows that a complex-valued function  on  can be written as an infinite linear superposition of unitary characters of .
The left-hand side of Einstein's equation is a non-linear analog of the Laplacian of the metric tensor (and reduces to that in the weak field limit), and the right hand side is the analog of the distribution function, times .
where the constant  is the base of the natural logarithm.
These numbers are among the most well-known and widely used historical approximations of the constant.
One common technique is to memorize a story or poem in which the word lengths represent the digits of : The first word has three letters, the second word has one, the third has four, the fourth has one, the fifth has five, and so on.
Around 265 AD, the Wei Kingdom mathematician Liu Hui created a polygon-based iterative algorithm and used it with a 3,072-sided polygon to obtain a value of  of&nbsp;3.1416.
This probability is based on the observation that the probability that any number is divisible by a prime  is  (for example, every 7th integer is divisible by 7.)
French mathematician Adrien-Marie Legendre proved in 1794 that 2 is also irrational.
Italian author Dante apparently employed the value .
In 1882, German mathematician Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that  is transcendental, confirming a conjecture made by both Legendre and Euler.
Second, since no transcendental number can be constructed with compass and straightedge, it is not possible to "square the circle".
The solution to the Basel problem implies that the geometrically derived quantity  is connected in a deep way to the distribution of prime numbers.
This is in contrast to infinite series or iterative algorithms, which retain and use all intermediate digits until the final result is produced.
Thus they are never used to approximate  when speed or accuracy is desired.
In English,  is pronounced as "pie" ( , ).
It converges quite slowly, though&nbsp;– after 500,000 terms, it produces only five correct decimal digits of .
The Chinese mathematician Zu Chongzhi, around 480 AD, calculated that  (a fraction that goes by the name ''Milü'' in Chinese), using Liu Hui's algorithm applied to a 12,288-sided polygon.
When a poem is used, it is sometimes referred to as a ''piem''.
These avoid reliance on infinite series.
where  is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.
This formula, the Gregory–Leibniz series, equals  when evaluated with &nbsp;=&nbsp;1.
The first written description of an infinite series that could be used to compute  was laid out in Sanskrit verse by Indian astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji in his ''Tantrasamgraha'', around 1500 AD.
Because  is irrational, it has an infinite number of digits in its decimal representation, and it does not settle into an infinitely repeating pattern of digits.
The bill was passed by the Indiana House of Representatives, but rejected by the Senate.
The one-dimensional case is just Wirtinger's inequality.
They also have practical benefits, such as testing supercomputers, testing numerical analysis algorithms (including high-precision multiplication algorithms); and within pure mathematics itself, providing data for evaluating the randomness of the digits of .
The bill is notorious as an attempt to establish a value of scientific constant by legislative fiat.
There are  different complex numbers  satisfying , and these are called the "-th roots of unity".
The development of computers in the mid-20th century again revolutionized the hunt for digits of .
Such algorithms are particularly important in modern  computations, because most of the computer's time is devoted to multiplication.
This is the integral transform, that takes a complex-valued integrable function  on the real line to the function defined as:
The fast iterative algorithms were anticipated in 1914, when the Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan published dozens of innovative new formulae for , remarkable for their elegance, mathematical depth, and rapid convergence.
The point (0.25, ε) at the cusp of the large "valley" on the right side of the Mandelbrot set behaves similarly: the number of iterations until divergence multiplied by the square root of ε tends to .
Two algorithms were discovered in 1995 that opened up new avenues of research into .
Several infinite series are described, including series for sine, tangent, and cosine, which are now referred to as the Madhava series or Gregory–Leibniz series.
The central limit theorem explains the central role of normal distributions, and thus of , in probability and statistics.
Ehrhart's volume conjecture is that this is the (optimal) upper bound on the volume of a convex body containing only one lattice point.
Series that converge even faster include Machin's series and Chudnovsky's series, the latter producing 14 correct decimal digits per term.
In ancient China, values for  included 3.1547 (around 1 AD),  (100 AD, approximately 3.1623), and  (3rd century, approximately 3.1556).
This rapid convergence comes at a price: the iterative algorithms require significantly more memory than infinite series.
There are several proofs that  is irrational; they generally require calculus and rely on the reductio ad absurdum technique.
More general distributions of matter (or charge) are obtained from this by convolution, giving the Poisson equation
Newton himself used an arcsin series to compute a 15 digit approximation of  in 1665 or 1666, later writing "I am ashamed to tell you to how many figures I carried these computations, having no other business at the time."
Poems for memorizing  have been composed in several languages in addition to English.
In particular, the digit sequence of  is conjectured to satisfy a specific kind of statistical randomness, but to date no proof of this has been discovered.
Infinite series allowed mathematicians to compute  with much greater precision than Archimedes and others who used geometrical techniques.
In a similar spirit,  can be defined instead using properties of the complex exponential, , of a complex variable .
Despite this, people have worked strenuously to compute  to thousands and millions of digits.
So  appears as an optimal constant in Wirtinger's inequality, and from this it follows that it is the smallest such eigenvalue (by Rayleigh quotient methods).
The first recorded algorithm for rigorously calculating the value of  was a geometrical approach using polygons, devised around 250&nbsp;BC by the Greek mathematician Archimedes.
The modes of vibration of the string are solutions of the differential equation .
For example, the Brent-Salamin algorithm doubles the number of digits in each iteration.
