It is placed as the rightmost pedal in the group.
Piano tuners have to use their ear to "stretch" the tuning of a piano to make it sound in tune.
On the piano string, waves reflect from both ends.
The black keys are for the "accidental" notes (or "black notes"), which are the sharp and flat notes, which are F#, G#, Bb, C#, and Eb, which are needed to play in all twelve keys.
Digital, MIDI-equipped, pianos can output a stream of MIDI data, or record and play via a CD ROM or USB flash drive using MIDI format files, similar in concept to a pianola.
The strings are sounded when the keys are pressed or struck, and silenced by a damper when the hands are lifted off the keyboard.
The electric pianos that became most popular in pop and rock music in the 1960s and 1970s, such as the Fender Rhodes use metal tines in place of strings and use electromagnetic pickups similar to those on an electric guitar.
Piano tuning involves adjusting the tensions of the piano's strings, thereby aligning the intervals among their tones so that the instrument is in tune.
Starting in Beethoven's later career, the fortepiano evolved into an instrument more like the modern piano of the 2000s.
Over the 1800s, influenced by the musical trends of the Romantic music era, many innovations were made to make grand pianos louder, and give them a stronger and more powerful tone, such as using massive cast-iron frames and adding extra aliquot stringing.
Changes in musical styles and audience preferences, as well as the emergence of virtuoso performers contributed to this evolution, and to the growth of distinct approaches or schools of piano playing.
While the clavichord allowed expressive control of volume and sustain, it was too quiet for large performances in big halls.
Including an extremely large piece of metal in a piano is potentially an aesthetic handicap.
If all strings throughout the piano's compass were individual (monochord), the massive bass strings would overpower the upper ranges.
The inharmonicity of piano strings requires that octaves be ''stretched,'' or tuned to a lower octave's corresponding sharp overtone rather than to a theoretically correct octave.
The US Library of Congress recognizes the toy piano as a unique instrument with the subject designation, Toy Piano Scores: M175 T69.
The higher the partial, the further sharp it runs.
The plate (harp), or metal frame, of a piano is usually made of cast iron.
The vibrating piano strings themselves are not very loud, but their vibrations are transmitted to a large soundboard that moves air and thus converts the energy to sound.
Herbie Hancock was one of the first jazz xomposer-pianists to find mainstream popularity working with newer urban music techniques such as jazz-funk.
If octaves are not stretched, single octaves sound in tune, but double—and notably triple—octaves are unacceptably narrow.
Well-known approaches to piano technique include those by Dorothy Taubman, Edna Golandsky, Fred Karpoff, Charles-Louis Hanon and Otto Ortmann.
These systems were used to strengthen the tone of the highest register of notes on the piano, which up till this time were viewed as being too weak-sounding.
They achieved this in about 1777.
These extra keys are sometimes hidden under a small hinged lid that can cover the keys to prevent visual disorientation for pianists unfamiliar with the extra keys, or the colors of the extra white keys are reversed (black instead of white).
Wing and Son of New York offered a five-pedal piano from approximately 1893 through the 1920s.
Other improvements of the mechanism included the use of firm felt hammer coverings instead of layered leather or cotton.
More recently, the Kawai firm built pianos with action parts made of more modern materials such as carbon fiber reinforced plastic, and the piano parts manufacturer Wessell, Nickel and Gross has launched a new line of carefully engineered composite parts.
The pianos were introduced to their product line in response to numerous requests in favor of it.
The hammer roller then lifts the lever carrying the hammer.
There are two types of pedal piano.
Although an acoustic piano has strings, it is usually classified as a percussion instrument rather than as a stringed instrument, because the strings are struck rather than plucked (as with a harpsichord or spinet); in the Hornbostel-Sachs system of instrument classification, pianos are considered chordophones.
For example, if the pianist plays the 440&nbsp;Hz "A" note, the higher octave "A" notes will also sound sympathetically.
Alternatively, a person can practice an electronic piano with headphones to avoid disturbing others.
One of these builders was Gottfried Silbermann, better known as an organ builder.
This is the shortest cabinet that can accommodate a full-sized action located above the keyboard.
However, electric pianos, particularly the Fender Rhodes, became important instruments in funk, jazz fusion and some rock music genres.
Plates often include the manufacturer's ornamental medallion.
The piano is a crucial instrument in Western classical music, jazz, blues, rock, folk music, film and television scoring, and many other Western musical genres.
This revolution was in response to a preference by composers and pianists for a more powerful, sustained piano sound, and made possible by the ongoing Industrial Revolution with resources such as high-quality piano wire for strings, and precision casting for the production of massive iron frames that could withstand the tremendous tension of the strings.
The superposition of reflecting waves results in a standing wave pattern, but only for wavelengths , where  is the length of the string.
This extended the life of the hammers when the Orch pedal was used, a good idea for practicing, and created an echo-like sound that mimicked playing in an orchestral hall.
It lifts the dampers from all keys, sustaining all played notes.
A similar concept is used in the electric-acoustic Rhodes piano.
Many classical music composers, including Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, composed for the fortepiano, a rather different instrument than the modern piano.
Pianos need regular maintenance to ensure the felt hammers and key mechanisms are functioning properly.
These pianos are true pianos with action and strings.
The pinblock, which holds the tuning pins in place, is another area where toughness is important.
Moreover, the hammer must return to its rest position without bouncing violently, and it must return to a position in which it is ready to play almost immediately after its key is depressed so the player can repeat the same note rapidly.
The notes can be sustained, even when the keys are released, by the use of pedals at the base of the instrument.
Often, by replacing a great number of their parts, and adjusting them, old instrumnets can perform as well as new pianos.
"Instrument: piano et forte genandt"–a reference to the instrument's ability to play soft and loud–was an expression that Bach used to help sell the instrument when he was acting as Silbermann's agent in 1749.
The meaning of the term ''in tune'' in the context of piano tuning is not simply a particular fixed set of pitches.
On many upright pianos, the middle pedal is called the "practice" or ''celeste'' pedal.
Over-stringing was invented by Pape during the 1820s, and first patented for use in grand pianos in the United States by Henry Steinway, Jr. in 1859.
Upright pianos are generally less expensive than grand pianos.
Pressing one or more keys on the piano's keyboard causes a padded hammer (typically padded with firm felt) to strike the strings.
The Viennese makers similarly followed these trends; however the two schools used different piano actions: Broadwoods used a more robust action, whereas Viennese instruments were more sensitive.
It has since been imitated by other makers.
Most grand pianos in the US have three pedals: the soft pedal (una corda), sostenuto, and sustain pedal (from left to right, respectively), while in Europe, the standard is two pedals: the soft pedal and the sustain pedal.
Due to its double keyboard musical work that were originally created for double-manual Harpsichord such as Goldberg Variations by Bach become much easier to play, since playing on a conventional single keyboard piano involve complex and hand-tangling cross-hand movements.
* The top of a ''spinet'' model barely rises above the keyboard.
When the key is struck, a chain reaction occurs to produce the sound.
Piano strings (also called piano wire), which must endure years of extreme tension and hard blows, are made of high carbon steel.
For a repeating wave, the velocity  equals the wavelength  times the frequency ,
Cristofori's early instruments were made with thin strings, and were much quieter than the modern piano, but they were much louder and with more sustain in comparison to the clavichord—the only previous keyboard instrument capable of dynamic nuance via the weight or force with which the keyboard is played.
Silbermann's pianos were virtually direct copies of Cristofori's, with one important addition: Silbermann invented the forerunner of the modern sustain pedal, which lifts all the dampers from the strings simultaneously.
Also, ivory tends to chip more easily than plastic.
This makes it possible to sustain selected notes (by depressing the sostenuto pedal before those notes are released) while the player's hands are free to play additional notes (which are not sustained).
The largest piano available on the general market, the Fazioli F308, weighs 570&nbsp;kg (1257&nbsp;lb).
The hammer must strike the string, but not remain in contact with it, because this would damp the sound and stop the string from vibrating and making sound.
Some piano manufacturers extend the range further in one or both directions.
In uprights this action is not possible; instead the pedal moves the hammers closer to the strings, allowing the hammers to strike with less kinetic energy.
Only about 60 Emánuel Moór Pianoforte were made, mostly manufactured by Bösendorfer.
When the invention became public, as revised by Henri Herz, the double escapement action gradually became standard in grand pianos, and is still incorporated into all grand pianos currently produced in the 2000s.
Additional samples emulate sympathetic resonance of the strings when the sustain pedal is depressed, key release, the drop of the dampers, and simulations of techniques such as re-pedalling.
They featured an octave range larger than the earlier fortepiano instrument, adding around 30 more keys to the instrument, which extended the deep bass range and the high treble range.
According to Harold A. Conklin, the purpose of a sturdy rim is so that, "...&nbsp;the vibrational energy will stay as much as possible in the soundboard instead of dissipating uselessly in the case parts, which are inefficient radiators of sound."
The best piano makers use quarter-sawn, defect-free spruce of close annular grain, carefully seasoning it over a long period before fabricating the soundboards.
Honky-tonk music, featuring yet another style of piano rhythm, became popular during the same era.
John Broadwood joined with another Scot, Robert Stodart, and a Dutchman, Americus Backers, to design a piano in the harpsichord case—the origin of the "grand".
Stretching a small piano's octaves to match its inherent inharmonicity level creates an imbalance among all the instrument's intervallic relationships, not just its octaves.
They sent pianos to both Joseph Haydn and Ludwig van Beethoven, and were the first firm to build pianos with a range of more than five octaves: five octaves and a fifth (interval) during the 1790s, six octaves by 1810 (Beethoven used the extra notes in his later works), and seven octaves by 1820.
Theodore Steinway in 1880 to reduce manufacturing time and costs.
Piano-making flourished during the late 18th century in the Viennese school, which included Johann Andreas Stein (who worked in Augsburg, Germany) and the Viennese makers Nannette Streicher (daughter of Stein) and Anton Walter.
Electronic pianos are non-acoustic; they do not have strings, tines or hammers, but are a type of synthesizer that simulates or imitates piano sounds using oscillators and filters that synthesize the sound of an acoustic piano.
Square pianos were built in great numbers through the 1840s in Europe and the 1890s in the United States, and saw the most visible change of any type of piano: the iron-framed, over-strung squares manufactured by Steinway & Sons were more than two-and-a-half times the size of Zumpe's wood-framed instruments from a century before.
"Giraffe pianos", "pyramid pianos" and "lyre pianos" were arranged in a somewhat similar fashion, using evocatively shaped cases.
This produces a slightly softer sound, but no change in timbre.
The invention of the piano is credited to Bartolomeo Cristofori (1655–1731) of Padua, Italy, who was employed by Ferdinando de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany, as the Keeper of the Instruments.
One innovation that helped create the powerful sound of the modern piano was the use of a massive, strong, cast iron frame.
The resulting electrical, analogue signal can then be amplified with a keyboard amplifier or electronically manipulated with effects units.
A temperament system is also known as a set of '''bearings'''.
The piano tuner uses special tools.
The numerous parts of a piano action are generally made from hardwood, such as maple, beech, and hornbeam, however, since World War II, makers have also incorporated plastics.
Digital pianos are also non-acoustic and do not have strings or hammers.
The pianos of Mozart's day had a softer, more ethereal tone than 2000-era pianos or English pianos, with less sustaining power.
By the 1820s, the center of piano innovation had shifted to Paris, where the Pleyel firm manufactured pianos used by Frédéric Chopin and the Érard firm manufactured those used by Franz Liszt.
Pianos are usually tuned to a modified version of the system called equal temperament (''see Piano key frequencies for the theoretical piano tuning'').
This allows the pianist to sustain the notes that she has depressed even after her fingers are no longer pressing down the keys.
Bebop techniques grew out of jazz, with leading composer-pianists such as Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell.
From ''pianissimo'' (''pp'') to ''fortissimo'' (''ff'') the hammer velocity changes by almost a factor of a hundred.
On one, the pedal board is an integral part of the instrument, using the same strings and mechanism as the manual keyboard.
Modern equivalents of the player piano include the Bösendorfer CEUS, Yamaha Disklavier and QRS Pianomation, using solenoids and MIDI rather than pneumatics and rolls.
In a clavichord, the strings are struck by tangents, while in a harpsichord, they are mechanically plucked by quills when the performer depresses the key.
The prepared piano, present in some contemporary art music from the 20th and 21st century is a piano with objects placed inside it to alter its sound, or has had its mechanism changed in some other way.
This results from the piano's considerable string stiffness; as a struck string decays its harmonics vibrate, not from their termination, but from a point very slightly toward the center (or more flexible part) of the string.
The extra keys are added primarily for increased resonance from the associated strings; that is, they vibrate sympathetically with other strings whenever the damper pedal is depressed and thus give a fuller tone.
Aluminum piano plates were not widely accepted, and were discontinued.
(In the 18th century, some pianos used levers pressed upward by the player's knee instead of pedals.)
In addition, it alters the overall tone by allowing all strings, including those not directly played, to reverberate.
The sustain pedal (or, damper pedal) is often simply called "the pedal", since it is the most frequently used.
However, since ivory-yielding species are now endangered and protected by treaty, makers use plastics almost exclusively.
The bent plywood system was developed by C.F.
There are three factors that influence the pitch of a vibrating wire.
There are also specialized and novelty pianos, electric pianos based on electromechanical designs, electronic pianos that synthesize piano-like tones using oscillators, and digital pianos using digital samples of acoustic piano sounds.
Therefore, the only frequencies produced on a single string are .
The hammer contact time with the string shortens from 4 ms at ''pp'' to less than 2 ms at ''ff''.
Pianos have had pedals, or some close equivalent, since the earliest days.
By the 17th century, the mechanisms of keyboard instruments such as the clavichord and the harpsichord were well developed.
Most of the next generation of piano builders started their work based on reading the article.
Labeled left to right, the pedals are Mandolin, Orchestra, Expression, Soft, and Forte (Sustain).
The design also featured a special fourth pedal that coupled the lower and upper keyboard, so when playing on the lower keyboard the note one octave higher also played.
A large number of composers and songwriters are proficient pianists because the piano keyboard offers an effective means of experimenting with complex melodic and harmonic interplay and trying out multiple, independent melody lines that are played at the same time.
In grand pianos it shifts the entire action/keyboard assembly to the right (a very few instruments have shifted left) so that the hammers hit two of the three strings for each note.
Some piano makers developed schemes to enhance the tone of each note.
Smaller grands satisfy the space and cost needs of domestic use; as well, they are used in some small teaching studios and smaller performance venues..
Adding an eraser between the bass strings produces a mellow, thumpy sound reminiscent of the plucked double bass.
Unlike two of the major keyboard instruments that were widely used before the piano, the pipe organ and the harpsichord, the weight or force with which a performer presses or strikes the keys on a piano changes the dynamics and tone of the instrument's sound.
All else being equal, longer pianos with longer strings have larger, richer sound and lower inharmonicity of the strings.
Modern upright and grand pianos attained their present, 2000-era forms by the end of the 19th century.
The easiest intervals to identify, and the easiest intervals to tune, are those that are just, meaning they have a simple whole-number ratio.
* ''Studio'' pianos are around 42 to 45&nbsp;inches (106 to 114&nbsp;cm) tall.
This is the identical material that is used in quality acoustic guitar soundboards.
This means that the piano can play 88 different pitches (or "notes"), going from the deepest bass range to the highest treble range.
Whereas earlier instruments' bass strings were a mere continuation of a single string plane, over-stringing placed the bass bridge behind and to the treble side of the tenor bridge area.
The other, rarer type, consists of two independent pianos (each with separate mechanics and strings) placed one above the other—one for the hands and one for the feet.
It had strings arranged vertically on a continuous frame with bridges extended nearly to the floor, behind the keyboard and very large ''sticker action''.
Even composers of the Romantic movement, like Liszt, Chopin, Robert Schumann, Felix Mendelssohn, and Johannes Brahms, wrote for pianos substantially different from 2010-era modern pianos.
This innovation enabled pianists to, for example, play a loud chord with both hands in the lower register of the instrument, sustain the chord with the sustain pedal, and then, with the chord continuing to sound, relocate their hands to a different register of the keyboard in preparation for a subsequent section.
The term was later revived by many manufacturers for advertising purposes.
The extra keys are the same as the other keys in appearance.
Hardwood rims are commonly made by laminating thin, hence flexible, strips of hardwood, bending them to the desired shape immediately after the application of glue.
It is not known exactly when Cristofori first built a piano.
Each part produces a pitch of its own, called a partial.
Eager to copy these effects, Theodore Steinway invented ''duplex scaling'', which used short lengths of non-speaking wire bridged by the "aliquot" throughout much of upper the range of the piano, always in locations that caused them to vibrate sympathetically in conformity with their respective overtones—typically in doubled octaves and twelfths.
Other piano manufactures such as Bechstein, Chickering, and Steinway & Sons had also manufactured a few.
Many older pianos only have 85 keys (seven octaves from A0 to A7).
Contemporary musicians may adjust their interpretation of historical compositions from the 1600s to the 1800s to account for sound quality differences between old and new instruments or to changing performance practice.
Ragtime music, popularized by composers such as Scott Joplin, reached a broader audience by 1900.
Modernist styles of music have also appealed to composers writing for the modern grand piano, including John Cage and Philip Glass.
The first model, known as the ''Pianette,''' was unique in that the tuning pins extended through the instrument, so it could be tuned at the front.
Although technique is often viewed as only the physical execution of a musical idea, many pedagogues and performers stress the interrelatedness of the physical and mental or emotional aspects of piano playing.
This involves tuning the highest-pitched strings slightly higher and the lowest-pitched strings slightly lower than what a mathematical frequency table (in which octaves are derived by doubling the Hertz) would suggest.
Pianists began accompanying singers or dancers performing on stage, or playing dance tunes for patrons dancing on a dance floor.
The piano was founded on earlier technological innovations in keyboard instruments.
Plate casting is an art, since dimensions are crucial and the iron shrinks about one percent during cooling.
In an effort to make pianos lighter, Alcoa worked with Winter and Company piano manufacturers to make pianos using an aluminum plate during the 1940s.
Some early pianos had shapes and designs that are no longer in use.
In the earliest pianos whose unisons were bichords rather than trichords, the action shifted so that hammers hit a single string, hence the name ''una corda'', or 'one string'.
The toy piano manufacturer Schoenhut started manufacturing both grands and uprights with only 44 or 49 keys, and shorter distance between the keyboard and the pedals.
A modern exception, Bösendorfer, the Austrian manufacturer of high-quality pianos, constructs their inner rims from solid spruce, the same wood that the soundboard is made from, which is notched to allow it to bend; rather than isolating the rim from vibration, their "resonance case principle" allows the framework to more freely resonate with the soundboard, creating additional coloration and complexity of the overall sound.
Inharmonicity is the degree to which the frequencies of overtones (known as partials or harmonics) sound sharp relative to whole multiples of the fundamental frequency.
On their instruments, the frequency range extends from C0 to F8, which is the widest practical range for the acoustic piano.
While the hitchpins of these separately suspended Aliquot strings are raised slightly above the level of the usual tri-choir strings, they are not struck by the hammers but rather are damped by attachments of the usual dampers.
Players use this pedal to sustain a single bass note or chord over many measures, while playing the melody in the treble section.
The ''pedalier'' piano, or pedal piano, is a rare type of piano that includes a pedalboard so players can user their feet to play bass register notes, as on an organ.
The thick wooden posts on the underside (grands) or back (uprights) of the piano stabilize the rim structure, and are made of softwood for stability.
Piano technique evolved during the transition from harpsichord and clavichord to fortepiano playing, and continued through the development of the modern piano.
Aged and worn pianos can be rebuilt or reconditioned by piano rebuilders.
This type of software may use no samples but synthesize a sound based on aspects of the physics that went into the creation of a played note.
If one wire vibrates out of synchronization with the other, they subtract from each other and produce a softer tone of longer duration.
This is especially true of the outer rim.
Pipe organs have been used since Antiquity, and as such, the development of pipe organs enabled instrument builders to learn about creating keyboard mechanisms for sounding pitches.
* Mass per unit length: All other factors the same, the thinner the wire, the higher the pitch.
The short cottage upright or ''pianino'' with vertical stringing, made popular by Robert Wornum around 1815, was built into the 20th century.
Since the strings vibrate from the plate at both ends, an insufficiently massive plate would absorb too much of the vibrational energy that should go through the bridge to the soundboard.
Also called the "plate", the iron frame sits atop the soundboard, and serves as the primary bulwark against the force of string tension that can exceed 20 tons in a modern grand.
* Tension: All other factors the same, the tighter the wire, the higher the pitch.
The mechanical action structure of the upright piano was invented in London, England in 1826 by Robert Wornum, and upright models became the most popular model.
Modern acoustic pianos have two basic configurations, the grand piano and the upright piano, with various styles of each.
This instrument has a braceless back, and a soundboard positioned below the keys—meaning that long metal rods pulled on the levers to make the hammers strike the strings.
They quickly gained a reputation for the splendour and powerful tone of their instruments, with Broadwood constructing pianos that were progressively larger, louder, and more robustly constructed.
During the Middle Ages, there were several attempts at creating stringed keyboard instruments with struck strings.
George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue broke new musical ground by combining American jazz piano with symphonic sounds.
Pianos have also been used prominently in rock and roll and rock music by entertainers such as Jerry Lee Lewis, Little Richard, Keith Emerson (Emerson, Lake & Palmer), Elton John, Ben Folds, Billy Joel, Nicky Hopkins, and Tori Amos, to name a few.
It was invented by Hungarian composer and pianist, Emánuel Moór (19 February 1863&nbsp;– 20 October 1931).
The processing power of digital pianos has enabled highly realistic pianos using multi-gigabyte piano sample sets with as many as ninety recordings, each lasting many seconds, for each key under different conditions (e.g., there are samples of each note being struck softly, loudly, with a sharp attack, etc.).
He used his knowledge of harpsichord keyboard mechanisms and actions to help him to develop the first pianos.
This pedal keeps raised any damper already raised at the moment the pedal is depressed.
Some Bösendorfer pianos, for example, extend the normal range down to F0, and one of their models has 97 keys reaches a bottom C0 for a full eight octave range.
Their overwhelming popularity was due to inexpensive construction and price, although their tone and performance were limited by narrow soundboards, simple actions and string spacing that made proper hammer alignment difficult.
First, the key raises the "wippen" mechanism, which forces the jack against the hammer roller (or ''knuckle'').
They are informally called ''birdcage pianos'' because of their prominent damper mechanism.
Felt, which was first introduced by Jean-Henri Pape in 1826, was a more consistent material, permitting wider dynamic ranges as hammer weights and string tension increased.
Early technological progress in the late 1700s owed much to the firm of Broadwood.
In 1954 a German company exhibited a wire-less piano at the Spring Fair in Frankfurt, Germany that sold for $238.
Spruce is typically used in high-quality pianos.
Fazioli currently offers a fourth pedal that provides a second soft pedal, that works by bringing the keys closer to the strings.
Each used more distinctly ringing, undamped vibrations of sympathetically vibrating strings to add to the tone, except the Blüthner Aliquot stringing, which uses an additional fourth string in the upper two treble sections.
