Over the course of the 19th century, with the opening up of communications within the Highlands, in particular, the railways, a competing circuit emerged with the two most pre-eminent competitions being held at Inverness and Oban, the former descended directly from the first Falkirk competition.
Bagpipe societies, such as the Glasgow-based ''Piobaireachd Society'', have commonly employed the term ''piobaireachd'' as a synonym for ''ceol mor'' played on the Great Highland Bagpipes.
The written notation of pibroch serves mainly as a rough guide for the piper.
Melbourne-based piper Dr Barrie Orme, who was trained in a lineage traceable back to Simon Fraser, has documented this parallel body of around 140 pibroch through tutor publications, a six volume series of archival recordings of the Simon Fraser pibroch repertoire, and a DVD video demonstrating the performance techniques passed down to Orme by his teacher Hugh Fraser, Simon Fraser's son.
Salutes were often written upon the birth of children or after a visitation to a prominent figure such as a clan chief.
The Irish wire-strung harp standard "Brian Boru's March" appears with pibroch variations and a range of titles in the Scottish bagpipe repertoire: Angus MacKay and General C.S.
A live CD "Ceol Na Pioba (Music Of The Pipes) - A Concert Of Piobaireachd" documented these performances.
Carnegie Mellon University, in Pittsburgh, PA (USA) created the first degree in bagpiping, a BFA in Music Performance (Bagpipe).
They funded annual competitions, with the first being held at the Falkirk Masonic Lodge in 1781.
He has recorded transcribed pibroch, fiddle pibroch and medieval Irish harp ceòl mór, played on a replica early Scottish Queen Mary wire-strung clarsach harp with brass, silver and gold strings.
There is some controversy over the attribution of authorship of key pibroch tunes to the MacCrimmons by Walter Scott, Angus Mackay and others who published on the topic in the 19th century.
He has made his analysis of pibroch canntaireachd, ornamentation and performance techniques available as an online resource with recorded audio demonstrations.
Brown is composing and recording new works of pibroch and related musical traditions informed by this research.
Bardic verses traditionally celebrated the clarsach harp and made no mention of bagpipes.
*Irregular - The theme or ground does not fit into any of the above structures.
Multiple written manuscripts of pibroch in staff notation have been published, including Angus MacKay's book ''A Collection of Ancient Pìobaireachd'' (1845), Archibald Campbell's ''The Kilberry Book of Ceòl Mór'' (1969), and ''The Pìobaireachd Society Books''
Pibroch does not follow a strict metre but it does have a rhythmic flow or pulse; it does not follow a strict beat or tempo although it does have pacing.
Walter Scott wrote new romantic verses to this tune in 1818 with the title "Lament - (Cha till suin tuille)" which translates as "We shall return no more", later republished as "Mackrimmon’s Lament.
Chris Caswell is a multi-instrumentalist wire-strung harp player and maker, flautist and piper who studied harp with Alison Kinnaird and bagpipes with Donald MacPherson and Donald Shaw Ramsay.
They host a series of concerts that featured Barnaby Brown in 2010 performing the pibroch "Desperate Battle" arranged for the triple-pipe or ''cuisle''.
Rideout and early Gaelic and Welsh harper and scholar Bill Taylor have recorded an arrangement of the early Scottish air "Minstrel of MacDonald" with newly composed pibroch variations.
Thomason both give two titles "Taom-boileinn na Coinneamh//The Frenzy of Meeting" and "Lament for Brian O'Duff", which concurs with the ''Campbell Canntaireachd'' title “Brian O’Duff’s Lament”; Simon Fraser lists the tune as "A Lament for King Brian of Old"; and the Niel MacLeod of Gesto book of Canntaireachd gives the title "Tumilin O'Counichan an Irish Tune".
The term ''piobaireachd'' or ''pibroch'' is also historically employed to describe ''ceol mor'' related repertoire played on instruments other than bagpipes, particularly the Scottish fiddle.
In many cases the composer is unknown, however pibroch continues to be composed up to the present day.
Heymann and Chadwick are contributing to a research project to reconstruct an early Welsh horse hair-strung bray harp, testing this theory through application.
A promising emerging generation of wire-strung harpers and scholars are also disseminating transcriptions of pibroch performed on the harp via YouTube.
The newly founded Glasgow Piping Centre hosted a series of pibroch concert recitals in 1996-1998 documented in a series of live recordings.
Breton piper Patrick Molard organised the first pibroch recitals in Brest and Paris in 1992.
*Secondary - The theme or ground is composed of four phrases, with A and B being one-bar phrases and C and D being two-bar phrases, and played in the following order:
At the Edinburgh Festival in 2004 MacDonald arranged the "Battle Lines" series of battle pibroch performances on cello, viola, flute, fiddle, wire-strung clarsach harp, piano, small pipes and big pipes with associated Gaelic songs.
Rideout first performed “The Battle of Harlaw” on the BBC radio series ''Scotland's Music'' hosted by John Purser, along with the harp and fiddle pibroch "Cumh Ioarla Wigton (Lament for the Earl of Wigtown)" The ''Harlaw'' CD features key Ceòl Mór revivalists including pibroch bagpipers Allan MacDonald and Barnaby Brown, early Scottish luter Ron MacFarlane, flautist Chris Norman and early Gaelic and Welsh harper Bill Taylor.
Joseph MacDonald) that the structure was originally counted in 4, so a Primary form would be
McMurchy may well then have been one of the key transcribers of pibroch.
At the Highland Society of London pibroch competition in Edinburgh in 1785, John MacPherson is listed as having played "Piobrachd Ereanach an Irish Pibrach."
Simon Fraser (1845–1934), whose family emigrated to Melbourne, Australia in the 19th century, passed down a distinct body of pibroch repertoire via canntaireachd, staff notation and through the training of students.
In her early recordings she played this music on a modern lever harp, She has recorded ceòl mór related compositions with Ann Heymann who plays a replica early Irish clairseach wire-strung harp.
In MacKay's book James Logan notes: "This piobaireachd, so unlike all others, is evidently from its style, of very high antiquity.
At the William Kennedy International Piping Festival (2009), held in Armagh, Barnaby Brown conducted workshops on the chanting of Irish associated pibroch canntaireachd from the Campbell Canntaireachd manuscript.
Ann Heymann has researched the ap Huw manuscript with a particular focus on the interpretation of the notation of playing techniques that are comparable to the Irish wire-strung harp techniques noted down by Edward Bunting in the late 18th century.
Likely wire-strung harp repertoire can also be found in a number of collections of Irish and Scottish songs and tunes, often published in arrangements for violin, flute and other modern instruments.
A variety of new pibroch recital performance events have been initiated recently as an alternative format to the more conservative and insular competition circuit.
The role of the pibroch may inform the performers interpretative expression of rhythm and tempo.
This pibroch is entitled "Glass Mhoier" in the Campbell Canntaireachd.
MS. (1826) with the very Irish title of "O’Kelly’s Lament."
Rideout has begun the release of a series of dedicated recordings of fiddle pibroch produced by her mentor John Purser.
* Salutes (''Fàilte'') are tunes that acknowledge a person, event or location.
Pibroch fiddlers employed alternative scordatura tunings to play this repertoire, such as the ''"A E a e"'' tuning recommended by violinist/composer James Oswald.
The predominant vocable system used today is the Nether Lorn canntaireachd sourced from the Campbell Canntaireachd manuscripts (1797 & 1814) and used in the subsequent Piobaireachd Society books.
He describes this as "double notes, chords etc" for the left treble hand and right bass hand.
Similarly, Secondary form can be read as
Many compositions appear to have been edited and distorted to make them conform unnecessarily to particular recognised tune structures.
In addition the theme will usually have one of several internal structures for the ordering of its musical phrases.
There is debate over the interpretation of references in Welsh manuscripts to the role of gut-strung and horse hair-strung bray harps in the late-Middle Ages.
A number of pibroch collected by MacKay have very different titles in earlier manuscript sources.
MS'' (1826), and the ''John MacKay MS'' (1840).
Few pibrochs are pure examples of any of these structures though most can be fit into one of the first three with a slight modification of one or two of the phrases in one or more lines.
Peter Greenhill's reading of the manuscripts has led him to conclude that the pieces were played on a wire strung harp and that they were instrumental pieces, though he theorises that the Clymau Cytgerdd section may have been used for poetical accompaniment.
His performances on this recording draw on early manuscript sources such as the Colin Campbell Canntaireachd (1797 & 1814) that pre-date MacKay's standardised versions.
The timing given to the theme notes is of critical importance in displaying the virtuosity of the master piper.
He also specified regular time signatures that standardised and regulated a music that was traditionally performed with expressive rubato rhythmic interpretation of the musical phrasing and dynamics.
A North Uist tradition identifies the first MacCrimmon as a harper.
Cheape identifies accounts of a MacArthur college of piping instruction in Ceòl Mór as a continuation of a pre-existing Irish bardic model.
Taylor and Irish wire-strung harpist Paul Dooley discuss and perform demonstrations of the ap Huw music in the recent BBC documentary ''History of the Harp''.
He is the reputed composer of a number of highly regarded pibrochs including "An Tarbh BreacDearg/The Red Speckled Bull", "A Bhoalaich/An Intended Lament," also published in Angus MacKay's book as "A Bhoilich/The Vaunting", and "Glas Mheur" which MacKay translates as "The Finger Lock."
This canntaireachd provides possible surviving documentation of an Irish harp Ceòl Mór repertoire.
Pibroch is properly expressed by minute and often subtle variations in note duration and tempo.
Ann Heymann has recently transcribed, performed and recorded this pibroch played on a replica early Irish wire-strung Clairseach harp.
Frank Timoney argues that "Lament for the Earl of Antrim" is another likely Irish wire-strung harp composition.
Allan MacDonald has played and recorded these two closely related compositions as a bagpipe medley, with the harp tune informing his revisions of the standard pibroch settings.
This medieval composition survived in the repertoire as a training tune for wire-strung harp students that provided a vehicle for the mastery of characteristic ornamental performance techniques.
In Gaelic, ''pìobaireachd'' literally refers to any pipe music, not merely ''ceòl mór'' (lit.
He has made live performances of pibroch and early Irish music on the wire harp available online on video via YouTube.
He has recorded a dedicated album of pibroch attributed to the composer Raghnall Mac Ailein Òig (1662-1741) performed on the wire harp, released in 2013.
Music of a similar nature, pre-dating the adoption on the Highland pipes, has historically been played on the wire-strung Gaelic harp (clarsach) and later on the Scottish fiddle, and this form is undergoing a revival.
There were a number of musicians across the period from the 17th to the 18th centuries who were noted multi-instrumentalists and potentially formed a bridge from the harp to the fiddle and bagpipe repertoire.
Independent documentation of this tradition of oral transmission can be found in canntaireachd manuscripts, chanted vocable transcriptions of the music that predate the normative musical scores authorised by the Pìobaireachd Society and enforced through prescriptive competition judging criteria.
Heymann has recorded pibroch transcribed from early manuscripts such as the Campbell Canntaireachd MS, in arrangements that employ a mobility of drone effects on the resonant wire strings, reverse engineering the shift to fixed drones that would have occurred in an appropriation of harp music by the bagpipes.
''Scotland's Fiddle Piobaireachd Volume 1'' features collaborations with pibroch bagpiper and scholar Allan MacDonald, Alan Jackson on gut-string harp and Chris Norman on baroque flute.
"Caoineadh Rìoghail/The Royal Lament" (ca 1649) is a harp tune similar in structure to pibroch with an introductory theme and formal variations.
* Rowing pibroch are more rhythmic tunes used to encourage rowers while crossing the sea.
Around seventeen fiddle pibroch compositions survive in various 18th- and 19th-century manuscripts and publications, collected by Walter McFarlan, Daniel Dow, James Oswald and others.
''Pibroch'' is a spelling variant first attested in Lowland Scots in 1719.
Ross Watt was a Scottish-born, South African-based piper who also published a further small number of distinctive pibroch sourced from Simon Fraser.
Pibroch continued to be played by bagpipers, but with diminished patronage and status, and was perceived to have gone into a decline.
Ceòl Mór is being situated within a broader medieval cultural milieu in the British Isles through the revival of early Welsh Cerdd Dant (String Music).
He has also made a body of live performances of pibroch and early Irish ceol mor on the wire harp available online on video via YouTube.
Variations after the ùrlar or ground usually include a '''siubhal''' ("passing" or "traversing") or '''dithis''' ("two" or "a pair") or both.
The different categories of pibroch do not have consistent distinctive musical patterns that are characteristic of the category.
The siubhal comprises theme notes each coupled with a single note of higher or lower pitch that usually precedes the theme note.
These are usually classified as follows:
She has recorded transcribed pibroch together with revived Breton harp repertoire such as medieval bardic lays.
In Angus MacKay's book ''A Collection of Ancient Piobaireachd or Highland Pipe Music'', 1838, the pibroch "Cha till mi tuill" is subsequently published with the title "MacCrummen will never return".
A related tune was published by Angus Fraser in 1816 with the title "Cumha Craobh nan teud/Lament for the Harp Tree".
William McMurchy (c. 1700-c. 1778) from Kintyre, was a noted poet, wire-strung harper and piper, reportedly attached to MacDonald of Largie in 1745.
Alexander Nicholson (b.
*Primary - The theme or ground is composed of two two-bar phrases, A and B, played in the following order:
A series of manuscripts in the early 19th century documented pibroch in staff notation, including the ''Hannay - MacAuslan MS'' (c. 1815), a primary source for the ''Donald MacDonald MS'' (1820) the ''John MacGregor/Angus MacArthur MS'' (1820), the ''Donald MacDonald Jnr.
"Glas" is also a key term found in the Irish wire-harp tradition, as noted down by Edward Bunting from harpers such as Denis O'Hampsey who was one of the last musicians still playing the traditional Gaelic repertoire in the late 18th century.
Scottish Harper Alison Kinnaird recorded revived pibroch related ceòl mór repertoire on the harp along with other early Scottish harp music genres such as ports the following year.
The pibrochs "Hugh's Lament," "Samuel's Black Dog" or "Lament for Samuel," and "Lament for the Earl of Antrim" also have an association with this Irish conflict.
It strikes us that this is a bardic expression for the instrument itself, as we should say "the Bag of Pipes."
The two forms are likely to have developed in parallel from a common shared source in earlier harp music and Gaelic song.
Hugh Cheape argues that the bagpipes gained popularity and prominence through the need for a martial instrument in a period of increasing military engagements.
Fiddle pibroch performance techniques included double-stops, different bowing patterns, complex ornamentation and expressive rubato rhythmic freedom.
Ceòl Mór repertoire is likely to have transferred from the harp to the newly developed Italian violin in the late 16th century as fiddlers began to receive aristocratic patronage and supplement the role of the harpers.
His recordings include collaborations with musicians outside the piping fraternity who are researching and playing Ceòl Mór and related musical traditions on other instruments, notably acclaimed pibroch fiddler Bonnie Rideout, Gaelic singer Margaret Stewart and wire-strung Gaelic harp player Javier Sainz.
The tune structure is usually simple so that it could be recognized easily by clan members.
It includes arrangements of traditional fiddle pibrochs and two new compositions in the fiddle pibroch form by Rideout.
'''Pibroch''', '''Piobaireachd''' or '''Ceòl Mòr''' is an art music genre associated primarily with the Scottish Highlands that is characterised by extended compositions with a melodic theme and elaborate formal variations.
His recordings have included arrangements of three Bagpipe Pibroch urlar performed on wire harp, released in 1985.
He has researched and recorded pibroch and chanted canntaireachd on the recent album ''Dastirum'' that restores and interprets repertoire that was "tidied up" and edited out by Angus MacKay and subsequent PS editors.
MacKay simplified many of the pibroch compositions, editing out complex ornamentation and asymmetries that were evident in documentation of the same compositions published in earlier manuscripts such as the ''Campbell Canntaireachd MS''.
The site makes freely available a comprehensive resource of largely unpublished early manuscripts of pibroch notation and canntaireachd from the late 18th and early 19th century.
Air - Cha till mi tuille."
Bagpipes were grafted on to existing structures of aristocratic cultural patronage and aesthetic appreciation in the mid-17th century and became the primary Ceòl Mór instrument, appropriating and supplanting the high cultural and musical role of the harp.
Those normative tune settings have been the basis on which Ceòl Mór competitors at the various Highland Games have been judged ever since, with the piping judges themselves being appointed by the Society.
Pine is a classically trained violinist who has recorded music by late 19th-century composers such as Max Bruch and Alexander "Pibroch" MacKenzie that incorporated Scottish fiddle repertoire into extended classical works.
Rideout performs the early harp and fiddle pibroch “The Battle of Harlaw” and the related bagpipe pibroch “The Battle of the Birds” on the John Purser produced album ''Harlaw 1411-2011''.
He began playing pibroch on the harp in 1973 and has transcribed and recorded the pibroch Catriona's (Catherine's) Lament played on a bronze-strung harp.
Evidence of concurrent patronage can be found in a notary report sent to the Laird of Grant in 1638 detailing that his fiddler John Hay and his harper had injured each other in a fight.
Many pibroch tunes have intriguing names such as "Too Long in This Condition", "The Piper's Warning to His Master", "Scarce of Fishing", "The Unjust Incarceration" and "The Big Spree" which suggest specific narrative events or possible song lyric sources.
Angus MacKay's book ''A Collection of Ancient Piobaireachd or Highland Pipe Music'', published in 1838, documented and presented the pibroch repertoire in staff notation with supplementary commentary by antiquarian James Logan.
A significant body of wire-strung harp compositions and related performance practices were notated from the last of the Irish wire-strung harpists by Edward Bunting in the late 18th century.
Pine's live repertoire includes revived fiddle pibroch compositions such as "MacIntosh's Lament" and "Pibroch."
An emerging model of historically informed practice-based research into pibroch is being conducted by innovative piper/scholars such as Barnaby Brown and Allan MacDonald.
The Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama started a similar music degree program in partnership with the National Piping Centre.
The theme is usually a very simple melody, though few if any pibroch contain the theme in its simplest form.
The heightened social and cultural status for fiddlers was consolidated by Clan Cummings of Freuchie who became the hereditary fiddlers and subsequently also pipers to the Laird of Grant from the early 17th century until the late 18th century.
In correspondence regarding McMurchy's collection of Gaelic poetry that was passed to the Highland Society, Duncan Stewart of Glenbuckie, Argyle's Chamberlain in Kintyre, commented that "The eldest of them (the McMurchy brothers) William who was a great genius put all the pibroch and many highland airs to music."
It is reputed to have been composed by the aristocratic wire-strung harper John Garbh MacLean, Laird of Coll, on the execution of Charles the First.
A number of the earliest manuscripts such as the Campbell Canntaireachd MS that predate the standard edited published collections have been made available by the Alt Pibroch Club website as a comparative resource.
Bonnie Rideout is an award-winning fiddler who has researched and revived fiddle pibroch repertoire and performance techniques.
Bonnie Rideout's CD Scotland's Fiddle Piobaireachd Volume 2, produced by John Purser was released in 2012.
The art music performed on the wire-strung harp was passed down through oral transmission and much of the repertoire is likely to have been lost.
Pipers and researchers such as Alan MacDonald, Barnaby Brown and William Donaldson have questioned the editing of the tunes that went in the Pìobaireach Society books.
The pibroch "Cumha a Chleirich" which translates as "The Cleric's Lament" and is commonly known as "The Bard's Lament" is entitled “one of the Irish piobarich” in the ''Campbell Canntaireachd'' manuscript.
Violinists such as Rachel Barton Pine and Bonnie Rideout are continuing this revival of the performance of fiddle pibroch repertoire on the violin, viola and cello with outcomes that are notable for their expressive musicality.
In some cases the name and subject matter of pibroch tunes appears to have been reassigned by-19th century editors such as Angus MacKay, whose book ''A Collection of Ancient Piobaireachd or Highland Pipe Music'' (1838) included historically fanciful and romantic pibroch source stories by antiquarian James Logan.
Allan MacDonald is a noted composer of new pibroch works such as 'Na-h-Eilthirich,' a wrenching lament for those who suffered ethnic cleansing in the 18th and 19th centuries, commissioned for the BBC series of the same title.
MacKay's translated English titles became the commonly accepted modern pibroch names, sanctioned by subsequent Piobaireachd Society editors.
Traditionally, the music was taught using a system of unique chanted vocables referred to as Canntaireachd, an effective method of denoting the various movements in pibroch music, and assisting the learner in proper expression and memorization of the tune.
The Alt Pibroch Club website has made a range of these Canntaireachd manuscripts available online as a comparative resource.
Paul Dooley has researched and recorded a dedicated album of ap Huw compositions played on a replica early Irish wire-strung clairseach harp.
She has recorded "Kaniad San Silin," one of the oldest compositions in the Cerdd Dant repertoire on a replica early Irish wire-strung clairseach harp.
There are two other pibrochs in the Campbell Canntaireachd MS. with the related titles “A Glase”, and “A Glass”.
The dithis is similar.
He has also extemporised pibroch variations to the early Scottish song "Dol Dhan Taigh Bhuan Leat (Going to the Eternal Dwelling with You)" reviving a lost compositional practice described in early accounts.
Further clues to the broader cultural context of bagpipe pibroch can be found in the small body of compositions that have an Irish association.
This genre of Irish influenced medieval Welsh music offers a precedent for Scottish pibroch as an aristocratic extended art music played on the harp with a repeated melodic theme or ground and elaborate formal variations.
The word is derived from ''pìob'' ("pipes") via ''pìobaire'' ("piper") plus the abstract forming suffix ''-eachd''.
Recent research suggests that the style of ornamentation in pibroch points to earlier origins in wire-strung Gaelic harp music, in particular the use of rapid descending arpeggios as gracenotes.
He argues that instrumental early Cerdd Dant music was originally played on the highly resonant wire-strung harp using similar sharpened nail-based string striking and dampening techniques and ornamentation employed in Irish and Scottish Ceòl Mór harp music.
He identifies the pibroch composition with the song "Feill nan Crann" attributed to one of the last Scottish wire-strung harper poets Rory Dall Morison (c. 1656-c. 1714), also known as Ruaidhri Dall Mac Mhuirich, written in his later years as a satirical lament to his declining sexual potency.
A pibroch in the Angus MacKay MS Vol 1 entitled "Spiocaireachd Iasgaich/Scarce of Fishing" appears in the earlier Donald MacDonald Jnr.
The ''Campbell Canntaireachd'', written in 1797, is a two-volume manuscript with chanted vocable transcriptions of pibroch music that predates the 19th-century attributions.
Taylor has published extensive online resources outlining this applied performance-based research.
The first two volumes were also lost in 1816 but rediscovered in 1907 in the possession of Anne Campbell, a descendant of Colin Campbell.
Notable fiddle pibrochs include compositions likely to have been transcribed from the wire-strung harp repertoire such as "Cumha Iarla Wigton/Lament for the Earl of Wigton," and "Cumh Easpuic Earra-ghaoidheal/Lament for the Bishop of Argyll," and compositions for the violin within the pibroch form such as "Marsail Lochinalie" and "Mackintosh's Lament."
Multi-instrumental violinist Clare Salaman has collaborated with harper Bill Taylor and pibroch piper Barnaby Brown on the recording of bagpipe pibroch arranged for the hardanger fiddle, hurdy-gurdy and vielle, released in 2016.
Another more well known pibroch published by Angus MacKay with the Gaelic title "Cumhadh Craobh nan teud" is translated as "Lament for the Harp Tree."
Heymann has led the revival of sharpened fingernail-based techniques of playing the wire-strung harp documented by Edward Bunting in the late 18th century from the playing of Denis O'Hampsey, one of the last traditional Irish wire-strung harp players.
*Tertiary - A relative of Primary Pibroch, with three two-bar phrases, A, B, and C, played in the following order:
The wire-strung clarsach harp was traditionally the primary high status aristocratic instrument in Gaelic Scotland and Ireland.
The first comprehensive collections were the canntaireachd notations in the ''Campbell Canntaireachd MS'' (1797 & 1814) and the ''Neil MacLeod Gesto Canntaireachd MS'' (1828) collected from John MacCrimmon prior to his death in 1822.
Most pibroch are commonly assumed to have been written during the 16th to 18th centuries.
1844) in his book ''History of Skye'' originally published in 1930, recounts a tradition that the MacCrimmons were "skilful players of the harp, and may have been composers of its music, before they began to cultivate the other and more romantic instrument."
The subsequent variations can number from one up to about twenty, although there are a few fragmentary tunes for which only a ground is known.
Ronald MacDonald of Morar (1662–1741), known in Gaelic as Raghnall MacAilein Òig, was an aristocratic wire-strung clarsach harpist, fiddler, piper and composer, celebrated in the pibroch "The Lament for Ronald MacDonald of Morar."
MacKay's staff notated edited version of pibroch became the authoritative reference for the 19th- and 20th-century revival of pibroch, and greatly influenced subsequent modern pibroch performance.
Taylor and Brown have made available documentation of their collaborative research on the arrangements of bagpipe pibroch for wire strung Clarsach via the alt-pibroch website.
A number of her recordings feature extended fiddle pibrochs such as "MacIntosh's Lament" and "Marsail Lochinalie."
The common source of influence for these shared musical practices is likely to be found in the formal conventions of medieval aristocratic and religious Irish Gaelic wire-strung harp music.
The MacCrimmons asserted that they received their first training in a school in Ireland.
The only composition in the Irish wire-strung harp repertoire similar in structure to Ceòl Mór that is documented with intact formal variations is "Burns March", notated by Bunting and revived on the wire-strung harp in recordings by Charles Guard, Gráinne Yeats and more recently by Simon Chadwick.
In 1903, The Pìobaireachd Society was founded with the aim of recording the corpus of existing pibroch tunes, collating the various versions, and publishing an authoritative edition.
A distinctive body of Ceòl Mór known as fiddle pibroch developed in this period with melodic themes and formal variations that are similar to, but not necessarily derived from or imitative of concurrent bagpipe pibroch, as the name "fiddle pibroch" might suggest.
This pattern has led critics of the orthodox accounts of pibroch history such as Alistair Campsie to conclude that the authorship and origins of the pibroch repertoire were reframed for political and Hanoverian motivations that can be traced back to anxieties over Scottish nationalism.
Brendan Ring is a multi-instrumentalist all Ireland champion piper, pipemaker, low-whistle player and wire harper.
Allan MacDonald and Iain MacInnes curated the first dedicated pibroch recitals at the Edinburgh Arts Festival in 1999 as a series of nine concerts including performances by Allan MacDonald, William McCallum, Roderick MacLeod, Robert Wallace and Barnaby Brown, who premiered the public performance of two Campbell Canntaireachd pibrochs.
Following the siubhal or dithis variation are other more complex embellishments.
The theme note is accented and followed by a cut note of lower pitch, usually alternating, for example, between an A and a G.  If the coupled pairs are played in a repeating pattern, it too is called a dithis doubling.
He has recorded pibroch transcribed to the wire harp alongside revived Irish harp repertoire and original compositions, performed on a replica of the Trinity College clairseach harp with brass, silver and gold strings, released in 2014.
However, not all pibrochs will include all or even any of these movements but instead use variations that are deemed to be irregular.
The clarsach Ceòl Mór is likely to have predated and influenced the later pipe and fiddle music.
The patronage of high prestige professional hereditary harpers was largely gone by the mid-17th century, although there are records of harpers such as Rory Dall Morison who were still being maintained by leading families up until the early 18th century.
Mis-translation of Gaelic names with non-standard phonetic spelling adds to the confusion.
In most cases the variations following the ground involve the use of a number of different musical embellishments, usually starting very simply and progressing through successively more complex movements before returning again to the ground.
There is a growing community of harpers performing early Scottish and Irish music on replica early clàrsach harps, strung with brass, bronze and silver wire, and increasingly with precious gold bass strings, based on historical and applied research by Ann and Charlie Heymann and Simon Chadwick.
The expression of the rhythms and tempos of the pibroch tune are primarily acquired from an experienced teacher and applied through interpretive performance practice.
We have not been able to procure any satisfactory account of Cumhadh Craobh nan teud, which is usually translated, "Lament for the Harp Tree," i.e.
The staff notation in Angus MacKay's book and subsequent Pìobaireachd Society sanctioned publications is characterised by a simplification and standardisation of the ornamental and rhythmic complexities of many pibroch compositions when compared with earlier unpublished manuscript sources.
Related Ceòl Mór genres were historically also played on the fiddle and on the wire-strung Gaelic harp or clarsach.
Alternative lineages have also survived in unlikely settings.
Manx harper Charles Guard was the first to record arrangements of bagpipe pibrochs performed on the wire strung clarsach harp in 1977.
There is evidence from early treatises (e.g.
Bill Taylor is a Scottish and Welsh early harp scholar and performer who has collaborated with pibroch piper Barnaby Brown and violinist Clare Salaman on the recording of bagpipe pibroch arranged for the Clarsach wire harp, lyre, hardanger fiddle, hurdy-gurdy, vielle, bone flute, bagpipes and canntaireachd vocals, released in 2016.
It contains no references to the MacCrimmons and has different names for numerous tunes that were subsequently associated with them.
Scottish Fiddler and composer Paul Anderson incorporates revived fiddle pibrochs and transcribed bagpipe pibrochs in his live repertoire, documented on YouTube, and has composed the new work "Lament for the Gordons of Knock" in the fiddle pibroch form.
The tune was documented and transcribed for the piano by Simon Fraser from repertoire that had survived in his family.
He has revived and recorded lesser known pibroch such as "Hioemtra Haentra" and "Hihorodo Hiharara" from the ''Campbell Canntaireachd MS'' that have not been publicly performed for hundreds of years and plays them on replica early bagpipes from the period.
