It received its première in Donaueschingen in October 1962.
In 1988 the incoming Culture Minister Jack Lang appointed Pierre Bergé (president of Yves Saint Laurent) as Director.
It is in the ''Onze notations pour orchestre'' that Bennett first detects the influence of Webern: "virtually diatonic passages alternate with others in a style more nearly resembling Webern's own jagged chromaticism."
In the spring of 1945 he gained the Conservatoire’s first prize in harmony.
The most notorious instance of this is Boulez's declaration in 1952 that "any musician who has not experienced‍—‌I do not say understood, but truly experienced‍—‌the necessity of dodecaphonic music is USELESS.
In January 1958 the ''Improvisations sur Mallarmé (I et II)'' appeared, forming the kernel of a work which would grow over the next four years into a vast, five-movement "portrait of Mallarmé", ''Pli selon pli''.
In 1979 he embarked with Patrice Chéreau on an operatic project scarcely less groundbreaking than the ''Ring'': the first performances of the three-act version of Alban Berg's ''Lulu'' at the Paris Opera in the completion by Friedrich Cerha.
Much of Boulez’s writing was linked to specific occasions, whether a first performance of a new piece, notes for a recording or a eulogy for a lost colleague.
Messiaen said later: "He was in revolt against everything."
He was in the process of developing ''Anthèmes 2'' into a large-scale work for violin and orchestra for Anne-Sophie Mutter and spoke of writing an opera based on Beckett's ''Waiting For Godot''.
Stein realised that vision in his staging for WNO in 1992, John Rockwell describing it as "an abstract, angry ''Pelléas'', one perhaps over-intent on emphasizing the score's links to modernity".
Boulez likened the experience of playing taped music in a concert hall to a "crematorium ceremony".
Oliver Knussen, himself a distinguished composer-conductor, observed that: "his rehearsals are models of clear-headedness and professional courtesy—he effortlessly commands respect."
The dependence on a subscription audience limited his programming.
Its material was reused in the 1970 composition ''Cummings ist der Dichter''.
The following academic year he studied fugue with Simone Plé-Caussade, whose lack of imagination so infuriated him that he boycotted the class and organized a petition that Messiaen be given a full professorship in composition.
Boulez's earliest surviving compositions date from his school days in 1942–43, mostly songs on texts by Baudelaire, Gautier and Rilke.
In 2015 Erato issued ''Pierre Boulez—The Complete Erato Recordings'' on 14 CDs.
In his portrait for ''The New Yorker'', published shortly after Boulez's death under the title ''The Magus'', Alex Ross described him as "affable, implacable, unknowable."
His performances so impressed both orchestra and management that he was offered the chief conductorship in succession to Leonard Bernstein.
The cynicism of the way an opera house like that was run disgusted me.
His attempts to find a librettist were unsuccessful: "both times the writer has died on me, so I'm a bit superstitious about looking for a third candidate".
In the 1968–69 season he also made guest appearances in Boston, Chicago and Los Angeles.
It was in Lyon that he first heard an orchestra and saw his first operas (''Boris Godunov'' and ''Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg'').
In May 1952 Boulez gave the first public performance of ''Structure 1a'' for two pianos (with Olivier Messiaen).
Apart from ''Pli selon pli'', the only substantial new work to emerge in the first half of the 1960s was the final version of book 2 of his ''Structures'' for two pianos.
Performances of new works were relatively rare.
In 2014 Sony Classical issued ''Pierre Boulez—The Complete Columbia Album Collection'' on 67 CDs.
Léon (1891-1969), an engineer and technical director of a steel factory, is described by biographers as an authoritarian figure, but with a strong sense of fairness; Marcelle (1897-1985) as a sociable, good-humoured woman, who deferred to her husband’s strict Catholic beliefs whilst not necessarily sharing them.
''Le soleil des eaux'' (1948) originated in incidental music for a radio drama by Char.
The hostility of the establishment to what you were able to do in the Forties and Fifties was very strong.
In January 1945 Boulez moved to two small garret rooms at 4 rue Beautreillis in the Marais district of Paris, where he lived for the next fourteen years.
Of his humour, Gerard McBurney wrote that it "depended on his twinkling eyes, his perfect timing, his infectious schoolboy giggle, and his reckless compulsion always to say what the other person would not expect."
It was here that he first studied twelve-tone technique and discovered the music of Webern.
It centred on the orchestras of Chicago and Cleveland in the United States and Vienna and Berlin in Europe.
And he probably preferred it this way."
In the mid-1970s Boulez embarked on a second, more radical transformation of these short piano pieces into extended works for large orchestra, a project which pre-occupied him to the end of his life, nearly seventy years after the original composition.
He was dissatisfied with the result and never returned to the piece.
For Griffiths the violent character of much of the music “is not just superficial: it is expressive of a whole aesthetic of annihilation, and in particular of a need to obliterate what had gone before.” When Boulez played the work for Copland, the older composer asked "But must we start a revolution all over again?
In an interview in 2010 Boulez said that he had finished ''Notation V'' in short score and was now working on ''Notation VIII''.
By the age of fifteen he was sceptical about religion: "what struck me most was that it was so mechanical: there was a total absence of genuine conviction behind it".
Consisting of a modular concert hall, museum and mediatheque—with the Paris Conservatoire on an adjacent site—it became the home to the Ensemble Intercontemporain and attracted a diverse audience.
At the same time Boulez founded the Ensemble Intercontemporain, a virtuoso ensemble which specialised in the performance of twentieth-century music and the creation of new works.
For the next ten years he spent the last three weeks of summer working with young composers and conducting programmes with the Academy's orchestra.
In January 2016 BBC Four broadcast the hour-long documentary ''Pierre Boulez at the BBC: Master and Maverick''.
The writer and pianist Susan Bradshaw thought this was deliberate and related to a sense of being overshadowed as a composer by Stockhausen, who from the late 1950s was increasingly prolific.
IRCAM's aims would include research into acoustics, instrumental design and the use of computers in composition.
He stayed at Cage's apartment but their friendship was already cooling as he could not accept Cage's increasing commitment to compositional procedures based on chance.
Boulez first conducted the BBC Symphony Orchestra in February 1964, in an unlikely place–the seaside resort of Worthing–and in some unlikely repertoire, accompanying Vladimir Ashkenazy in a Chopin piano concerto ("It was terrible, I felt like a waiter who keeps dropping the plates").
One of the outstanding achievements of the Columbia years was a wide-ranging survey of the music of Schoenberg, including ''Gurrelieder'', ''Moses und Aron'', ''Erwartung'' and ''Pierrot lunaire'', but also less well-known works such as ''Die Jakobsleiter'' and the unaccompanied choral music.
He also experimented for the first time with electronic music, producing ''Deux Etudes'' for magnetic tape for Pierre Schaeffer’s Groupe Recherche de la Radiodiffusion Française but again he was dissatisfied with the results and withdrew them.
After completing the first part of his baccalaureate a year early he spent the academic year of 1940–41 at the Pensionnat St. Louis, a boarding school in nearby St. Etienne.
His appearances became more infrequent after an eye operation in 2010 left him with severely impaired sight.
He was primarily known for his polished interpretations of twentieth-century classicsStravinsky and Bartók, Debussy and Ravel, Mahler and Varèse, Schoenberg, Webern and Berg as well as for authoritative performances of contemporary music.
There were failures too, most famously the first Paris performance of Stravinsky's ''Threni'' in 1958.
Pierre Boulez died at his home in Baden-Baden on 5 January 2016, aged 90.
Amid the confusion of postwar life, with so many truths discredited, his certitude was reassuring."
A police spokesman apologized and expressed the hope that it would not stop Boulez returning to Basel: “I understand a lot of Swiss like his music.”
His rhythmic precision, achieved without the use of a baton, combined with his acute tonal discernment to engender many orchestral legends: "There are countless stories of him detecting, for example, faulty intonation from the third oboe in a complex orchestral texture," Paul Griffiths wrote in ''The New York Times''.
Boulez acknowledged to the biographer Joan Peyser that there was a passionate affair in 1946, described as "intense and tormented" and which Peyser suggested was the trigger for the "wild, courageous works" of that period.
He created a quasi-theatrical space with the orchestra and two conductors on platforms in a mounting spiral, and with the speakers placed behind the audience.
His first engagement as an orchestral conductor had been in 1956, when he conducted the Venezuelan Symphony Orchestra whilst on tour with the Renaud-Barrault company.
In 2015 Universal Music brought together the recordings from this period in a 10-CD set.
This period also marked a return to the opera house.
As a young composer in the 1950s he quickly became a leading figure in the musical avant-garde, playing an important role in the development of integral serialism and controlled chance music.
Around this time he was one of a number of Conservatoire students (organised, it was said, by Leibowitz) who joined in sustained booing at a performance of Stravinsky's ''Danses concertantes'', a work whose neo-classicism represented the pre-war culture he was determined to reject.
Around this time he met two composers who were to be important influences: John Cage and Karlheinz Stockhausen.
The first of these were ''Répons'' (1981–84), a large-scale work for soloists and ensemble, and ''Dialogue de l'ombre double'' (1985), a more intimate work for clarinet and electronics.
Aside from this his personal life remained almost entirely invisible.
His work in the opera house included the ''Jahrhundertring''—the production of Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle for the centenary of the Bayreuth Festival—and the world premiere of the complete, three-act version of Alban Berg's ''Lulu''.
The LSO also contributed to the Webern edition which Boulez supervised, consisting of all the works with opus numbers.
The family prospered, moving in 1929 from the apartment above a pharmacy at 29 rue Tupinerie, where Boulez was born, to a comfortable detached house at 46 avenue d'Alsace-Lorraine, where he spent most of his childhood.
Their plan—to close the Opéra-Comique, merge its orchestra with that of the Palais Garnier, end permanent singer contracts and focus on a smaller repertoire—was derailed by the political fallout from the 1968 student protests.
For the centenary ''Ring'' in Bayreuth, Boulez originally asked Ingmar Bergman then Peter Brook to direct, both of whom refused.
From the mid-1960s Boulez spoke of composing an opera himself.
The writer Jean Vermeil, who observed Boulez in the 1990s in the company of Jean Batigne (founder of the Percussions de Strasbourg), discovered "a Boulez asking about the health of a musician in the Strasbourg orchestra, about another player's children, a Boulez who knew everyone by name and who reacted to each person's news with sadness or with joy."
In April of the same year, as part of the Festtage in Berlin, Boulez and Daniel Barenboim presented a cycle of the Mahler symphonies with the Staatskapelle Berlin (Boulez conducted numbers 2, 3, 4, 6 and 8), repeating it over twelve days at Carnegie Hall in 2009.
Later, in the mid-1980s, Boulez became Vice President of the planned Opéra Bastille in Paris, working with Daniel Barenboim, who was to be its music director.
In the 1980s he also recorded for the Erato label, mostly with the Ensemble Intercontemporain, with a greater emphasis on the music of his contemporaries (Berio, Ligeti, Carter, Donatoni, Xenakis and Kurtág).
From the 1950s, beginning with the ''Third Piano Sonata'' (195557/63), Boulez experimented with what he called "controlled chance" and he developed his views on aleatoric music in the articles "Aléa" and "Sonate, que me veux-tu?"
Coupled with Berg's ''Lulu-Suite'', it was his final recording.
Boulez quickly became one of the philosophical leaders of the post-war modernist movement in the arts.
For the conductor Otto Klemperer he was "without doubt the only man of his generation who is an outstanding conductor ''and'' musician."
When the great French conductor Roger Désormière was paralysed by a stroke in 1952 Boulez sent scripts to French Radio in Désormière's name so that his mentor could collect the fee.
Composers new to his discography included Richard Strauss, Szymanowski and Anton Bruckner—his recording of the Eighth Symphony met with particular acclaim.
HIs own late music featured prominently, including ''Répons'', ''...explosante-fixe...'' and ''Sur Incises''.
The piece was a revelation to him and he organised a group of fellow students to take private lessons with Leibowitz.
Both production and musical realisation grew in stature over the following four years and by the end of the final cycle in 1980 they received a 45-minute ovation.
Indeed, he has often seemed to enjoy expressing his contempt for other musicians who do not share his musical views."
From the 1970s onwards he pioneered the electronic transformation of instrumental music in real time.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, few new works emerged during this period: ''Cummings ist der Dichter'' was first performed in Stuttgart in September 1970.
His commitment to the modernist project and the trenchant, polemical tone in which he expressed his views on music led some to criticise him as a dogmatist, a reputation which softened in later years.
He co-founded the Cité de la Musique, which opened in La Villette on the outskirts of Paris in 1995.
Other techniques used in the "''Bourreaux de solitude''" cycle were first described by Ulrich Mosch, and later fully elaborated by him.
György Ligeti published a detailed analysis of the first "chapter" of this last piece in 1958, concluding that its "ascetic attitude was akin to compulsion neurosis", and that Boulez "had to break away from it&nbsp;... and so he created the sensual, feline world of the 'Marteau'".
As Alex Ross observed: "At all times he seemed absolutely sure of what he was doing.
In later life, he was known for his charm and personal warmth.
Impressed by his ability, she persuaded Léon to allow his son to apply to the Conservatoire in Lyon, but the selection board rejected him.
When the Frankfurt ''Wozzeck'' was revived after Wieland's death Boulez was deeply disillusioned by the working conditions: "there was no rehearsal, no care taken over anything.
At one stage he planned to add a second part, of equal length, to ''Répons'', creating a work which would occupy a full evening.
In 1984 he collaborated with Frank Zappa, conducting the Ensemble Intercontemporain in three of Zappa's pieces.
He held the post until 2005, when he became conductor emeritus.
Messaien had already made an experiment in this direction in his ''Mode de valeurs et d’intensité'' for piano (1949).
In its original version (1946–47) the piece was scored for small forces (soprano, contralto, two ondes Martenot, piano and percussion).
David Stevens described their 1995 production of Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron'' in Amsterdam as "theatrically and musically thrilling."
He later turned to the German playwright Heiner Müller, who was working on a reduction of Aeschylus's ''The Oresteia'' for Boulez when he died in 1995, again without leaving anything usable.
He also conducted performances of Wagner's ''Tristan und Isolde'' by the Bayreuth company at the Osaka Festival in Japan in 1967, but the lack of adequate rehearsal made it an experience he later said he "would rather forget".
He later said that it was this experience which prompted his notorious remarks in an interview the following year in ''Der Spiegel'', in which he claimed that "no opera worth mentioning had been composed since 1935", that "a Beatles record is certainly cleverer (and shorter) than a Henze opera" and that "the most elegant" solution to opera's moribund condition would be "to blow the opera houses up".
A serial work of great energy, its single-movement form was influenced by Schoenberg’s Chamber Symphony No.1.
He enjoyed exceptional conditions, with thirty orchestral rehearsals instead of the usual three or four, and the critical response was unanimously favourable.
in the Loire district of east-central France, to Léon and Marcelle (née Calabre) Boulez.
Many composers of Boulez's generation taught at the International Summer Course for New Music in Darmstadt, Germany, which Boulez attended for the first time in July 1952.
In the autumn of 1944 he joined Olivier Messiaen’s advanced harmony class at the Conservatoire and attended the private seminars which Messiaen gave to chosen students, where key works of the early twentieth-century, including Stravinsky’s ''Rite of Spring'', were subjected to intensive analysis.
The French aesthetician Pierre Souvchinsky disagreed: "Boulez became a conductor because he had a great gift for it".
His use of chance, which he would later employ in compositions like ''Éclat'' (1965), ''Domaines'' (196168) and ''Rituel in memoriam Bruno Maderna'' (197475), is very different from that in the works of, for example, John Cage.
In 2004 and 2005 he returned to Bayreuth to conduct a controversial new production of ''Parsifal'' directed by Christoph Schlingensief.
DVDs of two opera productions are also available on DG: the WNO ''Pelléas et Mélisande'' and the Vienna ''From the House of the Dead''.
Recognising a lack of expressive flexibility in the language (outlined in his essay "At the Limit of Fertile Land...") Boulez refined his compositional language, loosening the strictness of total serialism into a more supple and strongly gestural music.
His final appearance as a conductor was in Salzburg on 28 January 2012 with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra and Mitsuko Uchida in a programme of Schoenberg (''Begleitmusik zu einer Lichtspielszene'' and the Piano Concerto), Mozart (Piano Concerto No.19 in F major K459) and Stravinsky (''Pulcinella Suite'').
He became the orchestra’s principal guest conductor in February 1969, a post he held until the end of 1971.
Gerald Bennett describes them as "modest, delicate and rather anonymous employing a certain number of standard elements of French salon music of the time—whole-tone scales, pentatonic scales and polytonality".
In Darmstadt in September 1957 Boulez played an early version of the Piano Sonata No.&nbsp;3.
The following month he attended a private performance of Schoenberg’s Wind Quintet, conducted by René Leibowitz, a follower of Schoenberg.
Thereafter he cancelled all conducting engagements.
In 1995 he was named principal guest conductor in Chicago, only the third conductor to hold that position in the orchestra's history.
Occasional releases provide a glimpse of the wealth of material they contain.
Other landmarks in the Domaine's history included a Webern festival (1955), the European premiere of Stravinsky’s ''Agon'' (1957) and first performances of Messaien’s ''Oiseaux exotiques'' (1955) and ''Sept Haïkaï'' (1963).
Jean-Louis Barrault, who knew him in his twenties, caught the contradictions in his personality: "his powerful aggressiveness was a sign of creative passion, a particular blend of intransigence and humour, the way his moods of affection and insolence succeeded one another, all these had drawn us near to him."
He explored modes of articulation between song and speech, as well as quarter-tones.
He arranged and conducted incidental music, mostly by composers with whom he had little affinity (such as Milhaud and Tchaikovsky) but it gave him the chance to work with professional musicians and left him time to compose during the day.
"Our parents were strong, but finally we were stronger than they," Boulez would later say.
He first combined orchestra and electronics in ''Poésie pour pouvoir'' (1958), using a text by Henri Michaux.
Peter Stein initially agreed but withdrew in 1974.
His appearances with the orchestra over the next five years included his débuts at the Proms and at Carnegie Hall (1965), and a tour to Prague, Berlin, Moscow and Leningrad (1967).
In fact, when he moved to Paris in the autumn of 1943, Léon accompanied him, helped him find a room (at 14 rue Oudinot, near the Invalides) and subsidized him until he could earn a living.
There then followed two cantatas based on the poetry of René Char.
His tenure in New York lasted between 1971 and 1977 and was not an unqualified success.
In 1968 the final version of ''Figures, Doubles, Prismes'' for large orchestra, a version of two movements from ''Livre pour quatuor'' for string orchestra (entitled ''Livre pour codes'') and the two versions of ''Domaines'' (clarinet solo / clarinet and ensemble) all received first performances.
He made his orchestral debut in the United States in March 1965 with the Cleveland Orchestra, an orchestra with which he had a particular affinity because of its virtuosity and tonal refinement.
Born in Montbrison in the Loire district of France, the son of an engineer, Boulez studied at the Paris Conservatoire with Olivier Messiaen, and privately with Andrée Vaurabourg and René Leibowitz.
He updated the action to the 19th and 20th centuries, using imagery of the industrial age, and he achieved an unprecedented degree of naturalism in the singers' performances.
In the early years of the Domaine musical Boulez left most of the conducting to others, including Hermann Scherchen and Hans Rosbaud.
Throughout his career he also expressed himself through long-form interviews, of which perhaps the most substantial are those with Antoine Goléa (1958), Célestin Deliège (1975) and Jean Vermeil (1989).
In 2000 he conducted Stravinsky's ''Le sacre du printemps'' and ''Symphony of Psalms'' for the Zingaro equestrian theatre in an exhibition centre near Charles de Gaulle Airport.
He began his professional career in the late 1940s as Music Director of the Renaud-Barrault theatre company in Paris.
Lunchtime O'Boulez has been spreading gossip about the classical music world since the 1970s.
In fact it was with a 1952 article with the inflammatory title ''Schoenberg is Dead'', published in the British journal ''The Score'' shortly after the older composer’s death, that Boulez first attracted international attention as a writer.
There he was introduced to Andrée Vaurabourg, wife of the composer Arthur Honegger, and between April 1944 and May 1946 he studied counterpoint privately with her.
There was a fifth recording of ''Le marteau sans maÎtre'' (with Hilary Summers in 2002) and a third of ''Pli selon pli'' (with Christine Schäfer) in its definitive version, incorporating major revisions made in the late 1980s.
As a child he took piano lessons, played chamber music with local amateurs and sang in the school choir.
Alexander Goehr thought that "Boulez's failures will be better than most people's successes."
This was a period of intense compositional activity for Boulez.
In 1998 he completed work on a large piece for three pianos, three harps and three percussionists, ''Sur Incises'', for which he was awarded the 2001 Grawemeyer Prize for composition, and he contributed a short piece for six instruments (''Petite dérive—en écho'') to a 90th birthday tribute to Elliott Carter in the British journal ''Tempo''.
The first movement (''Complainte du lézard amoureux'') is a love song addressed by a lizard to a goldfinch in the heat of a summer day, in an atmosphere which Jameux characterises as "fluid and nonchalant".
Otherwise Boulez scaled back his conducting commitments to concentrate on IRCAM.
His aim was "to create a feeling that we are all, audience, players and myself, taking part in an act of exploration."
Boulez met American singer-songwriter Paul Simon and his then-wife Peggy at a party in New York, where he mistakenly referred to Paul as "Al" and to Peggy as "Betty", giving Simon the idea for the song ''You Can Call Me Al'', his biggest solo hit.
In 1954, with the financial backing of Barrault and Renaud, he started a concert series at the Petit Marigny theatre, which became known as the Domaine musical.
According to Alex Ross the resulting “surfeit of ever-changing musical data” has the effect of erasing at any given point previous impressions the listener may have formed: “the present moment is all there is.”
From the late 1960s he exchanged ideas with the radical French playwright and novelist Jean Genet and parts of a draft libretto were found among Genet’s papers after his death in 1986.
They attracted musicians, painters and writers, as well as fashionable society, but they proved so costly that Boulez had to turn to wealthy private patrons for support, in particular Suzanne Tézenas.
The third of these volumes brought together for the first time the lectures Boulez gave as Professor of the Collège de France between 1976 and 1995.
Explaining why he turned to conducting, Boulez said that he was convinced that the best possible training for a composer was "to have to play or conduct his own works and to face their difficulties of execution"–yet on a practical level he sometimes struggled to find time to compose around his conducting commitments.
Patrice Chéreau, who was primarily a theatre director, accepted and went on to create one of the defining opera productions of modern times, helping to usher in the era of ''Regietheater''.
As a young man Boulez was an explosive, often confrontational figure.
Among the first projects were the Paris ''Wozzeck'' (with Walter Berry) and the Covent Garden ''Pelléas et Mélisande'' (with George Shirley and Elisabeth Söderström).
Although in the first part of his career he conducted a wide range of earlier composers, only Berlioz and Wagner remained a consistent presence in his repertoire.
In a career lasting more than sixty years he directed most of the world's major orchestras.
Boulez wrote two further pieces using the resources of IRCAM: ''...explosante-fixe...'' (1993), which had its origins in 1972 as a tribute to Stravinsky; and ''Anthèmes II'' (1997) for solo violin and electronics.
Apart from Wagner, he conducted only twentieth-century works.
In a career lasting more than sixty years he conducted many of the world's great orchestras and held the positions of Chief Conductor of the New York Philharmonic and the BBC Symphony Orchestra, Music Director of the Ensemble Intercontemporain and Principal Guest Conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the Cleveland Orchestra.
It was Lev Koblyakov, however, who first described its presence in the three "L'artisanat furieux" movements of ''Le marteau sans maître'', in his 1981 doctoral thesis.
Boulez had in mind as a model the Bauhaus, which had provided a meeting place for artists and scientists of all disciplines.
In 2001 Boulez conducted a major Bartok cycle with the Orchestre de Paris.
With the resources of the BBC behind him he could be more uncompromising in his choice of repertoire.
As well as Stockhausen, Boulez was in contact there with other composers who would become significant figures in contemporary music, including Luciano Berio, Luigi Nono, Bruno Maderna, and Henri Pousseur.
Boulez proved an energetic and accomplished administrator, taking charge of everything from managing subscriptions to putting out music stands.
His recorded legacy is extensive and he received 26 Grammy Awards.
The Boulez scholar Jean-Jacques Nattiez placed Boulez as one of the two twentieth-century composers who wrote most prolifically about music (the other being Schoenberg), joining a line of writer-composers going back to Schumann, Berlioz and Wagner.
Before the rehabilitation of the ''Notations'', the ''Sonatine pour flûte et piano'' (1946) was the first work Boulez acknowledged as part of his canon.
They also include two of his five recordings of ''Le marteau sans maÎtre'' (with contraltos Marie-Thérèse Cahn in 1956 and Jeanne Deroubaix in 1964).
Midway through the decade, however, Boulez appeared to find his voice again.
He was entirely self-taught, although he said that he learnt a great deal—both about the practicalities of conducting and about orchestration—from attending Roger Désormière's rehearsals.
The composer Francis Poulenc observed: "there is a touching atmosphere at the concerts.
Of Debussy's ''Pelléas et Mélisande'' Boulez had written: "I don't like the French tradition of sweetness and gentleness ... the work is not gentle at all, but cruel and mysterious."
Thanks to his years with the Barrault company, the theatrical dimension was as important to him as the musical and he always attended staging rehearsals.
HIs cantata on poems by René Char, ''Le visage nuptial'' (1946) was radically re-worked, reaching its final form in 1989.
It was five years before relations were restored.
Towards the end of that year a tour with the Renaud-Barrault company took him to New York for the first time, where he met Stravinsky and Varèse.
By contrast the second movement (''La Sorgue'') is described by Griffiths as a violent and incantatory protest against the pollution of the river Sorgue, "with shouting chorus and a bounding quaver rhythm".
He wrote extensively about the painter Paul Klee and collected contemporary art, including works by Joan Miró, Francis Bacon, Nicholas de Staël and Maria Helena Vieira da Silva, all of whom he knew personally.
Bennett finds in it a tone new to Boulez’s writing: "a sharp, brittle violence juxtaposed against an extreme sensitivity and delicacy."
He greatly enjoyed working with her and she remembered him as an exceptional student, using his exercises as models in advanced counterpoint until the end of her teaching career.
Bergé dismissed Barenboim and Boulez withdrew in solidarity, taking his planned productions with him.
There was a Stravinsky cycle—including his only recordings of the complete ''Pulcinella'' and ''The Soldier's Tale''—as well as a survey of some of his own music, including a second recording of ''Pli selon pli'' (with Phyllis Bryn-Julson as soloist) and recordings of ''Le visage nuptial'', ''Le soleil des eaux'' and ''Figures, Double, Prismes''.
None of these projects came to fruition.
In 2007 he was re-united with Chéreau for a production of Leoš Janáček's ''From the House of the Dead'', (Theater an der Wien, Amsterdam and Aix).
His close friends included Daniel Barenboim and Patrice Chéreau.
Cage introduced him to publishers who agreed to take Boulez's recent pieces; Boulez helped to arrange a private performance of Cage’s ''Sonatas and Interludes for Prepared Piano''.
The British satirical magazine ''Private Eye'' appropriated his name for the byline on one of its regular columns, ''Music and Musicians''.
