File:Bunga Kuda.jpg|Bunga kuda (also known as bunga pundak) is a traditional dessert in Malaysia, containing a coconut filling.
Queen Victoria was painted in 1850 with her seventh child and third son, Prince Arthur, who wore white and pink.
The name derives from the frilled edge of the flowers—the verb "to pink" dates from the 14th century and means "to decorate with a perforated or punched pattern" (possibly from German ''pinken'', "to peck").
File:Pink Cotton Candy.jpg|Cotton candy was first made for the French Royal Court in the 18th century, but did not become popular until the beginning of the 20th century, when an American dentist invented a machine for spinning it quickly and cheaply.
When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink?In 1927, Time magazine printed a chart showing sex-appropriate colors for girls and boys according to leading U.S. stores.
In the Japanese language, the traditional word for pink, ,  takes its name from the peach blossom.
In many cultures, pink is associated with femininity.
A unhealthy or malnourished flamingo, or one kept in captivity and not fed sufficient carotene, is usually pale or white.
Traditional rosé wines get their pink color when they are fermented a short time with dark purple grapeskins.
File:Sailorsuit.jpg|Boy in a sailor suit (1920).
In this painting, it symbolized childhood, innocence and tenderness.
File:Salmon Fish.JPG|The meat of the salmon is also colored pink by the natural carotenoid pigment called astaxanthin.
West has said that the pink was intended as an "outcry to nature".
In optics, the word "pink" can refer to any of the colors between bluish red (purple) and red, of medium to high brightness and of low to moderate saturation.
File:Macau Government Headquarters 01.JPG|Macau Government Headquarters (1849), an example of Portuguese colonial architecture and the Pombaline style in Macau.
The remaining pinkish sunlight can also be scattered by cloud droplets and other relatively large particles, which give the sky above the horizon a pink or reddish glow.
It is usually colored with synthetic pigments  or with carmine, a natural pigment made from the cochineal insect.
De Bretteville arranged the squares of paper to form a "quilt" from which posters were printed and disseminated throughout Los Angeles.
The US presidential inauguration of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953 when Eisenhower's wife Mamie Eisenhower wore a pink dress as her inaugural gown is thought to have been a key turning point to the association of pink as a color associated with girls.
Farm-bred salmon are sometimes fed these pigments to improve their pinkness, and it is sometimes also used to enhance the color of egg yolks.
The transition to pink as a sexually differentiating color for girls occurred gradually, through the selective process of the marketplace, in the 1930s and 40s.
An article in the trade publication ''Earnshaw's Infants' Department'' in June 1918 said:
File:Canada Place Building Edmonton.jpg|Canada Place Building, in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (1988) a post-modernist style government office building.
There is a separate word for the color of the cherry blossom:  ''sakura-iro''.
In 1931 she created a new variety of the color, called Shocking pink, made by mixing magenta with a small amount of white.
3, an organoiodine compound, a derivative of fluorone, which is a cherry-pink synthetic.
And this pigment does you great credit if you use it for painting faces, hands and nudes on walls..."
The salt (sodium nitrate) permits the ham to retain its original pink color, even when dried out.
In the 17th century, the word ''pink'' or ''pinke'' was also used to describe a yellowish pigment, which was mixed with blue colors to yield greenish colors.
In 1973, Sheila Levrant de Bretteville created "Pink," a broadside (poster) meant to explore the notions of gender as associated with the color pink, for an American Institute of Graphic Arts exhibition about color.
In its 1957 catalog, Lionel Trains offered for sale a pink model freight train for girls.
File:Isla Great Santa Cruz49.JPG|A pink sand beach on Great Santa Cruz Island in the Philippine Islands.
File:Flamingos Laguna Colorada.jpg|Flamingoes in Laguna Colorada, Bolivia.
File:Raphael Madonna of the Pinks.jpg|In the painting Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, the Christ Child gives a pink flower to the Virgin Mary, symbolizing the union between the mother and child.
Mamie's strong liking of pink led to the public association with pink being a color that "ladylike women wear."
While pink was quite evidently the color of seduction in the portraits made by George Romney of  Emma, Lady Hamilton, the future mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, in the late 18th century, it had the completely opposite meaning in the portrait of Sarah Barrett Moulton painted by Thomas Lawrence in 1794.
In the 20th century, the practice in Europe varied from country to country,  with some assigning colors based on the baby's complexion, and others assigning pink sometimes to boys and sometimes to girls.
As of 2008 various feminist groups and the Breast Cancer Awareness Month use the color pink to convey empowerment of women.
According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most associated with sweet foods and beverages.
File:Rostas (ready and served).JPG|Roast beef gets its distinctive pink color from myoglobin, which gradually turns from red to pink to brown  (rare to medium to well-done) when heated.
Here she is in 1962 with French Minister of Culture Andre Malraux at the unveiling of the Mona Lisa on its first visit to America.
The structure is built of pink sandstone on the outside over an earlier core of brick.
File:George Romney - Lady Hamilton (as a Bacchante) 3.jpg|Emma, Lady Hamilton, later the mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, had herself painted by English painter George Romney posing as a Bacchante, dressed in pink.
Sunrise at Serifos, Greece.
In some countries, the ''salmon press'' identifies economic newspapers or economics sections in "white" newspapers.
Royal Hawaiian.jpg|The Royal Hawaiian Hotel in Honolulu, Hawaii, built in 1927, was the first hotel on Waikiki Beach.
She had a special pink tint created for her by the Sevres porcelain factory.
File:FranciscaGonzagaDeBranganca.jpg|Francisca of Brazil, Princess of Joinville, wearing a pink dress decorated with pink roses, 1850s.
File:Herero women.jpg|Women of the Herero people from Namibia.
It became her signature color.
Her fashions, co-designed with artists such as Cocteau, featured the new pinks.
One reason for the increased use of pink for girls and blue for boys was the invention of new chemical dyes, which meant that children's clothing could be mass-produced and washed in hot water without fading.
In the 19th century, baby boys often wore white and pink.
Pink was first used as a color name in the late 17th century.
In the Odyssey, written in approximately 800 BCE, Homer wrote "Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared..." Roman poets also described the color.
In his famous 15th century manual on painting, ''Il Libro Dell'Arte'', Cennino Cennini described it this way: "This pigment is made from the loveliest and lightest sinopia that is found and is mixed and mulled with St. John’s white, as it is called in Florence; and this white is made from thoroughly white and thoroughly purified lime.
File:Female baby.jpg|In the United States and Europe, baby girls are often dressed in pink and white.
In 19th century England, pink ribbons or decorations were often worn by young boys;  boys were simply considered small men, and while men in England wore red uniforms, boys wore pink.
Greater flamingoes in flight over Pocharam Lake in Andhra Pradesh, India.
File:Shocking Pink Schiaparelli.jpg|Shocking pink was a new and more assertive pink invented by Italian fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli in 1931, by mixing a little white with magenta.
Some products use a natural red or pink food coloring, Cochineal, also called carmine, made with crushed insects of the family Dactylopius coccus.
593) - WGA06706.jpg|In the 1280s, Duccio also painted the Christ child dressed in pink
However, today it is a valuable collector's item.
She was often called "Pinky" as a result.
But stores nonetheless found that people were increasingly choosing to buy pink for girls, and blue for boys, until this became an accepted norm in the 1940s.
Pink was the least-favorite color of seventeen percent of respondents; the only color more disliked was brown, with twenty percent.
Some sports newspapers, such as La Gazzetta dello Sport in Italy, also use pink paper to stand out from other newspapers.
The steam locomotive and coal car were pink and the freight cars of the freight train were various pastel colors.
Pork contains less myoglobin than beef and therefore is less red; when heated, it changes from pinkish-red to less pink to tan or white.
According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most often associated with  charm, politeness, sensitivity, tenderness, sweetness, childhood, femininity, and the romantic.
Many of the men surveyed were unable to even identify pink correctly, confusing it with mauve.
Pink is also one of the few colors to be strongly associated with a particular aroma, that of roses.
Many strawberry and raspberry-flavored foods are colored pink and light red as well, sometimes to distinguish them from cherry-flavored foods that are more commonly colored dark red (although raspberry-flavored foods, particularly in the United States, are often colored blue as well).
who  wore combinations of pale blue and pink, and had a particular tint of pink made for her by the Sevres porcelain factory, created by adding nuances of blue, black and yellow.
When you need some, take however much of it seems appropriate.
There was a notable difference between men and women;  three percent of women chose pink as their favorite color, compared with less than one percent of men.
Today the color is used to distinguish the newspaper  from competitors on a press kiosk or news stand.
File:Rose Champagne Bubbles.jpg|Pink champagne takes its color either by being fermented for a short time with the skins of dark purple grapes, or by the addition of a small amount of red wine.
Early pink buildings were usually built of brick or sandstone, which takes its pale red color from hematite, or iron ore.
File:Roseate Spoonbill - Myakka River State Park.jpg|A Roseate Spoonbill in Myakka River State Park in Florida.
File:Bandol rose.jpg|A Rosé wine from Bandol, in Provence.
The golden age of the color pink was the Rococo Period (1720–1777) in the 18th century, when  pastel colors became very fashionable in all the courts of Europe.
The blue sailor suit helped make blue instead of pink the color for boys in the 20th century.
In the 13th and 14th century,  in works by Cimabue and Duccio, the Christ child was sometimes portrayed dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ.
The pink or reddish color of flamingos comes from carotenoid proteins in their diet of animal and plant plankton.
Supermarket hams are made by a different and faster process;  they are brined, or infused with a salt-water solution, containing sodium nitrite, which transfers nitric oxide, which bonds with the  myoglobin to form the traditional pink cured ham color.
Agra 03-2016 09 Agra Fort.jpg|The Agra Fort, also known as the Red Fort, in Agra, Pradesh, India was built between 1558 and 1574 by the Mughal emperor Akbar.
Although pink is generally considered a tint of red, most variations of pink lie between red, white and magenta colors.
This fashion plate is from 1778–1787.
'''Pink''' is a pale red color, which takes its name from the flower of the same name.
Its pink color, like that of the flamingo, comes from the carotenoid pigments in its diet.
While the word "pink" was first used as a noun to refer to a color in the 17th century, the verb "pink" continues to be reflected today in the name of those hand-held scissors that cut a zig-zagged line referred to as pinking shears.
The pioneer in the creation of the new wave of pinks was the Italian  designer Elsa Schiaparelli, (1890-1973) who was aligned with the artists of the surrealist movement, including Jean Cocteau.
File:Cimabue, The Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels.jpg| In the early Renaissance, the infant Jesus was sometimes shown dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ.
One study by two neuroscientists in ''Current Biology'' examined color preferences across cultures and found significant differences between male and female responses.
The pink color in most packaged and processed foods, ice creams, candies and pastries is made with artificial food coloring.
Lucretius used the word to describe the dawn in his epic poem ''On the Nature of Things'' (''De rerum natura'').
Prior to this time, most small children of both sexes wore white, which could be frequently washed.
These colors were first used as gender signifiers just prior to World War I (for either girls or boys), and pink was first established as a female gender signifier in the 1940s.
In recent times a word based on the English version, , has begun to be used.
Thomas von Taschitzki has said that "the monochrome pink wrappings"..."form a counterpoint to the small green wooded islands."
File:Chi chi dango.jpg|Chi chi dango is a sweet dessert made of rice flour.
File:Choco pink.jpg|Pink is the color most commonly associated with sweet tastes.
“It could have gone the other way”
File:Pink 1963 Cadillac.jpg|Pink is sometimes associated with extravagance and a wish to be noticed.
Despite the fact that the study used adults, and both groups preferred blues, and responses to the color ''pink'' were never even tested, the popular press represented the research as an indication of an innate preference by girls for pink.
The Japanese language has different words for the pink of cherry blossoms (''sakura-iro''), and peach blossoms (''momo-iro'').
Pink was particularly championed by Madame de Pompadour (1721–1764), the mistress of King Louis XV of France.
File:Mugdha Godse Ghagra choli.jpg|Indian actress Mugdha Godse.
Mughal emperor Akbar.
File:American School, Young Boy with Whip, ca.
File:Pinkie detailed.jpg|The portrait of Sarah Moulton, popularly known as "Pinkie", by Sir Thomas Lawrence (1794).
It awards a pink jersey to the winner of Italy's most important bicycle race, the Giro d'Italia.
So did Best & Co. in New York City, Halle’s in Cleveland and Marshall Field in Chicago.Today’s color dictate wasn’t established until the 1940s, as a result of Americans’ preferences as interpreted by manufacturers and retailers.
Because of this, the pink triangle has become a symbol of the modern gay rights movement.
File:Strawberry Ice Cream Cone (5076899310).jpg|A strawberry ice cream cone.
"Grasse-green is made of Pink and Bice, it is shadowed with Indigo and Pink … French-green of Pink and Indico shadowed with Indico" (pp.&nbsp;38–40).
Castillo de Malbork, Polonia, 2013-05-19, DD 04.jpg|Malbork Castle in Poland, built by the Teutonic Knights in 1440, is the largest brick structure in the world.
In Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, inmates of Nazi concentration camps who were accused of homosexuality were forced to wear a pink triangle.
Ham, though it contains myoglobins like beef, undergoes a different transformation.
Thomas Jenner's ''A Book of Drawing, Limning, Washing'' (1652) categorizes "Pink & blew bice" amongst the greens (p. &nbsp;38), and specifies several admixtures of greenish colors made with pink—e.g.
When beef is cooked, the myoglobin proteins undergo oxidation, and gradually turn from red to pink to brown; that is, from rare to medium to well-done.
It was associated with both romanticism and seduction.
In Boston, Filene’s told parents to dress boys in pink.
This means that the pink's hue is between red and magenta.
Painting by Franz Xaver Winterhalter.
Its pink color was designed to match an exotic setting, and to contrast with the blue of the sea and green of the landscape.
Casa Rosada Buenos Aires.jpg|Casa Rosada, or the "Pink House",  in Buenos Aires,  built between 1713 and 1855 as a fort and then customs house, is the official residence and office of the President of Argentina.
In William Salmon's ''Polygraphice'' (1673), "Pink yellow" is mentioned amongst the chief yellow pigments (p.&nbsp;96), and the reader is instructed to mix it with either Saffron or Ceruse for "sad" or "light" shades thereof, respectively.
In Japan, pink is the color most commonly associated with springtime due to the blooming cherry blossoms.
Colors with a shorter wavelength, such as blue and green, scatter more strongly, and are removed from the light that finally reaches the eye.
File:Kneeling knight received a swan-crested helmet.jpg|A knight in red receiving a helmet from a damsel in pink, from an English manuscript of The Romance of Alexander (1338-1344).
Many have noted the contrary association of pink with boys in 20th-century America.
The color pink has been described in literature since ancient times.
In the 20th century, pinks became bolder, brighter, and more assertive, in part because of the invention of chemical dyes which did not fade.
In Europe and the United States, pink is often associated with girls, while blue is associated with boys.
File:Pompadour6.jpg|Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of Louis XV of France, made pink and blue the leading fashion colors in the Court of Versailles.
Another factor was the popularity of blue and white sailor suits for young boys, a fashion that started in the late 19th century.
File:Усадьба Останкино.jpg|Ostankino Palace, outside of Moscow, is an 18th-century country house built by Pyotr Sheremetev, then the richest man in Russia.
File:Greater Flamingoes (Phoenicopterus roseus) in flight W IMG 0081.jpg|Pink is often associated with the exotic.
This was the only entry about the color pink.
Pink was the favorite color of only two-percent of respondents, compared with forty-five-percent who chose blue.
The misreading has been often repeated in market research, reinforcing American culture's association of pink with girls on the basis of imagined innate characteristics.
A key tactic of these charities is encouraging women and men to wear pink to show their support for breast cancer awareness and research.
File:Pink News Screenshot 15th April 2012.png|The Pink News is a newspaper for the Gay community in Britain.
File:Gentlemen Prefer Blondes Movie Trailer Screenshot (34).jpg|Pink combined with black or violet is associated with seduction.
The 1957 American musical Funny Face also played a role in cementing the color's association with women.
File:Claude Monet - Springtime - Google Art Project.jpg|The Impressionist painter Claude Monet used pink, blue and green to capture the effects of light and shadows on a white dress in ''Springtime'' (1872).
The pink was a symbol of marriage, showing a spiritual marriage between the mother and child.
This is the Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels, by Cimabue.
File:Three Nuns in Pink (8398117658).jpg|Three nuns in pink in Yangon, Burma.
According to public opinion surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most associated with charm, politeness, sensitivity, tenderness, sweetness, softness, childhood, the feminine, and the romantic.
And when these two pigments have been thoroughly mulled together (that is, two parts cinabrese and the third white), make little loaves of them like half walnuts and leave them to dry.
Pink was seen as a masculine color,  while girls often wore white and blue.
File:Prosciutto.jpg|Prosciutto hams also get their pink color from salt combined with the natural protein called myoglobin.
Both girls and boys wore pink in the 19th century.
This is different from surveys in the United States and Europe where green is the color most associated with springtime.
File:East in Libadakia, Serifos, Greece.jpg|The Greek poet Homer wrote of "the child of morning, rose-fingered dawn" in The Odyssey.
Pink was also more popular with older people than younger;  twenty-five percent of women under twenty-five called pink their least favorite color, compared with only eight percent of women over fifty.
During the Renaissance, pink was mainly used for the flesh color of faces and hands.
File:Kannur City Centre, Kerala, India.jpg|The City Center in Kannur, India.
It is usually listed on package labels as E-127.
Both groups favored blues over other hues, but women had more favorable responses to the reddish-purple range of the spectrum and men had more favorable responses to the greenish-yellow end of the spectrum.
Twenty-nine percent of men under the age of twenty-five said pink was their least favorite color, compared with eight percent of men over fifty.
Pink has symbolized a "welcome embrace" in India and masculinity in Japan.
In the high Renaissance painting the Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, the Christ child is presenting a pink flower to the Virgin Mary.
Another common red or pink (particularly in the United States where erythrosine is less frequently used) is Allura Red AC (E-129), also known as Red No.
File:Pink gothlolita.jpg|Pink and white together symbolize youth, tenderness and innocence.
Various women including many in the Feminist Studio Workshop at the Woman's Building submitted entries exploring their association with the color.
Marilyn Monroe in the trailer for the film ''Gentlemen Prefer Blondes'' (1953).
Breast cancer charities around the world have used the color to symbolize support for people with breast cancer and promote awareness of the disease.
The same process turns cooked lobster and crab from blue-green to red when they are boiled.
It was a marketing failure because any girl who might want a model train would want a realistically colored train, while boys in the 1950s did not want to be seen playing with a pink train.
Recently the word ''pinku'' has also become popular.
1840.jpg|Young boy in pink, American school of painting (about 1840).
Traditional hams, such as prosciutto, are made by taking the hind leg or thigh of a pig, covering it with sea salt, which removes the moisture content, and then letting it dry or cure for as long as two years.
Their shells, naturally blue-green, turn pink or red when cooked.
However, it did appear in women's fashion, and in religious art.
Pink was not a common color in the fashion of the Middle Ages; nobles usually preferred brighter reds, such as crimson.
This portrait by Maurice Quentin de la Tour was painted between 1748 and 1755.
Toys aimed at girls often display pink prominently on packaging and the toy themselves.
File:NCI steamed shrimp.jpg|The shells and flesh of steamed shrimp contain a natural carotenoid pigment called astaxanthin, which turns pink when heated.
More modern pink buildings usually use the color pink to appear exotic or to attract attention.
File:Duccio di Buoninsegna - Madonna and Child (no.
The most common pink food coloring is erythrosine, also known as Red No.
File:Cherry blossoms in the Tsutsujigaoka Park.jpg|Cherry blossoms in Senai, Miyagi, Japan.
Blue was associated with seriousness and study, while pink was associated with childhood and softness.
At sunrise and sunset, when the path of the sunlight through the atmosphere to the eye is longest, the blue and green components are removed almost completely, leaving the longer wavelength orange, red and pink light.
''Roseus'' is the Latin word meaning "rosy" or "pink."
The flesh of the salmon also contains astaxanthins, which makes it pink.
File:Macarons filled with raspberries at Lawry's The Prime Rib, Mandarin Orchard Singapore - 20100309.jpg|A macaron with raspberries
The pigment commonly used for this was called light cinabrese; it was a mixture of the red earth pigment called sinopia, or Venetian red, and a white pigment called ''Bianco San Genovese'', or lime white.
Raw beef is red, because the muscles of vertebrate animals, such as cows and pigs, contain a protein called myoglobin, which binds oxygen and iron atoms.
File:Queen Victoria with Prince Arthur.jpg|Queen Victoria in 1850 or 1851 with her third son and seventh child, Prince Arthur.
File:Barite-Rhodochrosite-tcm01a.jpg|Rhodochrosite is one of the many kinds of pink gemstones.
When combined with white, it is associated with  innocence.
In fact the clothing for children in the 19th century was almost always white, since, before the invention of chemical dyes, clothing of any color  would quickly fade when washed in boiling water.
It is of Japanese origin, and very popular in Hawaii.
This is called  Rayleigh scattering.
File:Interesting Building Angle of Georgia-Pacific Tower Atlanta.jpg|The Georgia-Pacific Tower in Atlanta, Georgia (1981), a modernist pink skyscraper.
