Phocids are less agile on land.
They also have a well-developed ''tapetum lucidum'', a reflecting layer that increases sensitivity by reflecting light back through the rods.
Desmatophocids lived 23–10 mya and had elongated skulls, fairly large eyes, cheekbones connected by a mortised structure and rounded cheek teeth.
Phocids are known to have existed for at least 15&nbsp;mya, and molecular evidence supports a divergence of the Monachinae and Phocinae lineages 22&nbsp;mya.
Polygynous species also tend to be extremely sexual dimorphic in favor of males.
To keep their blood pressure stable, phocids have an elastic aorta that dissipates some energy of each heartbeat.
Pinnipedia was historically considered its own suborder under Carnivora.
Other terrestrial predators include cougars, brown hyenas and various species of canids, which mostly target the young.
Humans have hunted seals since the Stone Age.
Pinnipeds have streamlined, spindle-shaped bodies with reduced or non-existent external ear flaps, rounded heads, flexible necks, limbs modified into flippers, and small tails.
Otariids originated in the North Pacific.
Pinnipeds that breed on fast ice tend to cluster together more than those that breed on pack ice.
''Enaliarctos'', a fossil species of late Oligocene/early Miocene (24–22 mya) California, closely resembled modern pinnipeds; it was adapted to an aquatic life with a flexible spine, and limbs modified into flippers.
Gestation in seals (including delayed implantation) typically lasts a year.
The eyes of pinnipeds are relatively large for their size and are positioned near the front of the head.
Dominant male elephant seals advertise their status and threaten rivals with "clap-threats" and loud drum-like calls that may be modified by the proboscis.
Pinnipeds can move around on land, though not as well as terrestrial animals.
Pinnipeds are also targeted by terrestrial and pagophilic predators.
The Japanese sea lion and the Caribbean monk seal have become extinct in the past century, while the Mediterranean monk seal and Hawaiian monk seal are ranked Critically Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
The calls appear to contain prefixes and suffixes that serve to emphasize a message.
Pinnipeds can also be threatened by humans in more indirect ways.
Pinnipeds are typically hunted for their meat and blubber.
The walrus is unique in that it consumes its prey by suction feeding, using its tongue to suck the meat of a bivalve out of the shell.
Most species inhabit coastal areas, though some travel offshore and feed in deep waters off oceanic islands.
The Navy insists that the sea lions are removed once their mission is complete.
Otariids use their front limbs primarily to propel themselves through the water, while phocids and walruses use their hind limbs.
The Government of Canada permits the hunting of harp seals.
Alloparenting occurs in these fasting species; while most northern elephant seal mothers nurse their own pups and reject nursings from alien pups, some do accept alien pups with their own.
The well-developed dilator muscle gives the animals a great range in pupil dilation.
The extraocular muscles of the walrus are well developed.
Antarctic seals are more vocal on land or ice than Arctic seals due to a lack of terrestrial and pagophliic predators like the polar bear.
One study of three species—the harbor seal, California sea lion and northern elephant seal—found that the sea lion was best adapted for airborne hearing, the harbor seal was equally capable of hearing in air and water, and the elephant seal was better adapted for underwater hearing.
Traveling seals may use various features of their environment to reach their destination including geomagnetic fields, water and wind currents, the position of the sun and moon and the taste and temperature of the water.
The fore-flippers move in a transverse, rather than a sagittal fashion.
Male otariids have strong barks, growls, roars and "whickers".
Pinnipeds may dive during foraging or to avoid predators.
In a match-to-sample task study, a single California sea lion was able to demonstrate an understanding of symmetry, transitivity and equivalence; a second seal was unable to complete the tasks.
The genera ''Valenictus'' and ''Odobenus'' developed elongated tusks.
Although pinnipeds have a fairly good sense of smell on land, it is useless underwater as their nostrils are closed.
Even some fully furred species (particularly sea lions) are less haired than most land mammals.
If a male leaves the beach to feed, he will likely lose mating opportunities and his dominance.
Most species are preyed on by the killer whale or orca.
The same adaptations that conserve heat while in water tend to inhibit heat loss when out of water.
Exploited species included harp seals, hooded seals, Caspian seals, elephant seals, walruses and all species of fur seal.
Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths.
In addition to foraging, vibrissae may also play a role in navigation; spotted seals appear to use them to detect breathing holes in the ice.
Lek systems are known to exist among some populations of walruses.
Walruses, despite being specialized for feeding on bottom-dwelling invertebrates, occasionally prey on Arctic seals.
In 2011, a captive California sea lion named Ronan was recorded bobbing its head in synchrony to musical rhythms.
In addition, harbor seals may visit estuaries, lakes and rivers and sometimes stay as long as a year.
Leopard seals typically target crabeater pups, which form an important part of their diet from November to January.
Seals are more agile and flexible, and some otariids, such as the California sea lion, are capable of bending their necks backwards far enough to reach their hind-flippers, allowing them to make dorsal turns.
These foraging trips may last anywhere between a day and two weeks, depending on the abundance of food and the distance of foraging sites.
Delayed implantation postpones the birth of young until the female hauls-out on land or until conditions for birthing are favorable.
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals allows limited hunting of crabeater seals, leopard seals and Weddell seals.
These tissue masses, which contain extensive contorted spirals of arteries and thin-walled veins, act as blood reservoirs that increase oxygen stores for use during diving.
An exception to this is the northern elephant seal, which feeds on fish at great depths in the open ocean.
These differences are likely important for mothers and pups who need to remain in contact on crowded beaches.
Eventually, seal hunters used harpoons to spear the animals from boats out at sea, and hooks for killing pups on ice or land.
Few islands are favorable for breeding, and those that are tend to be crowded.
They can also turn their hind-flippers forward and "walk" on land.
During deep dives, any remaining air in their bodies is stored in the bronchioles and trachea, which prevents them from experiencing decompression sickness, oxygen toxicity and nitrogen narcosis.
''Enaliarctos'' was capable of swimming with both the fore-flippers and hind-flippers, but it may have been more specialized as a fore-flipper swimmer.
High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are near the top of food chains and have large reserves of blubber.
Pinnipeds split from other caniforms 50 million years ago (mya) during the Eocene.
Large sharks are another major predator of pinnipeds—usually the great white shark but also the tiger shark and mako shark.
Pinnipeds do not have an appendix.
However, Weddell seal hunting is prohibited between September and February if the animal is over one year of age, to ensure breeding stocks are healthy.
In terrestrially breeding species, pups may get crushed by fighting males.
In between nursing bouts, the females leave their young onshore to forage at sea.
Seals range in size from the  and  Baikal seal to the  and  southern elephant seal, which is also the largest carnivoran.
As of 2013, International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) recognizes 35 pinniped species.
The Caribbean monk seal has been killed and exploited by Europeans settlers and their descendants since 1494, starting with Christopher Columbus himself.
When foraging, Weddell seals typically dive for less than 15 minutes to depths of around  but can dive for as long as 73 minutes and to depths of up to .
They cannot pull their hind-flippers forward, and move on land by lunging, bouncing and wiggling while their fore-flippers keep them balanced.
Steller sea lions have been recorded eating the pups of harbor seals, northern fur seals and California sea lions.
Alternatively, this lineage may have spread from the North Pacific to the Arctic and subsequently the North Atlantic during the Pleistocene.
Other species known to enter freshwater include California sea lions and South American sea lions.
Male walruses may help inexperienced young as they learn to swim, and have even been recorded caring for orphans.
Females can usually move freely between territories and males are unable to coerce them, but in some species such as the northern fur seal, South American sea lion and Australian sea lion, males can successfully contain females in their territories and prevent them from leaving.
The 2007 law seeks to relieve pressure on the crashing Pacific Northwest salmon populations.
Of the three, ''Puijila'' was the least specialized for aquatic life.
The walrus has unique upper canines that are elongated into tusks.
Older crabeater seals commonly bear scars from failed leopard seal attacks; a 1977 study found that 75% of a sample of 85 individual crabeaters had these scars.
Elephant seal males establish dominance hierarchies with the highest ranking males—the alpha males—maintaining harems of as many as 30–100 females.
Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change, particularly declines in sea ice.
The vibrissa's angle relative to the flow, not the shape, however, seems to be the most important factor.
The longest recorded lifespans include 43 years for a wild female ringed seal and 46 years for a wild female grey seal.
The pure white fur of harp seal pups conceals them in their Arctic environment.
This and its lack of orbital roof allow it to protrude its eyes and see in both frontal and dorsal directions.
''Monachus'' emerged in the Mediterranean and migrated to the Caribbean and then the central North Pacific.
The corneal epithelium is keratinized and the sclera is thick enough to withstand the pressures of diving.
Otariid females and their young use mother-pup attraction calls to help them reunite when the mother returns from foraging at sea.
These are important for detecting their prey on the muddy sea floor.
Navy officials say that the sea lions can do this in seconds, before the enemy realizes what happened.
In otariid species like the South American and Australian sea lions, non-territorial subadults form "gangs" and cause chaos within the breeding rookeries to increase their chances of mating with females.
Underwater vocals include trills, chugs, chirps, chugs and knocks.
Increased body weight in males increases the length of time they can fast due to the ample energy reserves stored in the blubber.
Male harp seals, crabeater seals and hooded seals follow and defend lactating females in their vicinity—usually one or two at a time,—and wait for them to reach estrus.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped the sea and its animals, and often depicted sea lions in their art.
Before diving, pinnipeds typically exhale to empty their lungs of half the air and then close their nostrils and throat cartilages to protect the trachea.
Phocids have thickened mastoids, enlarged entotympanic bones, everted pelvic bones and massive ankle bones.
Males can also pose threats to the safety of pups.
In the mid-nineteenth century, the species was thought to have gone extinct until a small colony was found near the Yucatán Peninsula in 1886.
More elaborate exhibits contain deep pools that can be viewed underwater with rock-mimicking cement as haul-out areas.
They also harass and attempt to mate with females that head out to the water.
Otariids are more vocal on land, while phocids are more vocal in water.
Pinnipeds also have very muscular and vascularized irises.
Otariids establish territories containing resources that attract females, such as shade, tide pools or access to water.
The female rests at the surface with its head held up, and the young suckle upside down.
500 to 32,000&nbsp;Hz in the northern fur seal, compared to 20 to 20,000&nbsp;Hz in humans), their airborne hearing sensitivity is weaker overall.
Vocalizations are particularly important during the breeding seasons.
When moving in water, the walrus relies on its hind-flippers for locomotion, while its fore-flippers are used for steering.
Five genera and seven species (one now extinct) of sea lion are known to exist, while two genera and nine species of fur seal exist.
Pinnipeds tend to be slower swimmers than cetaceans, typically cruising at  compared to around  for several species of dolphin.
Grey seal males usually claim a location among a cluster of females whose members may change over time.
Otariids have visible external ears, while phocids and walruses lack these.
Vocals are produced both in air and underwater.
Alternative mating strategies also exist in young male grey seals, which do have some success.
Their evolutionary link to terrestrial mammals was unknown until the 2007 discovery of ''Puijila darwini'' in early Miocene deposits in Nunavut, Canada.
Some exhibits have rocky backgrounds with artificial haul-out sites and a pool, while others have pens with small rocky, elevated shelters where the animals can dive into their pools.
As in most marine mammals, the kidneys are divided into small lobes and can effectively absorb water and filter out excess salt.
The elaborately cusped teeth of filter-feeding species, such as crabeater seals, allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food.
In certain species, like the Steller sea lion and northern fur seal, a dominant male can maintain a territory for as long as 2–3 months.
This is supported by a 2006 molecular study that also found that the Australian sea lion and New Zealand sea lion are more closely related to ''Arctocephalus'' than to other sea lions.
Flexible eye movement has been documented in seals.
Although pinnipeds are widespread, most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
Pinnipeds conserve heat with their large and compact body size, insulating blubber and fur, and high metabolism.
They also lack supraorbital processes on the frontal and have underdeveloped calcaneal tubers.
Seals typically consume their prey underwater where it is swallowed whole.
Bears are known to use sit-and-wait tactics as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water.
Some of these species are serially monogamous, including the harp seal, crabeater seal and hooded seal.
They kill their prey with their long tusks and eat their blubber and skin.
In 1989, Annalisa Berta and colleagues proposed the unranked clade Pinnipedimorpha to contain the fossil genus ''Enaliarctos'' and modern seals as a sister group.
The males arrive earlier in the season and wait for them.
Walruses are specialized for feeding on bottom-dwelling mollusks.
It has since recolonized much of its historic range, but has a population bottleneck.
Individuals also return to the same territorial site each breeding season.
Phocids such as elephant seals, grey seals and hooded seals remain on land or ice and fast during their relatively short lactation period–four days for the hooded seal and five weeks for elephant seals.
The vibrissae of some otariids grow quite long—those of the Antarctic fur seal can reach .
Its teeth were adapted for shearing (like terrestrial carnivorans), and it may have stayed near shore more often than its extant relatives.
The lineage of the modern walrus may have spread from the North Pacific to the Caribbean (via the Central American Seaway) 8–5&nbsp;mya and subsequently made it to the North Atlantic and returned to the North Pacific via the Arctic 1&nbsp;mya.
While terrestrial mammals are generally unable to empty their lungs, pinnipeds can reinflate their lungs even after complete respiratory collapse.
National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of killing are seen as less destructive and wasteful.
Phocids tend to migrate more than otariids.
For most species, birthing takes place in the spring and summer months.
Veins containing cool blood from the body extremities surround arteries, which contain warm blood received from the core of the body.
Otariids are also known as eared seals due to the presence of pinnae.
Their large size and playfulness make them popular attractions.
Most of the other otariids diversified in the Southern Hemisphere.
One species, ''Enaliarctos emlongi'', exhibited notable sexual dimorphism, suggesting that this physical characteristic may have been an important driver of pinniped evolution.
The former behavior is typical when hunting non-schooling fish, slow-moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey.
While most species are generalist and opportunistic feeders, a few are specialists.
Lactation in otariids may last 6–11 months; in the Galápagos fur seal it can last as long as 3 years.
Male vocals are usually of lower frequencies than those of the females.
By holding their vibrissae steady, pinnipeds are able to maximize their detection ability.
Pinnipeds have an amphibious lifestyle; they spend most of their lives in the water, but haul-out to mate, raise young, molt, rest, thermoregulate or escape from aquatic predators.
Subadult elephant seals will sneak into female clusters and try to blend in by pulling in their noses.
Sea lions have been recorded climbing up flights of stairs.
The most common pinniped species kept in captivity is the California sea lion as it is abundant and easy to train.
Other species popularly kept in captivity include the grey seal and harbor seal.
They were also trapped in nets.
Like a modern otter, ''Puijila'' had a long tail, short limbs and webbed feet instead of flippers.
Some species have become so numerous that they conflict with local people.
In the Persian Gulf, the animals can swim behind divers approaching a U.S. naval ship and attach a clamp with a rope to the diver's leg.
The ''Callorhinus'' lineage split earlier at 16&nbsp;mya.
'''Pinnipeds''' () (from Latin ''pinna'' "fin" and ''pes, pedis'' "foot"), commonly known as '''seals''', are a widely distributed and diverse clade of carnivorous, fin-footed, semiaquatic marine mammals.
In temperate and tropical areas, they haul-out on to sandy and pebble beaches, rocky shores, shoals, mud flats, tide pools and in sea caves.
They are commonly kept in captivity and are even sometimes trained to perform tricks and tasks.
While most vocals are audible to the human ear, a captive leopard seal was recorded making ultrasonic calls underwater.
The northern elephant seal was hunted to near extinction in the late 19th century, with only a small population remaining on Guadalupe Island.
The earliest fossil ''Pithanotaria'', found in California, is dated to 11&nbsp;mya.
Detecting vibrations is useful when the animals are foraging and may add to or even replace vision, particularly in darkness.
Seals that breed on ice tend to have little or no sexual dimorphism.
This "rhythmic entrainment" was previously seen only in humans, parrots and other birds possessing vocal mimicry.
The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic seals and walruses, particularly pups.
The age at which a pinniped sexually matures can vary from 2–12 years depending on the species.
These animals are used to perform tricks and entertain visitors.
Some species also rest on man-made structures, like piers, jetties, buoys and oil platforms.
As a whole, pinnipeds can be found in a variety of aquatic habitats, including coastal water, open ocean, brackish water and even freshwater lakes and rivers.
The Caspian seal's ancestor became isolated as the Paratethys shrank, leaving the animal in a small remnant sea, the Caspian Sea.
Pinnipeds have lifespans averaging 25–30 years.
Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, Antarctic fur seals may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting.
Various human cultures have depicted pinnipeds for millennia.
Pinnipeds have well-developed senses—their eyesight and hearing are adapted for both air and water, and they have an advanced tactile system in their whiskers or vibrissae.
Seals release large amounts of mucus to protect their eyes.
Female pinnipeds are also known to bellow when protecting their young.
Larger males also likely enjoy access to feeding grounds that smaller ones are unable to access due to their lower thermoregulatory ability and decreased energy stores.
Otariids consist of two types: sea lions and fur seals.
Adult male pinnipeds have several strategies to ensure reproductive success.
Male California sea lions have been observed to help shield swimming pups from predators.
Nevertheless, there is some dispute as to whether pinnipeds are more closely related to bears or musteloids, as some studies support the former theory and others the latter.
In some instances, only the largest males are able to reach the furthest deepest foraging grounds where they enjoy maximum energetic yields that are unavailable to smaller males and females.
Their unique lungs have airways that are highly reinforced with cartilaginous rings and smooth muscle, and alveoli that completely deflate during deeper dives.
Some species leap out of the water, which may allow then to travel faster.
While they are capable of hearing a wide range of frequencies (e.g.
Female Steller sea lions are known to solicit mating with their territorial males.
They also lack arrector pili, so their fur can be streamlined as they swim.
Once relentlessly hunted by commercial industries for their products, seals and walruses are now protected by international law.
In Inuit mythology, the goddess Sedna rules over the sea and marine animals.
