A marriage in each suit is worth 240 or 24 total points, which is nothing more than the sum of the marriages, plus kings around and queens around.
In auction pinochle, players bid for the points they predict their hand could earn.
* Winning the game +5 or +10 checks
After receiving the cards, the bid winner examines what will create the strongest hand and then discards an equal number of cards back to their partner.
A player can score one meld after each trick won of the first 12 tricks.
* Playing the hand and losing -1 additional check
In some versions of pinochle, after the bid has been taken and trump declared in a partnership game, the bid winning team exchanges cards.
The partner of the bid winner passes first.
Melding consists of displaying specific combinations of cards to all players.
Partners are seated opposite from each other.
For example, if the bid is 350 and a player has only 80 points in meld, that player is forced to concede.
There is an increased possibility that when one team declares trump another team may have an equal number of trump also, which may lead to an interesting game.
most of the extra melds made possible by the triple pack do not count extra.
In larger groups, one or more players can sit out each hand allowing the remaining players to follow the appropriate rules for the respective number of players.
The player can either keep that card for her or his hand or reject the card.
* "Flush", "family", "rope", "book", or "run" - A, 10, K, Q, and J of trump suit only - 150 or 15 points.
Other than this, the four player rules apply, and any variations may also be used.
Similar to the arounds, a double run&nbsp;– or two runs in trump in the same hand&nbsp;– is worth 1500 points.
Today the Internet is host to many live professional cash tournaments, although many are still cautious about playing online because of potential cheating.
If the highest bidder fails to make their contract by adding meld points and trick points from the play, then their score is negative the amount of the bid for that hand.
High bidder names trump.
* "100 aces" or "aces around" - four aces of different suits - 100 or 10 points
Play continues normally in terms of scoring and trick taking.
One variation on winning allows a team or individual to win instantly from any score by taking all the tricks in a hand.
* "Marriage" - king and queen of a suit other than trump - 20 or 2 points, 40 or 4  for double
In playing cards for tricks, there are strict rules of forced play, which limit a player's ability to strategically retain high cards.
The original version of pinochle involves a partial deal of twelve cards to both players in sets of four, leaving a stock of 24 cards.
* Flush or run  +1 check
The marriages and flush are the "sequence melds":
Two-handed pinochle is the original pinochle game, while partnership, auction, and all other variants are derived from it.
The dealer deals the entire deck out (16 cards to each player),  in packets of four.
* "800 kings" or "kings abound" - all eight kings - 800 or 80 points
After the shuffle, the dealer will offer a cut to the player on their right, then distribute the cards.
Bidding begins at 300, or as little as 150 for "under-the-gun" bids, and increases in multiples of 10.
After the first trick, the winner of each trick leads the first card for the next trick, until all the cards are played.
When adding counters, cards from each player's discard pile are included in totals for a total of 240 counters per round, plus one counter for winning the final trick.
Only when a player has no cards in suit, and has no trump, can the player choose to play any card in their hand.
* Not looking at the talon and conceding 300 points.
Trick-taking commences and continues until all held cards have been played.
* "600 queens" or "queens abound" - all eight queens - 600 or 60 points
* "1000 aces" or "aces abound" - all eight aces - 1000 or 100 points
Again, if a player does not have any cards of the lead suit and can play a trump card higher than any other trump played so far, the player must do so, even if the player expects that a later player will beat the card.
The winning bid only decides trump; both (or all) teams' bids become their contract, meaning any team can score or be set.
It is derived from the card game bezique; players score points by trick-taking and also by forming combinations of cards into melds.
* "80 kings" or "kings around" - four kings of different suits - 80 or 8 points
They also can play for this victory even if their bid cannot be made with the maximum number of trick points available plus their meld.
Internet pinochle is almost always "double deck" except for a few applications for some smart phones.
The game is usually played to a score of 5,000 or higher.
One variation to make it more difficult for the bid-winning player, the discard pile created by drawing cards is used by the non-bidding player to score towards tricks.
One player begins the hand-building process by drawing the top card of the widow.
* After viewing the widow, the highest bidder may concede the hand and take a negative score for the amount of their bid; however, they still must name trumps and the other two players score their meld.
In variations for odd numbers of players like three, a "widow's hand" (also called a "kitty", "talon", or "stock") of cards remain.
Four-handed pinochle, or "partnership pinochle" is played with two teams of two players each.
There typically is no kitty.
The objective of the partner is either to add to the total points in meld or to pass trick-winning cards.
In pinochle circles and tournaments the post-1945 rules are played about half of the time according to Pagat and Hoyle.
The deal rotates clockwise, so the dealer's left-hand opponent will deal next.
The game is won when one player reaches 1000 points.
This is known as a "slide-out".
Traditionally, the deal is done clockwise, dealing a packet of three or four cards at a time, starting with the player to the left (the eldest hand) and ending with the dealer.
Marriage in non-trump
It is also possible for a person to lose with the high score if they do not take a winning bid.
Then there are two variations of following suit depending if you are playing post-1945 or pre-1945 rules.
Once a player passes, he or she is out of the auction.
In triple-deck pinochle six play in two partnerships of three each; each player has an opponent at their right and left.
All players meld after the bid winner shows meld first.
The player that made this final bid will then declare trump in the suit that is desired.
A pinochle deck consists of two copies of each of the 9, 10, jack, queen, king, and ace cards of all four suits, for 48 cards per deck.
* A player forced to take the bid for 300 points may choose to concede without viewing the widow.
The traditional trick-taking rules apply only for these last 12 tricks.
The only significant difference in its rules from bezique is the scoring.
'''Pinochle''' () or '''binocle''' (sometimes '''pinocle''', or '''penuchle''') is a  trick-taking card game typically for two to four players and played with a 48-card deck.
Eight hundred kings
('''J♠ J♥ J♦ J♣''')
In some house rules, trump cannot be declared in any suit not containing a "run", "marriage" or "dix" meld.
If the player has a meld, he or she is required to open the bidding; otherwise, they may pass or bid.
If a player is about to win, it may have been worthwhile to play the hand and try to deny that player a trick.
All other aspects of the game generally remain the same.
It is possible for two or all three players to go over 1000 on the same hand.
The following events cause a gain or loss of checks.
The pinochle and dix are the "special melds", the pinochle being the game's namesake.
Three pinochle decks with no nines are mixed together, making a pack of 120 cards.
It is only when trump is led that "heading" the trick is mandatory.
Pinochle was the favorite card game of American Jews and Irish immigrants, while skat was the preferred game of a majority of German immigrants.
Likewise, if a player cannot follow suit, but has trump, they must play trump.
The only way to win in cutthroat pinochle, however, is to "bid and out", or to have taken the bid and surpassed the predetermined winning score.
Pinochle follows a nonstandard card ordering.
With bidding, the player winning the bid declares trump, then lays all meld face-up on the table.
The other two players also lay meld face-up for count.
If another trump has already been played that a player cannot beat, then they can play any trump in their hand, but they still must play a trump card if they can.
The opening bid is typically 150, but can be a higher agreed on value.
:Note that checks for meld can be earned either by the bidder or non-bidder.
This version often features "meld bidding", a bid made to let a partner know what is in the bidder's hand.
It may be two, three, or four cards, depending on the version of the game.
After each trick, players draw one card from the stock into their hand starting with the trick-winning player.
('''K♠ K♥ K♦ K♣''')
They are generally played with 1 1/2 or doubled decks, with extra dix added or withheld to make an even deal.
With an odd number of players, the bidder asks for a desired card in the trump suit, with the first matching player being partner for that hand.
They are scored as follows:
In the most common form of the game (see variations below), any one card may be used in only one meld of each type.
Conceding the hand does save the trick points opponents would score playing their hands, although opponents will not have an opportunity to lose their meld by failing to take a trick.
Some varieties accept a "round house", kings and queens of each suit, and earn a bonus 10 points awarding a total of 250 points.
* Roundtable +2 checks (marriage in each suit)
* If two players exceed 1000 points on the same hand, then the high bidder for that round automatically is declared the winner.
Double run in trump
It is thus considered part of a "trick-and-meld" category which also includes a cousin, belote.
'''Alternate end games'''
* "Dix" - nine of trumps - 10 or 1 points each
The player to the dealer's left initiates the bidding process.
"pinochling" does not require a bidder to make their bid.
Everyone else plays against the team.
The highest bidder earns the right to declare the trump suit.
* "40 jacks" or "jacks around" - four jacks of different suits - 40 or 4 points
This means that the total bid amount is subtracted from the total game score, often accompanied by losing the points scored in meld for that hand as well.
if a player should hold twenty aces, five of each suit, the value would be that of double aces and triple aces combined.
In that case, those following that player may play any card of the lead suit, since they must follow the lead suit but are already losing to the player who played trump.
The three discards by the highest bidder count toward their counter score for the hand, so there is always a total of 250 points for the trick score among the three players.
This creates a more balanced game.
('''A A 10 10 K K Q Q J J''')
Most books of post-1945 rules say that unless trump is led, there is no requirement to try to win the trick.
This will reduce the bid winner's hand to 15 cards.
Thus, a queen can be used in one marriage with one king, regardless of if the player has the other king of the same suit.
Variations are for the bid winner and partner to exchange the designated number of cards simultaneously, or for no passing to occur.
In some variations, bids are made in increments of 10 or more points until 600 is reached, then by 50 points.
The highest bidder wins the auction and turns up the three-card widow for all to see.
* "400 jacks" or "jacks abound" - all eight jacks - 400 or 40 points
This rule holds regardless of score fluctuations (players "going minus" - failing to reach their bid amounts&nbsp;— and falling below 1000 points.
* A player may not attempt to play the hand for more than 250 points.
Each player is dealt 12 cards.
The three widow cards are placed in the bid winner's hand.
Checks are kept even if the bid is not made.
If he or she passes, the obligation to bid passes to the next player, if meld is held.
Auction pinochle for three players has some similarities with the German game skat, although the bidding is more similar to that of bid whist.
Both the bidder and his partner have their score count towards making the contract.
All four players may bid.
('''Q♠ Q♠ Q♥ Q♥ Q♦ Q♦ Q♣ Q♣''')
The standard game today is called "partnership auction pinochle."
This can result in a negative score.
During World War I, the city of Syracuse, New York outlawed the playing of pinochle in a fit of anti-German sentiment.
After the appropriate points have been tallied the bid winner must set aside any three cards that have not been melded, though if not enough cards remain in the hand they may be taken from melded cards.
* "60 queens" or "queens around" - four queens of different suits - 60 or 6 points
If two non-bidders exceed 1000 points on the same hand, then either of the other methods apply.
If the player chooses to hold the initial card, the player then draws a second card from the widow, then places it face-down, without looking at it, creating a discard pile.
When a player passes, they can no longer bid.
('''A♠ A♠ A♥ A♥ A♦ A♦ A♣ A♣''')
To win in this fashion, the winning player or team must play very skillfully to prevent opposing players from taking even one lowly (even zero-point) trick.
However, many alternate scoring rules drop the unnecessary trailing zero; in that case, bids of 10 and 25, respectively, have the same values.
Variants of pinochle can be played with five, six, eight or more players.
It is the same as to 1000, except that players keep track of "checks".
The high bidder leads the play with the first card, which can be any card in the contract winner's hand, although some rules require the first card led to be a trump card.
During the round, a player must take at least one trick to "save one's meld", even if the trick contains no points; otherwise, no meld points will be counted for that player during that round.
Games with five hands or more typically modify partnership pinochle in a variety of ways.
Thus bidding involves anticipating the points that will be accumulated from melds and from the points accumulated from winning tricks.
* Double aces, double kings, double queens, or double jacks +2 checks
The French word ''binocle'' also meant "eyeglasses".
Melded cards can even be used to win tricks.
The only exception is if a player played a trump card when trump was not the suit led.
All players review their cards and silently determine their bids.
Players alternate turns in this hand-building process until all cards are chosen.
After all tricks are taken, counters are tallied for each player.
* "Double pinochle" - both jacks of diamonds and both queens of spades - 300 or 30 points
If two identical cards are played, the first one outranks the second.
* 7 nines  +5 or +10 checks (do not need to win the bid to get credit)
('''J♠ J♠ J♥ J♥ J♦ J♦ J♣ J♣''')
Check pinochle is a gambling variant of three-hand.
One of the players, usually the player to the left of the dealer, or the dealer themselves, is obligated to open with a first bid.
Originally, the deck had to be composed by combining two poker, piquet or euchre decks and removing unneeded cards (a piquet deck does not have the 2-6, making it easier to modify, and a euchre deck is exactly half a pinochle deck), but with the game's popularity in the United States in the early 1900s, a single boxed deck with the necessary cards was marketed, and these specialized pinochle decks are now widely available in similar styles to common 52-card counterparts.
When playing "bid-out" rules, a team can win without bidding if their score reaches (and remains above) the agreed upon game-ending score while their opponents fail to make their bid three times.
This victory is known as "pinochling".
When a player has the turn to bid, the player may either bid or pass.
The types of melds include "arounds", "marriages", "flushes" and "pinochles".
* "Pinochle" - jack of diamonds and queen of spades - 40 or 4 points
* "Trump marriage" - king and queen of trump suit - 40 or 4 points, 80 or 8 for double
If the player rejects the first card, the card becomes the first card in the discard pile.
All the cards are dealt in partnership pinochle.
Pinochle derives from the game bezique.
('''A♠ A♥ A♦ A♣''')
For the last 12 tricks, melds are taken into each player's hand and are no longer announced by the player who wins the trick.
A related though different style of bidding is for the players to bid individually, and partners' bids are then summed.
The complete ordering from highest to lowest is A, 10, K, Q, J, 9.
Instead, the entire deck is placed face-down on the playing surface between the two players to form the widow.
The player to the left of the dealer begins the bidding once meld has been silently determined by all players.
As a shortcut, this is called a "roundtable", "marriages around", "round house", or a "round robin".
Similar to three-handed pinochle, cutthroat is a simple modification.
('''Q♠ Q♥ Q♦ Q♣''')
Their score is lowered by 300 points, and the opponents score nothing for the hand.
Team members are spaced so that they are not able to see any other hands.
If the combined score is lower than the bid, then the bidding team or player has been "set".
* Playing another hand
The auction ends when all subsequent players in rotation have passed after the last bid.
This strategy is useful when another player is close to winning.
For instance, a pinochle has a simplified score of 4, a double Pinochle would score 30.
The bid winner then declares trump and lays down meld.
In variations of two-handed play, no cards are initially dealt, a distinction from all other variations.
After the melds are displayed, the points are counted and each player totals their individual meld scores.
Each hand must meld separately.
The other player shows her or his melds as well.
Each player is dealt 20 cards, and the rules of double deck pinochle apply, except that the minimum bid is 75, and the last trick is worth 3 points.
Aces are always considered high.
These melds are placed under "headings"  where a card which is melded under a particular heading can be used again under another heading, but cannot be melded again under the same heading.
