Because organs are commonly found in churches and synagogues, the organ repertoire includes a large amount of sacred music, which is accompanimental (choral anthems, congregational hymns, liturgical elements, etc.)
Often these were relocated to private homes.
When the organist selects a stop, the valve allows wind to reach the selected rank.
The Buxheimer Orgelbuch, which dates from about 1470 and was compiled in Germany, includes intabulations of vocal music by the English composer John Dunstaple.
Likewise, a stop that sounds an octave lower than unison pitch is at 16&prime; pitch, and one that sounds two octaves lower is at 32&prime; pitch.
It should be noted that electronic "organs" may have a lower purchase price but have demonstrated a higher cost of ownership as components fail and parts become obsolete.
Pipe organs, made of metal, wood, leather, and felt can be maintained for centuries.
The desire for louder, grander organs required that the stops be voiced on a higher wind pressure than before.
Electricity may control the action indirectly through air pressure valves (pneumatics), in which case the action is electro-pneumatic.
The pipes of an enclosed division are placed in a chamber generally called the ''swell box''.
A pipe organ has one or more keyboards played by the hands (called ''manuals''), and a pedalboard played by the feet; each keyboard has its own group of stops.
The visible portion of the case, called the ''façade'', will most often contain pipes, which may be either sounding pipes or dummy pipes solely for decoration.
During the Renaissance and Baroque periods, the organ's tonal colors became more varied.
Boxes containing small embedded computers in the console and near the windchests translate console commands into fast serial data for the cable, and back into electrical commands at the windchests.
The organ's continuous supply of wind allows it to sustain notes for as long as the corresponding keys are depressed, unlike the piano and harpsichord whose sound begins to dissipate immediately after it is played.
The music of French composers (and Italian composers such as Girolamo Frescobaldi) was written for use during the Mass.
The case often is designed to complement the building's architectural style and it may contain ornamental carvings and other decorations.
For example, an 8&prime; Diapason rank may also be made available as a 4&prime; Octave.
The keyboard played by the feet is a ''pedalboard''.
For example, a coupler labelled "Swell to Great" allows the stops drawn in the Swell division to be played on the Great manual.
Among these are the Zimbelstern (a wheel of rotating bells), the nightingale (a pipe submerged in a small pool of water, creating the sound of a bird warbling when wind is admitted), and the ''effet d'orage'' ("thunder effect", a device that sounds the lowest bass pipes simultaneously).
65 of Felix Mendelssohn (published 1845) marked the beginning of a renewed interest in composing for the organ.
The most modern actions are primarily electronic, which connect the console and windchests via narrow data cables instead of the larger multiconductor cables of electric actions.
Its earliest predecessors were built in Ancient Greece in the 3rd century BC.
Pipe organs are installed in churches, synagogues, concert halls, schools, and other public buildings.
The swell box and the independent pedal division appeared in English organs beginning in the 18th century.
New technologies and the work of organ builders such as Eberhard Friedrich Walcker, Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, and Henry Willis made it possible to build larger organs with more stops, more variation in sound and timbre, and more divisions.
Stops that control multiple ranks display a Roman numeral indicating the number of ranks present, instead of its pitch.
Enclosed divisions became common, and registration aids were developed to make it easier for the organist to manage the great number of stops.
In France, as in Italy, Spain and Portugal, organs were primarily designed to play alternatim verses rather than accompany congregational singing.
Organ music was seldom written in the Classical era, as composers preferred the piano with its ability to create dynamics.
Starting in the 1860s bellows were gradually replaced by wind turbines which were later directly connected to electrical motors.
The timbre and volume of the sound produced by a pipe depends on the volume of air delivered to the pipe and the manner in which it is constructed and voiced, the latter adjusted by the builder to produce the desired tone and volume.
Stops allow the organist to control which ranks of pipes sound at a given time.
A stop that sounds at unison pitch when a key is depressed is referred to as being at 8&prime; (pronounced "eight-foot") pitch.
For the same reason, a stop that sounds an octave higher is at 4&prime; pitch, and one that sounds two octaves higher is at 2&prime; pitch.
This made it possible for organists to practice regularly on the organ.
The 0.10 psi above would register as 2.75 inches of water (70&nbsp;mmAq).
These are simple switches, like wall switches for room lights.
The earliest Italian organ music is found in the Faenza Codex, dating from 1420.
This is the origin of the idiom "to pull out all the stops".
Because each pipe produces a single pitch, the pipes are provided in sets called ''ranks'', each of which has a common timbre and volume throughout the keyboard compass.
When the organist depresses a key, the corresponding tracker pulls open its pallet, allowing wind to enter the pipe.
Large organs such as the one installed in 1361 in Halberstadt, Germany, the first documented permanent organ installation, likely prompted Guillaume de Machaut to describe the organ as "the king of instruments", a characterization still frequently applied.
Electric stop actions can be controlled at the console by stop knobs, by pivoted tilting tablets, or rocker tabs.
Each keyboard is named for a particular division of the organ (a group of ranks) and generally controls only the stops from that division.
The higher-pitched ranks of the Blockwerk remained grouped together under a single stop control; these stops developed into mixtures.
Each division generally is played from its own keyboard and conceptually comprises an individual instrument within the organ.
It had twenty bellows operated by ten men, and the wind pressure was so high that the player had to use the full strength of his arm to hold down a key.
Organ cases occasionally feature a few ranks of pipes protruding horizontally from the case in the manner of a row of trumpets.
At the Restoration, organ builders such as Renatus Harris and "Father" Bernard Smith brought new organ-building ideas from continental Europe.
Different national styles of organ building began to develop, often due to changing political climates.
The smallest portable pipe organs may have only one or two dozen pipes and one manual; the largest may have over 20,000 pipes and seven manuals.
He devised an instrument called the hydraulis, which delivered a wind supply maintained through water pressure to a set of pipes.
as well as solo in nature (chorale preludes, hymn versets designed for ''alternatim'' use, etc.).
Some may include electromagnets for setting or resetting when combinations are selected.
During the Romantic period, the organ became more symphonic, capable of creating a gradual crescendo.
The organ music of Johann Sebastian Bach fused characteristics of every national tradition and historical style in his large-scale preludes and fugues and chorale-based works.
Other composers who have used the organ prominently in orchestral music include Gustav Holst, Richard Strauss, Ottorino Respighi, Gustav Mahler, Anton Bruckner, and Ralph Vaughan Williams.
''Enclosure'' refers to a system that allows for the control of volume without requiring the addition or subtraction of stops.
The organist operates the stops and the keyboards from the console.
In a two-manual organ with Great and Swell divisions, the Swell will be enclosed.
Very little secular organ music was composed in France and Italy during the Baroque period; the written repertoire is almost exclusively intended for liturgical use.
The controls available to the organist, including the keyboards, couplers, expression pedals, stops, and registration aids are accessed from the console.
By the mid-19th-century bellows were also being operated by water engines, steam engines or gasoline engines.
This refers to the length of the lowest-sounding pipe in that rank, which is approximately eight feet.
English-speaking nations as well as Japan are more receptive to foreign nomenclature.
Most current specifications call for two or more manuals with sixty-one notes (five octaves, from C to c&Prime;&Prime;) and a pedalboard with thirty or thirty-two notes (two and a half octaves, from C to f&prime; or g&prime;).
These devices were the forerunners of modern stop actions.
The first Western pipe organ with "great leaden pipes" was sent from Constantinople to the West by the Byzantine emperor Constantine V as a gift to Pepin the Short King of the Franks in 757.
In the early 1970s, Rodgers Instruments pioneered the ''hybrid'' organ, an electronic instrument that incorporates real pipes; other builders such as Allen Organs and Johannus Orgelbouw have since built hybrid organs.
Pepin's son Charlemagne requested a similar organ for his chapel in Aachen in 812, beginning its establishment in Western church music.
The Italian composer Claudio Merulo wrote in the typical Italian genres of the toccata, the canzona, and the ricercar.
Stops of different pitch levels are designed to be played simultaneously.
These are referred to as pipes ''en chamade'' and are particularly common in organs of the Iberian peninsula and large 20th-century instruments.
Each manual controlled ranks at multiple pitches, known as the ''Blockwerk''.
The oldest of these sources is the Robertsbridge Codex, dating from about 1360.
To facilitate a large range of timbres, organ stops exist at different pitch levels.
In the mid-20th century, organ builders began to build historically inspired instruments modelled on Baroque organs.
Until the mid-15th century, organs had no stop controls.
The greater the length of the pipe, the lower its resulting pitch will be.
The Halberstadt organ was the first instrument to use a chromatic key layout across its three manuals and pedalboard, although the keys were wider than on modern instruments.
Such a rank is said to be ''unified'' or ''borrowed''.
For example, the names on an organ built in the north German Baroque style generally will be derived from the German language, while the names of similar stops on an organ in the French Romantic style will usually be French.
They returned to building mechanical key actions, voicing with lower wind pressures and thinner pipe scales, and designing specifications with more mixture stops.
Organ builders often measure organ wind using a U-tube manometer containing water, so commonly give its magnitude as the difference in water levels in the two legs of the manometer, rather than in units of pressure.
A later development was the tubular-pneumatic action, which uses changes of pressure within lead tubing to operate pneumatic valves throughout the instrument.
In a mechanical stop action, each stop control operates a valve for a whole rank of pipes.
The range of the keyboards has varied widely across time and between countries.
Inspired by the newly built Cavaillé-Coll organs, the French organist-composers César Franck, Alexandre Guilmant and Charles-Marie Widor led organ music into the symphonic realm.
The organ boasts a substantial repertoire, which spans over 500&nbsp;years.
Hence a pipe's volume cannot be readily changed while playing.
When the swell shades are open, more sound is heard than when they are closed.
The wind system consists of the parts that produce, store, and deliver wind to the pipes.
Pipes are arranged by timbre and pitch into ranks.
The '''pipe organ''' is a musical instrument that produces sound by driving pressurized air (called ''wind'') through organ pipes selected via a keyboard.
Because these concert hall instruments could approximate the sounds of symphony orchestras, transcriptions of orchestral works found a place in the organ repertoire.
The hydraulis was played in the arenas of the Roman Empire.
This control was at first a draw stop knob, which the organist selects by pulling (or drawing) toward himself/herself.
Messiaen's music in particular redefined many of the traditional notions of organ registration and technique.
Portable organs (the portative and the positive organ) were invented in the Middle Ages.
Because the French organ of the 17th and early 18th centuries was very standardized, a conventional set of registrations developed for its repertoire.
If the regulation is wrongly set, the keys may be at different heights, some pipes may sound when the keys are not pressed, or pipes may not sound when a key is pressed.
There is also an extensive repertoire from the Netherlands, England, and the United States.
In the early 20th century, pipe organs were installed in theaters to accompany the screening of films during the silent movie era; in municipal auditoria, where orchestral transcriptions were popular; and in the homes of the wealthy.
A stop labelled "Mixture&nbsp;V" is a five-rank mixture.
It also allows every stop of the organ to be played simultaneously from one manual.
A ''coupler'' allows the stops of one division to be played from the keyboard of another division.
Every organ has at least one manual (most have two or more), and most have a pedalboard.
This genre was developed by Georg Böhm, Johann Pachelbel, and Dieterich Buxtehude.
The pipes, action, and wind system are almost always contained in a case, the design of which also may incorporate the console.
Besides making these mechanisms simpler and more reliable, this also makes it possible to record and play back an organist’s performance via the MIDI protocol.
By the 6th or 7th century AD, bellows were used to supply organs with wind.
Because the 8&prime; rank does not have enough pipes to sound the top octave of the keyboard at 4&prime; pitch, it is common for an extra octave of pipes used only for the borrowed 4&prime; stop to be added.
Stop names are not standardized: two otherwise identical stops from different organs may have different names.
Before the pallet opens, wind pressure augments tension of the pallet spring, but once the pallet opens, only the spring tension is felt at the key.
In France, organ music developed during the Baroque era through the music of Jean Titelouze, François Couperin, and Nicolas de Grigny.
In larger organs, parts or all of the Choir and Solo divisions may also be enclosed.
In Germany, the six sonatas op.
The stop action allows the organist to control which ranks are engaged.
Although most countries whose music falls into the Western tradition have contributed to the organ repertoire, France and Germany in particular have produced exceptionally large amounts of organ music.
Thus, a stop labelled "Open Diapason 8&prime; " is a single-rank diapason stop sounding at 8&prime; pitch.
Around 1450, controls were designed that allowed the ranks of the Blockwerk to be played individually.
A combination action can be used to switch instantly from one combination of stops (called a ''registration'') to another.
A more recent development is the electric action which uses low voltage DC to control the key and/or stop mechanisms.
An action may be mechanical, pneumatic, or electrical (or some combination of these, such as electro-pneumatic action).
The wind supplied is stored in one or more regulators to maintain a constant pressure in the ''windchests'' until the action allows it to flow into the pipes.
When both of these stops are selected and a key (for example, c&prime;) is pressed, two pipes of the same rank will sound: the pipe normally corresponding to the key played (c&prime;), and the pipe one octave above that (c&prime;&prime;).
This device is usually placed above the centre of the pedalboard and is configured to rotate away from the organist from a near-vertical position (in which the shades are closed) to a near-horizontal position (in which the shades are open).
The development of symphonic organ music continued with Louis Vierne and Charles Tournemire.
Modern combination actions operate via computer memory, and can store several channels of registrations.
It was often used in the Hippodrome in the imperial capital of Constantinople.
The organ's secular repertoire includes preludes, fugues, sonatas, organ symphonies, suites, and transcriptions of orchestral works.
Organ pipes are made from either wood or metal  and produce sound ("speak") when air under pressure ("wind") is directed through them.
Ranks of pipes are organized into groups called divisions.
In Spain, the works of Antonio de Cabezón began the most prolific period of Spanish organ composition, which culminated with Juan Cabanilles.
The pumps and water regulators of the hydraulis were replaced by an inflated leather bag in the 2nd century AD, and true bellows began to appear in the Eastern Roman Empire in the 6th or 7th century AD.
They are used in the performance of classical music, sacred music, secular music, and popular music.
When electricity operates the action directly without the assistance of pneumatics, it is commonly referred to as direct electric action.
In the Netherlands, the organ became a large instrument with several divisions, doubled ranks, and mounted cornets.
Organs began to be built in concert halls (such as the organ at the Palais du Trocadéro in Paris), and composers such as Camille Saint-Saëns and Gustav Mahler used the organ in their orchestral works.
Because sound does not project from a chamber into the room as clearly as from a freestanding organ case, enchambered organs may sound muffled and distant.
A pipe organ with "great leaden pipes" was sent to the West by the Byzantine emperor Constantine V as a gift to Pepin the Short, King of the Franks, in 757.
Most organs have multiple ranks of pipes of differing timbre, pitch, and volume that the player can employ singly or in combination through the use of controls called stops.
Connection is achieved through a series of rods called trackers.
The Echo division began to be enclosed in the early 18th century, and in 1712 Abraham Jordan claimed his "swelling organ" at St Magnus-the-Martyr to be a new invention.
In isolated, extreme cases, some stops have been voiced on .
These practices created a warmer, richer sound than was common in the 18th century.
The Greek engineer Ctesibius of Alexandria is credited with inventing the organ in the 3rd century BC.
This allowed a lighter touch, and more flexibility in the location of the console, within a 50-foot (15-m) limit.
The most common method of controlling the louvers is the balanced swell pedal.
The divisions of the organ became visibly discernible from the case design.
The difference in water level is proportional to the difference in pressure between the wind being measured and the atmosphere.
The ''French Classical Organ'', became remarkably consistent throughout France over the course of the Baroque era, more so than any other style of organ building in history, and standardized registrations developed.
Pepin's son Charlemagne requested a similar organ for his chapel in Aachen in 812, beginning the pipe organ's establishment in Western church music.
This coupler is a unison coupler, because it causes the pipes of the Swell division to sound at the same pitch as the keys played on the Great manual.
The electronic organ developed throughout the 20th century.
Its portability made the portative useful for the accompaniment of both sacred and secular music in a variety of settings.
This provides a "breakaway" feel.
More modern stop selectors, used for electric actions, are tilting tablets or rocker tabs.
The pistons may be ''divisional'' (affecting only a single division) or ''general'' (affecting all the divisions), and are either preset by the organ builder or can be altered by the organist.
20th-century musicologists labelled this the ''Werkprinzip''.
In the late 20th century, organ builders began to incorporate digital components into their key, stop, and combination actions.
Most organs, both new and historic, have electric blowers, although others can still be operated manually.
Organ pipes are divided into flue pipes and reed pipes according to their design and timbre.
Frequently the organ is given a soloistic part, such as in Joseph Jongen's ''Symphonie Concertante for Organ & Orchestra'', Francis Poulenc's ''Concerto for Organ, Strings and Tympani'', and Frigyes Hidas' Organ Concerto.
Sacred organ music was based on chorales: composers such as Samuel Scheidt and Heinrich Scheidemann wrote chorale preludes, chorale fantasias, and chorale motets.
Each stop usually controls one rank of pipes, although mixtures and undulating stops (such as the Voix céleste) control multiple ranks.
Special unpitched stops also appear in some organs.
The label on a stop knob or rocker tab indicates the stop’s name and its pitch in feet.
As a result, a greater force was required to overcome the wind pressure and depress the keys.
An action connects the keyboards to the pipes.
The case blends the organ's sound and aids in projecting it into the room.
Sweelinck in particular developed a rich collection of keyboard figuration that influenced subsequent composers.
Widor and Vierne wrote large-scale, multi-movement works called ''organ symphonies'' that exploited the full possibilities of the symphonic organ.
English organs evolved from small one- or two-manual instruments into three or more divisions disposed in the French manner with grander reeds and mixtures.
In this case, the full rank of pipes (now an ''extended rank'') is one octave longer than the keyboard.
A key action which physically connects the keys and the windchests is a mechanical or tracker action.
It was elaborately described by Dom Bédos de Celles in his treatise ''L'art du facteur d'orgues'' (''The Art of Organ Building'').
The primary type of free-form piece in this period was the praeludium, as exemplified in the works of Matthias Weckmann, Nicolaus Bruhns, Böhm, and Buxtehude.
When a key is depressed, the key action admits wind into a pipe.
Coupling allows stops from different divisions to be combined to create various tonal effects.
As silent films became popular, theatre organs were installed in theatres to provide accompaniment for the films.
As one pipe produces a single pitch, multiple pipes are necessary to accommodate the musical scale.
The pipes produce sound when pressurized air produced by the wind system passes through them.
Schnitger's organs featured particularly distinctive reed timbres and large Pedal and Rückpositiv divisions.
Organ builders fashioned stops that imitated various instruments, such as the krummhorn and the viola da gamba.
Towards the end of the Baroque era, George Frideric Handel composed the first organ concertos.
An organ may also have a similar-looking crescendo pedal, found alongside any expression pedals.
Most countries tend to use only their own languages for stop nomenclature.
Playing the organ before electricity required at least one person to operate the bellows.
An organ contains two actions, or systems of moving parts.
A pipe organ contains one or more sets of pipes, a wind system, and one or more keyboards.
To solve this problem, Cavaillé-Coll configured the English "Barker lever" to assist in operating the key action.
In addition, larger organs may use ''unison off'' couplers, which prevent the stops pulled in a particular division from sounding at their normal pitch.
Regulation adjusts the action so that all pipes sound correctly.
Builders such as Arp Schnitger, Jasper Johannsen, Zacharias Hildebrandt and Gottfried Silbermann constructed instruments that were in themselves artistic masterpieces, displaying both exquisite craftsmanship and beautiful sound.
By the 17th century, most of the sounds available on the modern classical organ had been developed.
Sometimes the shades are exposed, but they are often concealed behind a row of facade-pipes or a grill.
Max Reger and Sigfrid Karg-Elert's symphonic works made use of the abilities of the large Romantic organs being built in Germany at the time.
