Local buses connect the city of Pisa with all the neighboring cities (come to Pontedera, then take a bus for Volterra, San Miniato, etc.).
It houses works by Jacopo da Empoli, Taddeo Gaddi and Santi di Tito.
*'''San Frediano''': This ancient church built by 1061, has a basilica interior with three aisles, with a crucifix from the 12th century.
These had the power to ratify the laws of the Major General Council and the Senate.
Pisa experiences a borderline humid subtropical (''Cfa'') and Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification ''Csa''), since only a single month receives less than .
*'''San Nicola''': This ancient church built by 1097, was enlarged between 1297 and 1313 by the Augustinians, perhaps by the design of Giovanni Pisano.
One year later the two cities signed a peace treaty which resulted in favourable conditions for Pisa.
This defeat ended the maritime power of Pisa and the town never fully recovered: in 1290 the Genoese destroyed forever the Porto Pisano (Pisa's Port), and covered the land with salt.
The war began presumably in 1165 on the Rhône, when an attack on a convoy, directed to some Pisan trade centres on the river, by the Genoese and their ally, the count of Toulouse failed.
Noteworthy are also the wood sculptures by Giovanni and Nino Pisano, and the Annunciation by Francesco di Valdambrino.
This extreme measure was only removed in 1257.
The edifice was erected in 1559 by Baccio Bandinelli for Cosimo I de Medici, and was later enlarged including other palaces.
It is annexed to the Romanesque Chapel of St. Agatha, with an unusual pyramidal cusp or peak.
The region around Pisa did not permit the city to recover from the loss of thousands of sailors from the Meloria, while Liguria guaranteed enough sailors to Genoa.
It houses a bust by Donatello, and paintings by Vasari, Jacopo Ligozzi, Alessandro Fei, and Pontormo.
Victory or defeat was immensely important to the team players and their partisans, but sometimes the game was fought to a draw and both sides celebrated.
Pisa was the birthplace of the important early physicist Galileo Galilei.
In 1935 Vittorio Emanuele III with the royal family witnessed  the first revival of a modern version of the game, which has been pursued in the 20th and 21st centuries with some interruptions and varying degrees of enthusiasm by Pisans and their civic institutions.
The struggle was limited to forty-five minutes.
Pisa is a one-hour drive from Florence ().
This was simply a confirmation of the present situation, because in those years the marquis had already been excluded from power.
The interior shows frescoes boasting Pisa's sea victories.
At that time, the city was a very important commercial centre and controlled a significant Mediterranean merchant fleet and navy.
Remarkably, there are at least two other leaning towers in the city, one at the southern end of central , the other halfway through the  riverside promenade.
It has been closed on 15 December 2013 for the realization of a people mover.
In the Gherardesca Chapel are buried Ugolino della Gherardesca and his sons.
The origin of the name, Pisa, is a mystery.
In the 12th century the Pisan quarter in the Eastern part of Constantinople had grown to 1,000 people.
*: The botanical garden of the University of Pisa is Europe's oldest university botanical garden.
Francis''': The church of San Francesco may have been designed by Giovanni di Simone, built after 1276.
Later, the trading posts in Sicily were lost when the new Pope Innocent III, though removing the excommunication cast over Pisa by his predecessor Celestine III, allied himself with the Guelph League of Tuscany, led by Florence.
It includes the Gothic-Romanesque church of ''San Michele in Borgo'' (990).
Virgil, in his ''Aeneid'', states that Pisa was already a great center by the times described; the settlers from the Alpheus coast have been credited with the founding of the city in the 'Etruscan lands'.
In 1180 the two cities agreed to a non-aggression treaty in the Tyrrhenian and the Adriatic, but the death of Emperor Manuel Comnenus in Constantinople changed the situation.
The participants wore quilted armor and the only offensive weapon allowed was the ''targone'', a shield-shaped, stout board with precisely specified dimensions.
When in 1494 Charles VIII of France invaded the Italian states to claim the Kingdom of Naples, Pisa grabbed the opportunity to reclaim its independence as the Second Pisan Republic.
One year later he excommunicated Frederick II and called for an anti-Empire council to be held in Rome in 1241.
It suffered repeated destruction during World War II.
Here Galileo Galilei showed to Grand Duke of Tuscany the planets he had discovered with his telescope.
It had originally a single nave; two more were added in the 17th century.
The object of the two opposing teams was to penetrate, drive back, and disperse the opponents' ranks and to thereby drive them backwards off the bridge.
It has a single nave and a notable belfry, as well as a 15th-century cloister.
*: The palace is a Gothic building also known as , with its 15th-century façade and remains of the ancient city walls dating back to before 1155.
In the following naval battle they were defeated by the Venetians.
*: The ("Royal Palace"), once belonged to the Caetani patrician family.
Strabo referred Pisa's origins to the mythical Nestor, king of Pylos, after the fall of Troy.
The maritime role of Pisa should have been already prominent if the ancient authorities ascribed to it the invention of the naval ram.
This transitional climate keeps Pisa from enjoying a summer devoid of rain, typical of Central and Southern Italy, as occasional showers disturb the drier summer.
Furthermore, in the 15th century, access to the sea became more and more difficult, as the port was silting up and was cut off from the sea.
The area is framed by medieval walls kept by municipality administration.
In 1409 Pisa was the seat of a council trying to set the question of the Great Schism.
The gold treasure taken from the Saracens in Palermo allowed the Pisans to start the building of their cathedral and the other monuments which constitute the famous .
Soon there were attacks on Venetian convoys.
In 1927 the tradition was revived by college students as an elaborate costume parade.
But in 1199 the Pisans violated it by blockading the port of Brindisi in Apulia.
Pisa signed trade and political pacts with Ancona, Pula, Zara, Split and Brindisi: in 1195 a Pisan fleet reached Pola to defend its independence from Venice, but the Serenissima managed soon to reconquer the rebel sea town.
Paintings from the 16th century were added during a restoration, including works by Ventura Salimbeni, Domenico Passignano, Aurelio Lomi, and Rutilio Manetti.
Pisa took advantage of being the only port along the western coast from Genoa (then a small village) to Ostia.
In 89 BC,  became a municipium.
In 1238 Pope Gregory IX formed an alliance between Genoa and Venice against the empire, and consequently against Pisa too.
A twenty-year peace treaty was signed.
From that point on the two cities were united against the rising power of Genoa and sometimes collaborated to increase the trading benefits in Constantinople.
In 970 they gave also strong support to the Otto&nbsp;I's expedition, defeating a Byzantine fleet in front of Calabrese coasts.
Sited on the square
In 1017 Sardinian Giudicati were militarily supported by Pisa, in alliance with Genoa, to defeat the Saracen King Mugahid who had settled a logistic base in the north of Sardinia the year before.
In the 7th century Pisa helped Pope Gregory&nbsp;I by supplying numerous ships in his military expedition against the Byzantines of Ravenna: Pisa was the sole Byzantine centre of Tuscia to fall peacefully in Lombard hands, through assimilation with the neighbouring region where their trading interests were prevailing.
In Pisa there was a festival and game '':fr:Gioco del Ponte'' (Game of the Bridge) which was celebrated (in some form) in Pisa from perhaps the 1200s down to 1807.
The  also houses the  (the Cathedral), the Baptistry and the  (the monumental cemetery).
This was much appreciated by Frederick I.
In 828 Pisan ships assaulted the coast of North Africa.
All the complex is kept by the ''Opera (fabrica ecclesiae) della Primaziale Pisana'', an old non profit foundation that operates since the building of the Cathedral (1063) to the maintenance of the sacred buildings.
Goods however continued to be traded, albeit in reduced quantity, but the end came when the River Arno started to change course, preventing the galleys from reaching the city's port up the river.
It is still the seat of an archbishopric.
In all these cities the Pisans were granted privileges and immunity from taxation, but had to contribute to the defence in case of attack.
While the bell tower of the Cathedral, known as "the leaning Tower of Pisa", is the most famous image of the city, it is one of many works of art and architecture in the city's , also known, since the 20th century, as  (Square of Miracles), to the north of the old town center.
The war continued until 1175 without significant victories.
*'''Medici Palace''': The palace was once a possession of the Appiano family, who ruled Pisa in 1392–1398.
Pisa's trade with the Languedoc and Provence (Noli, Savona, Fréjus and Montpellier) were an obstacle to the Genoese interests in cities like Hyères, Fos, Antibes and Marseille.
and tried to defy the Venetian rule of the Adriatic Sea.
The paintings include the ''Madonna with Child'' by Francesco Traini (14th century) and ''St.
The Pisan victory helped to consolidate its position in the Mediterranean.
In 1343 new chapels were added and the church was elevated.
The ''Società del Tiro a Segno'' di Pisa was founded on July 9, 1862.
The Virgilian commentator Servius wrote that the Teuti, or Pelops, the king of the Pisaeans, founded the town thirteen centuries before the start of the common era.
Anyway, the Tuscan city tried to take advantage of the favourable situation to conquer the Corsican city of Aleria and even lay siege to Genoa itself in 1243.
It also contains spoils from the many naval battles between the Cavalieri (Knights of St. Stephan) and the Turks between the 16th and 18th centuries, including the Turkish battle pennant hoisted from Ali Pacha's flagship at the 1571 Battle of Lepanto.
In June 1135, Bernard of Clairvaux took a leading part in the Council of Pisa, asserting the claims of pope Innocent II against those of pope Anacletus II, who had been elected pope in 1130 with Norman support but was not recognised outside Rome.
The presence of an Etruscan necropolis, discovered during excavations in the  in 1991, confirmed its Etruscan origins.
*'''Santo Stefano dei Cavalieri''': Church sited on Piazza dei Cavalieri, and also designed by Vasari.
But when in 1220 the emperor Frederick II confirmed his supremacy over the Tyrrhenian coast from Civitavecchia to Portovenere, the Genoese and Tuscan resentment against Pisa grew again.
Politically it became part of the duchy of Lucca.
The strong Ghibelline position of Pisa brought this town diametrically against the Pope, who was in a strong dispute with the Empire.
One can also get a train directly to Florence from a Central rail station in Pisa (Pisa Centrale).
In 1092 Pope Urban II awarded Pisa the supremacy over Corsica and Sardinia, and at the same time raising the town to the rank of archbishopric.
On May 3, 1241, a combined fleet of Pisan and Sicilian ships, led by the Emperor's son Enzo, attacked a Genoese convoy carrying prelates from Northern Italy and France, next to the isle of Giglio (''Battle of Giglio''), in front of Tuscany: the Genoese lost 25 ships, while about thousand sailors, two cardinals and one bishop were taken prisoner.
In 860, Pisa was captured by vikings led by Björn Ironside.
Four years later Pisan and Genoese ships helped Alfonso VI of Castilla to push El Cid out of Valencia.
It was used as a seat of the most important notarial deeds of the town, also hosting the Council of Elders.
Since the early 1950s the US Army has maintained Camp Darby just outside Pisa which is used by many US military personnel as a base for vacations in the area.
In 871 they took part in the defence of Salerno from the Saracens.
In 1192, Pisa managed to conquer Messina.
*'''San Paolo a Ripa d'Arno''': The church was founded around 952 and enlarged in the mid-12th century along lines similar to those of the cathedral.
The two cities fought each other on land and at sea, but hostilities were limited to raids and pirate-like assaults.
Taxis come when requested from Pisa International Airport and Central Station.
Construction of a new leaning tower of glass and steel 57 meters tall, containing offices and apartments was scheduled to start in summer 2004 and take 4 years.
Though short-lived, this success of Pisa in Spain increased the rivalry with Genoa.
And indeed the pope tried to deprive the town of its dominions in northern Sardinia.
When the Pisans subsequently ousted the Genoese from Sardinia, a new conflict and rivalry was born between these mighty marine republics.
The city is characterized by mild winters and very warm summers.
The name of the building comes from the coffee rooms of , historic meeting place founded on September 1, 1775.
Another point of attrition was Sicily, where both the cities had privileges granted by Henry VI.
For that they were suspected of treachery and Paolo was put to death.
Pisa acquired a mainly cultural role spurred by the presence of the University of Pisa, created in 1343, and later reinforced by the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa (1810) and Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies (1987).
Emperor Augustus fortified the colony into an important port and changed the name in .
In 1060 Pisa had to engage in their first battle with Genoa.
Soon he stipulated a pact with Genoa too, further weakening the Pisan presence in Southern Italy.
Nicholas Saving Pisa from the Plague'' (15th century).
In spite of these reforms, the conquered lands and the city itself were harassed by the rivalry between the two families of Della Gherardesca and Visconti.
During the later years of the Roman Empire, Pisa did not decline as much as the other cities of Italy, probably thanks to the complexity of its river system and its consequent ease of defence.
*: This palace is a 14th-century Gothic building, and now houses the offices of the municipality.
Pisa could then, unhindered by Genoa, participate in the conflict of Innocent II against king Roger II of Sicily.
In 930 Pisa became the county centre (status it maintained until the arrival of Otto I) within the mark of Tuscia.
In 1003 Pisa was the protagonist of the first communal war in Italy, against Lucca.
It expanded its powers in 1005 through the sack of  in the south of Italy.
The clash with Lucca also concerned the possession of the castle of Montignoso and mainly the control of the , the main trade route between Rome and France.
However resources of Pisa were getting low and, at the end, the city was sold to Visconti family from Milan and eventually to Florence again.
Pope Gregory VII recognised in 1077 the new "Laws and customs of the sea" instituted by the Pisans, and emperor Henry IV granted them the right to name their own consuls, advised by a Council of Elders.
In 180 BC, it became a Roman colony under Roman law, as .
Besides its educational institutions; it has become a light industrial centre and a railway hub.
Pisa began in this way its rise to the role of main port of the Upper Tyrrhenian Sea and became the main trading centre between Tuscany and Corsica, Sardinia and the southern coasts of France and Spain.
Lucca was the capital but Pisa was the most important city, as in the middle of 10th century Liutprand of Cremona, bishop of Cremona, called Pisa  ("capital of the province of Tuscia"), and one century later the marquis of Tuscia was commonly referred to as "marquis of Pisa".
Between 1030 and 1035, Pisa went on to defeat several rival towns in Sicily and conquer Carthage in North Africa.
*'''San Pietro in Vinculis''': The church ''St Peter in Chains'', known as ''San Pierino'', is an 11th-century church with a crypt and a cosmatesque mosaic on the floor of the main nave.
*'''Santa Maria della Spina''': This small white marble church alongside the Arno, is attributed to Lupo di Francesco (1230), is another excellent Gothic building.
In 1237 the archbishop and the Emperor Frederick II intervened to reconcile the two rivals, but the strains did not cease.
They marked the apex of Pisa's power, but also spurred the resentment of cities like Lucca, Massa, Volterra and Florence, who saw their aim to expand towards the sea thwarted.
After this outstanding victory the council in Rome failed, but Pisa was excommunicated.
Much of the city's architecture was financed from its history as one of the Italian maritime republics.
Two years later its soldiers sacked Salerno.
On their way to the Holy Land the ships did not miss the occasion to sack some Byzantine islands: the Pisan crusaders were led by their archbishop Daibert, the future patriarch of Jerusalem.
This victory gave Pisa supremacy in the Tyrrhenian Sea.
But the new freedom did not last long.
From the naval point of view, since the 9th century the emergence of the Saracen pirates urged the city to expand its fleet: in the following years this fleet gave the town an opportunity for more expansion.
Pisa sacked the Tunisian city of Mahdia in 1088.
They also had other possessions in Jerusalem and Caesarea, plus smaller colonies (with lesser autonomy) in Cairo, Alexandria and of course Constantinople, where the Byzantine Emperor Alexius I Comnenus granted them special mooring and trading rights.
*: This medieval borgo or neighborhood contains strolling arcades and the ''Lungarno'', the avenues along the river Arno.
In 1063 admiral Giovanni Orlando, coming to the aid of the Norman Roger I, took Palermo from the Saracen pirates.
In 1051–1052 the admiral Jacopo Ciurini conquered Corsica, provoking more resentment from the Genoese.
Always Ghibelline, Pisa tried to build up its power in the course of the 14th century and even managed to defeat Florence in the Battle of Montecatini (1315), under the command of Uguccione della Faggiuola.
Although Pisa is known worldwide for its leaning tower (the bell tower of the city's cathedral), the city of over 89,940 residents (around 200,000 with the metropolitan area) contains more than 20 other historic churches, several medieval palaces and various bridges across the River Arno.
For some years of that century Pisa was the most prominent merchant and military ally of the Byzantine Empire, overcoming Venice itself.
In the following years Pisa clashed with Lucca in Garfagnana and was defeated by the Florentines at Castel del Bosco.
Ancient Roman authors referred to Pisa as an old city.
The system with consuls was abandoned and in 1230 the new city rulers named a ''Capitano del Popolo'' ("People's Chieftain") as civil and military leader.
In the following years Pisa was one of the staunchest supporters of the Ghibelline party.
The war that followed ended in 1206 with a treaty in which Pisa gave up all its hopes to expand in the Adriatic, though it maintained the trading posts it had established in the area.
He issued in 1162 and 1165 two important documents, with the following grants: apart from the jurisdiction over the Pisan countryside, the Pisans were granted freedom of trade in the whole Empire, the coast from Civitavecchia to Portovenere, a half of Palermo, Messina, Salerno and Naples, the whole of Gaeta, Mazara and Trapani, and a street with houses for its merchants in every city of the Kingdom of Sicily.
Amalfi, one of the Maritime Republics (though already declining under Norman rule), was conquered on August 6, 1136: the Pisans destroyed the ships in the port, assaulted the castles in the surrounding areas and drove back an army sent by Roger from Aversa.
It is said that the decline began on August 6, 1284, when the numerically superior fleet of Pisa, under the command of Albertino Morosini, was defeated by the brilliant tactics of the Genoese fleet, under the command of Benedetto Zaccaria and Oberto Doria, in the dramatic naval Battle of Meloria.
The medieval complex includes the above-mentioned four sacred buildings, the hospital and few palaces.
*'''Knights' Square''' (), where the , with its impressive façade designed by Giorgio Vasari may be seen.
It is today one of the best preserved early Romanesque buildings in town.
In particular the Pisans founded colonies in Antiochia, Acre, Jaffa, Tripoli, Tyre, Latakia and Accone.
In 1400 the Medici acquired it, and Lorenzo de' Medici sojourned here.
It was designed by Dante Oscar Benini and raised criticism.
Strabo states that the city was  away from the coast.
Eventually, however, after a long siege, Pisa was occupied by Florentines in 1406: in fact florentines corrupted the ''Capitano del Popolo'' ("People's Chieftain") Giovanni Gambacorta that opened by night the city gate of San Marco.
In 1209 there were in Lerici two councils for a final resolution of the rivalry with Genoa.
'''Pisa''' (; ) is a city in Tuscany, Central Italy, straddling the River Arno just before it empties into the Tyrrhenian Sea.
There were fifteen years of battles and sieges by the Florentine troops led by Antonio da Filicaja, Averardo Salviati and Niccolò Capponi but they never managed to conquer the city.
In 1885, they acquired their own training field.
However it was a maritime city, with ships sailing up the Arno.
After Charlemagne had defeated the Lombards under the command of Desiderius in&nbsp;774, Pisa went through a crisis but soon recovered.
However, due to the alluvial sediments from the Arno and the Serchio, whose mouth lies about  north of the Arno's, the shore moved west.
The true end came in 1324 when Sardinia was entirely lost in favour of the Aragonese.
Innocent II resolved the conflict with Genoa, establishing the sphere of influence of Pisa and Genoa.
There was another station called Pisa Aeroporto situated next to the Airport with services to Pisa Centrale and Florence.
Some of these grants were later confirmed by Henry VI, Otto IV and Frederick II.
Pisa was in continuous conflict with the Saracens, who had their bases in Corsica, for control of the Mediterranean.
Pisa was never conquered by an army.
Two opposing teams started at opposite ends of the bridge.
Pisa and the other  took advantage of the crusade to establish trading posts and colonies in the Eastern coastal cities of the Levant.
A Pisan fleet of 120 ships also took part in the First Crusade and the Pisans were instrumental in the taking of Jerusalem in 1099.
*'''Mural ''': The modern mural is the last public work of Keith Haring, on the rear wall of the convent of the Church of ''Sant'Antonio'', painted in June 1989.
It is supposed that Pisa was founded on the shore.
Parking: Pratale (San Jacopo), Pietrasantina (Via Pietrasantina), Piazza Carrara, Lungarni.
It is the capital city of the Province of Pisa.
Archaeological remains from the 5th century BC confirmed the existence of a city at the sea, trading with Greeks and Gauls.
Shooting was one of the first sports to have their own association in Pisa.
In the 90s AD, a baths complex was built in the city.
The war began in 1119 when the Genoese attacked several galleys on their way to the motherland, and lasted until 1133.
Last but not least, such a sudden and large increase of power by Pisa could only lead to another war with Genoa.
Its role of major port of Tuscany went to Livorno.
From the end of the 1400s the game took the form of a mock battle fought upon Pisa's central bridge (''Ponte di Mezzo'').
The shooting range was almost completely destroyed during World War II.
This episode was followed by a series of battles culminating in the Genoese conquest of Syracuse in 1204.
The city is also home of the University of Pisa, which has a history going back to the 12th century and also has the mythic Napoleonic Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa and Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies as the best sanctioned Superior Graduate Schools in Italy.
Genoa had acquired a largely dominant position in the markets of Southern France.
The great expansion in the Mediterranean and the prominence of the merchant class urged a modification in the city's institutes.
Other interesting sights include:
