In 2005, 2009, and 2011, Pittsburgh was named the most livable city in the United States and in those years, between the 26th- and 29th-most livable cities worldwide by ''The Economist''.
In 1986, UPMC announced a $230 million ($ today) modernization.
For part of the 20th century, Pittsburgh was behind only New York and Chicago in corporate headquarters employment; it had the most U.S. stockholders per capita.
The city rebuilt with the aid of Irish immigrants and by 1857, Pittsburgh's 1,000 factories were consuming 22 million coal bushels yearly.
Independent student-written university-based newspapers include ''The Pitt News'' of the University of Pittsburgh, ''The Tartan'' of Carnegie Mellon University, ''The Duquesne Duke'' of Duquesne University, and ''The Globe'' of Point Park University.
Golf legends Arnold Palmer, Jim Furyk, and Rocco Mediate learned the game and began their careers on Pittsburgh area courses.
The major network television affiliates are KDKA-TV 2 (CBS), WTAE 4 (ABC), WPXI 11 (NBC), WPGH-TV 53 (Fox), WPCW 19 (CW), WINP-TV 16 (Ion), WPNT 22 (MyNetworkTV), and WPCB 40 (Cornerstone).
Many punk rock and Hardcore punk acts, such as Aus Rotten and Anti-Flag, originated in Pittsburgh.
In the metro Pittsburgh area live more than 200,000 Croatian descendants.
European pioneers, primarily Dutch, followed in the early 18th century.
Pittsburgh has hosted INPEX, the world's largest invention trade show annually since 1984, Tekko since 2003, Anthrocon since 2006, and DUG East energy trade show since 2009.
In 1901, Carnegie merged several companies into U.S. Steel.
Many Pittsburgh neighborhoods are steeply sloped with two-lane roads.
Pittsburgh's Wiz Khalifa is a recent artist to have a number one record.
During the late 2000s recession, Pittsburgh was economically strong, adding jobs when most cities were losing them.
In 1984, Allegheny General surgeons pioneered modern brain surgery.
Most significantly, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is embarking on RiverParc, a four-block mixed-use "green" community, featuring 700 residential units and multiple towers between 20 and 30 stories.
This compares to the nationwide average of $1,087.
The Duquesne University Red Masquers, founded in 1912, are the oldest, continuously producing theater company in Pennsylvania.
Perry Como and Christina Aguilera are from Pittsburgh suburbs.
The National Negro Opera Company was founded in the city as the first all African-American opera company in the United States.
The American Civil War boosted the city's economy with increased iron and armament demand.
The nonprofit arts and cultural industry in Allegheny County generates $341 million in economic activity that supports over 10,000 full-time equivalent jobs with nearly $34 million in local and state taxes raised.
Pittsburgh Dance Council and the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater host a variety of dance events.
Oakland, the South Side, the North Side, and the Golden Triangle are characterized by more density of housing, walking neighborhoods, and a more diverse, urban feel.
The Duquesne Incline is operated by a non-profit preservation trust, but accepts Port Authority passes and charges Port Authority fares.
The global impact of Pittsburgh technology and business was recently demonstrated in several key components of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner being manufactured and supplied by area companies.
The Ed Debartolo owned Pittsburgh Maulers featured a Heisman Trophy winner in the mid-1980s, former superstar University of Nebraska running back Mike Rozier.
A National Bureau of Economic Research 2014 report named Pittsburgh the second-best U.S. city for intergenerational economic mobility or the American Dream.
They are elected from single-member districts.
By 1797, glass manufacture began, while the population grew to around 1,400.
Unrest during the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794 resulted in federal troops being sent to the area.
Much of her memoir An American Childhood takes place in post-World War II Pittsburgh.
Pittsburgh Panthers women's basketball has qualified for 14 post season tournaments (including 4 NCAA tournaments) and boasts of 5 All-Americans selected 6 times with 3 WNBA players.
in nearby Latrobe, Carnegie, Jennerstown, Trafford, and Greensburg, respectively, employ Pittsburgh actors and contribute to the culture of the region.
British General Edward Braddock was dispatched with Major George Washington as his aide to take Fort Duquesne.
The president of city council is Bruce Kraus.
In Pittsburghese one would say "the car needs washed" instead of "needs to be washed," "needs washing," or "needs a wash." The dialect has some tonal similarities to other nearby regional dialects of Erie and Baltimore, but is noted for its somewhat staccato rhythms.
Average 2010 rent for all bedrooms in Pittsburgh was $789.
Dr. Starzl arranged the 1985 liver transplant of 5 year old Amie Garrison as a UPMC surgery team flew to Baylor University, starting its transplant program.
Ice skating rinks are enjoyed at PPG Place and North Park.
Pittsburgh has one of the largest Italian-American communities in the nation, the fifth-largest Ukrainian community, and the largest Croatian community in the USA.
Pittsburgh has adapted since the collapse of its century-long steel and electronics industries.
Pittsburgh falls within the borders of Appalachia as defined by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and has long been characterized as the "northern urban industrial anchor of Appalachia."
The Senator John Heinz History Center and Western Pennsylvania Sports Museum is a Smithsonian affiliated regional history museum located in the Strip District and its associated Fort Pitt Museum is located in Point State Park.
News and World Report's'' "Honor Roll" every year since 2000.
Livability rankings typically consider factors such as cost of living, crime, and cultural opportunities.
Pittsburgh's unique literary style extends to playwrights, as well as local graffiti and hip hop artists.
Fort Pitt (now Pittsburgh) at the source of the Ohio River became the main base for settlers moving into the Northwest Territory.
An analyst recently observed of the city's medical sector: "That's both more jobs and a higher share of the region's total employment than the steel industry represented in the 1970s."
Pittsburgh also became a main destination of the African-American Great Migration from the rural South during the first half of the 20th century.
The 2010 census ranked 18 other U.S. metros as having greater black-white segregation, while 32 other U.S. metros rank higher for black-white isolation.
According to a 2010 ARDA study, residents include 773,341 "Catholics"; 326,125 "Mainline Protestants"; 174,119 "Evangelical Protestants;" 20,976 "Black Protestants;" and 16,405 "Orthodox Christians," with 996,826 listed as "unclaimed" and 16,405 as "other" in the metro area.
Pittsburgh has the most bars per capita in the nation.
Local public schools include many charter and magnet schools, including City Charter High School (computer and technology focused), Pittsburgh Montessori School (formerly Homewood Montessori), Pittsburgh Gifted Center, Barack Obama Academy of International Studies 6-12, Pittsburgh Creative and Performing Arts 6–12, Pittsburgh Science and Technology Academy, the Western Pennsylvania School for Blind Children, and the Western Pennsylvania School for the Deaf.
The Pittsburgh English dialect, commonly called ''Pittsburghese'', was influenced by Scots-Irish, Welsh, German, Central European, and Eastern European immigrants.
WESCO International|
The $130 million ($ today) 350,000 sq.
The coldest month is January, when the 24-hour average is , and lows of  or below can be expected on an average 2.6 nights per year.
In April 2014, Niche rated Pittsburgh the 15th best city for millennials.
The nation's fifth-largest bank, eight Fortune 500 companies, and six of the top 300 US law firms make their global headquarters in the Pittsburgh area, while RAND, BNY Mellon, Nova, FedEx, Bayer and NIOSH have regional bases that helped Pittsburgh become the sixth-best area for U.S. job growth.
Officially, record temperatures range from , on January 19, 1994 to , which occurred three times, most recently on July 16, 1988; the record cold daily maximum is , which occurred three times, most recently the day of the all-time record low, while, conversely, the record warm daily minimum is  on July 1, 1901.
KDKA-TV, WPCW, WINP-TV, and WPCB are network owned-and-operated stations.
It is considered the birthplace of the national Republican Party, as the party held its first convention here in February 1856.
The city also has an extensive library system, both public and university.
Duquesne, Carnegie Mellon University, and Washington & Jefferson College all posted major bowl games and AP Poll rankings from the 1920s to the 1940s as that era's equivalent of Top 25 FBS programs.
The area has four distinct seasons: winters are cold, cloudy, and moderately snowy, springs and falls generally mild with moderate levels of sunshine, and summers warm to hot and humid.
Many buildings date from the 19th century and are constructed of brick or stone and adorned with decorative woodwork, ceramic tile, slate roofs and stained glass.
Crimes of a federal nature are covered by the  U.S. Attorney for Western Pennsylvania.
The Civic Arena also hosted the Championship Tournament for the Eastern Eight Conference from 1978 until 1982.
The first military hospital in U.S. history as well as the first west of the Atlantic Plain—General Edward Hand Hospital—served the area from 1777 to 1845.
The city extends east to include the Oakland and Shadyside sections, which are home to the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, Chatham University, Carnegie Museum and Library, and many other educational, medical, and cultural institutions.
* Mylan Classic 2010–2013
Amateurs (8) have also called Oakmont home.
The NHL's Pittsburgh Penguins have played in Pittsburgh since the team's founding in 1967.
The North Side is also home to many popular attractions such as Heinz Field, PNC Park, Carnegie Science Center, National Aviary, Andy Warhol Museum, Mattress Factory installation art museum, Children's Museum of Pittsburgh,  Randyland, Highmark SportsWorks, Penn Brewery, and Allegheny Observatory.
His anthem "Black and Yellow" (a tribute to Pittsburgh's official colors) reached number one on Billboard's "Hot 100" for the Week of February 19, 2011 Not since Grammy-winning blues guitarist George Benson  has a Pittsburgh artist received such national acclaim.
Pitt is ranked as the 20th national public university by ''US News & World Report'' and 62nd overall, and is known for the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs, University of Pittsburgh School of Information Sciences, Swanson School of Engineering, University of Pittsburgh College of Business Administration, University of Pittsburgh School of Law, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Social Work, and other biomedical and health-related sciences.
The region is a hub for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, sustainable energy, and energy extraction.
A month later, ''Forbes'' named Pittsburgh the 7th best place to raise a family.
The city was listed among the 10 best U.S. places to retire in 2012 by ''CBS Money Watch'' and ''U.S.
Conditions are often humid, and combined with highs reaching  on an average 9.5&nbsp;days a year, a considerable heat index arises.
Both Duquesne and Robert Morris also have competitive Division I women's basketball programs.
Allegheny City merged with Pittsburgh under great protest from its citizens.
The West End includes Mt.
The value of homes in the South Side has increased in value by about 10% annually for the past 10 years.
Rogers' Neighborhood'', several National Geographic specials, and ''Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?''
The Pittsburgh Passion has been the city's professional women's football team since 2002 and plays its home games at Highmark Stadium.
The Allegheny County Sheriff focuses on jail and courthouse security.
New condo towers have been constructed and historic office towers are converted to residential use, increasing 24-hour residents.
The ''Pittsburgh Dad'' series has showcased the Pittsburghese genre to a global YouTube audience since 2011.
Due to elevation and location on the windward side of the Appalachian Mountains, + readings are very rare, and were last seen on July 15, 1995.
The Allegheny County Police primarily patrols county-owned parks and airports, while providing detective/investigatory functions for smaller suburbs and the Port Authority police patrols rapid transit.
The Strip District to the west along the Allegheny River is an open-air marketplace by day and a clubbing destination by night.
Residents living near smaller tributary streams are less protected from occasional flooding, and the cost of a comprehensive flood control program for the region has been estimated at a prohibitive $50 billion.
U.S. Steel Tower is the tallest at 841&nbsp;ft (256 m).
Pitt has won 13 conference titles, qualified for the NCAA tournament 25 times including a post season tournament every season since 1999–2000 and regularly sells out the Petersen Events Center.
Non-Hispanic Whites were 64.8% of the population in 2010, compared to 78.7% in 1970.
The Cathedral of Learning's Nationality Rooms showcase pre-19th century learning environments from around the world.
UPMC officially adopted in Erie, Pennsylvania's Hamot Medical Center in 2010.
News of the team has preempted news of elections and other events and are more than a sports team to the region and its diaspora.
The "crosstown" is Interstate 579 allowing access to the heart of downtown, the Liberty Tunnels and the CONSOL Energy Center.
Pittsburgh is represented in the Pennsylvania General Assembly by three Senate Districts (Randy Vulakovich (R)-38, Wayne D. Fontana (D)-42, and Jay Costa (D)-43) and nine House Districts (Jake Wheatley-19, Adam Ravenstahl-20, Dom Costa-21, Erin Molchany-22, Dan Frankel-23, Ed Gainey-24, Dan Deasy-27, Paul Costa-34, and Harry Readshaw-36).
CMU is globally respected for its School of Computer Science, College of Engineering, School of Business, Heinz College, College of Fine Arts, writing, social and decision sciences, information systems, statistics, and psychology programs.
This heritage left the area with renowned museums, medical centers, parks, research centers, libraries, a diverse cultural district and the most bars per capita in the U.S.
The city developed as a vital link of the Atlantic coast and Midwest.
Also in 1985, UPMC surgeons Drs.
In terms of annual percent-average possible sunshine received, Pittsburgh (45%) is similar to Seattle (43%).
These include downtown's PNC Financial Services, PPG Industries, U.S. Steel, The Kraft Heinz Company, WESCO International, and the Findlay Township, Pennsylvania based Dick's Sporting Goods.
WQED 13 is the local PBS station in Pittsburgh.
General John Forbes finally took the forks in 1758.
Local universities Duquesne and Robert Morris have loyal fan bases that follow their lower (FCS) teams.
The Steelers have been owned by the Rooney family since the team's founding in 1933, show consistency in coaching (only three coaches since the 1960s all with the same basic philosophy) and are noted as one of sports' most respectable franchises.
The Smithfield Street Bridge was the world's first lenticular truss bridge.
For ozone (smog) pollution, Pittsburgh was ranked 24th among U.S. metro areas.
'', ''Happy's Party'', ''Cappelli & Company'', and ''The Children's Corner'', all nationally broadcast.
United States Steel|
Coal mining and iron manufacturing attracted waves of European immigrants to the area.
Other major employers include BNY Mellon, GlaxoSmithKline, Thermo Fisher Scientific, and Lanxess.
Port Authority runs a network of intracity and intercity bus routes, the Monongahela Incline funicular railway (more commonly known as an "incline") on Mount Washington, a light rail system that runs mostly above-ground in the suburbs and underground as a subway in the city, and one of the nation's largest busway systems.
Since the 1950s the Mayor's Chief of Staff has assumed a large role in advising, long term planning, and as a "gatekeeper" to the mayor.
Like 100 years ago, Pittsburgh is again a hotbed for semi-pro and amateur teams such as the top 50 ranked Junior Penguins, Predators and Viper Stars with the Hornets a top 20 team for the last 7 years.
The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.95.
The South Side is one of the most popular neighborhoods in the city in which to own a home.
The area has become a local Pittsburgher destination.
Point Park University was founded in 1961 and is well known for its Conservatory of Performing Arts and its Pittsburgh Playhouse.
During 1753–54, the British hastily built Fort Prince George before a larger French force drove them off.
The metro area has shown greater residential racial integration during the last 30 years.
The Great Allegheny Passage and Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Towpath connect the city directly to downtown Washington, D.C. (some  away) with a continuous bike/running trail.
Common Pittsburghese terms are: slippy (slippery), redd up (clean up), jagger bush (thorn bush), and gum bands (rubber bands).
The region has shifted to high technology, robotics, health care, nuclear engineering, tourism, biomedical technology, finance, education, and services.
With the exceptions of the 1973 and 1977 elections (where lifelong Democrats ran off the party ticket), Democrats have been elected consecutively to the mayor's office since the 1933 election.
Pittsburgh's rail industry dates to 1851 when the Pennsylvania Railroad first opened service between the city and Philadelphia, the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad entered the city in 1871.
UPMC's Thomas Detre founded the International Society for Bipolar Disorders at a world medical conference in Pittsburgh in 1999.
Port Authority of Allegheny County, commonly known as the Port Authority, but sometimes referred to by its former nickname "PAT" or "PAT Transit", is the region's mass transit system.
It was established on April 1, 1954, and was the first community-sponsored television station and the fifth public station in the United States.
The city's population swelled to over a half million with European immigration via Ellis Island in New York harbor.
The ToonSeum, one of three museums in the US dedicated to cartoon art, is located downtown.
The Firstside portion of downtown borders the Monongahela River, the historic Mon Wharf and is home to the distinctive PPG Place Gothic-style glass skyscraper complex.
It is also home to Point Park University, The Art Institute of Pittsburgh and Duquesne University which borders Uptown.
The largest single employer in that industry is the University of Pittsburgh, with 10,700 employees.
The industrial base continued to expand through the 1970s, but beginning in the early 1980s both the area's steel and electronics industries imploded during national industrial restructuring.
Pittsburgh is home to one of Norfolk Southern Railway's busiest freight corridors, the Pittsburgh Line, and operates up to 70 trains per day through the city.
Hockey survived with the Pittsburgh Hornets farm team (1936–1967) and their seven finals appearances and three championships in 18 playoff seasons; all in an "original six" NHL era with "farm team" talent (especially Calder Cup champions) exceeding the level on most modern day NHL playoff teams.
Pennsylvania State Police Troop B provides patrols for the city and immediate suburbs.
In 2009, the $600 million ($ today) Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC opened.
Education is another major industry in the region.
The  Panhandle Bridge carries the Port Authority's Blue/Red/Brown subway lines across the Monongahela River.
2.3% of Pittsburgh's population was of Hispanic or Latino origin of any race.
PNC Financial Services|
Lord Jeffrey Amherst ordered blankets contaminated from smallpox victims to be distributed in 1763 to the tribes surrounding the fort.
Reflecting the citywide shift from industry to technology, former factories have been renovated as modern office space.
Black or African American
There are two major daily newspapers in Pittsburgh: the ''Pittsburgh Post-Gazette'' and the ''Pittsburgh Tribune-Review''.
The region's readings also reflect pollution swept in from Ohio and West Virginia, though both are outside the jurisdictional powers of local leadership.
By the terms of the 1768 Treaty of Fort Stanwix, the Penns were allowed to purchase the modern region from the Iroquois.
The French and Indian War, the North American front of the Seven Years' War, began with the future Pittsburgh as its center.
Pittsburgh has a long tradition of jazz, blues, and bluegrass music.
Pittsburgh ranked No.
While serving only a portion of the Pittsburgh area (the nation's 20th largest metro area), it is the 11th largest transit agency in the nation and helped the region rank 8th on commuters that use non-car means to work, second to only Chicago in metros outside the Northeast corridor.
The two largest area health care providers are the world-renowned University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) (since 1893) and Allegheny Health Network (since 1882).
The following year, the ''Pittsburgh Post-Gazette'' was started, and in 1787, the Pittsburgh Academy was chartered.
During World War II, demand increased and area mills operated 24 hours a day to produce 95 million tons of steel for the war effort.
The area is home to 68 colleges and universities, including research and development leaders Carnegie Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh.
In a 2013 ranking of 277 metropolitan areas in the United States, the American Lung Association (ALA) ranked only six U.S. metro areas as having higher amounts of short-term particle pollution, and only seven U.S. metro areas having higher amounts of year-round particle pollution than Pittsburgh.
Pittsburgh is home to many colleges, universities and research facilities, the most well-known of which are Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Pittsburgh, and Duquesne University.
The campus was featured in world news in 2012 for several unique approaches to patient care.
Downtown Pittsburgh has 30 skyscrapers, nine of which top .
On average, December and January have the greatest number of precipitation days.
The Cultural District comprises a 14-block area of downtown along the Allegheny River.
During this period, the powerful nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, based in New York, had maintained control of much of the Ohio Valley as hunting grounds by right of conquest after defeating other tribes.
The Northeast U.S. regional headquarters for Chevron Corporation, Nova Chemicals, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, FedEx Ground, Ariba, and the RAND Corporation call the area home.
Pittsburgh International Airport and Arnold Palmer Regional Airport provide commercial passenger service to the metropolitan area.
The War of 1812 cut off the supply of British goods, stimulating American industry.
His successor, Bill Peduto, was sworn in January 6, 2014.
Wiring the brain around spine damage to restore arm and leg muscle function was successful using robotic arms controlled via an embedded computer to translate signals near a small group of neurons with 200 needles.
Other major cities in the northeast and mid-west have increasingly borrowed from Pittsburgh's model in order to renew their industries and economic base.
ft., cancer center.
Annual events continue during the winter months at area ski resorts such as Boyce Park, Seven Springs, Hidden Valley Resort, Laurel Mountain, and Wisp.
Turnpike spurs such as the Mon–Fayette Expressway, Pennsylvania Route 576 and Route 66 also help traffic flow.
East Carson Street has developed as one of the most vibrant areas of the city, packed with diverse shopping, ethnic eateries, vibrant nightlife, and live music venues.
By 1940, non-Hispanic whites were 90.6% of the city's population.
Pittsburgh is one of the few American cities to be spelled with an ''h'' at the end of a ''burg'' suffix.
Pittsburgh also has a rich Negro League history, with the former Pittsburgh Crawfords and the Homestead Grays credited with as many as 14 league titles and 11 Hall of Famers between them in the 1930s and 1940s, while the Keystones fielded teams in the 1920s.
During Pontiac's Rebellion, native tribes conducted a siege of Fort Pitt for two months until Colonel Henry Bouquet relieved it after the Battle of Bushy Run.
In February 2013 ''Forbes'' again placed Pittsburgh among its 10 most unexpectedly romantic world locations.
Ice hockey has had a regional fan base since the 1890s semi-pro Keystones.
Six Fortune 500 companies call the Pittsburgh area home.
Pittsburgh often places high in lists of the nation's most livable cities.
The mayor and the nine-member council serve a four-year term.
Construction began in 1998.
UPMC announced in 2013 that it had partnered with Nazarbayev University to help found its medical school.
It is packed with theaters and arts venues, and has a growing residential segment.
The Panthers won two pre-tournament era Helms Athletic Foundation National Championships in 1928 and 1930, competed in a "national title game" against LSU in 1935, and made a Final Four appearance in 1941.
Located at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, which form the Ohio River, Pittsburgh is known as both "the Steel City" for its more than 300 steel-related businesses, and as the "City of Bridges" for its 446 bridges.
Duquesne was the city's first team to appear in a Final Four (1940), obtain a number one AP Poll ranking (1954), and to win a post-season national title, the 1955 National Invitation Tournament on its second straight trip to the NIT title game.
Modern writers include Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright August Wilson and Michael Chabon with his Pittsburgh-focused commentary on student and college life.
Pittsburgh also has five city parks and several parks managed by the Nature Conservancy, the largest of which, Frick Park, provides a  of woodland park with extensive hiking and biking trails throughout steep valleys and wooded slopes.
Although the county was still below the "pass" threshold, the report showed substantial improvement over previous decades on every air quality measure.
The staccato qualities of the dialect are thought to originate either from Welsh or other European languages.
