Note that for  the energy of the mode is not zero.
It was a platinum box, divided by diaphragms, with its interior blackened with iron oxide.
These distributions represent the spectral radiance of blackbodies—the power emitted from the emitting surface, per unit projected area of emitting surface, per unit solid angle, per spectral unit (frequency, wavelength, wavenumber or their angular equivalents).
Here we have implicitly defined
Ultimately, Planck's law of black-body radiation contributed to Einstein's concept of quanta of light carrying linear momentum, which became the fundamental basis for the development of quantum mechanics.
For matter not enclosed in such a cavity, thermal radiation can be approximately explained by appropriate use of Planck's law.
Planck's law arises as a limit of the Bose–Einstein distribution, the energy distribution describing non-interactive bosons in thermodynamic equilibrium.
This can be done exactly in the thermodynamic limit as  approaches infinity.
Classical physics led, via the Equipartition theorem, to the Ultraviolet catastrophe, a prediction that the total blackbody radiation intensity was infinite.
Both approximations were known to Planck before he developed his law.
According to Thomas Kuhn, it was not till 1908 that Planck more or less accepted part of Einstein's arguments for physical as distinct from abstract mathematical discreteness in thermal radiation physics.
where  is a Bose–Einstein integral given by:
In this report there was no mention of black bodies.
Their design has been used largely unchanged for radiation measurements to the present day.
The surface of the sun (~) emits large amounts of both infrared and ultraviolet radiation; its emission is peaked in the visible spectrum.
He argued that the flows of heat radiation must be the same in each case.
In the following we will calculate the internal energy of the box at absolute temperature .
We will first calculate the spectral energy density within the cavity and then determine the spectral radiance of the emitted radiation.
The total power radiated into any solid angle is the integral of  over those three quantities, and is given by the Stefan–Boltzmann law.
Expressed in micrometers this puts 98% of the Sun's radiation in the range from 0.251 to 3.961&nbsp;µm.
He analyzed the surface through what he called "isothermal" curves, sections for a single temperature, with a spectral variable on the abscissa and a power variable on the ordinate.
Thus '''Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation''' can be stated: ''For any material at all, radiating and absorbing in thermodynamic equilibrium at any given temperature '''', for every wavelength '''', the ratio of emissive power to absorptive ratio has one universal value, which is characteristic of a perfect black body, and is an emissive power which we here represent by ''''.''
He proposed that his measurements implied that radiation was both absorbed and emitted by particles of matter throughout depths of the media in which it propagated.
In his paper submitted on 29 July 1925, Heisenberg's theory accounted for Bohr's above-mentioned formula of 1913.
The relationships between the Einstein coefficients will yield the expression of Kirchhoff's law expressed in the ''Radiative transfer'' section above, namely that
One might propose to use such a filtered transfer of heat in such a band to drive a heat engine.
The spectral radiance of a body, , describes the amount of energy it gives off as radiation of different frequencies.
For different material gases at given temperature, the pressure and internal energy density can vary independently, because different molecules can carry independently different excitation energies.
The absorption coefficient  is the fractional change in the intensity of the light beam as it travels the distance , and has units of length−1.
It is in general dependent on chemical composition and physical structure, on temperature, on the wavelength, on the angle of passage, and on the polarization.
They correspond to Balfour Stewart's reference bodies, with internal radiation, coated with lamp-black.
where Planck used the symbols  and  to denote empirical fitting constants.
Here is used a notation different from Kirchhoff's.
Once Planck had discovered the empirically fitting function, he constructed a physical derivation of this law.
That is, only 1% of the Sun's radiation is at wavelengths shorter than 251&nbsp;nm, and only 1% at longer than 3961&nbsp;nm.
Further, one may define the emissivity  of the material of the body  just so that at thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature , one has .
As to its material interior, a body of condensed matter, liquid, solid, or plasma, with a definite interface with its surroundings, is completely black to radiation if it is completely opaque.
The equality of absorptivity and emissivity here demonstrated is specific for thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature  and is in general not to be expected to hold when conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium do not hold.
Kirchhoff stated later in 1860 that his theoretical proof was better than Balfour Stewart's, and in some respects it was so.
If there is a small hole in one of the walls, the radiation emitted from the hole will be characteristic of a perfect black body.
The above-mentioned linearity of Planck's mechanical assumptions, not allowing for energetic interactions between frequency components, was superseded in 1925 by Heisenberg's original quantum mechanics.
Planck believed that in a cavity with perfectly reflecting walls and with no matter present, the electromagnetic field cannot exchange energy between frequency components.
In general, one may not convert between the various forms of Planck's law simply by substituting one variable for another, because this would not take into account that the different forms have different units.
He wrote "Lamp-black, which absorbs all the rays that fall upon it, and therefore possesses the greatest possible absorbing power, will possess also the greatest possible radiating power."
For the case of the absence of matter, quantum field theory is necessary, because non-relativistic quantum mechanics with fixed particle numbers does not provide a sufficient account.
He was led by these two approximations to develop a law which incorporated both limits, which ultimately became Planck's law.
He postulated an ideal black body that interfaced with its surrounds in just such a way as to absorb all the radiation that falls on it.
Such an interface can neither absorb nor emit, because it is not composed of physical matter; but it is the site of reflection and transmission of radiation, because it is a surface of discontinuity of optical properties.
This was not the celebrated Rayleigh–Jeans formula , which did not emerge until 1905, though it did reduce to the latter for long wavelengths, which are the relevant ones here.
It is known that  and this leads to  and thence to  for long wavelengths.
It was not till 1919 that Planck in the third edition of his monograph more or less accepted his 'third theory', that both emission and absorption of light were quantal.
That function  has occasionally been called 'Kirchhoff's (emission, universal) function', though its precise mathematical form would not be known for another forty years, till it was discovered by Planck in 1900.
Motion of the walls can affect the radiation.
The surface of a black body can be modelled by a small hole in the wall of a large enclosure which is maintained at a uniform temperature with opaque walls that, at every wavelength, are not perfectly reflective.
This is because of the linearity of Maxwell's equations.
The various forms of the law for spectral radiance are summarized in the table below.
At a particular frequency , the radiation emitted from a particular cross-section through the centre of  in one sense in a direction normal to that cross-section may be denoted , characteristically for the material of .
Consider a cube of side  with conducting walls filled with electromagnetic radiation in thermal equilibrium at temperature .
Analogous to the wave function of a particle in a box, one finds that the fields are superpositions of periodic functions.
Thus Einstein was contradicting the undulatory theory of light held by Planck.
According to statistical mechanics, the probability distribution over the energy levels of a particular mode is given by:
In a series of papers from 1881 to 1886, Langley reported measurements of the spectrum of heat radiation, using diffraction gratings and prisms, and the most sensitive detectors that he could make.
In 1880, André-Prosper-Paul Crova published a diagram of the three-dimensional appearance of the graph of the strength of thermal radiation as a function of wavelength and temperature.
This means that the number of photon states in a certain region of -space is twice the volume of that region.
Every physical body spontaneously and continuously emits electromagnetic radiation.
For the above corresponding forms of expression of the spectral radiance, one may use an obvious expansion of notation, temporarily for the present calculation only.
Kirchhoff's proof considered an arbitrary non-ideal body labeled  as well as various perfect black bodies labeled .
He was concerned with selective thermal radiation, which he investigated with plates of substances that radiated and absorbed selectively for different qualities of radiation rather than maximally for all qualities of radiation.
Heisenberg's explanation of the Planck oscillators, as non-linear effects apparent as Fourier modes of transient processes of emission or absorption of radiation, showed why Planck's oscillators, viewed as enduring physical objects such as might be envisaged by classical physics, did not give an adequate explanation of the phenomena.
It took some forty years of development of improved methods of measurement of electromagnetic radiation to get a reliable result.
Beyond these requirements, the component material of the walls is unrestricted.
Having read Langley, in 1888, Russian physicist V.A.
Stewart offered a theoretical proof that this should be the case separately for every selected quality of thermal radiation, but his mathematics was not rigorously valid.
According to quantum theory, the energy levels of a mode are given by:
The  in  refers to that.
His thinking revolved around entropy rather than being directly about temperature.
To calculate the density of states we rewrite equation (1) as follows:
When thermal equilibrium prevails at temperature , the rate of accumulation of energy vanishes so that .
Just as the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution is the unique maximum entropy energy distribution for a gas of material particles at thermal equilibrium, so is Planck's distribution for a gas of photons.
(In contrast with Balfour Stewart's, Kirchhoff's definition of his absorption ratio did not refer in particular to a lamp-black surface as the source of the incident radiation.)
This is expressed by saying that radiation from the surface of a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium obeys Lambert's cosine law.
Photons are viewed as the carriers of the electromagnetic interaction between electrically charged elementary particles.
The three parameters ,  and , known as the Einstein coefficients, are associated with the photon frequency  produced by the transition between two energy levels (states).
At equilibrium, the radiation inside this enclosure follows Planck's law, and so will the radiation coming out of the small hole.
When there is thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature , the cavity radiation from the walls has that unique universal value, so that .
This is why he had to resort to Boltzmann's probabilistic arguments.
The purpose here is only to summarize the main physical factors in the situation, and the main conclusions.
In 1905, "Einstein believed that Planck's theory could not be made to agree with the idea of light quanta, a mistake he corrected in 1906."
It can be converted to an expression for  in wavelength units by substituting  by  and evaluating
Integrals of this type for Bose and Fermi gases can be expressed in terms of polylogarithms.
A perfectly black interface reflects no radiation, but transmits all that falls on it, from either side.
Thinking theoretically, Kirchhoff went a little further, and pointed out that this implied that the spectral radiance, as a function of radiative frequency, of any such cavity in thermodynamic equilibrium must be a unique universal function of temperature.
The interface is not composed of physical matter but is a theoretical conception, a mathematical two-dimensional surface, a joint property of the two contiguous media, strictly speaking belonging to neither separately.
Only emission was quantal.
His proof first argued that for wavelength  and at temperature , at thermal equilibrium, all perfectly black bodies of the same size and shape have the one and the same common value of emissive power , with the dimensions of power.
This led Planck to the formula
The change in intensity of a light beam due to absorption as it traverses a small distance  will then be
Planck showed that the spectral radiance of a body at absolute temperature  is given by
Stimulated emission is emission by the material body which is caused by and is proportional to the incoming radiation.
Kirchhoff's seminal insight, mentioned just above, was that, at thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature , there exists a unique universal radiative distribution, nowadays denoted , that is independent of the chemical characteristics of the materials  and , that leads to a very valuable understanding of the radiative exchange equilibrium of any body at all, as follows.
At any point in the interior of a black body located inside a cavity in thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature  the radiation is homogeneous, isotropic and unpolarized.
According to historian D. M. Siegel: "He was not a practitioner of the more sophisticated techniques of nineteenth-century mathematical physics; he did not even make use of the functional notation in dealing with spectral distributions."
His measurements confirmed that substances that emit and absorb selectively respect the principle of selective equality of emission and absorption at thermal equilibrium.
This is the reason for the name ''cosine law''.
They had one peak at a spectral value characteristic for the temperature, and fell either side of it towards the horizontal axis.
It was not till five years after Planck made his heuristic assumption of abstract elements of energy or of action that Albert Einstein conceived of really existing quanta of light in 1905 as a revolutionary explanation of black-body radiation, of photoluminescence, of the photoelectric effect, and of the ionization of gases by ultraviolet light.
In 1913, Bohr gave another formula with a further different physical meaning to the quantity .
The following is an introductory sketch of that situation, and is very far from being a rigorous physical argument.
The three wavelengths , , and , in the three directions orthogonal to the walls can be:
Contrary to Planck's beliefs of the time, Einstein proposed a model and formula whereby light was emitted, absorbed, and propagated in free space in energy quanta localized in points of space.
Near thermodynamic equilibrium, the emitted radiation is nearly described by Planck's law.
It follows that in thermodynamic equilibrium, when ,
An article by Helge Kragh published in ''Physics World'' gives an account of this history.
where  is the spectral radiance of the radiation field.
independent of direction), the power emitted at an angle to the normal is proportional to the projected area, and therefore to the cosine of that angle as per Lambert's cosine law, and is unpolarized.
According to Klein, one may speculate that it is likely that Planck had seen this suggestion though he did not mention it in his papers of 1900 and 1901.
The emissivity of a natural interface is always between  and 1.
The equation of radiative transfer will then be the sum of these two contributions:
The wavelength and frequency peaks are in bold and occur at 25.0% and 64.6% respectively.
On 7 October 1900, Rubens told Planck that in the complementary domain (long wavelength, low frequency), and only there, Rayleigh's 1900 formula fitted the observed data well.
It is included in the absorption term because, like absorption, it is proportional to the intensity of the incoming radiation.
In 1898, Otto Lummer and Ferdinand Kurlbaum published an account of their cavity radiation source.
In this case, it is given by
Until then, Planck had been consistent in thinking that discreteness of action quanta was to be found neither in his resonant oscillators nor in the propagation of thermal radiation.
Planck did not attribute any definite physical significance to his hypothesis of resonant oscillators, but rather proposed it as a mathematical device that enabled him to derive a single expression for the black body spectrum that matched the empirical data at all wavelengths.
Wavelength and frequency units are reciprocal.
This formula, apart from the first vacuum energy term, is a special case of the general formula for particles obeying Bose–Einstein statistics.
Because the components of  have to be positive, this shell spans an octant of a sphere.
Planck would have been aware of various other proposed formulas which had been offered.
The equation of radiative transfer states that for a beam of light going through a small distance , energy is conserved: The change in the (spectral) radiance of that beam () is equal to the amount removed by the material medium plus the amount gained from the material medium.
For theoretical reasons, Planck at that time accepted this formulation, which has an effective cut-off of short wavelengths.
It was an important ingredient for the progressively improved measurements that led to the discovery of Planck's law.
Taking into account the independence of direction of the spectral radiance of radiation from the surface of a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium, one has  and so
The total electromagnetic energy inside the box is thus given by:
Planck explained further that the respective definite unit, , of energy should be proportional to the respective characteristic oscillation frequency  of the hypothetical oscillator, and in 1901 he expressed this with the constant of proportionality :
Like the mass absorption coefficient, it too is a property of the material itself.
In contrast to Planck's model, the frequency  has no immediate relation to frequencies that might describe those quantum states themselves.
In this limit,  becomes continuous and we can then integrate  over this parameter.
According to Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation, this entails that, for every frequency , at thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature , one has , so that the thermal radiation from a black body is always equal to the full amount specified by Planck's law.
It required that the bodies be kept in a cavity in thermal equilibrium at temperature  .
Bohr's formula was  where  and  denote the energy levels of quantum states of an atom, with quantum numbers  and .
Evidently, the location of the peak of the spectral distribution for Planck's law depends on the choice of spectral variable.
At low densities, the number of available quantum states per particle is large, and this difference becomes irrelevant.
If the radiation field is in equilibrium with the material medium, these two contributions will be equal.
Planck considered a cavity with perfectly reflective walls; the cavity contained finitely many hypothetical well separated and recognizable but identically constituted, of definite magnitude, resonant oscillatory bodies, several such oscillators at each of finitely many characteristic frequencies.
His proof noted that the dimensionless wavelength-specific absorption ratio  of a perfectly black body is by definition exactly 1.
It is measured in terms of the power emitted per unit area of the body, per unit solid angle that the radiation is measured over, per unit frequency.
There are two main cases: (a) when the approach to thermodynamic equilibrium is in the presence of matter, when the walls of the cavity are imperfectly reflective for every wavelength or when the walls are perfectly reflective while the cavity contains a small black body (this was the main case considered by Planck); or (b) when the approach to equilibrium is in the absence of matter, when the walls are perfectly reflective for all wavelengths and the cavity contains no matter.
Planck radiation is the greatest amount of radiation that any body at thermal equilibrium can emit from its surface, whatever its chemical composition or surface structure.
is used here instead of  because it is the SI symbol for ''spectral radiance''.
An energy range of  corresponds to shell of thickness  in -space.
Then for a perfectly black body, the wavelength-specific ratio of emissive power to absorption ratio  is again just , with the dimensions of power.
His proof intended to show that the ratio  was independent of the nature  of the non-ideal body, however partly transparent or partly reflective it was.
Corresponding forms of expression are related because they express one and the same physical fact: for a particular physical spectral increment, a corresponding particular physical energy increment is radiated.
They were not the more realistic perfectly black bodies later considered by Planck.
The rate  of accumulation of energy in one sense into the cross-section of the body can then be expressed
Combining the above two equations with the requirement that they be valid at any temperature yields two relationships between the Einstein coefficients:
Which peak to use depends on the application.
There is another fundamental equilibrium energy distribution: the Fermi–Dirac distribution, which describes fermions, such as electrons, in thermal equilibrium.
If we write the total number of single photon states with energies between  and  as , where  is the density of states (which is evaluated below), then we can write:
An infinitesimal amount of power  is radiated in the direction described by the angle  from the surface normal from infinitesimal surface area  into infinitesimal solid angle  in an infinitesimal frequency band of width  centered on frequency .
The rays were repeatedly reflected from polished crystal surfaces, and the rays that made it all the way through the process were 'residual', and were of wavelengths preferentially reflected by crystals of suitably specific materials.
If the radiation field is in equilibrium with the material medium, then the radiation will be homogeneous (independent of position) so that  and:
In a more considered account in a book in 1862, Kirchhoff mentioned the connection of his law with "Carnot's principle", which is a form of the second law.
When the atoms and the radiation field are in equilibrium, the radiance will be given by Planck's law and, by the principle of detailed balance, the sum of these rates must be zero:
By contrast to a material gas where the masses and number of particles play a role, the spectral radiance, pressure and energy density of a photon gas at thermal equilibrium are entirely determined by the temperature.
The Sun's radiation is that arriving at the top of the atmosphere (TOA).
The quantum number  can be interpreted as the number of photons in the mode.
Since the radiance is isotropic (i.e.
For the case of the presence of matter, quantum mechanics provides a good account, as found below in the section headed Einstein coefficients.
If the walls are not opaque, then the thermodynamic equilibrium is not isolated.
According to Helge Kragh, "Quantum theory owes its origin to the study of thermal radiation, in particular to the "blackbody" radiation that Robert Kirchhoff had first defined in 1859–1860."
For the Sun,  is 5778&nbsp;K, allowing the percentile points of the Sun's radiation, in nanometers, to be tabulated as follows when modeled as a black body radiator, to which the Sun is a fair approximation.
The idea of quantization of the free electromagnetic field was developed later, and eventually incorporated into what we now know as quantum field theory.
Kirchhoff announced that the determination of the function  was a problem of the highest importance, though he recognized that there would be experimental difficulties to be overcome.
Since there is no restriction on the total number of photons, the chemical potential is zero.
The importance of the Lummer and Kurlbaum cavity radiation source was that it was an experimentally accessible source of black-body radiation, as distinct from radiation from a simply exposed incandescent solid body, which had been the nearest available experimental approximation to black-body radiation over a suitable range of temperatures.
On the other hand, a perfectly black interface is not found in nature.
Kirchhoff pointed out that he did not know the precise character of  , but he thought it important that it should be found out.
He did not in this paper mention that the qualities of the rays might be described by their wavelengths, nor did he use spectrally resolving apparatus such as prisms or diffraction gratings.
Planck believed that a field with no interactions neither obeys nor violates the classical principle of equipartition of energy, and instead remains exactly as it was when introduced, rather than evolving into a black body field.
In symbols, the law stated that the wavelength-specific ratio  has one and the same value for all bodies, that is for all values of index .
Balfour Stewart found experimentally that of all surfaces, one of lamp-black emitted the greatest amount of thermal radiation for every quality of radiation, judged by various filters.
The actual word 'photon' was invented still later, by G.N.
Later, in 1924, Satyendra Nath Bose developed the theory of the statistical mechanics of photons, which allowed a theoretical derivation of Planck's law.
Planck did not propose that light propagating in free space is quantized.
He discussed the experiments in terms of rays which could be reflected and refracted, and which obeyed the Helmholtz reciprocity principle (though he did not use an eponym for it).
Then, for a particular spectral increment, the particular physical energy increment may be written
The colourful term "ultraviolet catastrophe" was given by Paul Ehrenfest in 1911 to the paradoxical result that the total energy in the cavity tends to infinity when the equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics is (mistakenly) applied to black body radiation.
so that Planck’s law for ''spectral radiant exitance'' can be written as
Kirchhoff considered, successively, thermal equilibrium with the arbitrary non-ideal body, and with a perfectly black body of the same size and shape, in place in his cavity in equilibrium at temperature  .
But more importantly, it relied on a new theoretical postulate of '''"perfectly black bodies"''', which is the reason why one speaks of Kirchhoff's law.
It has units of W·m−2·sr−1·Hz−1 in the SI system.
Again, the ratio  of emitting power to absorption ratio is a dimensioned quantity, with the dimensions of emitting power.
The SI units of  are , while those of  are .
Heuristically, Boltzmann had distributed the energy in arbitrary merely mathematical quanta  , which he had proceeded to make tend to zero in magnitude, because the finite magnitude  had served only to allow definite counting for the sake of mathematical calculation of probabilities, and had no physical significance.
In an electromagnetic field isolated in a vacuum in a vessel with perfectly reflective walls, such as was considered by Planck, indeed the photons would be conserved according to Einstein's 1905 model, but Lewis was referring to a field of photons considered as a system closed with respect to ponderable matter but open to exchange of electromagnetic energy with a surrounding system of ponderable matter, and he mistakenly imagined that still the photons were conserved, being stored inside atoms.
He made no mention of thermodynamics in this paper, though he did refer to conservation of ''vis viva''.
where the  are positive integers.
These coefficients apply to both atoms and molecules.
