In genetics, the breeding of pea plants allowed Gregor Mendel to derive the basic laws governing inheritance, and examination of chromosomes in maize allowed Barbara McClintock to demonstrate their connection to inherited traits.
The freshwater stoneworts strongly resemble land plants and are believed to be their closest relatives.
Certain plants contain psychotropic chemicals that are extracted and ingested, including tobacco, cannabis (marijuana), opium, and cocaine.
From the Devonian, detailed fossils of rhyniophytes have been found.
Myrmecophytes are plants that have coevolved with ants.
Sweeteners such as sugar and stevia are derived from plants.
Plants are often the dominant physical and structural component of habitats where they occur.
This chert preserved early plants in cellular detail, petrified in volcanic springs.
In the mosses and hornworts a cuticle is usually only produced on the sporophyte.
Root systems capable of obtaining soil water and nutrients also evolved during the Devonian.
They trap small animals and digest them to obtain mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus.
They can only survive where moisture is available for significant periods, although some species are desiccation-tolerant.
Other plants may be organized according to their seasonal growth pattern: annual plants live and reproduce within one growing season, biennial plants live for two growing seasons and usually reproduce in second year, and perennial plants live for many growing seasons and continue to reproduce once they are mature.
Ant wastes provide organic fertilizer.
Green plants have cell walls with cellulose and obtain most of their energy from sunlight via photosynthesis by primary chloroplasts, derived from endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria.
This may have set the scene for the evolution of flowering plants in the Triassic (~), which exploded in the Cretaceous and Tertiary.
Unlike plants, which generally gain carbon through photosynthesis, and so are called autotrophs, fungi generally obtain carbon by breaking down and absorbing surrounding materials, and so are called heterotrophic saprotrophs.
Cloth is often made from cotton, flax, ramie or synthetic fibers derived from cellulose, such as rayon and acetate.
Medicines derived from plants include aspirin, taxol, morphine, quinine, reserpine, colchicine, digitalis and vincristine.
In exchange, the ants defend the plant from herbivores and sometimes competing plants.
The xylem moves water and minerals from the root to the rest of the plant, and the phloem provides the roots with sugars and other nutrient produced by the leaves.
Olive oil has been used in lamps for centuries to provide illumination.
A megasporangium invested in protective layer called an integument is known as an ovule.
Some plants grow as submerged aquatics, using oxygen dissolved in the surrounding water, and a few specialized vascular plants, such as mangroves, can grow with their roots in anoxic conditions.
6CO2 + 6H2O → (in the presence of light and chlorophyll) C6H12O6 + 6O2
Many plants are epiphytes, meaning they grow on other plants, usually trees, without parasitizing them.
Late Devonian plants had thereby reached a degree of sophistication that allowed them to form forests of tall trees.
Cooking oils and margarine come from maize, soybean, rapeseed, safflower, sunflower, olive and others.
A 1997 proposed phylogenetic tree of Plantae, after Kenrick and Crane, is as follows, with modification to the Pteridophyta from Smith ''et al.''
After fertilisation by means of sperm deposited by pollen grains, an embryo develops inside the ovule.
By means of cells that behave like nerves, plants receive and distribute within their systems information about incident light intensity and quality.
Ancient trees are revered and many are famous.
Some plants cause allergic reactions when ingested, while other plants cause food intolerances that negatively affect health.
Wood also may be pulped for the manufacture of paper and cardboard.
They are not close relatives of the Archaeplastida, presumably having acquired chloroplasts separately from ingested or symbiotic green and red algae.
Viridiplantae encompass a group of organisms that have cellulose in their cell walls, possess chlorophylls ''a'' and ''b'' and have plastids that are bound by only two membranes that are capable of storing starch.
The majority of plant species have various kinds of fungi associated with their root systems in a kind of mutualistic symbiosis known as mycorrhiza.
Green plants provide most of the world's molecular oxygen and are the basis of most of the earth's ecologies, especially on land.
Each of these algal groups also includes various microscopic and single-celled organisms.
Cereals are staple crops, meaning that they provide calories (in the form of complex carbohydrates such as starch) that are needed to fuel daily activities, and thus form the foundation of a daily diet.
The oldest known fossils of embryophytes date from the Ordovician, though such fossils are fragmentary.
The gametophytes of all vascular plant groups evolved to become reduced in size and prominence in the life cycle.
Plantae ''sensu lato''
Plants are also the source of beverages produced either by infusion, such as coffee and tea; by fermentation, such as beer and wine; or by distillation, such as whisky, vodka, rum, and other alcoholic spirits.
Plants usually rely on soil primarily for support and water (in quantitative terms), but also obtain compounds of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium and other elemental nutrients.
This recognition triggers an immune response.
The first plant receptors of conserved microbial signatures were identified in rice (XA21, 1995) and in ''Arabidopsis thaliana'' (FLS2, 2000).
Among the vascular plants, perennials include both evergreens that keep their leaves the entire year, and deciduous plants that lose their leaves for some part of it.
Various forms of parasitism are also fairly common among plants, from the semi-parasitic mistletoe that merely takes some nutrients from its host, but still has photosynthetic leaves, to the fully parasitic broomrape and toothwort that acquire all their nutrients through connections to the roots of other plants, and so have no chlorophyll.
However, whether a particular food is considered a "vegetable" or a "fruit" will depend on context, since the word ''fruit'' has a more precise definition in botany than it does in general use.
Intracellular freezing, which usually kills the cell (Lyons et al.
At freezing temperatures, water in the intercellular spaces of plant tissue freezes first, though the water may remain unfrozen until temperatures drop below .
Certain plants contain psychotropic chemicals, which are extracted and ingested or smoked, including tobacco, cannabis (marijuana), cocaine and opium.
The simple equation of photosynthesis is as follows:-
Old classifications placed diverse algae, fungi or bacteria in Plantae (e.g., Plantae or Vegetabilia Linnaeus, Plantae Haeckel 1866, Metaphyta Haeckel, 1894, Plantae Whittaker, 1969).
Some plants are parasitic and have lost the ability to produce normal amounts of chlorophyll or to photosynthesize.
Ornamental plants have sometimes changed the course of history, as in tulipomania.
Fossil land plants are recorded in terrestrial, lacustrine, fluvial and nearshore marine sediments.
Coal and petroleum are fossil fuels derived from the remains of plants.
Human cultivation of plants is part of agriculture, which is the basis of human civilization.
Several plants cause skin irritations when touched, such as poison ivy.
While they inhabit a multitude of biomes and ecoregions, few can be found beyond the tundras at the northernmost regions of continental shelves.
This group comprises the green plants above plus Rhodophyta (red algae) and Glaucophyta (glaucophyte algae).
Animals and most other organisms are aerobic, relying on oxygen; those that do not are confined to relatively rare anaerobic environments.
This clade includes the organisms that eons ago acquired their chloroplasts directly by engulfing cyanobacteria (e.g., Plantae Cavalier-Smith, 1981).
The process of intercellular ice formation was described by Glerum (1985).
An algal scum formed on the land , but it was not until the Ordovician Period, around , that land plants appeared.
The names given to these groups vary considerably .
Four surviving groups remain widespread now, particularly the conifers, which are dominant trees in several biomes.
Early seed plants are gymnosperms, as the ovules and subsequent seeds are not enclosed in a protective structure (carpels or fruit), but are found naked, typically on cone scales.
In the Fossil Grove at Victoria Park in Glasgow, Scotland, the stumps of ''Lepidodendron'' trees are found in their original growth positions.
Plant roots play an essential role in soil development and prevention of soil erosion.
This may or may not be lethal, depending on the hardiness of the tissue.
Plant fossils include roots, wood, leaves, seeds, fruit, pollen, spores, phytoliths, and amber (the fossilized resin produced by some plants).
Cell division is also characterized by the development of a phragmoplast for the construction of a cell plate in the late stages of cytokinesis.
They also include the ''bryophytes'', of which mosses and liverworts are the most common.
Fruiting bodies, of which mushrooms are the most familiar example, are the reproductive structures of fungi, and are unlike any structures produced by plants.
Many orchids, bromeliads, ferns and mosses often grow as epiphytes.
There are about 4,300 species of mainly marine organisms, both unicellular and multicellular.
Fruits provide a higher quantity of sugars and have a sweeter taste than vegetables.
Researchers, from the Warsaw University of Life Sciences in Poland, found that plants have a specific memory for varying light conditions, which prepares their immune systems against seasonal pathogens.
In contrast, most other algae (e.g.
In addition, the substructure of multicellular fungi is different from that of plants, taking the form of many chitinous microscopic strands called hyphae, which may be further subdivided into cells or may form a syncytium containing many eukaryotic nuclei.
Plants protect themselves from frost and dehydration stress with antifreeze proteins, heat-shock proteins and sugars (sucrose is common).
In temperate and boreal climates, they generally lose their leaves during the winter; many tropical plants lose their leaves during the dry season.
With later developments in microbiology, in the 19th century Ernst Haeckel felt that another kingdom was required to classify newly discovered micro-organisms.
Petrified wood is common in some parts of the world, and is most frequently found in arid or desert areas where it is more readily exposed by erosion.
Some mosses grow less than 0.001&nbsp;millimeters per hour (mm/h), while most trees grow 0.025-0.250&nbsp;mm/h.
Many plants are used to flavor foods.
Tree rings themselves are an important method of dating in archeology, and serve as a record of past climates.
The primary mechanism plants have for capturing light energy is the pigment chlorophyll.
Plants also carry immune receptors that recognize highly variable pathogen effectors.
These fossils resemble calcified multicellular members of the Dasycladales.
The weight of large numbers of epiphytes may break tree limbs.
Architectural designs resembling plants appear in the capitals of ancient Egyptian columns, which were carved to resemble either the Egyptian white lotus or the papyrus.
Plants are the source of many natural products such as essential oils, natural dyes, pigments, waxes, resins, tannins, alkaloids, amber and cork.
Venus Flytrap, sensitive plant and resurrection plant are examples of plants sold as novelties.
Embryophytes include the vascular plants, such as ferns, conifers and flowering plants.
LEA (Late Embryogenesis Abundant) protein expression is induced by stresses and protects other proteins from aggregation as a result of desiccation and freezing.
Whittaker's original reclassification was based on the fundamental difference in nutrition between the Fungi and the Plantae.
The integument becomes a seed coat, and the ovule develops into a seed.
Plants may cause harm to animals, including people.
Arboretums and botanical gardens are public collections of living plants.
The evolutionary history of plants is not yet completely settled, but one accepted relationship between the three groups described above is shown below.
Plants are often used as memorials, gifts and to mark special occasions such as births, deaths, weddings and holidays.
Products derived from plants include soaps, shampoos, perfumes, cosmetics, paint, varnish, turpentine, rubber, latex, lubricants, linoleum, plastics, inks, and gums.
Vegetables are important for the vitamins, minerals, and dietary fiber they supply.
Old definitions of plant
The latter of these pigments is not found in red or brown algae.
Structural resources and fibers from plants are used in both the construction of dwellings and the manufacture of clothing.
Just as in animals, plant cells differentiate and develop into multiple cell types.
Plants are distinguished from green algae, which represent a mode of photosynthetic life similar to the kind modern plants are believed to have evolved from, by having specialized reproductive organs protected by non-reproductive tissues.
(Parasitic plants, on the other hand, use the resources of its host to grow.)
This dehydration is now considered the fundamental cause of freezing injury.
Green plants exclude the red and brown algae, the fungi, archaea, bacteria and animals.
Smoking causes damage to health or even death, while some drugs may also be harmful or fatal to people.
Most species of bryophytes remain small throughout their life-cycle.
The fungi help the plants gain water and mineral nutrients from the soil, while the plant gives the fungi carbohydrates manufactured in photosynthesis.
The Chlorophyta (a name that has also been used for ''all'' green algae) are the sister group to the group from which the land plants evolved.
Gardens may cultivate the plants in a naturalistic state, or may sculpture their growth, as with topiary or espalier.
They developed a number of adaptations that allowed them to spread into increasingly more arid places, notably the vascular tissues xylem and phloem, that transport water and food throughout the organism.
Pesticides derived from plants include nicotine, rotenone, strychnine and pyrethrins.
Hemiepiphytes like the strangler fig begin as epiphytes but eventually set their own roots and overpower and kill their host.
They are used as ornaments and, until recently and in great variety, they have served as the source of most medicines and drugs.
All three groups together are generally believed to have a single common origin, and so are classified together in the taxon Archaeplastida, whose name implies that the chloroplasts or plastids of all the members of the taxon were derived from a single ancient endosymbiotic event.
Numerous animals have coevolved with plants.
rosemary and mint), which come from the green leafy parts of plants, and spices (e.g.
Molecular evidence has since shown that the most recent common ancestor (concestor), of the Fungi was probably more similar to that of the Animalia than to that of Plantae or any other kingdom.
Many of the Earth's biomes are named for the type of vegetation because plants are the dominant organisms in those biomes, such as grasslands and forests.
Streptophyte algae are either unicellular or form multicellular filaments, branched or unbranched.
Hemp and jute are grown for their fibers, which may be woven into rope or rough sacking.
They are used as national and state emblems, including state trees and state flowers.
Such specimens may be cut and polished using lapidary equipment.
Most conspicuous among the algae are the seaweeds, multicellular algae that may roughly resemble land plants, but are classified among the brown, red and green algae.
Other staple crops include potatoes, cassava, yams, and legumes.
After the initial formation of ice intercellularly, the cells shrink as water is lost to the segregated ice, and the cells undergo freeze-drying.
However, it is now known that the land plants evolved from within a group of green algae, so that the green algae by themselves are a paraphyletic group, i.e.
Large areas of many countries are given over to the cultivation of cereals for local consumption or export to other countries.
About three hundred plant species do not photosynthesize but are parasites on other species of photosynthetic plants.
In private outdoor gardens, lawn grasses, shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, herbaceous perennials and bedding plants are used.
Some plants, known as myco-heterotrophs, parasitize mycorrhizal fungi, and hence act as epiparasites on other plants.
The fossilized remains of conifer and angiosperm roots, stems and branches may be locally abundant in lake and inshore sedimentary rocks from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras.
For the majority of plants to grow successfully they also require oxygen in the atmosphere and around their roots (soil gas) for respiration.
The Devonian period also saw the evolution of what many believe to be the first modern tree, ''Archaeopteris''.
They are thus not included in even the broadest modern definition of the plant kingdom, although they were in the past.
Streptophyta to mean the group that excludes the land plants and Charophyta for the stoneworts alone or the stoneworts plus the land plants.)
Epiphytes may indirectly harm their host plant by intercepting mineral nutrients and light that the host would otherwise receive.
Plants can be so crowded that no single individual produces normal growth, causing etiolation and chlorosis.
(See Antarctic flora.)
A newer proposed classification follows Leliaert et al.
a group that excludes some of the descendants of a common ancestor.
Plants that produce grains, fruits and vegetables form humankind's basic foodstuffs, and have been domesticated for millennia.
Petrified wood is often heavily silicified (the organic material replaced by silicon dioxide), and the impregnated tissue is often preserved in fine detail.
The first seed plants, Pteridosperms (seed ferns), now extinct, appeared in the Devonian and diversified through the Carboniferous.
Some climbing species, such as kudzu, which do not need to produce thick supportive tissue, may grow up to 12.5&nbsp;mm/h.
The Coal measures are a major source of Paleozoic plant fossils, with many groups of plants in existence at this time.
Plants are the primary producers in most terrestrial ecosystems and form the basis of the food web in those ecosystems.
Incident light that stimulates a chemical reaction in one leaf, will cause a chain reaction of signals to the entire plant via a type of cell termed a ''bundle sheath cell''.
Land plants are key components of the water cycle and several other biogeochemical cycles.
Growing underwater, they consist of a central stalk with whorls of branchlets, giving them a superficial resemblance to horsetails, species of the genus ''Equisetum'', which are true land plants.
Evolutionary innovation continued after the Devonian period.
Algae comprise several different groups of organisms which produce energy through photosynthesis and for that reason have been included in the plant kingdom in the past.
This involves an alternation between two generations: a haploid stage, called the gametophyte, and a diploid stage, called the sporophyte.
cumin and cinnamon), which come from other plant parts.
Bryophytes first appeared during the early Paleozoic.
The plants that are likely most familiar to us are the multicellular land plants, called embryophytes.
There are hundreds of herbal supplements such as ginkgo, Echinacea, feverfew, and Saint John's wort.
Such plants include herbs (e.g.
Some plants have coevolved with nitrogen fixing bacteria, making plants an important part of the nitrogen cycle.
2011 and modified with Silar 2016 for the green algae clades and Novíkov & Barabaš-Krasni 2015 for the land plants clade.
Biotic factors are also capable of affecting plant growth.
Pollen, spores and algae (dinoflagellates and acritarchs) are used for dating sedimentary rock sequences.
They undergo closed mitosis without centrioles, and typically have mitochondria with flat cristae.
The latest major group of plants to evolve were the grasses, which became important in the mid Tertiary, from around .
Those which have been called "plants" are in bold.
Plants are distributed worldwide in varying numbers.
Outside of formal scientific contexts, the term "plant" implies an association with certain traits, such as being multicellular, possessing cellulose, and having the ability to carry out photosynthesis.
Plants may also be grown or kept indoors as houseplants, or in specialized buildings such as greenhouses that are designed for the care and cultivation of living plants.
Bromeliad epiphytes accumulate water in leaf axils to form phytotelmata that may contain complex aquatic food webs.
750 mya) has been attributed to the Cladophorales, while the oldest reliable records of the Bryopsidales, Dasycladales) and stoneworts are from the Paleozoic.
Archaeplastida, Plastida or Primoplantae
The green plants or Viridiplantae were traditionally divided into the green algae (including the stoneworts) and the land plants.
Human nutrition depends to a large extent on cereals, especially maize (or corn), wheat, rice, oats, and millet.
The field of ethnobotany studies plant use by indigenous cultures, which helps to conserve endangered species as well as discover new medicinal plants.
While some gardens are planted with food crops, many are planted for aesthetic, ornamental, or conservation purposes.
Precise numbers are difficult to determine, but , there are thought to be 300–315 thousand species of plants, of which the great majority, some 260–290 thousand, are seed plants (see the table below).
Their chloroplasts contain chlorophylls a and b, which gives them their green color.
Wood is used not only for buildings, boats, and furniture, but also for smaller items such as musical instruments and sports equipment.
The classification of fungi has been controversial until quite recently in the history of biology.
Livestock animals including cows, pigs, sheep, goats and camels are all herbivores; and most feed primarily or entirely on cereal plants.
Invasive plants cause costly damage in crop losses annually by displacing crop plants, they further increase the cost of production and the use of chemicals to control them, which in turn affects the environment.
The Viridiplantae, the green plants – green algae and land plants – form a clade, a group consisting of all the descendants of a common ancestor.
Plants are photosynthetic, which means that they manufacture their own food molecules using energy obtained from light.
Human food also includes vegetables, which consist principally of leaves and stems eaten as food.
Two additional groups, the Rhodophyta (red algae) and Glaucophyta (glaucophyte algae), also have chloroplasts which appear to be derived directly from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria, although they differ in the pigments which are used in photosynthesis and so are different in colour.
epidermal layer), or reproductive tissues, with more primitive plants lacking some tissue types.
Food additives include gum arabic, guar gum, locust bean gum, starch and pectin.
Seed plants can survive and reproduce in extremely arid conditions, because they are not dependent on free water for the movement of sperm, or the development of free living gametophytes.
The photosynthesis conducted by land plants and algae is the ultimate source of energy and organic material in nearly all ecosystems.
Toxalbumins are plant poisons fatal to most mammals and act as a serious deterrent to consumption.
