Established in 1912, Shaker Heights, Ohio,  was planned and developed in by the Van Sweringen brothers, railroad moguls who envisioned the community as a suburban retreat from the industrial inner-city of Cleveland.
Some improvement in infrastructure has been seen subsequently.
Borrowing from the New Town movement in the United Kingdom, some 30 new towns have been built all over Japan.
* Ilsan, Goyang City
Milton Keynes in particular was designed with a grid-based distributor road system.
In the past, the Japanese government had proposed relocating the capital to a planned city, but this plan was cancelled.
If an existing town was close to the newly constructed station but on land not owned by the CPR, the town was forced to move itself to the new site and reconstruct itself, essentially building a new town.
Later influences on planned community development in Canada were the exploitation of mineral and forest wealth, usually in remote locations of the vast country.
* Perspective, Nicholas Fiévé and Paul Waley, eds.
Interest on these loans was rolled up, in the expectation that the growth in land values caused by the development of the town would eventually allow the loans to be repaid in full.
The Romans planned many towns in Britain, but the settlements were changed out of all recognition in subsequent centuries.
Bramalea, located in Brampton, Ontario and Erin Mills, located in Mississauga, Ontario, were both developed in phases.
The new town was planned by Carl Axel Setterberg.
As seen in the ancient sites of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro in Pakistan and western border of India, this urban plan included the world's first urban sanitation systems.
**Lekki Free Zone, a free trade zone in the Lekki
Other planned areas, but in a lesser degree, are Punta Pacifica and the former Canal Zone.
* Pangyo, Seongnam City
The term "new town" in Ireland was also used for some earlier developments, notably during the Georgian era.
The city of Gaborone was planned and constructed in the 1960s.
By that time, the city's official boundary was the river Sava, since nothing was built over it.
Thus urban complexes arose that reflected the ideals of socialist realism.
Three "Greenbelt Communities", Greenbelt, Maryland, Greenhills, Ohio, and Greendale, Wisconsin, built by the Federal government during the 1930s were planned with a surrounding "belt" of woodland and natural landscaping.
Those cities also known as ''Development Towns''.
Since the 1990s, several planned communities were built in the Seoul Metropolitan Area to alleviate housing demands in Seoul.
Inhabitation of the city was subsidized by the local government, through the concession of free empty lots and funding for building houses.
Derry was the first ever planned city in Ireland (the city is now located in Northern Ireland).
The city of Vaasa was rebuilt about seven kilometers northwest of its original location in 1862, after a fire which destroyed the city in 1852.
Australia is still building planned communities with developers such as Delfin Lend Lease, an S&P/ASX 50 company, that has been responsible for large master planned communities such as;
East Kilbride is the second largest town in Scotland, or the 6th largest settlement with a population of over 73,000 and Livingston with a population of 76,000.
370,000 (2006)), was reclaimed from the Zuiderzee (Southern Sea).
In 1961 Elektrėnai was established as planned city for workers in Elektrėnai Power Plant and in 1975 Visaginas was established as planned city for workers in Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant.
It was built as planned town in the 1970s, although the area was inhabited in Roman times.
It was the first Ideal Worker's City in Italy, built close to the cotton factory.
In 1975, Jubail Industrial City, also known as Jubail, was designated as a new industrial city by the Saudi government.
Building Brasília was part of Juscelino's "fifty years of prosperity in five" plan.
The town is perhaps most widely known now for its international sports stadium and shopping centre.
) that was marketed to attract middle-class people into an area only populated with farmers with the phrase, "A Country Club for the middle class."
It is located in the Zlatibor District near the city of Užice, two hundred kilometers southwest of Serbia's capital, Belgrade.
After a flood in 1916, it was decided that the Zuiderzee, an inland sea within the Netherlands, would be closed and reclaimed.
On 6 November 2005, the administrative capital of Burma was officially moved to a greenfield 3.2&nbsp;km west of Pyinmana, and approximately 300&nbsp;km north of Yangon (Rangoon), the previous capital.
Singapore's expertise in successful new town design was internationally recognised when the Building and Social Housing Foundation (BSHF) of the United Nations awarded the World Habitat Award to Tampines New Town, which was selected as a representative of Singapore's new towns, on 5 October 1992.
75% of all resales today in the Phoenix area are homes in master planned communities, and 80% of all new home construction permits issued by Arizona building departments are master planned communities.
Other than the diagonals, all streets are on a rectangular grid, and are numbered consecutively.
Together these committees reflected a strong consensus to halt the uncontrolled sprawl of London and other large cities.
In 1912, after an extensive planning competition was completed, the vision of American Walter Burley Griffin was chosen as the winning design for the city.
All New Towns designated under the New Towns Act of 1946 were serviced by a secretariat, the New Towns Association, a quango that reported to the New Towns Directorate of the Department of the Environment.
During the Florida land boom of the 1920s in Southern Florida, the communities of Coral Gables, Opa-locka, and Miami Springs, now suburbs of Miami, were incorporated as fully planned "themed" communities which were to reflect the architecture and look of Spain, Arabia, and Mexico respectively, and are now considered some of the first modern planned communities in the United States.
*Festac Town in Lagos, Lagos State
to Greeks, Armenians and Sephardic Jews and secured exemptions on taxes, customs duties and tolls, which contributed to its fast development.
Adelaide was founded by British and German colonists in 1836 to test out Edward Gibbon Wakefield's theories of systematic colonisation.
For many years the Gary Works was the largest steel mill in the world, and it dominated the town, the main entrance being at the northern end of Broadway, the city's main thoroughfare.
There are, however, also traces of planned settlements of non-Roman origin in pre-historic northern Europe.
The earlier new towns, where construction was often rushed and whose inhabitants were generally plucked out of their established communities with little ceremony, rapidly got a poor press reputation as the home of "new town blues".
The first towns are Sha Tin, Tsuen Wan, Tuen Mun and Tseung Kwan O. Tuen Mun was intended to be self-reliant, but was not successful and turned into a bedroom community like the other new towns.
Part of Limerick city was built in a planned fashion as "Newtown Pery".
A recent twist is the town of Ave Maria, Florida, founded in 2007, which is anchored by a Catholic university and has a large Catholic church in the center of town surrounded by commercial and residential development.
The first part of the new lake that was reclaimed was the Noordoostpolder (Northeast polder).
It will accommodate more than 31,000 households.
The settlers generally were attracted by fiscal, economical and juridical advantages granted by the founding lord, or were forced to move from elsewhere from his estates.
A similar plan was developed for the Clyde Valley in 1946 to combat similar problems faced in Glasgow.
It was designed and planned by Israeli architect Moshe Safdie.
However, the high levels of retail price inflation experienced in the developed world in the 1970s and 1980s fed through into interest rates and frustrated this expectation, so that substantial parts of the loans had ultimately to be written off.
Most of the Prypiat's former inhabitants were resettled to Slavutych which was planned and built for that purpose.
In recent years, new towns such as Mountain House, San Joaquin County, California, have added a new wrinkle to the movement: to prevent conurbation with nearby cities, they have imposed strict growth boundaries, as well as automatic "circuit breakers" that place moratoriums on residential development if the number of jobs per resident in the town falls below a certain value.
A controversial Japanese-backed planned city, Multifunction Polis, was proposed in the 1980s but never implemented.
Arthurdale and Eleanor, West Virginia, federally funded New Deal communities, were Eleanor Roosevelt's projects to ease the burden of the depression on coal miners.
The only new towns in Wales have been Newtown and Cwmbran.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, the population of Spain declined due to emigration to the Americas and later kings and governments made efforts to repopulate the country.
Arvika was also a planned city.
The most recent new town in Ireland is Adamstown in County Dublin.
Brasília is approximately at the geographical center of Brazilian territory.
According to politics of country settlement a number of planned cities were created in peripheral regions.
Some towns, (Senri New Town, Tama New Town) do not provide much employment, and many of the residents commute to the nearby city.
* Tin Shui Wai New Town
There are also villas, particularly in the city's villa districts such as Kamienna Góra where Historicism inspired Neo-Renaissance and Neo-Baroque architecture.
However, its residents managed to save the town in 1983.
Finally, five "third-generation" towns were launched in the late 1960s: these were larger, some of them based on substantial existing settlements such as Peterborough, and the most famous was probably Milton Keynes, midway between London and Birmingham, known for its huge central park and shopping centre, designed from the outset as a new city &ndash; though in law it is a 'New Town'.
The city was designed to be the Federal Capital following the federation of the six Australian colonies which formed the Commonwealth of Australia.
Other New Towns act as industrial/academic agglomerations (''sangyo-shuseki'') (Tsukuba Science City, Kashima Port Town).
New Towns policy was also informed by a series of wartime commissions, including:
Most of them are located near Tokyo and the Kansai region.
The plan specifies which zones are residential, which zones are commercial, where industries can settle, where official buildings can be built, the maximum height of buildings, etc.
Fredericia was designed as a combination of town and military fortress following the devastation caused by the Thirty Years' War.
Hertfordshire built four other new towns, two in the vicinity of Stevenage (Welwyn Garden City and Hatfield), a third to the north called Letchworth, and Hemel Hempstead to the west.
Adelaide's design has been praised for its four-square layout, its choice of setting and its ample parklands which have had minimal encroachment of developments.
Rail transport is usually available at a later stage.
In 1918, the Aluminum Company of America built the town of Alcoa, Tennessee for the employees of the nearby aluminum processing plant.
(In addition, there are numerous other shorter diagonals.)
Centennial new town part in Tejon Ranch halfway between Los Angeles and Bakersfield, will incorporate such restrictions in order to minimize the commuter load on severely congested I-5.
*Abuja, one of the most populous planned cities, and the fastest growing city in the world.
It provides 50% of the country's drinking water through desalination of the water from the Persian Gulf.
* Ministry of Construction, Japan International Cooperation Agency, City Bureau.
Zamoyski's success with Zamość spawned numerous other Polish nobles to found their own "private" cities such as Białystok and many of these towns survive today, while Zamość was added to the UN World Heritage list in 1992 and is today considered one of the most precious urban complexes in Europe and in the world.
La Défense, in the greater Paris area, could also be considered a planned town, though it was not built all at once but in successive stages beginning in the 1950s.
In modern China, many special economic zones are developed from the sketch, for example, Pudong, a new district of Shanghai.
New Zealand has several small New Towns, built for a specific purpose.
Naypyidaw (, officially spelled '''Nay Pyi Taw''' and '''Naypyitaw'''; ) is the capital of Myanmar, also known as Burma.
*Banana Island, an affluent neighbourhood in Ikoyi, Lagos, Lagos State
It was built as a new green city, rich in parks, villas, large boulevards and called Milanino (Little Milan).
These communities provide functionality to the precious land left in the area, as well as the ability to create a housing-business-transportation-open space balance.
Both were planned and developed by the Canadian Northern Railway as middle class suburbs, though both, Leaside in particular, featured large industrial tracts.
* Golden Grove, South Australia (Completed 1991)
The central diamond within a walled city with four gates was thought to be a good design for defence.
The Municipality of Aerodrom within the City of Skopje is a planned community.
The city was inaugurated on December 18, 1932.
From a room that appears to have been set aside for bathing, waste water was directed to covered drains, which lined the major streets.
It is still under expansion and some new landmarks were built in it, the most famous one is the recent one, Arena Zagreb, built in 2008.
Mexico City was erected on top of the ruins and, over the ensuing centuries, most of Lake Texcoco has gradually been drained.
Cwmbran was established to provide new employment in the south eastern portion of the South Wales Coalfield.
One of them was the town of La Isabela (40.4295 N, 2.6876 W), which disappeared in the 1950s submerged under the waters of the newly created artificial lake of Buendía but is still visible just under the water in satellite imagery.
Pablo de Olavide was appointed superintendent and about forty new settlements were established of which the most notable was La Carolina, which has a perfectly rectangular grid design.
The fortunes of this planned city have historically risen and fallen with those of the steel mill: prosperous in the 1930s, the city has lost 55 percent of its population since 1960.
Prague was extended by large housing estates – "new towns" in the 1970s and 1980s: Severní Město (Northern Town), Jižní Město (Southern Town), Jihozápadní Město (South-Western Town) were the largest, with population around 100.000 each.
John Martin, the founder of the Wairarapa town of Martinborough, set out the town's first streets in the pattern of the Union Flag in the 19th century.
*Lekki, a new city in Lagos State
Australia's most prominent fully planned city is Canberra designed by American architect Walter Burley Griffin.
Las Colinas is a  master planned community within the Dallas-area city of Irving.
This new land included, among others, the former island of Urk and it was included with the province of Overijssel.
Their remote position to the city centre was compensated for by underground lines constructed usually a decade after the completion of the housing projects.
The Romans built a large number of towns throughout their empire, often as colonies for the settlement of citizens or veterans.
Other towns, such as Ashford in Kent, Basingstoke in Hampshire and Swindon in Wiltshire, were designated "Expanded Towns" and share many characteristics with the new towns.
* Scott, W. Stephen.
Unlike some other Australian cities, the road network, suburbs, parks and other elements of the city were designed in context with each other, rather than haphazard planning as witnessed in much of Sydney.
Aarão Reis, an urbanist from the State of Pará, was then set to design the second planned city of Brazil (the first one is Teresina), and then Cidade de Minas was inaugurated finally in 1897, with many unfinished constructions as the Brazilian Government set a deadline for its completion.
The designs for the government buildings were chosen in an international architectural competition.
The technopolis program of the 1980s has precedents in the New Industrial Cities Act of the 1960s.
It is called Milano Due.
During World War II, the Manhattan Project built several planned communities to provide accommodations for scientists, engineers, industrial workers and their families.
The term "new town" often refers in the UK to towns built after World War II under the New Towns Act 1946.
Texas was at the forefront of this trend.
The star-shaped fortress and the circular town plan are based on an Italian Renaissance fortress concept from the 16th century.
Following the building of Borehamwood, Middlesex, 12 miles north-west of central London, the first in a ring of major "first generation" New Towns around London (1946) were Stevenage, Hertfordshire, 27 miles to the north of London, and Basildon, Essex, 25 miles east of London along the River Thames.
After a flood in the 60's, many residents were moved and some other districts were created for the residents, such as Dubrava, which was the interconnection between the Zagreb's old part and Sesvete.
Drvengrad, meaning ''Wooden Town'' in Serbian, is a traditional village that the Serbian film director Emir Kusturica had built for his film ''Life Is a Miracle''.
As of 2009, the population was 925,000, which makes it Burma's third largest city, after Yangon and Mandalay.
Planned settlements set up for white inhabitants included Welkom, Sasolburg and Secunda.
All kinds of landlords, from the highest to the lowest rank, tried to found new villages and towns on their estates, in order to gain economical, political or military power.
The Zuiderzee was subsequently called IJsselmeer (IJssel-lake) and its previously salty water became fresh.
Later planned cities were Philadelphia, 1682; Albany, 1695; Williamsburg, 1699; Annapolis, 1718; New York 1731 (redesigned by the British);and Savannah, 1733; New Haven, 1748 (with an early plan dated 1638); and Alexandria, 1749.
**Orange Island, a planned real estate development in Lekki.
*Bonny Island in Rivers State
* (later) the Reith Report into New Towns (1947).
Louvain-la-Neuve, built for the Université Catholique de Louvain.
The suburb Albertslund was also built from scratch in the 1970s, merging the two villages Vridsløselille and Herstedvester.
Now the abandoned town is highly contaminated by radiation.
Undergraduate diss.
In early 20th century, during the fascist government of Benito Mussolini, many new cities were founded, the most prominent being Littoria (renamed Latina after the fall of the Fascism).
The best known pre-20th-century new town in the UK was undoubtedly the Edinburgh New Town, built in accordance with a 1766 master plan by James Craig, and (along with Bath and Dublin) the archetype of the elegant Georgian style of British architecture.
Abu Dhabi (UAE) and some of the recently built cities in the Persian Gulf region are also planned cities, built on the money from the oil boom.
It was built in the 1970s.
The streets of major cities in present-day Pakistan such as Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, the world's earliest planned cities, were laid out in a perfect grid pattern comparable to that of present-day New York City.
The official inauguration only occurred in 1942 with the presence of the president of the republic, governors, and ministers.
Employment can be found in industrial estates located within several towns.
Electric street lighting was installed in 1884, and was the first of its kind in Latin America.
The most successful is Ashdod with more than 200,000 inhabitants, a port and developed infrastructure.
Mangakino, constructed from 1946, was also meant to be a temporary construction town, but it too remains today.
Tres Cantos, near Madrid, is a good example of a successful new town design in Spain.
Bracknell in Berkshire, to the south-west of London, was designated a New Town in 1949 and is still expanding.
The capital of Flevoland is Lelystad, but the biggest city is Almere (pop.
Centenary City, in the Federal Capital Territory, is another planned smart city under development.
Another claimant to the title is Salisbury, established in the early 13th century by the then Bishop of Sarum.
The ancient Romans also founded many new colonial towns through their empire.
Oscar Niemeyer, a close friend, was the chief architect of most public buildings and Roberto Burle Marx was the landscape designer.
The first comprehensively-planned town was Charles Town (later Charleston, South Carolina), which was founded in 1670, planned in 1672, and relocated in 1680.
Modi'in also rates higher in terms of average salary and graduation rates than the national average.
Jan Zamoyski founded the city of Zamość in order to circumvent royal tariffs and duties while also serving as the capital for his mini-state.
Fordlândia was built to be a part of Henry Ford's motor company.
The former capital of Brazil was Rio de Janeiro, and resources tended to be concentrated in the southeast region of Brazil.
Brasília was built in 41 months, from 1956 to April 21, 1960, when it was officially inaugurated.
Also in the 1970s, just north of the existing town of Spring, Texas (north of Houston), oil and gas industry executive George P. Mitchell developed The Woodlands, a major residential and commercial master planned community which is now considered one of the premier residential and business destinations in the Houston area.
Most planned settlements of medieval Europe were created in the period of about the 12th to 14th centuries.
Convict labour was not employed and the colony in theory would be financially self-sufficient; in practice, government assistance was used in the early stages.
Each of these towns are in Scotland's list of 20 most populated towns and cities.
Scotland also gained three more new towns: Cumbernauld in 1956, famous for its enclosed 'town centre', Livingston (1962) and Irvine (1966).
* Forest Lake, Queensland, Brisbane (completed 2004)
The ancient Indus systems of sewage and drainage that were developed and used in cities throughout the Indus Valley were far more advanced than any found in contemporary urban sites in the Middle East and even more efficient than those in some areas of modern South Asia today.
Other notable planned cities in Brazil include Teresina (The first one, inaugurated in 1842), Petrópolis, Boa Vista, Palmas, Londrina, and Maringá (the latter two in the state of Paraná).
The CPR exercised complete control over the development of land under its ownership.
The Thatcher Government, from 1979, saw the new towns as a socialist experiment to be discontinued, and all the development corporations were dissolved by 1992 (with the closure of Milton Keynes Development Corporation), even for the third generation towns whose growth targets were still far from being achieved.
* the Barlow Commission (1940) into the distribution of industrial population,
Most of these constructions were initiated during the period of rapid economic growth in the 1960s, but construction continued into the 1980s.
It was not until 1967 that the Wright Report planned four towns in County Dublin.
In Peterlee the abstract artist Victor Pasmore was appointed part of the design team, which led to the building of the Apollo Pavilion.
Both included residential, commercial and industrial components.
These were generally characterised by a grid of streets and a planned water-supply; and many modern European towns of originally Roman foundation still retain part of the original street-grid.
The grid featured wide parallel streets, spanning a gently sloping valley between hills (Batman's Hill, Flagstaff Hill and Eastern Hill) and roughly parallel to the course of the Yarra River.
Planned cities in Poland have a long history and fall primarily into three time periods during which planned towns developed in Poland and its neighbors that once comprised the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
The disastrous consequences of the fire were considered as the design included five broad avenues which divided the town into sections and each block was divided by alleys.
Brasília: Juscelino Kubitschek, President of Brazil from 1956 to 1961, ordered the construction of Brasília, fulfilling the promise of the Constitution and his own political campaign promise.
In the San Francisco Bay Area, master planned commercial developments such as Bishop Ranch in San Ramon and Hacienda Business Park in Pleasanton have attracted major corporate tenants to relocate from downtown Oakland and San Francisco; these companies include Safeway, Chevron Corporation and AT&T (as the former Pacific Bell).
In the 1980s another two similar cities were built by Berlusconi, Milano 3 and Milano Visconti.
Construction of Kawerau began in 1953.
* Several ongoing developments in Hwaseong, including Bongdam, Dongtan, and Hyangnam
These are the Nobleman's Republic (16th to 18th centuries), the interwar period (1918–1939) and Socialist Realism (1944–1956).
Littoria was populated with immigrants coming from Northern Italy, mainly from Friuli and Veneto.
The walls were actually completed five years later in 1618.
One province of the Netherlands, Flevoland (pop.
In spite of the relative success of new towns in the London Metropolitan green belt, London continued to suffer from a chronic housing shortage, especially in the south-east.
Development in Erin Mills continues to this day.
Prior to the boom, these were just villages or towns.
