This forms a very strong and rigid partition which is at the same time fire-resisting and of lightweight, and when finished measures only from two to four inches (102&nbsp;mm) thick.
**Finally, one may have a brand new trowel "not yet broken-in" which he will used for "grinding"; this is when the plaster is nearly hardened and he is smoothing out any bumps or filling in any small dips (cat faces) to make the wall look like a uniform sheet of glossy white plaster.
Care must be taken when standing under your trowel or another plasterer.
They are also inspected to make sure no bumps are left on the walls from splashed plaster or water.
Broad spaces of background are now exposed by removing the finishing coat, thus revealing the colored plaster beneath, and following this the outlines of the rest of the design are scratched with an iron knife through the outer skimming to the underlying tinted surface.
Many modern plasterers use a hose with a special nozzle with a fine mist spray to dampen walls when rubbing up (using a wood float to bring a consistent finish).
Most plasterers have their own preference for the size of the trowel they use.
They have a brassy luster to them, a rubber handle and won't pit or rust if accidentally left in water overnight'' while others prefer a regular steal trowel which requires more maintenance but lasts for quite a long time and the pitting can give it a "bite" that helps when "finishing" (the last pass when the plaster is setting).
*Two-coat work is often used for factories or warehouses and the less important rooms of residences.
When this coat is nearly dry, it is finished with a smooth-skimming, 1/12 to 1/8&nbsp;inches thick, of Parian, selenitic or other fine cement or lime, only as much as can be finished in one day being laid on.
Sometimes an accelerant will be added to a mix to hasten the time delay from the initial mixing phase to when the plaster starts to set.
Typically a retarding agent is added to the mix.
The lay-on and mix is the same as with regular texturing.
In the UK, patents were obtained for "compositions" in 1803 (Thomas Fulchner), 1815 (Christopher Dihl) and 1817 (Peter Hamelin).
From this bucket he hangs his trowel or trowels and places into it various tools.
* '''''Set up tools'''''
* Rough stucco is used to imitate stonework.
The surface while still soft is scratched with a lath to give a key for the next coat.
The job of the laborer is to set up ahead of and clean up behind the plasterers, so they can concentrate on spreading the "mud" on the walls.
Typically walls are smooth and sometimes ceilings.
This saves much needed time as this process is a race against the chemical reaction.
The finishing or setting coat is about 3/16&nbsp;inches thick, and is worked with a hand float on the surface of the rendering, which must first be well wetted.
The earliest plasters known to us were lime-based.
The sawdust is used to bind the mix sometimes to make it go further.
It should be laid on diagonally, each trowelful overlapping the previous one.
Sand or marble dust, and lime, were sometimes added.
Retardant is added so that larger mixes can be made, since the texture technique doesn't require the person to wait until it starts to set before working it.
Roughcast or pebbledash plastering is a rough form of external plastering in much use for country houses.
The reason for this is that invariably when a ceiling is being worked on plaster will fall and splash onto the walls.
However, this was not the first time "artificial stone" had been widely used.
The whole surface should be uniformly scoured two or three times, with an interval between each operation of from six to twenty-four hours.
All timbers over three inches (76&nbsp;mm)  wide should be counter-lathed, that is, have a fillet or double lath nailed along the centre upon which the laths are then nailed.
However a texture mix doesn't need to be smoothed out when it starts to set:
Two-coat work is described as render and set on walls, and lath, plaster and set, or lath, lay and set on laths.
This is why smooth ceilings, that use no retardant and sometimes even accelerant, are done before the walls.
A splash coat is a very wet mix of two parts cement to one part sand that is "splashed" on the wall using the plasterers brush until the wall is covered.
If a wall is to be smooth and the ceiling textured, typically the wall is done first, then the ceiling after the wall has set.
Widely used by the architect Robert Adam who in turn commissioned George Jackson to produce reverse-cut boxwood moulds (many of which to Adam designs).
Any small holes or inequalities are filled up as he proceeds.
* The coarse stuff applied as the first coat is composed of sand and lime, usually in proportions approximating to two to one, with hair mixed into it in quantities of about a pound to two or three cubic feet of mortar.
Care must be taken not to stand directly under your trowel when doing this as it is very, very unpleasant, and dangerous to get a grain of sand in your eye; which is compounded by the irritation from the lime as well.
This line is then smoothed with a paintbrush to make the transition seamless.
Before use it must be well beaten, or teased, to separate the lumps.
Various experiments mixing different limes with volcanic earths took place in the 18th century.
Following the closure of the factory in South London, Coade stone stopped being produced, and the formula was lost.
Laths must be nailed so as to break joint in bays three or four feet wide with ends butted one against the other.
In Scotland this part of the process is termed "straightening" and in America "browning", and is performed when the first coat is dry, so as to form a straight surface to receive the finishing coat.
once the moisture of the plaster starts to be drawn by the board a second pass is made.
Holding the hawk in his off-hand and his trowel in his primary the plasterer then scoops a bulging roll of plaster onto his trowel.
John Smeaton (from 1756) experimented with hydraulic limes and concluded that the best limes were those fired from limestones containing a considerable quantity of clayey material.
The slabs may be obtained either with a keyed surface, which requires finishing with a setting coat when the partition or ceiling is in position, or a smooth finished face, which may be papered or painted immediately the joints have been carefully made.
The 17th century saw the introduction of different types of internal plasterwork.
In the 14th century, decorative plasterwork called pargeting was being used in South-East England to decorate the exterior of timber-framed buildings.
These were made primarily with a cement mix often incorporating fine and coarse aggregates for texture, pigments or dyes to imitate colouring and veining of natural stones, as well as other additives.
The process for three coat work is as follows:
Using a hose brings a superior finish and is more consistent in colour as there is more chance in catching the render before it has a chance to harden too much.
He then adds in extra expenses for soffits and cathedral ceilings.
If the walls are concrete, a splash coat is needed to ensure bonding.
Normally only three or four mixes are done in a day as plastering is very tiring and not as effective under unnatural lighting in the months with early dusk.
This was a lime-based mix and included "oyls of tar, turpentine and linseed" besides many other ingredients.
The second coat can be a slightly weaker mix 5/1/1, or the same as the base coat with maybe a water proofer in the mix added to the water to minimize efflorescence (rising of salts).
At certain angles these lights can make even the smoothest wall look like the surface of the moon.
Corrado Parducci was a notable plaster worker in the Detroit area during the middle half of the 20th century.
When on laths the stuff should be plastic enough to be worked through the spaces between the laths to form a key, yet so firm as not to drop off.
The principal varieties of stucco are common, rough, trowelled and bastard.
A very fine smooth surface is produced by means of the hand float.
This layer is well scratched to give a key for the next coat.
Black and grays are obtained by using forge ashes in varying proportions, greens by green enamel, reds by using litharge or red lead, and blues by mixing oxide or carbonate of copper with the other materials.
* Bastard stucco is of similar composition, but less labor is expended on it.
finished with a thin setting coat or slab.
The 18th century gave rise to renewed interest in innovative external plasters.
He starts about an inch above the floor and works his way upwards to the ceiling.
*thus a retardant such as "Cream of tartar" or sugar can be used to prolong the setting time, and is easily scraped off the walls.
He can then just walk away and let it set with care taken not too leave any globs and to make sure the corners look smooth and linear.
If this happens it is said the mix has "snapped" and is normally due to using old product or various types of weather (humidity or hot days can cause plaster to set quicker).
The plaster also generates its own heat and houses can become quite hellish.
It could also be cast to form mouldings and other ornaments.
In ancient India and China, renders in clay and gypsum plasters were used to produce a smooth surface over rough stone or mud brick walls, while in early Egyptian tombs, walls were coated with lime and gypsum plaster and the finished surface was often painted or decorated.
Lathing in metal, either in wire or in the form of perforated galvanised sheets, is now extensively used on account of its fireproof and lasting quality.
There are many kinds of this material in different designs, the best known in England being the Jhilmil, the Bostwick, Lathing, and Expanded Metal lathing.
(They will show up if painted and interfere with flooring and trim).
A wood float or plastic float is used to rub down the walls.
Onto the mixing table the plasterer usually sets his "hawk" so it will be handy when he needs to grab it and to keep dirt off of it.
In Australia, plaster or cement render that is applied to external brickwork on dwellings or commercial buildings can be one or two coats.
Stucco lustro was another a form of imitation marble (sometimes called stucco lucido) where a thin layer of lime or gypsum plaster was applied over a scored support of lime, with pigments scattered on surface of the wet plaster.
This makes a strong, straight, sanitary coating for walls and ceilings.
From the time the bags are dumped into the barrel to when the wall is completely set is called a mix.
*'''''Scratching'''''
Manila hemp fiber has been used as a substitute for hair.
very little pressure is applied and the trowel is kept relatively flat towards the wall.
Rent laths give the best results, as they split in a line with the grain of the wood, and are stronger and not so liable to twist as machine-made laths, some of the fibers of which are usually cut in the process of sawing.
* Fine stuff mixed with sand is used for the setting coat.
Hair was employed as reinforcement, with additives to assist set or plasticity including malt, urine, beer, milk and eggs.
Once the coat is on uniformly the plasterer then goes back and birds his corners.
This is normally done on cold days when setting is delayed or for small jobs to minimize the wait.
Retarded plaster can easily be scraped off a smooth plaster wall when wet.
The plasterer usually shows up after the hangers have finished building all the internal walls, by attaching blueboard over the frames of the house with screws.
**An alternative method seen in older houses of forming a rounded or bullnosed corner uses a quirked wooden staff bead.
Stucco is a term loosely applied to nearly all kinds of external plastering, whether composed of lime or of cement.
This type of sheet rock is designed to absorb some of the moisture of the plaster and thus allow it to cling the plaster better before it sets.
*Three-coat work is usually specified for all good work.
While most tools have remained unchanged over the centuries, developments in modern materials have led to some changes.
In the mid-15th century, Venetian skilled workers developed a new type of external facing, called marmorino made by applying lime directly onto masonry.
*'''''Laying on'''''
It is one of the oldest forms of external plastering.
However the amount used is often estimated; much the way one adds a dash of salt to a recipe.
Plaster is run up to the staff bead and then cut back locally to the bead or "quirked" to avoid a weak feather edge where the plaster meets the bead.
Screeds are narrow strips of plastering, carefully plumbed and leveled, so as to form a guide upon which the floating rule is run, thus securing a perfectly horizontal or vertical surface, or, in the case of circular work, a uniform curve.
* Floating stuff is of finer texture than that used for pricking up, and is used in a softer state, enabling it to be worked well into the keying of the first coat.
For short ceilings one can also work with milk crates.
Lathing nails are usually of iron, cut, wrought or cast, and in the better class of work they are galvanized to prevent rusting.
The shingle is often dipped in hot lime paste, well stirred up, and used as required.
**For use in setting it is mixed with fine washed sand in the ratio of one to three.
Sand finish is common for external render and may be one or two coats.
*and since time is not as restraining of a factor on textured ceilings a large mix, or back-to-back mixes can be done and all ceilings covered at the same time.
The sawdust should be used dry.
*another reason is that a bird is usually run along the top corner after doing a smooth ceiling, then it is easier to maintain this edge by doing the wall last.
For cathedral ceilings or very high walls, staging is set up and one works topside, the others further below.
Then holding the trowel parallel to the wall and at a slight angle of the wrist he tries to uniformly roll the plaster onto the wall.
Typically if the ceiling is to be smooth it is done first, before the walls.
The second method is quicker but can be several millimeters out of plumb.
Alternatively, both coats can be applied with the plasterer using a t-bar to screed the final coat until it is plumb straight and square.
The popularisation of Portland cement changed the composition of stucco, as well as mortar, to a harder material.
Canvas and mortar were in general use in Great Britain up to the middle of the 20th century.
Oil mastics introduced in the UK in this period included a "Composition or stone paste" patented in 1765 by David Wark.
This technique was practised in antiquity and was described by Vasari as being a quick and durable method for decorating building facades.
Into the bucket also goes a large brush used to splash water onto the wall and to clean his tools, a paint brush for smoothing corners, and  a corner bird for forming corners (''though many share one good bird to keep the room harmonious'').
**For cornices and for setting when the second coat is not allowed time to dry properly, a special compound must be used.
With this increased strength, it ceased to be just a veneer and became a more integral part of the building structure.
By breaking the joints of the lathing in this way, the tendency for the plaster to crack along the line of joints is diminished and a better key is obtained.
Plastering is done year round but unique problems may arise from season to season.
It is worked with a hand float covered with rough felt (a stiff bristled brush can also be used), which forms a sand surface on the plaster.
**The bead must be measured and cut to size; care is taken not to bend or warp it.
Combinations of these colors are made to produce any desired tone.
This made it even more versatile and durable.
Zinc nails are sometimes used, but are costly.
It is useful sometimes for heavy cornices and similar work, as it renders the material light and strong.
Staying away from the corner he then gets a trowel with a nice banana curve in it and starts to run it over the wall in a figure eight or Ess pattern, making sure to cross all areas at least once.
For two coat, some plasterers apply two full depth bands of render (one at the base of the wall and one around chest height) which are screed plumb and square and allowed to dry while applying the first coat over the remaining exposed wall.
''From my experience the preferred brand is a Marshalltown stainless steel.
Plasterers will typically divide a room, (especially a large or high-ceilinged wall) into top and bottom.
All rooms and walls are inspected for cracking and dents or scratches that may have been caused from others bumping into the walls.
The walls intended to be plastered are hanged with "Blueboard" (named as such for the industry standard of the outer paper being blue-grey in color).
In 1774, in France, a mémoire was published on the composition of ancient mortars.
Walls liable to damp are sometimes battened and lathed to form an air cavity between the damp wall and the plastering.
Some plasterers used lime putty in second coat instead of dehydrated lime in the render.
Following this, and as a backlash to the disappointment felt due to the repeated failure of oil mastics, in the second half of the 18th century water-based renders gained popularity once more.
Hair functions in much the same way as the strands in fiberglass resin, by controlling and containing any small cracks within the mortar while it dries or when it is subject to flexing.
At the present time it has fallen into disfavor, but in the early part of the 19th century a great deal of this work was done.
This is often gauged stuff, composed of three or four parts of lime putty and one part of plaster of Paris, mixed up in small quantities immediately before use.
The wall should be sufficiently rough to form a key and well wetted to prevent the moisture being absorbed from the plaster.
The two last-named are also widely used in America.
The difficulty of working upside down often results in plaster bombs splattering on the floors, walls and people below.
* wet dash: the traditional roughcast, harling the scratch or undercoat is left to cure and in the final coat the gravel/agrigate is mixed with the lime and sand and thrown on with the plaster spoon/scoop.
The plasterer needs to fill a 5-gallon bucket partway with water.
Any splatters from a smooth ceiling can easily be scraped off bare blueboard but not from an already plastered wall.
this is normally Cream of Tartar (or "Dope" in the plasterer's jargon) and care must be taken with the amount added.
Following the fall of the Roman Empire, the addition of marble dust to plaster to allow the production of fine detail and a hard, smooth finish in hand-modelled and moulded decoration was not used until the Renaissance.
Remove or neatly stack all trash.
In this case the wall is done first and the corner formed with the bird.
Also in the 19th century, various mixtures of modified gypsum plasters, such as Keene's cement, appeared.
The first coat or rendering is from 1/2 to 3/4&nbsp;inches thick, and is mixed in the proportions of from one part of cement to two of sand to one part to five of sand.
A smaller proportion of hair is also used.
For internal walls, two coats is the standard and follows the same method as for external rendering but with a weaker mix of five or six sand to one cement and one lime.
*'''''Inspection'''''
This process leaves the plaster with a close-grained and fairly smooth surface, offering little or no key to the coat that is to follow.
The drywall plaster is a thick paste.
From the mix table the plasterer scoops some "mud" onto the center of his hawk with his trowel.
In Scotland it is termed the "finishing coat", and in America the "hard finish coat" or "putty coat".
Around the 4th century BC, the Romans discovered the principles of the hydraulic set of lime, which by the addition of highly reactive forms of silica and alumina, such as volcanic earths, could solidify rapidly even under water.
some wield trowels as large as 20&nbsp;inches long but the norm seems to be a 16"×5".
If it is to be textured, it is done after the walls.
A lay-on trowel tends to be too flat for this and the vacuum caused by the water can stick it to the wall, forcing him to tear it off and thus he has to rework the area.
He then fills in the area near the ceiling so he will not have to stretch to reach it during the rest of the wall; And he forms the corner with his bird.
Around 7500 BC, the people of 'Ain Ghazal in Jordan used lime mixed with unheated crushed limestone to make plaster which was used on a large scale for covering walls, floors, and hearths in their houses.
It is done by the plasterer with a hand float that he applies vigorously with a rapid circular motion, at the same time sprinkling the work with water from a stock brush in the other hand.
Drummy is a term used to describe when the render doesn't bond completely with the wall, either because the wall is too smooth, a coat is too thick or by being floated when the render has hardened too much, leaving an air space that makes a drumming sound when a metal tool is "rubbed" over it.
* Trowelled stucco, the finishing coat of this work, consists of three parts sand to two parts fine stuff.
By the mid 19th century manufacturing centres were preparing cast stones based on cement for use in buildings.
Once the plaster is on the wall and starts to set (this can be determined by the table that sets first), the plasterer gingerly sprinkles water onto the wall; this helps to stall the setting and to create a slip.
* dry dash: while the first coat is still soft, gravel, shingle or other small stones are evenly thrown on with a small scoop and then brushed over with thin lime mortar to give a uniform surface.
Early 19th century rendered façades were colour-washed with distemper; oil paint for external walls was introduced around 1840.
''Time becomes a big factor here as once the plaster starts to harden (set) it will do so fairly rapidly and the plasterer has a small margin of error to get the wall smooth''.
It is laid on in two coats with a skimming float, scoured off at once, and then trowelled.
you add a small scoop of retarder, dependent on the size of the mix.
Two coat is superior as, although more expensive, it gives a more consistent finish and less chance of becoming drummy or cracking.
At the place where the two edges of wallboards meet there is a seam.
Mixes for renders were patented, including a "Water Cement, or Stucco" consisting of lime, sand, bone ash and lime-water (Dr Bryan Higgins, 1779).
Any debris in the plaster can become a major nuisance.
**The scouring of the floating coat is of great importance, for it consolidates the material, and, besides hardening it, prevents it from cracking.
it is fixed to a backing with a central handhold and is roughly the size of a standard trowel.
The craft or modelled plasterwork, inspired by the style of the early modern period, was revived by the designers of the Arts and Crafts movement in late-19th- and early-20th-century England.
In some cases, with fireproof ceilings, for instance, the metal lathing are hung up with wire hangers so as to allow a space of several inches between the soffit of the concrete floor and the ceiling.
Traditionally, crack propagation was arrested by stirring chopped horsehair thoroughly into the plaster mix.
*Ceiling second or first
During this same period, terracotta was reintroduced into Europe and was widely used for the production of ornament.
Then by pouncing through the pricked cartoon, the design is transferred to the plastered surface.
Two finish two techniques can be used:
Render is applied using a hawk and trowel and pushed on about 12&nbsp;mm thick to begin.
The pigments used for this work include Indian red, Turkey red, Antwerp blue, German blue, umber, ochre, purple brown, bone black or oxide of manganese for black.
