For instance he asks which is better—a bad democracy or a country reigned by a tyrant.
The oldest surviving complete manuscript for many of the dialogues is the Clarke Plato (Codex Oxoniensis Clarkianus 39, or Codex Boleianus MS E.D.
Plato was the innovator of the written dialogue and dialectic forms in philosophy, which originate with him.
The philosopher came from one of the wealthiest and most politically active families in&nbsp;Athens.
To help establish the text, the older evidence of papyri and the independent evidence of the testimony of commentators and other authors (i.e., those who quote and refer to an old text of Plato which is no longer extant) are also used.
This is not to say that Socrates is consistent: a man who is his friend in one dialogue may be an adversary or subject of his mockery in another.
Deeply influenced by Nietzsche and Heidegger, Strauss nonetheless rejects their condemnation of Plato and looks to the dialogues for a solution to what all three latter day thinkers acknowledge as 'the crisis of the West.'
He disparages sophists generally, and Prodicus specifically in the ''Apology'', whom he also slyly jabs in the ''Cratylus'' for charging the hefty fee of fifty drachmas for a course on language and grammar.
Based on ancient sources, most modern scholars believe that he was born in Athens or Aegina between 429 and 423 BCE.
Although ''Platon'' was a fairly common name (31 instances are known from Athens alone), the name does not occur in Plato's known family line.
In some editions however the readings in the papyri or testimonia are favoured in some places by the editing critic of the text.
Just as shadows are temporary, inconsequential epiphenomena produced by physical objects, physical objects are themselves fleeting phenomena caused by more substantial causes, the ideals of which they are mere instances.
During the early Islamic era, Persian and Arab scholars translated much of Plato into Arabic and wrote commentaries and interpretations on Plato's, Aristotle's and other Platonist philosophers' works (see Al-Farabi, Avicenna, Averroes, Hunayn ibn Ishaq).
In the ''Apology'', Socrates tries to dismiss rumors that he is a sophist and defends himself against charges of disbelief in the gods and corruption of the young.
In other words, Socrates was able to recognize two worlds: the apparent world, which constantly changes, and an unchanging and unseen world of forms, which may be the cause of what is apparent.
The ''Cambridge Greek and Latin Texts'' and ''Cambridge Classical Texts and Commentaries'' series includes Greek editions of the ''Protagoras'', ''Symposium'', ''Phaedrus'', ''Alcibiades'', and ''Clitophon'', with English philological, literary, and, to an extent, philosophical commentary.
Some dialogues have no narrator but have a pure "dramatic" form (examples: ''Meno'', ''Gorgias'', ''Phaedrus'', ''Crito'', ''Euthyphro''), some dialogues are narrated by Socrates, wherein he speaks in first person (examples: ''Lysis'', ''Charmides'', ''Republic'').
Some scholars indicate that the theory of Forms is absent from the late dialogues, its having been refuted in the ''Parmenides'', but there isn't total consensus that the ''Parmenides'' actually refutes the theory of Forms.
It should, however, be kept in mind that many of the positions in the ordering are still highly disputed, and also that the very notion that Plato's dialogues can or should be "ordered" is by no means universally accepted.
According to Burnet, "the opening scene of the ''Charmides'' is a glorification of the whole family connection ... Plato's dialogues are not only a memorial to Socrates, but also the happier days of his own family."
Pythagoras, or in a broader sense, the Pythagoreans, allegedly exercised an important influence on the work of Plato.
The ideal city is not promoted, but only used to magnify the different kinds of individual humans and the state of their soul.
In some of Plato's dialogues, this is expressed by Socrates, who spoke of forms in formulating a solution to the problem of universals.
Plato must have been instructed in grammar, music, and gymnastics by the most distinguished teachers of his time.
Accordingly the material principle is the Great and Small i.e.
In his description, Plato has Sparta in mind.
In the ''Apology'' (19b, c), Socrates says Aristophanes slandered him in a comic play, and blames him for causing his bad reputation, and ultimately, his death.
''First Alcibiades'' (*), ''Second Alcibiades'' (‡), ''Clitophon'' (*), ''Epinomis'' (‡), ''Epistles'' (*), ''Hipparchus'' (‡), ''Menexenus''(*), ''Minos'' (‡) ''(Rival) Lovers'' (‡), ''Theages'' (‡)
Karl Popper, on the other hand, claims that dialectic is the art of intuition for "visualising the divine originals, the Forms or Ideas, of unveiling the Great Mystery behind the common man's everyday world of appearances."
In addition, the ideal city is used as an image to illuminate the state of one's soul, or the will, reason, and desires combined in the human body.
In the ''Gorgias'', Socrates says that his trial will be like a doctor prosecuted by a cook who asks a jury of children to choose between the doctor's bitter medicine and the cook's tasty treats (521e–522a).
These correspond to the "appetite" part of the soul.
While it has not survived to the present day, all the extant medieval Greek manuscripts are based on his edition.
However, it must be taken into account that the ideal city outlined in the ''Republic'' is qualified by Socrates as the ideal ''luxurious'' city, examined to determine how it is that injustice and justice grow in a city (''Republic'' 372e).
Many of the greatest early modern scientists and artists who broke with Scholasticism and fostered the flowering of the Renaissance, with the support of the Plato-inspired Lorenzo (grandson of Cosimo), saw Plato's philosophy as the basis for progress in the arts and sciences.
They include ''The Apology of Socrates'', ''Charmides'', ''Crito'', ''Euthyphro'', ''Ion'', ''Laches'', ''Lesser Hippias'', ''Lysis'', ''Menexenus'', and ''Protagoras'' (often considered one of the last of the "early dialogues").
* ''Governing'' (Rulers or Philosopher Kings) — those who are intelligent, rational, self-controlled, in love with wisdom, well suited to make decisions for the community.
Friedrich Nietzsche notoriously attacked Plato's "idea of the good itself" along with many fundamentals of Christian morality, which he interpreted as "Platonism for the masses" in one of his most important works, ''Beyond Good and Evil ''(1886).
Whereas those classified as "early dialogues" often conclude in aporia, the so-called "middle dialogues" provide more clearly stated positive teachings that are often ascribed to Plato such as the theory of Forms.
The Academy was a large enclosure of ground about six stadia outside of Athens proper.
More than one dialogue contrasts knowledge and opinion, perception and reality, nature and custom, and body and soul.
These correspond to the "spirit" part of the soul.
Socrates is attempting to make an image of a rightly ordered human, and then later goes on to describe the different kinds of humans that can be observed, from tyrants to lovers of money in various kinds of cities.
Another story is that the name came from a supposed a former owner, a citizen of Athens also named Academus.
Although their popularity has fluctuated over the years, the works of Plato have never been without readers since the time they were written.
Socrates is often found arguing that knowledge is not empirical, and that it comes from divine insight.
This assumption may not be true in all cases.
The traditional date of Plato's birth (428/427) is based on a dubious interpretation of Diogenes Laertius, who says, "When Socrates was gone, Plato joined Cratylus the Heracleitean and Hermogenes, who philosophized in the manner of Parmenides.
For the last two tetralogies and the apocrypha, the oldest surviving complete manuscript is Codex Parisinus graecus 1807, designated ''A'', which was written nearly contemporaneously to ''B'', circa 900 AD.
Plato's philosophical views had many societal implications, especially on the idea of an ideal state or government.
In five volumes edited by John Burnet, its first edition was published 1900-1907, and it is still available from the publisher, having last been printed in 1993.
He also tells us what the material substrate is of which the Forms are predicated in the case of sensible things, and the One in that of the Forms - that it is this the duality (the Dyad, ἡ δυάς), the Great and Small (τὸ μέγα καὶ τὸ μικρόν).
Alfred North Whitehead once noted: "the safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato."
Aristocracy is the form of government (''politeia'') advocated in Plato's
It is probable that both were influenced by Orphism.
The ''Theaetetus'' is a peculiar case: a dialogue in dramatic form embedded within another dialogue in dramatic form.
He says that his quest to resolve the riddle of the oracle put him at odds with his fellow man, and that this is the reason he has been mistaken for a menace to the city-state of Athens.
According to Plato, a state made up of different kinds of souls will, overall, decline from an aristocracy (rule by the best) to a timocracy (rule by the honorable), then to an oligarchy (rule by the few), then to a democracy (rule by the people), and finally to tyranny (rule by one person, rule by a tyrant).
The only Platonic work known to western scholarship was Timaeus, until translations were made at a time post the fall of Constantinople, which occurred during 1453, George Gemistos Plethon brought Plato's original writings from Constantinople in the century of its fall.
Lewis Campbell was the first to make exhaustive use of stylometry to prove objectively that the ''Critias'', ''Timaeus'', ''Laws'', ''Philebus'', ''Sophist'', and ''Statesman'' were all clustered together as a group, while the ''Parmenides'', ''Phaedrus'', ''Republic'', and ''Theaetetus'' belong to a separate group, which must be earlier (given Aristotle's statement in his ''Politics'' that the ''Laws'' was written after the ''Republic''; cf.
Plato, through the words of Socrates, asserts that societies have a tripartite class structure corresponding to the appetite/spirit/reason structure of the individual soul.
''A'' probably had an initial volume containing the first 7 tetralogies which is now lost, but of which a copy was made, Codex Venetus append.
W. A. Borody argues that an Athenian openness towards a wider range of sexuality may have contributed to the Athenian philosophers' openness towards a wider range of thought, a cultural situation Borody describes as "polymorphously discursive."
Plato never presents himself as a participant in any of the dialogues, and with the exception of the ''Apology'', there is no suggestion that he heard any of the dialogues firsthand.
These dialogues include ''Cratylus'', ''Phaedo'', ''Phaedrus'', ''Republic'', ''Symposium'', ''Parmenides'', and ''Theaetetus''.
Cornell University Press has also begun the ''Agora'' series of English translations of classical and medieval philosophical texts, including a few of Plato's.
Albert Einstein suggested that the scientist who takes philosophy seriously would have to avoid systematization and take on many different roles, and possibly appear as a Platonist or Pythagorean, in that such a one would have "the viewpoint of logical simplicity as an indispensable and effective tool of his research."
During the Renaissance, with the general resurgence of interest in classical civilization, knowledge of Plato's philosophy would become widespread again in the West.
The knowledge must be present, Socrates concludes, in an eternal, non-experiential form.
The allegory of the cave (often said by scholars to represent Plato's own epistemology and metaphysics) is intimately connected to his political ideology (often said to also be Plato's own), that only people who have climbed out of the cave and cast their eyes on a vision of goodness are fit to rule.
The Academy operated until it was destroyed by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 84 BCE.
(2) There is evidence that Plato possibly took from Pythagoras the idea that mathematics and, generally speaking, abstract thinking is a secure basis for philosophical thinking as well as "for substantial theses in science and morals".
The Oxford Classical Texts offers the current standard complete Greek text of Plato's complete works.
He is widely considered the most pivotal figure in the development of philosophy, especially the Western tradition.
Dodds is the classical scholar whose writings most illuminated the Hellenic descent (in) ''The Greeks and the Irrational'' ...
According to Tertullian, Plato simply died in his sleep.
* ''Productive'' (Workers) — the labourers, carpenters, plumbers, masons, merchants, farmers, ranchers, etc.
Socrates was not a family man, and saw himself as the son of his mother, who was apparently a midwife.
Diogenes Laertius ''Lives'' 3.37).
One story, based on a mutilated manuscript, suggests Plato died in his bed, whilst a young Thracian girl played the flute to him.
It was this edition which established standard Stephanus pagination, still in use today.
Eventually Plato left Syracuse.
According to a disputed tradition, reported by Diogenes Laertius, Ariston traced his descent from the king of Athens, Codrus, and the king of Messenia, Melanthus.
The following represents one relatively common such division.
Then, at twenty-eight, Hermodorus says, Plato went to Euclides in Megara."
The forms, according to Socrates, are archetypes or abstract representations of the many types of things, and properties we feel and see around us, that can only be perceived by reason ().
As Debra Nails argues, "The text itself gives no reason to infer that Plato left immediately for Megara and implies the very opposite."
Many have interpreted Plato as stating—even having been the first to write—that knowledge is justified true belief, an influential view that informed future developments in epistemology.
Apollodorus assures his listener that he is recounting the story, which took place when he himself was an infant, not from his own memory, but as remembered by Aristodemus, who told him the story years ago.
''B'' contains the first six tetralogies and is described internally as being written by "John the Calligrapher" on behalf of Arethas of Caesarea.
The second edition is still in progress with only the first volume, printed in 1995, and the ''Republic'', printed in 2003, available.
For example, Socrates thinks that perfect justice exists (although it is not clear where) and his own trial would be a cheap copy of it.
There is some discrepancy between his early and later views.
In the ''Symposium'', the two of them are drinking together with other friends.
In his chapter on Plato and the Irrational Soul ... Dodds traces Plato's spiritual evolution from the pure rationalist of the ''Protagoras'' to the transcendental psychologist, influenced by the Pythagoreans and Orphics, of the later works culminating in the ''Laws''."
Their account is in full agreement with Aristotle's description of Plato's metaphysical doctrine.
This is the main thesis of Socrates in the ''Republic'', that the most wisdom the masses can muster is the wise choice of a ruler.
Besides Plato himself, Ariston and Perictione had three other children; these were two sons, Adeimantus and Glaucon, and a daughter Potone, the mother of Speusippus (the nephew and successor of Plato as head of his philosophical Academy).
In the ''Theaetetus'', he is found recruiting as a disciple a young man whose inheritance has been squandered.
Aristotle attributes a different doctrine with respect to the Ideas to Plato and Socrates (''Metaphysics'' 987b1–11).
Yet another account is that it was named after a member of the army of Castor and Pollux, an Arcadian named Echedemus.
In contrast to reticence about himself, Plato often introduced his distinguished relatives into his dialogues, or referred to them with some precision: Charmides has a dialogue named after him; Critias speaks in both ''Charmides'' and ''Protagoras''; and Adeimantus and Glaucon take prominent parts in the ''Republic''.
According to him, sailing and health are not things that everyone is qualified to practice by nature.
Plato almost faced death, but he was sold into slavery.
Plato describes these "philosopher kings" as "those who love the sight of truth" (''Republic'' 475c) and supports the idea with the analogy of a captain and his ship or a doctor and his medicine.
Plato makes it clear in his ''Apology of Socrates'', that he was a devoted young follower of Socrates.
According to some accounts, Ariston tried to force his attentions on Perictione, but failed in his purpose; then the god Apollo appeared to him in a vision, and as a result, Ariston left Perictione unmolested.
While looked to for Plato's "mature" answers to the questions posed by his earlier works, those answers are difficult to discern.
The remaining dialogues are classified as "late" and are generally agreed to be difficult and challenging pieces of philosophy.
In the ''Second Letter'', it says, "no writing of Plato exists or ever will exist, but those now said to be his are those of a Socrates become beautiful and new" (341c); if the Letter is Plato's, the final qualification seems to call into question the dialogues' historical fidelity.
However, if Plato was not named after an ancestor named Plato (there is no record of one), then the origin of his renaming as ''Plato'' becomes a conundrum.
Plato's own most decisive philosophical influences are usually thought to have been Socrates, Parmenides, Heraclitus and Pythagoras, although few of his predecessors' works remain extant and much of what we know about these figures today derives from Plato himself.
There is no record of a line from Aristocles to Plato's father, Ariston.
However, Socrates tells Theaetetus in his namesake dialogue that he admires Prodicus and has directed many pupils to him.
(3) Plato and Pythagoras shared a "mystical approach to the soul and its place in the material world".
Proponents of dividing the dialogues into periods often consider the ''Parmenides'' and ''Theaetetus'' to come late in this period and be transitional to the next, as they seem to treat the theory of Forms critically (''Parmenides'') or only indirectly (''Theaetetus'').
Due to a lack of surviving accounts, little is known about Plato's early life and education.
A modern scholar who recognized the importance of the unwritten doctrine of Plato was Heinrich Gomperz who described it in his speech during the 7th International Congress of Philosophy in 1930.
For example, Socrates praises the wisdom of Euthyphro many times in the ''Cratylus'', but makes him look like a fool in the ''Euthyphro''.
The importance of the unwritten doctrines does not seem to have been seriously questioned before the 19th century.
The ''Symposium'' is narrated by Apollodorus, a Socratic disciple, apparently to Glaucon.
The content of this lecture has been transmitted by several witnesses.
A number of these postmodern philosophers have thus appeared to disparage Platonism from more or less informed perspectives.
Putting it in a nutshell, Aristotle merely suggests that Socrates' idea of forms can be discovered through investigation of the natural world, unlike Plato's Forms that exist beyond and outside the ordinary range of human understanding.
Many years later, Edmund Gettier famously demonstrated the problems of the justified true belief account of knowledge.
The term "ἄγραφα δόγματα" literally means ''unwritten doctrines'' and it stands for the most fundamental metaphysical teaching of Plato, which he disclosed only orally, and some say only to his most trusted fellows, and which he may have kept secret from the public.
the Dyad, and the essence is the One (τὸ ἕν), since the numbers are derived from the Great and Small by participation in the One" (987 b).
That apprehension of forms is required for knowledge may be taken to cohere with Plato's theory in the ''Theaetetus'' and ''Meno''.
It appears to have undergone corrections by Arethas himself.
Socrates says that he who sees with his eyes is blind, and this idea is most famously captured in his allegory of the cave, and more explicitly in his description of the divided line.
He helped to distinguish between pure and applied mathematics by widening the gap between "arithmetic", now called number theory and "logistic", now called arithmetic.
Indeed, the apprehension of Forms may be at the base of the "account" required for justification, in that it offers foundational knowledge which itself needs no account, thereby avoiding an infinite regression.
The texts of Plato as received today apparently represent the complete written philosophical work of Plato and are generally good by the standards of textual criticism.
One dialogue, ''Protagoras'', begins in dramatic form but quickly proceeds to Socrates' narration of a conversation he had previously with the sophist for whom the dialogue is named; this narration continues uninterrupted till the dialogue's end.
The text as presented is usually not much different from what appears in the Byzantine manuscripts, and papyri and testimonia just confirm the manuscript tradition.
In the ''Protagoras'', Socrates is a guest at the home of Callias, son of Hipponicus, a man whom Socrates disparages in the ''Apology'' as having wasted a great amount of money on sophists' fees.
However, the philosopher king image was used by many after Plato to justify their personal political beliefs.
In several dialogues, most notably the ''Republic'', Socrates inverts the common man's intuition about what is knowable and what is real.
One story is that the name of the Academy comes from the ancient hero, Academus.
The ''Apology'' is Socrates' defense speech, and the ''Crito'' and ''Phaedo'' take place in prison after the conviction.
Five dialogues foreshadow the trial: In the ''Theaetetus'' (210d) and the ''Euthyphro'' (2a–b) Socrates tells people that he is about to face corruption charges.
Some scholars take this as an indication that Plato had by this date wearied of the narrated form.
Hartz's is a teleological interpretation at the core, in which philosophers will ultimately exhaust the available body of knowledge and thus reach "the end of history."
In the ''Phaedo'', the title character lists those who were in attendance at the prison on Socrates' last day, explaining Plato's absence by saying, "Plato was ill." (''Phaedo'' 59b)
These and other references suggest a considerable amount of family pride and enable us to reconstruct Plato's family tree.
The aristocratic state, and the man whose nature corresponds to it, are the objects of Plato's analyses throughout much of the ''Republic'', as opposed to the other four types of states/men, who are discussed later in his work.
The Clarke is given the siglum ''B'' in modern editions.
A large part of the ''Republic'' then addresses how the educational system should be set up to produce these philosopher kings.
The so-called "late dialogues" include ''Critias'', ''Laws'', ''Philebus'', ''Sophist'', ''Statesman'', and ''Timaeus''.
He speaks approvingly of this, and other forms of divine madness (drunkenness, eroticism, and dreaming) in the ''Phaedrus ''(265a–c), and yet in the ''''Republic'''' wants to outlaw Homer's great poetry, and laughter as well.
Apuleius informs us that Speusippus praised Plato's quickness of mind and modesty as a boy, and the "first fruits of his youth infused with hard work and love of study".
Socrates claims that the enlightened men of society must be forced from their divine contemplations and be compelled to run the city according to their lofty insights.
in ''Timaeus'' of the participant is different from what he says in his so-called ''unwritten teachings'' (ἄγραφα δόγματα)."
The ''Protagoras'' is also strongly linked to the ''Symposium'' by characters: all of the formal speakers at the ''Symposium'' (with the exception of Aristophanes) are present at the home of Callias in that dialogue.
More explicitly, Plato himself argues in the ''Timaeus'' that knowledge is always proportionate to the realm from which it is gained.
Democracy then degenerates into tyranny from the conflict of rich and poor.
In his ''Seventh Letter'', Plato notes that his coming of age coincided with the taking of power by the Thirty, remarking, "But a youth under the age of twenty made himself a laughingstock if he attempted to enter the political arena."
It was Plethon's student Bessarion who reconciled Plato with Christian theology, arguing that Plato's views were only ideals, unattainable due to the fall of man.
In the beginning of the ''Theaetetus'' (142c-143b), Euclides says that he compiled the conversation from notes he took based on what Socrates told him of his conversation with the title character.
Plato may have traveled in Italy, Sicily, Egypt and Cyrene.
The first book of the ''Republic'' is often thought to have been written significantly earlier than the rest of the work, although possibly having undergone revisions when the later books were attached to it.
The ''Protagoras'' contains the largest gathering of Socratic associates.
According to Socrates, physical objects and physical events are "shadows" of their ideal or perfect forms, and exist only to the extent that they instantiate the perfect versions of themselves.
The account is based on Diogenes Laertius's reference to an account by Hermippus, a third-century Alexandrian.
In total there are fifty-one such Byzantine manuscripts known, while others may yet be found.
Examples of characters crossing between dialogues can be further multiplied.
In that dialogue, Socrates is presented as mentioning Plato by name as one of those youths close enough to him to have been corrupted, if he were in fact guilty of corrupting the youth, and questioning why their fathers and brothers did not step forward to testify against him if he was indeed guilty of such a crime (33d-34a).
Dion would return to overthrow Dionysius and ruled Syracuse for a short time before being usurped by Calippus, a fellow disciple of Plato.
In several of Plato's dialogues, Socrates promulgates the idea that knowledge is a matter of recollection, and not of learning, observation, or study.
Pyrilampes had a son from a previous marriage, Demus, who was famous for his beauty.
And opinions are characterized by a lack of necessity and stability.
He maintains this view somewhat at his own expense, because in many dialogues, Socrates complains of his forgetfulness.
More problematic was Plato's belief in metempsychosis, transmigration of the soul, as well as his ethical views (on polyamory and euthanasia in particular), which did not match those of Christianity.
Aristotle claimed that the philosophy of Plato closely followed the teachings of the Pythagoreans, and Cicero repeats this claim: "They say Plato learned all things Pythagorean" (''Platonem ferunt didicisse Pythagorea omnia'').
A significant distinction of the early Plato and the later Plato has been offered by scholars such as E.R.
He regarded "logistic" as appropriate for business men and men of war who "must learn the art of numbers or he will not know how to array his troops," while "arithmetic" was appropriate for philosophers "because he has to arise out of the sea of change and lay hold of true being."
The rest of the ''Theaetetus'' is presented as a "book" written in dramatic form and read by one of Euclides' slaves (143c).
Another legend related that, when Plato was an infant, bees settled on his lips while he was sleeping: an augury of the sweetness of style in which he would discourse about philosophy.
Perictione gave birth to Pyrilampes' second son, Antiphon, the half-brother of Plato, who appears in ''Parmenides''.
The philosophic soul according to Socrates has reason, will, and desires united in virtuous harmony.
Many recent philosophers have diverged from what some would describe as the ontological models and moral ideals characteristic of traditional Platonism.
But when the mathematical demonstrations came, including numbers, geometrical figures and astronomy, and finally the statement Good is One seemed to them, I imagine, utterly unexpected and strange; hence some belittled the matter, while others rejected it."
Simplicius quotes Alexander of Aphrodisias, who states that "according to Plato, the first principles of everything, including the Forms themselves are One and Indefinite Duality (ἡ ἀόριστος δυάς), which he called Large and Small (τὸ μέγα καὶ τὸ μικρόν)", and Simplicius reports as well that "one might also learn this from Speusippus and Xenocrates and the others who were present at Plato's lecture on the Good".
Although Socrates influenced Plato directly as related in the dialogues, the influence of Pythagoras upon Plato also appears to have significant discussion in the philosophical literature.
Many intellectuals were schooled in the Academy, the most prominent one being Aristotle.
In ''Ion'', Socrates gives no hint of the disapproval of Homer that he expresses in the ''Republic''.
In many middle period dialogues, such as the ''Phaedo'', ''Republic'' and ''Phaedrus'' Plato advocates a belief in the immortality of the soul, and several dialogues end with long speeches imagining the afterlife.
And this theory may again be seen in the ''Meno'', where it is suggested that true belief can be raised to the level of knowledge if it is bound with an account as to the question of "why" the object of the true belief is so ().
Many papyri which contain fragments of Plato's texts are among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri.
7, with siglum ''W'', with a supposed date in the twelfth century.
According to Diogenes Laërtius, the philosopher was named ''Aristocles'' (Ἀριστοκλῆς) after his grandfather.
Throughout his later life, Plato became entangled with the politics of the city of Syracuse.
His father was Ariston.
Ancient sources describe him as a bright though modest boy who excelled in his studies.
Perictione was sister of Charmides and niece of Critias, both prominent figures of the Thirty Tyrants, the brief oligarchic regime, which followed on the collapse of Athens at the end of the Peloponnesian War (404–403 BCE).
During this first trip Dionysius's brother-in-law, Dion of Syracuse, became one of Plato's disciples, but the tyrant himself turned against Plato.
Clarke 39), which was written in Constantinople in 895 and acquired by Oxford University in 1809.
: "Until philosophers rule as kings or those who are now called kings and leading men genuinely and adequately philosophise, that is, until political power and philosophy entirely coincide, while the many natures who at present pursue either one exclusively are forcibly prevented from doing so, cities will have no rest from evils,... nor, I think, will the human race."
Some of the most famous doctrines are contained in the ''Republic'' during his middle period, as well as in the ''Laws'' and the ''Statesman''.
Socrates twice compares the relationship of the older man and his boy lover to the father-son relationship (''Lysis'' 213a, ''Republic'' 3.403b), and in the ''Phaedo'', Socrates' disciples, towards whom he displays more concern than his biological sons, say they will feel "fatherless" when he is gone.
