It is from this work, perhaps, that his love of the theater originated.
This is something that is not seen in Plautine comedy.
He seems to have followed the same path that Horace did, though Horace is much later, in that he is putting Roman ideas in Greek forms.
They are the earliest surviving intact works in Latin literature.
It was merely by their good graces and unlimited resources that a temporary stage would have been built during specific festivals.
M. Leigh writes in his chapter on Plautus and Hannibal that “the Plautus who emerges from this investigation is one whose comedies persistently touch the rawest nerves in the audience for whom he writes”.
Under the guise of protecting allies, Bickerman tells us, Rome was actually looking to expand its power and control eastward now that the Second Punic War was ended.
Andrews discusses the spatial semantics of Plautus; she has observed that even the different spaces of the stage are thematically charged.
A senex amator is classified as an old man who contracts a passion for a young girl and who, in varying degrees, attempts to satisfy this passion.
Indeed, since Plautus was adapting these plays it would be difficult not to have the same kinds of characters—roles such as slaves, concubines, soldiers, and old men.
Shakespeare borrowed from Plautus as Plautus borrowed from his Greek models.
Plautus's archaic forms are metrically convenient, but may also have had a stylistic effect on his original audience.
Because there was no orchestra, there was no space separating the audience from the stage.
One possible explanation for this is that many Roman slaves were foreigners of Greek origin.
In order to understand the Greek New Comedy of Menander and its similarities to Plautus, it is necessary to discuss, in juxtaposition with it, the days of Greek Old Comedy and its evolution into New Comedy.
Comedy and theater were means for the political commentary of the time – the public conscience.
These are the most common linguistic peculiarities (from the later perspective) in the plays of Plautus, some of them being also found in Terence, and noting them helps in the reading of his works and gives insight into early Roman language and interaction.
The greatest playwrights of the day had quality facilities in which to present their work and, in a general sense, there was always enough public support to keep the theater running and successful.
For example, he names his two main characters “Philocleon” and “Bdelycleon”, which mean “pro-Cleon” and “anti-Cleon”, respectively.
Thirty are unnamed in both the scene headings and the text and there are about nine characters who are named in the ancient text but not in any modern one.
Plautus's epitaph read:
Lowe wrote in his article “Aspects of Plautus’ Originality in the Asinaria”, “Plautus could substantially modify the characterization, and thus the whole emphasis of a play.”
While he makes no specific reference to the possible war with Greece or the previous war (that might be too dangerous), he does seem to push the message that the government should take care of its own people before attempting any other military actions.
One of the best examples of this method is the Plautine slave, a form that plays a major role in quite a few of Plautus’ works.
He says that the “verbosity of the Plautine prologues has often been commented upon and generally excused by the necessity of the Roman playwright to win his audience.” However, in both Menander and Plautus, word play is essential to their comedy.
However, because Plautus found humor in slaves tricking their masters or comparing themselves to great heroes, he took the character a step further and created something distinct.
Both characters seem fixated on food and where their next meal is coming from.
In the ''Casina'', the struggle for control between men and women... is articulated by characters’ efforts to control stage movement into and out of the house.
Also, by using his many Greek references and showing that his plays were originally Greek, “It is possible that Plautus was in a way a teacher of Greek literature, myth, art and philosophy; so too was he teaching something of the nature of Greek words to people, who, like himself, had recently come into closer contact with that foreign tongue and all its riches.”
Also, Shakespeare uses the same kind of opening monologue so common in Plautus’s plays.
The aristocracy was afraid of the power of the theater.
The wooden stages on which Plautus' plays appeared were shallow and long with three openings in respect to the scene-house.
In ''Ralph Roister Doister,'' the character of Matthew Merrygreeke follows in the tradition of both Plautine Parasite and Plautine slave, as he both searches and grovels for food and also attempts to achieve his master’s desires.
A noteworthy example is the use of two prayers in Punic in ''Poenulus'', spoken by the Carthaginian elder Hanno, which are significant to Semitic linguistics because they preserve the Carthaginian pronunciation of the vowels.
Although there are these discrepancies, Packman tries to give a pattern to the female role designations of Plautus.
The small stages had a significant effect on the stagecraft of ancient Roman theater.
Unlike Greek, Plautus most probably did not speak Punic himself, nor was the audience likely to understand it.
Any character in his plays could be compared to a god.
The risk-taking for which Aristophanes is known is noticeably lacking in the New Comedy plays of Menander.
In Ancient Greece during the time of New Comedy, from which Plautus drew so much of his inspiration, there were permanent theaters that catered to the audience as well as the actor.
H. A. Watt stresses the importance of recognizing the fact that the “two plays were written under conditions entirely different and served audiences as remote as the poles.”
Often the geography of the stage and more importantly the play matched the geography of the city so that the audience would be well oriented to the locale of the play.
He even uses a “villain” in ''The Comedy of Errors'' of the same type as the one in ''Menaechmi,'' switching the character from a doctor to a teacher but keeping the character a shrewd, educated man.
Even more practically, they were dismantled quickly due to their potential as fire-hazards.
These two are perfect examples of the stock characters of the pompous soldier and the desperate parasite that appeared in Plautine comedies.
Roman drama, specifically Plautine comedy, was acted out on stage during the ''ludi'' or festival games.
Plautus’ attack on the genre whose material he pirated was, as already stated, fourfold.
The audience member would have wanted that actor to speak directly to them.
It is likely that there was already much skepticism about the gods in Plautus’ era.
They would have seen every detail of the actor and hear every word he said.
Despite this, the manuscript tradition of Plautus is poorer than that of any other ancient dramatist, something not helped by the failure of scholia on Plautus to survive.
The Plautine and Shakespearean plays that most parallel each other are, respectively, The ''Menaechmi'' and ''The Comedy of Errors''.
Pyrgopolynices from ''Miles Gloriosus'' (vs. 1265), in bragging about his long life, says he was born one day later than Jupiter.
Plautus is especially fond of making up and changing the meaning of words, as Shakespeare does later.
Plautus did not make up or encourage irreverence to the gods, but reflected ideas of his time.
Watt also notes that some of these elements appear in many of his works, such as ''Twelfth Night'' or ''A Midsummer Night’s Dream'', and had a deep impact on Shakespeare’s writing.
As he speaks with the character, Periplectomenus, he uses a significant amount of alliteration in order to assert his cleverness and, therefore, his authority.
Two scholars, V. J. Rosivach and N. E. Andrews, have made interesting observations about stagecraft in Plautus: V. J. Rosivach writes about identifying the side of the stage with both social status and geography.
There is evidence of Plautine imitation in Edwardes’ ''Damon and Pythias'' and Heywood’s ''Silver Age'' as well as in Shakespeare's ''Errors.''
His comedies are the earliest Latin literary works to have survived in their entirety.
The most notable difference, according to Dana F. Sutton, is that New Comedy, in comparison to Old Comedy, is “devoid of a serious political, social or intellectual content” and “could be performed in any number of social and political settings without risk of giving offense”.
Against the spirit of the Greek original, he engineers events at the end... or alters the situation to fit his expectations.” Anderson’s vehement reaction to the co-opting of Greek plays by Plautus seems to suggest that they are in no way like their originals were.
While previous critics such as A. W. Gomme believed that the slave was “a truly comic character, the devisor of ingenious schemes, the controller of events, the commanding officer of his young master and friends, is a creation of Latin comedy,” and that Greek dramatists such as Menander did not use slaves in such a way that Plautus later did, Harsh refutes these beliefs by giving concrete examples of instances where a clever slave appeared in Greek comedy.
*the emendation of the final -''e'' of singular imperatives
The means of expression are not always specific to the writer, i.e., idiosyncratic, yet they are characteristic of the writer.
All of these characters have the same goal, to be with a younger woman, but all go about it in different ways, as Plautus could not be too redundant with his characters despite their already obvious similarities.
Also used, as seen above, is the technique of
Plautus’ range of characters was created through his use of various techniques, but probably the most important is his use of stock characters and situations in his various plays.
He does this, according to some scholarship, using monologue, the imperative mood and alliteration—all of which are specific and effective linguistic tools in both writing and speaking.
This means that about 18% of the total number of characters in Plautus are nameless.
The relationship is always a focus, even if it’s not the focus of every action taken by the main characters.
At the same time, the Roman Republic was expanding in power and influence.
This is similar to the use of French terms in the English language such as ''garçon'' or ''rendezvous''.
Aristophanes' work is noted for its critical commentary on politics and societal values, which is the key component of Old Comedy: consciousness of the world in which it is written, and analysis of this world.
These forms are frequent and of too great a number for a complete list here, but some of the most noteworthy features which from the classical perspective will be considered irregular or obsolete are:
Another difference between the audiences of Shakespeare and Plautus is that Shakespeare’s audience was Christian.
It would be in the forum or thereabouts that one would expect to find a ''medicus''.”  Moreover, he says that characters that oppose one another always have to exit in opposite directions.
By being translated as well as imitated, Plautus was a major influence on comedy of the Elizabethan era.
Later playwrights also borrowed Plautus's stock characters.
The state controlled stage productions, and Plautus’ plays would have been banned, had they been too risqué.
At the end of ''Errors,'' the world of the play is returned to normal when a Christian abbess interferes with the feuding.
The text of the prayers themselves was probably provided by a Carthaginian informant, and Plautus incorporated it to emphasize the authenticity and foreignness of Hanno's character.
His studies allowed him to produce his plays, which were released between c. 205 and 184 BC.
Often, though, in these interchanges of characters, there occurs the need to move on to the next act.
*the retention of final -''d'' after long vowel in the pronouns ''mēd'', ''tēd'', ''sēd'' (accusative and ablative, forms without ''-d'' also occur)
The audience could stand directly in front of the elevated wooden platform.
male/outside and female/inside, but then inverts them in order to establish an even more complex relationship among genre, gender and dramatic space.
He wrote Palliata comoedia, the genre devised by the innovator of Latin literature, Livius Andronicus.
I have gained an increasing respect for the manuscript tradition, a growing belief that the irregularities are, after all, in a certain sense regular.
150 BC would favor -''ve''- (as ''vostrum'' for later ''vestrum'')
Hence, many of the irregularities which have troubled scribes and scholars perhaps merely reflect the everyday usages of the careless and untrained tongues which Plautus heard about him.” Looking at the overall use of archaic forms in Plautus, one notes that they commonly occur in promises, agreements, threats, prologues, or speeches.
The chief manuscript of Plautus is a palimpsest, in which Plautus' plays had been scrubbed out to make way for Augustine's Commentary on the Psalms.
By working with the characters that were already there but injecting his own creativity, as J.C.B.
See also "jokes and wordplay" below.
postquam est mortem aptus Plautus, Comoedia luget,
His acting talent was eventually discovered; and he adopted the names "Maccius" (a clownish stock-character in popular farces) and "Plautus" (a term meaning either "flat-footed" or "flat-eared," like the ears of a hound).
Ryder, is the ''senex amator''.
This type of language is used, according to E. Segal, for “the forceful inversion, the reduction of the master to an abject position of supplication … the master-as-suppliant is thus an extremely important feature of the Plautine comic finale.” The imperative mood is therefore used in the complete role-reversal of the normal relationship between slave and master, and “those who enjoy authority and respect in the ordinary Roman world are unseated, ridiculed, while the lowliest members of society mount to their pedestals…the humble are in face exalted”.
One argument states that Plautus writes with originality and creativity—the other, that Plautus is a copycat of Greek New Comedy and that he makes no original contribution to playwriting.
the end of ''Aulularia'' and start of ''Bacchides'' are lost), plays with letters in the middle of the alphabet have decent texts, while only traces survive of the play ''Vidularia''.
Plautus attained such a popularity that his name alone became a hallmark of theatrical success.
For example, in '' Miles Gloriosus'', the titular “braggart soldier” Pyrgopolynices only shows his vain and immodest side in the first act, while the parasite Artotrogus exaggerates Pyrgopolynices’ achievements, creating more and more ludicrous claims that Pyrgopolynices agrees to without question.
As well as appearing in Shakespearean comedy, the Plautine parasite appears in one of the first English comedies.
With the repetition of responsibility to the desperation of the lower class, Plautus establishes himself firmly on the side of the average Roman citizen.
Instead, there is much more of a focus on the home and the family unit—something that the Romans, including Plautus, could easily understand and adopt for themselves later in history.
Plautus' comedies abound in puns and word play, which is an important component of his poetry.
Most free adult women, married or widowed, appear in scene headings as ''mulier'', simply translated as “woman”.
Plautus also used more technical means of expression in his plays.
However, this was not the case in Rome during the time of the Republic, when Plautus wrote his plays.
This colloquial style is the everyday speech that Plautus would have been familiar with, yet that means that most students of Latin are unfamiliar with it.
He addresses them as a reflection of Menander with some of Plautus’ own contributions.
*the use of the -''ier'' ending for the present passive and deponent infinitive
The “clever slave” in particular is a very strong character; he not only provides exposition and humor, but also often drives the plot in Plautus’ plays.
In essence it is Greek theater colonized by Rome and its playwrights.
M. Leigh has devoted an extensive chapter about Plautus and Hannibal in his 2004 book, ''Comedy and the Rise of Rome''.
For example, in Menander’s ''Dis Exapaton'' there is a focus on the betrayal between age groups and friends.
No permanent theater existed in Rome until Pompey dedicated one in 55 BCE in the Campus Martius.
Evidence of clever slaves also appears in Menander’s ''Thalis'', ''Hypobolimaios'', and from the papyrus fragment of his ''Perinthia''.
Only short fragments, mostly quotations by later writers of antiquity, survive from 31 other plays.
The most common appearance of proverbs in Plautus appears to be at the end of a soliloquy.
Indeed, the play itself is often seen as borrowing heavily from or even being based on the Plautine comedy ''Miles Gloriosus.''
But starting this war would not be an easy task considering those recent struggles with Carthage—many Romans were too tired of conflict to think of embarking on another campaign.
Plautus’ characters—many of which seem to crop up in quite a few of his plays—also came from Greek stock, though they too received some Plautine innovations.
One idea that is important to recognize is that of ''contaminatio'', which refers to the mixing of elements of two or more source plays.
Harsh acknowledges that Gomme’s statement was probably made before the discovery of many of the papyri that we now have.
This is not to say that the lower classes did not see the plays; but they probably had to stand while watching.
In his discussion of the importance of the ''ludi Megalenses'' in early Roman theater, John Arthur Hanson says that this particular festival “provided more days for dramatic representations than any of the other regular festivals, and it is in connection with these ''ludi'' that the most definite and secure literary evidence for the site of scenic games has come down to us”.
Iambic words, though common in Latin, are difficult to fit in this meter, and naturally occur at the end of verses.
The lack of a permanent space was a key factor in Roman theater and Plautine stagecraft.
(see Latin spelling and pronunciation §Sonus medius), and of -''vo''- before ''r'', ''s'' or ''t'', where the use after ''ca''.
There are approximately 220 characters in the 20 plays of Plautus.
'''Titus Maccius Plautus''' (c. 254 – 184 BC), commonly known as '''Plautus''', was a Roman playwright of the Old Latin period.
William S. Anderson discusses the believability of Menander versus the believability of Plautus and, in essence, says that Plautus’ plays are much less believable than those plays of Menander because they seem to be such a farce in comparison.
In The ''Menaechmi'', Plautus uses only one set of twins—twin brothers.
The stock parasite in this play, Gelasimus, has a patron-client relationship with this family and offers to do any job in order to make ends meet; Owens puts forward that Plautus is portraying the economic hardship many Roman citizens were experiencing due to the cost of war.
The language and style of Plautus are not easy or simple.
Most of the very important characters have names while most of the unnamed characters are of less importance.
The differences between The ''Menaechmi'' and ''The Comedy of Errors'' are clear.
M. Hammond, A.H. Mack, and W. Moskalew have noted in the introduction to their edition of the ''Miles Gloriosus'' that Plautus was “free from convention... and sought to reproduce the easy tone of daily speech rather than the formal regularity of oratory or poetry.
*the use of uncontracted forms of some verbs such as ''mavolo'' ("prefer") for later ''malo''
The many deceits that Plautus layered his plays with, giving the audience the feeling of a genre bordering on farce, appear in much of the comedy written by Shakespeare and Molière.
The historical context within which Plautus wrote can be seen, to some extent, in his comments on contemporary events and persons.
This becomes the main difference and, also, similarity between Menander and Plautus.
He reworked the Greek texts to give them a flavour that would appeal to the local Roman audiences.
This, of course, means Old Comedy was more controversial; Aristophanes even underwent persecution for his depiction of Athens in the now-fragmentary ''The Babylonians''.
But a great number are made for jokes, especially riddle jokes, which feature a "knock knock - who's there?"
There are differences not just in how the father-son relationship is presented, but also in the way in which Menander and Plautus write their poetry.
Like Packman, George Duckworth uses the scene headings in the manuscripts to support his theory about unnamed Plautine characters.
The ''servus callidus'' functions as the exposition in many of Plautus' plays.
The replacement character that acts as the chorus would in Greek drama is often called the “prologue.”
Plautus apparently pushes for the plan to be approved by the senate, working his audience up with the thought of an enemy in close proximity and a call to outmaneuver him.
In his article “On a Patriotic Passage in the ''Miles Gloriosus'' of Plautus”, he states that the war “engrossed the Romans more than all other public interests combined”.
It is no longer a political statement, as in Old Comedy, but a statement about household relations and proper behavior between a father and his son.
assonance, which is the repetition of similar sounding syllables.
The diction of Plautus, who used the colloquial speech of his own day, is distinctive and non-standard from the point of view of the later, classical period.
Proverbs would address a certain genre such as law, religion, medicine, trades, crafts, and seafaring.
It can be noted that the doubling is a stock situation of Elizabethan comedy.
W. Geoffrey Arnott says that “we see that a set of formulae used in the plays concerned with characterization, motif, and situation has been applied to two dramatic situations which possess in themselves just as many difference as they do similarities.” It is important to compare the two authors and the remarkable similarities between them because it is essential in understanding Plautus.
T. J. Moore notes that, “all distinction between the play, production, and ‘real life’ has been obliterated Plautus’ play ''Curculio''”.
But they also rely on flattery in order to gain these gifts, and both characters are willing to bury their patrons in empty praise.
And Melody's countless numbers all together wept.
In Plautus, on the other hand, the focus is still on the relationship between father and son, but we see betrayal between the two men that wasn’t seen in Menander.
Not much is known about Titus Maccius Plautus' early life.
William M. Seaman proposes that these Greek names would have delivered a comic punch to the audience because of its basic understanding of the Greek language.
Tradition holds that he made enough money to go into the nautical business, but that the venture collapsed.
The whole system of inflexion—and, I suspect, of syntax also and of versification—was less fixed and stable in Plautus’ time than it became later.
In Elizabethan romantic comedy, it is common for the plays to end with multiple marriages and couplings of pairs.
In other instances, Plautus will give a name to a character that only has a few words or lines.
Plautus employed the use of proverbs in many of his plays.
Greek New Comedy greatly differs from those plays of Aristophanes.
A single reading of the ''Miles Gloriosus'' leaves the reader with the notion that the names, place, and play are all Greek, but one must look beyond these superficial interpretations.
J. N. Hough suggests that Plautus’s use of Greek is for artistic purposes and not simply because a Latin phrase will not fit the meter.
A young woman who is unwed due to social status is usually referred to as ''meretrix'' or “courtesan.” A ''lena'', or adoptive mother, may be a woman who owns these girls.
The passage seems intended to rile up the audience, beginning with ''hostis tibi adesse,'' or “the foe is near at hand”.
As W. M. Owens writes in his article “Plautus’ ''Stichus'' and the Political Crisis of 200 B.C.”, “There is evidence that antiwar feeling ran deep and persisted even after the war was approved."
This vacillation between meter and word stress highlights the fact that Latin literature was still in its infancy, and that there was not yet a standard way to write verse.
''Menaechmi,'' on the other hand, “is almost completely lacking in a supernatural dimension.” A character in Plautus’ play would never blame an inconvenient situation on witchcraft—something that is quite common in Shakespeare.
Goldberg notes that “''ludi'' were generally held within the precinct of the particular god being honored.”
At the end, all the couples are happily together.
C. Stace argues that Plautus took the stock slave character from New Comedy in Greece and altered it for his own purposes.
For instance, the clever slave has important roles in both ''L’Avare'' and ''L’Etourdi'', two plays by Molière, and in both drives the plot and creates the ruse just like Palaestrio in ''Miles Gloriosus.''
Further interwoven into the plays of Plautus and just as common as the use of proverbs is the use of Greek within the texts of the plays.
The influence of Plautus's plays was felt in the early 16th century.
He deconstructed many of the Greek plays’ finely constructed plots; he reduced some, exaggerated others of the nicely drawn characters of Menander and of Menander’s contemporaries and followers into caricatures; he substituted for or superimposed upon the elegant humor of his models his own more vigorous, more simply ridiculous foolery in action, in statement, even in language.
Not only did men billeted in Greek areas have opportunity to learn sufficient Greek for the purpose of everyday conversation, but they were also able to see plays in the foreign tongue.”  Having an audience with knowledge of the Greek language, whether limited or more expanded, allowed Plautus more freedom to use Greek references and words.
Because the ''ludi'' were religious in nature, it was appropriate for the Romans to set up this temporary stage close to the temple of the deity being celebrated.
Greek words are used when describing foods, oils, perfumes, etc.
Further emphasizing and elevating the artistry of the language of the plays of Plautus is the use of meter, which simply put is the rhythm of the play.
What they have in common is the ridicule with which their attempts are viewed, the imagery that suggests that they are motivated largely by animal passion, the childish behavior, and the reversion to the love-language of their youth.
*the use of the ''-āī'' genitive singular ending, dissyllabic, besides ''-ae''
They sometimes appear alone or interwoven within a speech.
*the dropping of the final -''s'' of 2nd-singular verb forms and the final -''e'' of the question-particle -''ne'' when the two are joined (as ''viden?''
Because humor, vulgarity, and "incongruity" are so much a part of the Plautine comedies, the slave becomes the essential tool to connect the audience to the ''joke'' through his monologue and direct connection ''to'' the audience.
At the time of Plautus, Rome was expanding, and having much success in Greece.
Other records also tell us about performances of the ''Menaechmi.''
While there was public support for theater and people came to enjoy tragedy and comedy alike, there was also a notable lack of governmental support.
Limited records suggest that the first known university production of Plautus in England was of ''Miles Gloriosus'' at Oxford in 1522-3.
One of the most important echoes of Plautus is the stock character of the parasite.
To do this, he needed his characters to exit and enter to or from whatever area their social standing would befit.
On the fusion between Elizabethan and Plautine techniques, T. W. Baldwin writes, “…''Errors'' does not have the miniature unity of ''Menaechmi,'' which is characteristic of classic structure for comedy.” Baldwin notes that Shakespeare covers a much greater area in the structure of the play than Plautus does.
