These were characterized by a large head and a short neck, such as ''Liopleurodon'' and ''Simolestes''.
The pliosaurids had large, conical teeth and were the dominant marine carnivores of their time.
It is the earliest discovered more or less complete fossil reptile skeleton in a museum collection.
Adult individuals have more spongy bone.
When flying, the flipper movement is more vertical, its point describing an oval or "8".
To avoid confusion between the phylogeny, the evolutionary relationships, and the morphology, the way the animal is built, long-necked forms are therefore called "plesiosauromorph" and short-necked forms are called "pliosauromorph", without the "plesiosauromorph" species necessarily being more closely related to each other than to the "pliosauromorph" forms.
The skull of plesiosaurs showed the "euryapsid" condition, lacking the lower temporal fenestrae, the openings at the lower rear sides.
A subsequent publication in 2013 found that the Nothosauridae lacked this bone type, but that basal Pistosauria possessed it, a sign of a more elevated metabolism.
The scapula was much smaller, forming the outer front edge of the trunk.
It has been suggested that legends of sea serpents and modern sightings of supposed monsters in lakes or the sea could be explained by the survival of plesiosaurs into modern times.
During the same time, approximately 160 million years ago, the Cryptoclididae were present, shorter species with a long neck and a small head.
During the middle of the twentieth century, the USA remained an important centre of research, mainly through the discoveries of Samuel Paul Welles.
In the early twentieth century, the newly discovered principles of bird flight suggested to several researchers that plesiosaurs like turtles and penguins made a flying movement while swimming.
It is not known whether plesiosaurs hunted in packs.
It can perhaps be referred to ''Plesiosaurus dolichodeirus''.
According to one hypothesis, during its passage through the nasal ducts, the water would have been 'smelled' by olfactory epithelia.
Massare also tried to compare the speeds of plesiosaurs with those of the two other main sea reptile groups, the Ichthyosauria and the Mosasauridae.
Another way to define a clade is to let it consist of all species more closely related to a certain species that one in any case wishes to include in the clade, than to another species that one to the contrary desires to exclude.
Plesiosauria was in 2010 by Hillary Ketchum and Roger Benson defined as such a stem-based taxon: "all taxa more closely related to ''Plesiosaurus dolichodeirus'' and ''Pliosaurus brachydeirus'' than to ''Augustasaurus hagdorni''".
However, as those limbs no longer had functional elbow or knee joints and the underside by its very flatness would have generated a lot of friction, already in the nineteenth century it was hypothesised that plesiosaurs had been viviparous.
All these interpretations assumed that the neck was very flexible.
Later, the Pliosauridae were recognised as having a morphology fundamentally different from the plesiosaurids.
These vertebrae still possessed the original processes inherited from the land-dwelling ancestors of the Sauropterygia and had not been reduced to fish-like simple discs, as happened with the vertebrae of ichthyosaurs.
All plesiosaurs became extinct as a result of the K-T event at the end of the Cretaceous period, approximately  million years ago.
Gradually, other genera were named.
An early discovery in this respect was the holotype of ''Plesiosaurus conybeari'' (presently ''Attenborosaurus'').
One way to define a clade is to let it consist of the last common ancestor of two such species and all its descendants.
Plesiosaurs first appeared in the latest Triassic Period, possibly in the Rhaetian stage, about 205 million years ago.
The neck length variations were not caused by an elongation of the individual neck vertebrae, but by increasing the number of these cervical vertebrae.
Some of this is taking place away from the traditional areas, e.g.
Since then, more than a hundred valid species have been described.
It is also possible that the gait was optional and was adapted to the circumstances.
The following cladogram follows an analysis by Benson & Druckenmiller (2014).
In 2008, fossil remains of an undescribed plesiosaur that was named Predator X, now known as ''Pliosaurus funkei'', were unearthed in Svalbard.
Whereas during the nineteenth and most of the twentieth century, new plesiosaurs were described at a rate of three or four genera each decade, the pace suddenly picked up in the 1990s, with seventeen plesiosaurs being discovered in this period.
The two finds revealed the unique and bizarre build of the animals, in 1832 by Professor Buckland likened to "a sea serpent run through a turtle".
In 2006, a combined team of American and Argentinian investigators (the latter from the Argentinian Antarctic Institute and the La Plata Museum) found the skeleton of a juvenile plesiosaur measuring  in length on Vega Island in Antarctica.
Other naturalists during the seventeenth century added plesiosaur remains to their collections, such as John Woodward; these were only much later understood to be of a plesiosaurian nature and are today partly preserved in the Sedgwick Museum.
However, modern research has confirmed an earlier conjecture of Williston that the long plate-like spines on top of the vertebrae, the ''processus spinosi'', strongly limited a vertical movement.
In 1824, Conybeare also provided a specific name to ''Plesiosaurus'': ''dolichodeirus'', meaning "longneck".
Their morphology allowed for a high swimming speed.
The vertebrae show no such damage: they were probably protected by a superior blood supply, made possible by the arteries entering the bone through the two ''foramina subcentralia'', large openings in their undersides.
(2012) found the traditional Pliosauroidea to be paraphyletic in relation to Plesiosauroidea.
A recalculation, using corrected formulae, resulted in a speed of half a metre per second (1.8&nbsp;km/h) for a cold-blooded plesiosaur and one and a half metres per second (5.4&nbsp;km/h) for an endothermic plesiosaur.
Such a clade is called a "stem clade".
As with most tetrapods, the shoulder joint was formed by the scapula and coracoid.
In 2010, Sanders & Carpenter concluded that, with an alternating gait, the turbulence caused by the front pair would have hindered an effective action of the hind pair.
It is probably the best preserved specimen of a plesiosaur yet discovered.
A very different hypothesis claims that "plesiosauromorphs" were bottom feeders.
The various cladistic analyses have not resulted in a consensus about the relationships between the main plesiosaurian subgroups.
However, the total weight of the gastroliths found in various specimens appear to be insufficient to modify the buoyancy of these large reptiles.
had hundreds of teeth, allowing it to sieve small Crustacea from the water.
Their shoulder girdles remained weak, their pelves could not support the power of a strong swimming stroke, and their flippers were blunt.
The possibility of a tail fluke has been confirmed by recent studies on the caudal neural spine form of ''Pantosaurus'', ''Cryptoclidus'' and ''Rhomaleosaurus zetlandicus''.
Important collectors were the reverends William Mounsey and Baptist Noel Turner, active in the Vale of Belvoir, whose collections were in 1795 described by John Nicholls in the first part of his ''The History and Antiquities of the County of Leicestershire''.
Fossil impressions show that the skin was relatively smooth, not scaled, and this may have reduced form drag.
However, such a comparison was not very informative, as the mechanics of bird flight in this period were poorly understood.
This would have been proven by long furrows present in ancients seabeds.
Some plesiosaurian remains, such as a   long set of highly reconstructed and fragmentary lower jaws preserved in the Oxford University Museum and referable to ''Pliosaurus rossicus'' (previously referred to ''Stretosaurus'' and ''Liopleurodon''), indicated a length of .
The many recent discoveries have tested these hypotheses and given rise to new ones.
The anteriorly placed internal nostrils, the ''choanae'', have palatal grooves to channel water, the flow of which would be maintained by hydrodynamic pressure over the posteriorly placed, in front of the eye sockets, external nares during swimming.
The new method of cladistics has, for the first time, allowed the exact calculation of their evolutionary relationships.
Hawkins eventually sold his valuable and attractively restored specimens to the British Museum of Natural History.
The premaxillae directly touched the frontal bones, with the elasmosaurids even reaching backwards to the parietal bones.
Plesiosaurs became better known to the general public through two lavishly illustrated publications by the collector Thomas Hawkins: ''Memoirs of Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri'' of 1834 and ''The Book of the Great Sea-Dragons'' of 1840.
While these muscle groups were probably not very powerful, this could easily have been compensated by the large muscles on the back, especially the ''Musculus latissimus dorsi'', which would have been well developed in view of the high spines on the backbone.
The family Plesiosauridae had already been coined by John Edward Gray in 1825.
The specimen is today preserved in the Natural History Museum, its inventory number being BMNH R.1330.
Plesiosaurs can be divided into two major morphological types that differ in head and neck size.
The subsequent evolution of the plesiosaurs is very contentious.
Plesiosaurs were related to the earlier Nothosauridae, that had a more crocodile-like body.
This was true of the ulna, radius, metacarpals and fingers, as well of the tibia, fibula, metatarsals and toes.
Besides, it was hard to conceive how the largest species, as big as whales, could have survived a beaching.
The humerus in the upper arm, and the thighbone in the upper leg, had become large flat bones, expanded at their outer ends.
The first plesiosaur gastroliths, found with ''Mauisaurus gardneri'', were reported by Harry Govier Seeley in 1877.
Early, basal, members of the group, traditionally called "pistosaurids", were still largely coastal animals.
The bony fish (Osteichthyes), which further diversified during the Jurassic, were likely prey as well.
With early forms, the amphicoelous or amphiplat neck vertebrae bore double-headed neck ribs; later forms had single-headed ribs.
The large number of joints implied suggested to early researchers that the neck must have been very flexible; indeed, a swan-like curvature of the neck was assumed to be possible - in Icelandic plesiosaurs are even called ''Svaneðlur'', "swan lizards".
Its specific name means "with a short neck".
Therefore, the purely descriptive terms "plesiosauromorph" and "pliosauromorph" have been introduced, which do not imply a direct relationship.
Gastroliths have been suggested as a method to increase weight or even as means to attain neutral buoyancy, swallowing or spitting them out again as needed.
While the short-necked "pliosauromorphs" (e.g.
Like all tetrapods with limbs, plesiosaurs must have had a certain gait, a coordinated movement pattern of the, in this case, flippers.
One of Turner's partial plesiosaur skeletons is still preserved as specimen BMNH R.45 in the British Museum of Natural History; this is today referred to ''Thalassiodracon''.
The hip joint was formed by the ischium and the pubic bone.
A more detailed analysis published by both Benson and Druckenmiller in 2014 was not able to resolve the relationships among the lineages at the base of Plesiosauria.
However, this does not allow to deduce some exact depth as the damage could have been caused by a few very deep dives, or alternatively by a great number of relatively shallow descents.
Some plesiosaur fossils show pathologies, the result of illness or old age.
Both Cope and Marsh in their rivalry named many plesiosaur genera and species, most of which are today considered invalid.
Some forms had hundreds of needle-like teeth.
The teeth were placed in tooth-sockets, had vertically wrinkled enamel and lacked a true cutting edge or ''carina''.
The flippers made a flying movement through the water.
The fossil, dated 180&nbsp;Ma by the ammonites associated with it, measured  in length, and may be related to ''Rhomaleosaurus''.
From the parental care indicated by the large size of the young, it can be deduced that social behaviour in general was relatively complex.
During the first half of the nineteenth century, the number of plesiosaur finds steadily increased, especially through discoveries in the sea cliffs of Lyme Regis.
Marsh later claimed that the affair was the cause of his rivalry with Cope: "he has since been my bitter enemy".
Skeletons have also been discovered with gastroliths, stones, in their stomachs, though whether to help break down food, especially cephalopods, in a muscular gizzard, or to vary buoyancy, or both, has not been established.
In 2000, Theagarten Lingham-Soliar evaded the question by concluding that, like sea turtles, plesiosaurs only used the front pair for a powered stroke.
Mortified, Cope tried to destroy the entire edition of the textbook and, when this failed, immediately published an improved edition with a correct illustration but an identical date of publication.
The distance between the eye sockets and the nostrils was so limited because the nasal bones were strongly reduced, with many species even absent.
Whether perhaps plesiosaurs were warm-blooded as well, is difficult to determine.
Later, a more advanced pistosaurian group split off: the Plesiosauria.
The eye sockets were large, in general pointing obliquely upwards; the pliosaurids had more sideways directed eyes.
Such a clade is called a "node clade".
The stiff necks would have been used to plough the sea bottom, eating the benthos.
The tail was most likely only used for helping in directional control.
In the beginning of the nineteenth century, scientists realised how distinctive their build was and they were named as a separate order in 1835.
showing the outlines of the body.
Traditionally, it was assumed that extinct reptile groups were cold-blooded like modern reptiles.
Purported plesiosaur carcasses have been shown to be partially decomposed corpses of basking sharks instead.
Frey & Riess would have been mistaken in their assertion that the shoulder and pelvic plates had no muscles attached to their upper sides.
The size of the stones has been seen as an indication that they were not swallowed by accident but deliberately, the animal perhaps covering large distances in search of a suitable rock type.
Soft tissue remains of plesiosaurs are rare, but sometimes, especially in shale deposits, they have been partly preserved, e.g.
The limbs were very large, each about as long as the trunk.
in new sites developed in New Zealand, Argentine, Norway, China and Morocco, but the locations of the more original discoveries have proven to be still productive, with important new finds in England and Germany.
New research during the past decades has led to the conclusion that some groups, such as theropod dinosaurs and pterosaurs, were very likely warm-blooded.
This has had the advantage of making the group better known to the general public, but the disadvantage that people have trouble taking the subject seriously, forcing paleontologists to explain time and again that plesiosaurs really did exist and are not creatures of myth or fantasy.
They were pursuit predators or ambush predators of various sized prey and opportunistic feeders; their teeth could be used to pierce soft-bodied prey, especially fish.
Plesiosaurs have been found on every continent, including Antarctica.
Of the infinite number of possibilities, in practice attention has been largely directed to the question of whether the front pair and hind pair moved simultaneously, so that all four flippers were engaged at the same moment, or in an alternate pattern, each pair being employed in turn.
The Pistosauria became warm-blooded and viviparous, giving birth to live young.
Plesiosaurs retained their ancestral two pairs of limbs, which had evolved into large flippers.
Of the other axial movements, rolling could have been controlled by alternately engaging the flippers of the right or left side, and yaw by the long neck or a vertical tail fin.
This arrangement immobilised the entire trunk.
Fossil specimens have been found with cephalopod shells still in their stomach.
While plesiosaurs varied little in the build of the trunk, and can be called "conservative" in this respect, there were major differences between the subgroups as regards the form of the neck and the skull.
The tempo of discovery accelerated in the early twenty-first century, with about three or four plesiosaurs being named each year.
''Plesiosaurus'' and ''Peloneustes'' represented the main subgroups of the Plesiosauroidea and the Pliosauroidea and were chosen for historical reasons; any other species from these groups would have sufficed.
However, in 1982 Richard Anthony Thulborn showed that Seeley had been deceived by a "doctored" fossil of a nest of crayfish.
These were rather small forms that, despite their short necks, might have been more closely related to the Plesiosauridae than to the Pliosauridae.
Plesiosaurs showed two main morphological types.
The first plesiosaurian genus, the eponymous ''Plesiosaurus'', was named in 1821.
The media published exaggerated reports claiming it was  long, and weighed up to , which would have made it among the largest predators of all time.
As reptiles in general are oviparous, until the end of the twentieth century it had been seen as possible that smaller plesiosaurs may have crawled up on a beach to lay eggs, like modern turtles.
The generic name was derived from the Greek πλήσιος, ''plèsios'', "closer to" and the Latinised ''saurus'', in the meaning of "saurian", to express that ''Plesiosaurus'' was in the Chain of Being more closely positioned to the Sauria than ''Ichthyosaurus'', which had the form of a more lowly fish.
In total forty-seven gastroliths were present with a combined weight of thirteen kilogramme.
They proposed a more limited flying model in which a powerful downstroke was combined with a largely unpowered recovery, the flipper returning to its original position by the momentum of the forward moving and temporarily sinking body.
In 1982, she was criticised by Samuel Tarsitano, Eberhard Frey and Jürgen Riess, who claimed that, while the muscles at the underside of the shoulder and pelvic plates were clearly powerful enough to pull the limbs downwards, comparable muscle groups on the top of these plates to elevate the limbs were simply lacking, and, had they been present, could not have been forcefully employed, their bulging carrying the danger of hurting the internal organs.
During both strokes, down and up, according to Bernoulli's principle, forward and upward thrust is generated by the convexly curved upper profile of the flipper, the front edge slightly inclined relative to the water flow, while turbulence is minimal.
The hind pair would have been merely used for steering.
Hawkins entertained a very idiosyncratic view of the animals, seeing them as monstrous creations of the devil, during a pre-Adamitic phase of history.
She concluded that plesiosaurs were about twenty percent slower than advanced ichthyosaurs, which employed a very effective tunniform movement, oscillating just the tail, but five percent faster than mosasaurids, which were assumed to swim with an inefficient anguilliform, eel-like, movement of the body.
Its etymology referred to the earlier ''Plesiosaurus dolichodeirus'' as it is derived from πλεῖος, ''pleios'', "more fully", reflecting that according to Owen it was closer to the Sauria than ''Plesiosaurus''.
Sustained speed may be estimated by calculating the drag of a simplified model of the body, that can be approached by a prolate spheroid, and the sustainable level of energy output by the muscles.
The flippers would have been moved forward in a horizontal position, to minimise friction, and then axially rotated to a vertical position in order to be pulled to the rear, causing the largest possible reactive force.
The specimen is actually a very large plesiosaur, possibly reaching  in length.
During the middle of the twentieth century, Watson's "rowing model" remained the dominant hypothesis regarding the plesiosaur swimming stroke.
Cope attempted to reconstruct the animal on the assumption that the longer extremity of the vertebral column was the tail, the shorter one the neck.
The many plesiosaur species may have differed considerably in their swimming speeds, reflecting the various body shapes present in the group.
One of the indications of a high metabolism is the presence of fast-growing fibrolamellar bone.
No systematic distinction was made with ichthyosaurs, so the fossils of one group were sometimes combined with those of the other to obtain a more complete specimen.
Modern research, however, indicates that several "long-necked" groups might have had some short-necked members or vice versa.
Their relative brain size seems to be typical for reptiles.
Soon afterwards, the morphology became much better known.
The heads of the ''humeri'' and ''femora'' with many fossils show necrosis of the bone tissue, caused by a too rapid ascent after deep diving.
Although horizontal curving was less restricted, in general the neck must have been rather stiff and certainly was incapable of being bent into serpentine coils.
Besides, a long gliding phase after a simultaneous engagement would have been very energy efficient.
The Welshman Edward Lhuyd in his ''Lithophylacii Brittannici Ichnographia'' from 1699 also included depictions of plesiosaur vertebrae that again were considered fish vertebrae or ''Ichthyospondyli''.
The term "plesiosaur" is properly used to refer to the Plesiosauria as a whole, but informally it is sometimes meant to indicate only the long-necked forms, the old Plesiosauroidea.
Descending would have been helped by a negative Archimedes Force, i.e.
Little is known about growth rates or a possible sexual dimorphism.
A number of reasons have been presented for why a plesiosaurian identity is unlikely.
Traditionally, plesiosaurs have been divided into the long-necked plesiosauroidea and the short-necked pliosauroidea.
Their strong limbs and a flat underside seemed to have made this feasible.
Often, the lacrimal bones were also lacking.
During the Late Cretaceous, the elasmosaurids still had many species.
While the Loch Ness monster is often reported as looking like a plesiosaur, it is also often described as looking completely different.
The tooth form and number was very variable.
The number of these stones per individual is often very large.
He rejected Robinson's hypothesis that elastic energy was stored in the ribcage, considering the ribs too stiff for this.
Neoplesiosauria very likely is materially identical to Plesiosauria ''sensu'' Druckenmiller & Russell and was meant to be a replacement of this concept.
Even when assuming a low hydrodynamic efficiency of 0.65, Massare's model seemed to indicate that plesiosaurs, if warm-blooded, would have cruised at a speed of four metres per second, or about fourteen kilometres per hour, considerably exceeding the known speeds of extant dolphins and whales.
The elbow joints and the knee joints were no longer functional: the lower arm and the lower leg could not flex in relation to the upper limb elements, but formed a flat continuation of them.
Young plesiosaurs show pachyostosis, an extreme density of the bone tissue, which might have increased relative weight.
In the early twenty-first century, the number of discoveries has increased, leading to an improved understanding of their anatomy, relationships and way of life.
In 2004, what appeared to be a completely intact juvenile plesiosaur was discovered, by a local fisherman, at Bridgwater Bay National Nature Reserve in Somerset, UK.
The forelimbs and hindlimbs strongly resembled each other.
Lingham-Soliar deduced this from the form of the hip joint, which would have allowed for only a limited vertical movement.
The ilium, which in land vertebrates bears the weight of the hindlimb, had become a small element at the rear, no longer attached to either the pubic bone or the thighbone.
The two types are related to the traditional strict division of the Plesiosauria into two suborders, the long-necked Plesiosauroidea and the short-neck Pliosauroidea.
It has been suggested that with some groups the skull housed electro-sensitive organs.
Such teeth numbered four to six in the praemaxilla and about fourteen to twenty-five in the maxilla; the number in the lower jaws roughly equalled that of the skull.
While this included some German discoveries, it mainly involved plesiosaurs found in the sediments of the American Cretaceous ''Western Interior Seaway'', the Niobrara Chalk.
An advanced sauropterygian subgroup, the carnivorous Eusauropterygia with small heads and long necks, split into two branches during the Upper Triassic.
He excused his mistake by claiming that he had been misled by Leidy himself, who, describing a specimen of ''Cimoliasaurus'', had also reversed the vertebral column.
Small wrinkles are present in the skin that may have prevented separation of the laminar flow in the boundary layer and thereby reduced skin friction.
A study in 2010 concluded that fibrolamellar bone was originally present with sauropterygians.
In 1957, Lambert Beverly Halstead, at the time using the family name Tarlo, proposed a variant: the hindlimbs would have rowed in the horizontal plane but the forelimbs would have paddled, moved to below and to the rear.
Frey & Riess in 1991 proposed an alternate model, which would have had the advantage of a more continuous propulsion.
The short-necked "pliosauromorphs" were top carnivores, or apex predators, in their respective foodwebs.
Frequent explanations for the sightings include waves, floating inanimate objects, tricks of the light, swimming known animals, and practical jokes.
The increasing scientific interest in the group has been called a "plesiosaur renaissance".
The typical plesiosaur had a broad, flat, body and a short tail.
In fact, such a method would be very inefficient: the recovery stroke in this case generates no thrust and the rear stroke generates an enormous turbulence.
They became especially common during the Jurassic Period, thriving until their disappearance due to the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous Period, about 66 million years ago.
Their limbs had evolved into four long flippers, which were powered by strong muscles attached to wide bony plates formed by the shoulder girdle and the pelvis.
Around the turn of the century, most plesiosaur research was done by a former student of Marsh, Professor Samuel Wendell Williston.
Finally, Conybeare suggested the possibility that plesiosaurs swam on the surface, letting their necks plunge downwards to seek food at lower levels.
Also, the size of individual stones is often considerable.
