On 4 January 1878, Plovdiv was liberated from Ottoman rule by the Russian army.
It remained within the borders of Bulgaria until July of the same year, when it became the capital of the autonomous Ottoman region of Eastern Rumelia.
It was named after the mythical Thracian king Eumolpos, son of Poseidon or Jupiter in mythology, who may have founded the city around 1200 BC or 1350 BC, or after the Vestal Virgins in the temples - evmolpeya.
The Ancient Stadium is another important monument of the ancient city.
Some of the intellectuals, politicians and spiritual leaders of the nation graduated that school.
Almost every house in the Old Town has its characteristic exterior and interior decoration.
There are colourful mosaics which have geometrical forms and figures.
The Plovdiv Puppet Theatre, founded in 1948, remains one of the leading institutions in this genre.
In the night of 5–6 September these men led by Danail Nikolaev took control of the city and removed from office the General-Governor Gavril Krastevich.
The Regional Ethnographic Museum – Plovdiv was inaugurated in 1917.
The mayor of the Municipality of Plovdiv, Ivan Totev, with the six district mayors represent the local executive authorities.
The history of Plovdiv spans more than eight millennia.
Markovo tepe Mall (opened 2016), and Galeria Mall which is 6 stories high with 127 000 sq.m area, half of which is the parking lot and the rest is shopping area.
Therefore, the census number is a deflation of the number of Roma people and they are most likely the second largest group after the Bulgarians, most of all because the Muslim Roma in Plovdiv claim to be of Turkish ethnicity and Turkish-speaking at the census ("Xoraxane Roma").
Plovdiv is host to cultural events such as the International Fair Plovdiv, the international theatrical festival "A stage on a crossroad", and the TV festival "The golden chest".
They keep a good examples of the late Middle Age Orthodox architecture as well some iconography masterpieces typical for the region.
In the 16-17 century a significant number of Sephardic Jews settled along with a smaller Armenian community from Galicia.
Plovdiv has 78 schools including elementary, high, foreign language, mathematics, technical and art schools.
There are more than 40,000 objects.
In the 6th century Jordanes wrote that the former name of the city was ''Pulpudeva'' () and that Philip the Arab named the city after himself.
The city has six universities and a number of state and private colleges and branches of other universities.
It has an area of 11 hectares and was surrounded by shops and public buildings.
Among the most prestigious schools are the English Language School, the High School of Mathematics, the Ivan Vazov Language School, the National Schools of Commerce Plovdiv, the English Academy, the Academy of Music, Dance and Fine Arts Plovdiv, and the French High School of Plovdiv.
The historian John Fine describes Philippopolis as being a Byzantine possession at the time it was sacked by the ruler of Rus' Sviatoslav I of Kiev in 969 who impaled 20,000 citizens.
With the abolishment of Slavonic as the language of the Bulgarian Church and the complete abolition of the church in 1767, the introduction of the Millet System, a doctrine of ethnic division by religion, Christian and Muslim Bulgarians were subjected to Hellenization and  Turkification respectively.
Several smaller water parks are in the city as well.
The museum contains a rich collection of Thracian art.
Industry has been expanding again since the late 1990s, with manufacturing plants built in the city or in its outskirts, mainly the municipality of Maritsa.
Plovdiv has a well-developed cycling infrastructure which covers almost all districts of the city.
The famous Panagyurishte treasure is part of the museum's collection.
According to the Russian census of the same year Filibe had a population of 24,000 citizens, of which ethnic Bulgarians comprised 45.4%, Turks - 23.1% and Greeks - 19.9%.
The city have been called ''Philippopolis'' (ΦΙΛΙΠΠΟΠΟΛΙΣ ; , ''Philippoupoli'') or "the city of Philip", from Greek ''Philipos'' "horselover", most likely in honor of Philip II of Macedon possibly after his death or in honor of Philip V, as it was first attested in the 2nd century BC by Polybius in connection with the campaign of Philip V. ''Philippopolis'' was identified later by Plutarch and Pliny as the former ''Poneropolis''.
The Roman forum dates from the reign of Vespasian in the 1st century and was finished in the 2nd century.
The theatre could accommodate up to 7,000 people.
In 1943 1,500 Jews were saved from deportation in concentration camps by the archbishop of Plovdiv, Cyril, who later became the Bulgarian Patriarch.
On 5 September several hundred armed rebels from Golyamo Konare (now Saedinenie) marched to Plovdiv.
In 1892 Plovdiv became host of the First Bulgarian Fair with international participation which was succeeded by the International Fair Plovdiv.
At the first census after the Liberation of Bulgaria in 1880 with 24,053 citizens Plovdiv is the second largest city behind Ruse, which had 26 163 citizens then, while the capital Sofia had 20 501 citizens then.
The city was conquered by the Russians under Aleksandr Burago for several hours during the Battle of Philippopolis on January 17, 1878.
After the Romans had taken control of the area, the city was named in , meaning "The Three Hills",) mentioned in the 1st century by Pliny.
The total precipitation is  and is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year.
Tobacco Depot workers went on strike on May the 4th, 1953.
According to other data, Plovdiv was not Ottoman until the Battle of Maritsa in 1371 following which the citizens and the Bulgarian army fled leaving the city without resistance.
Great Britain and Austria-Hungary, however, did not approve that treaty and the final result of the war was concluded in the Congress of Berlin which divided the newly liberated country into several parts.
German, French and Belgian capital was invested in the city in development of modern trade, banking and industry.
The Crusaders mentioned the city as ''Prineople'', ''Sinople'' and ''Phinepople''.
After the Serbs were defeated in the Serbo-Bulgarian War, Bulgaria and Turkey reached an agreement according to which the Principality of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia had a common government, Parliament, administration and army.
Three of the city's seven hills are protected natural territories since 1995.
This process of Hellenization flourished up until the 1830s and declined with the Tanzimat, the idea of the Hellenic nation instead of the Romeic millet as Hellenes meant pagans to the Chirstians and finally with the re-establishment of the Bulgarian Church in 1870.
In 1927 the electrification of Plovdiv has started.
Plovdiv was given various names throughout its long history.
According to the statistics by the Bulgarian and Greek authors there is no Turks in the city, according to an alternative estimate the city was of Turkish majority then.
File: Old town3.jpg|Lamartine House
There are also 10 private schools and a seminary.
File:  Old town hindliyan.jpg|Hindliyan House
The vast majority of the inhabitants are Christians – mostly Eastern Orthodox — and there are Catholics, Eastern Catholics and Protestant trends (Adventists, Baptists and others).
The city has more than 200 archaeological sites, 30 of which are of national importance.
In 1944 the city was bombed by British-American coalition.
It was built in the beginning of the 2nd century during the reign of the Roman Emperor Trajan.
The heights of Sredna Gora rise to the northwest, to the east are the Chirpan Heights, and the Rhodope mountains surround the plain from the south.
Plovdiv has international airport, terminal for intermodal transport, several connection with Trakia motorway (connecting Sofia and Burgas), proximity to Maritsa motorway (the main corridor to Turkey), well-developed road and rail infrastructure.
File:Filibe cami.JPG|The Dzhumaya Mosque
Mists are common in the cooler months, especially along the banks of the Maritsa.
The three sections "Prehistory", "Antiquity" and "Middle Ages" contain precious artifacts from the Paleolithic to the early Ottoman period (15th–16th centuries).
File:Plovdiv Bulgaria street view.JPG|Looking down one of the streets in Plovdiv.
Many small airports are in the city's surroundings, including the Graf Ignatievo Air Base in Graf Ignatievo to the north of Plovdiv.
File: Small_basilica.jpg|Small basilica
According to records of the households and owners/renters in the central part of Plovdiv in the middle 19th century provided by Bulgarian and Greek chroniclers Genchev and Lyberatos, of a total of 358/421 the Bulgarians were either 141 or 118 and constituted 39.4% or 33.7%, the Gudilas were 94 or 141 constituting 26.3% or 38.1%, while the Langeris were 36-39 and between 10.1% and 10.5%, while according to the Bulgarian author the Bulgarian parents with children Gulidas were another 41 (11.4%).
For further information see the article Roma people in Plovdiv.
Ten years after the Macedonian invasion the Thracian kings started to exercise power again after the Odrysian Seuthes III had re-established their kingdom under Macedonian suzerainty as a result of a somehow successful revolt against Alexander the Great's rule resulting in neither victory, nor defeat, but stalemate.
Prior to the population exchange, as of 1 January 1885, the city of Plovdiv had a population of 33,442, of which 16,752 were Bulgarians (50%), 7,144 Turks (21%), 5,497 Greeks (16%), 2,168 Jews (6%), 1,061 Armenians (3%), 151 Italians, 112 Germans, 112 Romani people, 80 French people, 61 Russians and 304 people of other nationalities.
There are many remains from antiquity – Plovdiv is among the few cities with two ancient theatres; remains of the medieval walls and towers; Ottoman baths and mosques; a well-preserved old quarter from the National Revival period with beautiful houses, churches and narrow paved streets.
Since the 9th century the Bulgarian name began to appear as ''Papaldiv/n Plo(v)div, Pladiv, Pladin, Plapdiv, Plovdin'', which evolved from a Thracian variant ''Pulpudeva''.
Industry has been the sole leader in attracting investment.
On 5 September 2014, Plovdiv was selected as the Bulgarian host of the European Capital of Culture 2019.
The first railway in the city was built in 1874 connecting it with the Ottoman capital, and in 1888 it was linked with Sofia.
Spring arrives in March but that season is cooler than autumn.
It was the capital of the Provisional Russian Administration in Bulgaria between May and October.
In 1208 Kaloyan's successor Boril was defeated by the Latins in the Battle of Philippopolis.
the earliest name in chronological terms.
Those include Shopping Center Grand, Market Center and two more all on the Kapitan Raycho Street, Forum in Trakiya, Excelsior and others.
A major tourist centre, Plovdiv lies at the foot of the Rhodope Mountains, and most people wishing to explore the mountains choose it as their trip's starting point.
On 5 September 2014 Plovdiv was selected as Bulgarian host of European Capital of Culture in 2019.
Although it was not the capital of the Province of Thrace, the city was the largest and most important centre in the province.
The richer citizens constructed beautiful houses many of which can still be seen in the Architectural reserve Old Plovdiv.
The Roman Odeon was restored in 2004.
The ancient ruins tell a story of a vibrant, growing city with numerous public buildings, shrines, baths, theatres, a stadium and the only developed ancient water supply system in Bulgaria.
The latter name is most likely a Thracian oral translation of the other as it kept all consonants of the name Philip + deva (city), nevertheless the two names sounding similar, may not share the same origin as Odrin and Adrianople do not, and ''Pulpudeva'' may have predated the other name meaning "lake city"  in Thracian.
The museum possesses 59 aircraft and indoor and outdoor exhibitions.
An assumed name is the 1st century ''Tiberias'' in honor of the Roman emperor Tiberius, under whom the Odrysian Kingdom was a client of Rome.
Railway transport in the city dates back to 1872 when it became a station on the Lyubimets–Belovo railway line.
The Ottoman Empire created a constitution and appointed a governor.
Autumn starts in late September; days are long and relatively warm in early autumn.
In British English the Bulgarian variant ''Plòvdiv'' have become prevalent after World War I.
Since 1981, it has had a section for Mexican art donated by Mexican painters in honour of the 1,300-year anniversary of the Bulgarian State.
Two mosques remain in Plovdiv from the time of the Ottoman rule.
The Evmolpeya choir is another girls' choir from Plovdiv, whose patron when it was established in 2006 became the then mayor Ivan Chomakov.
This happened with the help of the  Municipal Foundation “Plovdiv 2019″ - a non-government organization which was established in 2011 by Plovdiv’s City Council.
Until 1906 there were Bulgarian and Greek bishops in the city.
In its ethnic character Plovdiv is the second or the third largest cosmopolitan city inhabited by Bulgarians after Sofia and possibly Varna.
The town was included in the Odrysian kingdom (460 BC-46 AD), a Thracian tribal union.
The Plovdiv International Airport is near the village of Krumovo,  southeast of the city.
Plovdiv sometimes experiences very hot days which are typical in the interior of the country.
File:Kolodruma_Plovdiv_2015.jpg|Velodrome
The city is a major road and railway hub in southern Bulgaria: the Trakia motorway (A1) is only at  to the north.
It was built in the 2nd century during the reign of the Roman Emperor Hadrian.
There are also some Muslims and Jews.
There are also playgrounds for the children.
Food processing, tobacco, brewing and textiles were the main pillars of the industry.
Aime de Varennes in 1180 encountered the singing of Byzantine songs in the city that recounted the deeds of Alexander the Great and his predecessors, over 1300 years before.
Ivan Asen II conquered the duchy finally in 1230 but the city had possibly been earlier conquered.
First-class roads lead to Sofia to the west, Karlovo to the north, Asenovgrad and Kardzhali to the south, Stara Zagora and Haskovo to the east.
With the establishment of Bulgaria in 681 Philippoupolis, the name of the city then, became an important border fortress of the Byzantine Empire.
The three-story scene is on the southern part and is decorated with friezes, cornices and statues.
Thus, although there is a little doubt about the Bulgarian origin of the Gulidas, the city could be considered of Greek or Bulgarian majority in the 19th century, on whether the Gudilas were considered part of the one or the other community.
File: Old town hisar kapia.jpg|Hisar gate with the ethnographical museum
The library was founded in 1879 and named after the famous Bulgarian writer and poet Ivan Vazov who worked in Plovdiv for five years creating some of his best works.
The 2009 IOI Honorary Patron was Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov.
The Latin Empire conquered Philippoupolis in 1204, and there were two short interregnum periods as the city was twice occupied by Kaloyan of Bulgaria before his death in 1207.
Plovdiv has hosted specialized exhibitions of the World's Fair in 1981, 1985, and 1991.
In the last several years the inhabitants from those villages had taken steps to rejoin the "urban" municipality.
The city has historically developed on seven syenite hills, some of which are  high.
Many events are still held on the scene including the Verdi festival and the International Folklore festival.
It is attested earliest on an artifact, mentioning, that king Beithys, priest of the Syrian goddess, brings gift to Kendriso Apollo, the deity is recorded to be named multiple times after different cities.
File:Plovdiv-Seminary-St.-Cyril-and-Methodius.jpg|The Orthodox seminary
It included the largest stadium and rowing canal in the country.
The exhibition is situated in three buildings.
Plovdiv Sports Complex consists of Plovdiv Stadium with several additional football fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, a rowing base with a 2&nbsp;km-long channel, restaurants and cafés in a spacious park in the western part of the city, just south of the Maritsa river.
Plovdiv has several volleyball and basketball teams.
File:St-George-Armenian-Church.jpg|St George Armenian Church
However, it was destroyed again by Attila's Huns in 441-442 and by the Goths of Teodoric Strabo in 471.
In 1939 there were 16,000 craftsmen and 17,000 workers in manufacturing factories, mainly for food and tobacco processing.
File: Odeon plovdiv.jpg|Odeon
In 72 BC the city was seized by the Roman general Marcus Lucullus but was soon restored to Thracian control.
Today 6 September is celebrated as the Unification Day and the Day of Plovdiv.
Gentle winds (0 to 5&nbsp;m/s) are predominant in the city with wind speeds of up to 1&nbsp;m/s, representing 95% of all winds during the year.
There are many remains preserved from antiquity such as the ancient Plovdiv Roman theatre, Roman odeon, Roman aqueduct, Roman Stadium, the archaeological complex Eirene, and others.
The Odrysian kingdom gradually overcome the Macedonian suzerainty, while the city was destroyed by the Celts as part of the Celtic settlement of Eastern Europe, most likely in the 270s BC.
After the fall of Communism in 1989 and the collapse of Bulgaria's planned economy, a number of industrial complexes were closed.
the Gregorian calendar).
Dating to the 19th century, it is one of the best-preserved examples of the so-called "Ottoman-style" synagogues in the Balkans.
The city has a total of 690 bike parkings.
It was approximately 240 meters long and 50 meters wide, and could seat up to 30 000 spectators.
File:ProtestantChurchPlovdiv (2).JPG|A Protestant church
The athletic games at the stadium were organised by the General Assembly of the province of Thrace.
Several hypermarkets have been built mainly on the outskirts of the city: Metro, Kaufland, Triumf, Praktiker, Billa, Mr. Bricolage, Baumax, Technopolis, Technomarket Europa, and others.
In the 1970s and 1980s antique remains were excavated and the Old Town was fully restored.
In 179 a second wall was built to encompass Trimontium which had already extended out of the Three hills into the valley.
Later Roman coins mentioned the name, which is possibly derived from Thracian god Kendriso equated with Appolo, cedar forests, which ancient writers mentioned, or from Thracian tribe from artifacts - kendrisi.
File:Dzhendem.jpg|Markovo Tepe Mall
On 6 April 1956 the first trolleybus line was opened and in the 1950s the Trimontsium Hotel was constructed.
Inside the city proper are six syenite hills,.
During Communist rule the city's economy greatly expanded and was dominated by heavy industry; it still produces lead and zinc, machinery, electronics, motor trucks, chemicals and cosmetics.
There are important road junctions to the south, southwest and north.
Afterwards Plovdiv was conquered by Byzantium, according to some information, by 1300 Plovdiv was a possession of Theodore Svetoslav of Bulgaria.
The BIAF Airshow is held every two years on the Krumovo airbase, one of the biggest airshows in the Balkans.
File:Synagogue_in_Plovdiv_D.jpg|The Plovdiv Synagogue
There are intercity buses which link Plovdiv with cities and towns all over the country and many European countries.
Plovdiv was the first geographic location to be featured as a theme day in Reddit's  Picturegame
The Roman times were a period of growth and cultural excellence.
In 1836 the first Bulgarian school was inaugurated and in 1850 modern secular education began when the "St Cyrill and Metodius" school was opened.
Winter is normally cold and snow is common.
The Plovdiv International Fair, held annually since 1892, is the largest and oldest fair in the country and all of southeastern Europe, gathering companies from all over the world in an exhibition area of  located on a territory of  on the northern banks of the Maristsa river.
However, the city is described at the time of Constantine VII in the 10th century as being within the Byzantine province (theme of Macedonia).
Some names are suggestive.
Plovdiv has a geographical position which makes it an international transport hub.
Ivanko was appointed as the governor of the Byzantine Theme of Philippopolis in 1196, but between 1198 and 1200 separated it from Byzantium in a union with Bulgaria.
In 2014, more than 35 thousand companies operate in the region which create jobs for 285,000 people.
It took a century and hard work to recover the city.
The rivalry between them is considered to be even more fierce than the one between Levski and CSKA of Sofia.
File: Wodo.jpg |Aqueduct
File:  Old town georgiadi.jpg|Plovdiv Regional Historical Museum
The average depth of snow cover is  and the maximum is normally , but in some winters it can reach  or more.
It is divided into two parts with 14 rows each divided with a horizontal lane.
The theatre was studied, conserved and restored between 1968 and 1984.
The numerous nations that lived here have left their traces on the 12m thick cultural layers of the city.
There are several rooms for wildlife and it contains Bulgaria's largest freshwater aquarium with 40 fish species.
There is a horse racing club and a horse base near the city.
The frost season ends in March or in April at the latest.
As the city have been for a long period of time a gathering center for the Orthodox Christians Plovdiv is surrounded by several monasteries located at the foot of the Rhodope Mountains - like "St. George", "St Kozma and Damian", St Kirik and Yulita(Ulita).
File:Sveta-Bogoroditsa-Church-Plovdiv.jpg| The Virgin Mary Eastern Orthodox Church
File: Klianti.jpg|Klianti House
On 14 October 1943 it was moved to a house in the Old Town.
File: Eirene mosaics5.jpg|Mosaics in Eirene residence
The town was a fort of the independent local Thracian tribe Bessi.
Summer (mid May to late September) is hot, moderately dry, and sunny with a July and August maximum average of .
This makes Plovdiv the most densely populated city in the country with 3,769 inhabitants per km².
Many of the old neighbourhoods are still referred to as ''Belomorski'', ''Vardarski''.
It separated the autonomous region of Eastern Rumelia from Bulgaria and Plovdiv became its capital.
During the Ottoman Interregnum, in 1410 Musa Çelebi conquered the city killing and displacing inhabitants.
The economy of Plovdiv has long tradition in manufacturing, commerce, transport, communications and tourism.
The Djumaya Mosque is considered the oldest European mosque outside Moorish Spain.
After the Wars for National Union (Balkan Wars and World War I) the city became home for thousands of refugees from the former Bulgarian lands in Macedonia, Western and Eastern Thrace.
Other stadiums include Stadion Botev (under re-construction), Lokomotiv (10,000 seats), Maritsa Stadium (5,000 seats) and Todor Diev Stadium (7,000 seats).
Massive walls surrounding a temple and a palace have been excavated.
File:Trade Center Forum, Trakiya, Plovdiv.JPG|Forum Trakia shopping center
The main objectives were to develop and to prepare Plovdiv’s bid book for European Capital of Culture in 2019.
The Trakiya Folklore Ensemble, founded in 1974, has performed thousands of concerts in Bulgaria and more than 42 countries.
The average number of days with snow cover in Plovdiv is 33.
The Trakiya Traditional Choir was nominated for a Grammy Award.
