She suggested it in a conversation with her grandfather Falconer Madan, a former librarian at the University of Oxford's Bodleian Library, who passed the name to astronomy professor Herbert Hall Turner, who cabled it to colleagues in the United States.
In Japanese, Houei Nojiri suggested the translation , and this was borrowed into Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese.
Pluto and Charon are sometimes considered a binary system because the barycenter of their orbits does not lie within either body.
Launched in 2006, it captured its first (distant) images of Pluto in late September 2006 during a test of the Long Range Reconnaissance Imager.
It is the largest known trans-Neptunian object by volume but is less massive than Eris, a dwarf planet in the scattered disc.
published findings regarding methane mixing ratios in Pluto's atmosphere consistent with a Plutonian diameter greater than 2360&nbsp;km, with a "best guess" of 2368&nbsp;km.
Pluto's surface is quite varied, with large differences in both brightness and color.
Pluto's surface is composed of more than 98 percent nitrogen ice, with traces of methane and carbon monoxide.
For example, on July 13, 2015, at the coordinates of the Applied Physics Laboratory where the probe was constructed, the Pluto Time was 8:38&nbsp;p.m., four minutes later than the apparent sunset of 8:34&nbsp;p.m. reported for that location by NOAA.
All the Jovian planets, particularly Jupiter, play a role in the creation of the superresonance.
The system is also unusual among planetary systems in that each is tidally locked to the other, which means that Pluto and Charon always have the same hemisphere facing each other.
The New Horizons science team summarized initial findings as "Pluto displays a surprisingly wide variety of geological landforms, including those resulting from glaciological and surface–atmosphere interactions as well as impact, tectonic, possible cryovolcanic, and mass-wasting processes."
Pluto's distance from Earth makes its in-depth study and exploration difficult.
The color varies between charcoal black, dark orange and white.
The Pluto–Charon barycenter came to perihelion on September 5, 1989, and was last closer to the Sun than Neptune between February 7, 1979, and February 11, 1999.
Due to Pluto's distance from Earth, in-depth study from Earth is difficult.
In 1976, Dale Cruikshank, Carl Pilcher and David Morrison of the University of Hawaii calculated Pluto's albedo for the first time, finding that it matched that for methane ice; this meant Pluto had to be exceptionally luminous for its size and therefore could not be more than 1 percent the mass of Earth.
The closest such angular separation occurs every 10,000 years.
The discovery made headlines around the globe.
This eccentricity means a small region of Pluto's orbit lies nearer the Sun than Neptune's.
In early 2007 the craft made use of a gravity assist from Jupiter.
In 1906, Percival Lowell—a wealthy Bostonian who had founded the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, in 1894—started an extensive project in search of a possible ninth planet, which he termed "Planet X".
Its discoverers and the press initially called it the tenth planet, although there was no official consensus at the time on whether to call it a planet.
The ''New Horizons'' spacecraft, which flew by Pluto in July 2015, is the first and so far only attempt to explore Pluto directly.
This means that Pluto periodically comes closer to the Sun than Neptune, but a stable orbital resonance with Neptune prevents them from colliding.
Others in the astronomical community considered the discovery the strongest argument for reclassifying Pluto as a minor planet.
Pluto is one of the most contrastive bodies in the Solar System, with as much contrast as Saturn's moon Iapetus.
Pluto's atmosphere is divided into roughly 20 regularly spaced haze layers  up to 150&nbsp;km high, thought to be the result of pressure waves created by airflow across Pluto's mountains.
It is less massive than the dwarf planet Eris, a trans-Neptunian object discovered in 2005, though Pluto has a larger diameter of 2374&nbsp;km compared to Eris's approximate diameter of 2326&nbsp;km.
In 1930, Walt Disney was apparently inspired by it when he introduced for Mickey Mouse a canine companion named Pluto, although Disney animator Ben Sharpsteen could not confirm why the name was given.
In 2007, observations by the Gemini Observatory of patches of ammonia hydrates and water crystals on the surface of Charon suggested the presence of active cryo-geysers.
With less than 0.2 lunar masses, Pluto is much less massive than the terrestrial planets, and also less massive than seven moons: Ganymede, Titan, Callisto, Io, the Moon, Europa, and Triton.
The Illinois Senate passed a similar resolution in 2009, on the basis that Clyde Tombaugh, the discoverer of Pluto, was born in Illinois.
Museum and planetarium directors occasionally created controversy by omitting Pluto from planetary models of the Solar System.
Most astronomers agree that Pluto owes its current position to a sudden migration undergone by Neptune early in the Solar System's formation.
The Nice model requires that there were about a thousand Pluto-sized bodies in the original planetesimal disk, which included Triton and Eris.
From any position on either body, the other is always at the same position in the sky, or always obscured.
These suggestions were disregarded.
Scientific observations of Pluto began five months before the closest approach and continued for at least a month after the encounter.
Alan Stern has contended that even a small increase in Pluto's surface temperature can lead to exponential increases in Pluto's atmospheric density; from 18 to as much as 280 millibars (three times that of Mars to a quarter that of the Earth).
The IAU has not formalized a definition for binary dwarf planets, and Charon is officially classified as a moon of Pluto.
It was the first Kuiper belt object to be discovered.
Its surface area is , or roughly the same surface area as Russia.
According to the measurements by ''New Horizons'', the surface pressure is about 1 Pa (10 μbar), roughly one million to 100,000 times less than Earth's atmospheric pressure.
This claim has been disputed with the argument that Pluto's escape velocity is too high for this to happen.
The objects in the scattered disc, a dynamically unstable region overlapping the Kuiper belt, are thought to have been placed in their current positions by interactions with Neptune's migrating resonances.
Pluto's moons are hypothesized to have been formed by a collision between Pluto and a similar-sized body, early in the history of the Solar System.
This pattern is such that, in each 500-year cycle, the first time Pluto is near perihelion, Neptune is over 50° ''behind'' Pluto.
Pluto has a tenuous atmosphere consisting of nitrogen (N2), methane (CH4), and carbon monoxide (CO), which are in equilibrium with their ices on Pluto's surface.
Its surface gravity is 0.063 ''g'' (compared to 1 ''g'' for Earth).
Upon the announcement, Madan gave Venetia £5 (equivalent to  GBP, or 450 USD in 2014) as a reward.
Pluto's color is more similar to that of Io with slightly more orange, significantly less red than Mars.
Unknown to Lowell, his surveys had captured two faint images of Pluto on March 19 and April 7, 1915, but they were not recognized for what they were.
When the two longitudes are the same—that is, when one could draw a straight line through both nodes and the Sun—Pluto's perihelion lies exactly at 90°, and hence it comes closest to the Sun when it is highest above Neptune's orbit.
Some other mechanism or mechanisms must therefore be at work.
The orbital periods of all Pluto's moons are linked in a system of orbital resonances and near resonances.
It has a moderately eccentric and inclined orbit during which it ranges from 30 to 49&nbsp;astronomical units or AU (4.4–7.4 billion&nbsp;km) from the Sun.
Observations were made of the change in the total average brightness of the Pluto–Charon system during the eclipses.
As its orbit changes, this has the gradual effect of changing the perihelion and longitude of Pluto's orbit (and, to a lesser degree, of Neptune).
Relative to Neptune, the amplitude of libration is 38°, and so the angular separation of Pluto's perihelion to the orbit of Neptune is always greater than 52° .
It has no craters that were visible to ''New Horizons'', indicating that its surface is less than 10 million years old.
Thus, even if Pluto's orbit were not inclined, the two bodies could never collide.
A resolution introduced by some members of the California State Assembly facetiously called the IAU decision a "scientific heresy".
On February 18, 1930, after nearly a year of searching, Tombaugh discovered a possible moving object on photographic plates taken on January 23 and 29 of that year.
During its brief flyby, ''New Horizons'' made detailed measurements and observations of Pluto and its moons.
NASA has posted a "Pluto Time" calculator that determines when the light on Earth is equivalent to that on Pluto on a clear day.
His other claim was that because less than five percent of astronomers voted for it, the decision was not representative of the entire astronomical community.
The name was soon embraced by wider culture.
As of 2011, surveys of the Kuiper belt to magnitude 21 were nearly complete and any remaining Pluto-sized objects are expected to be beyond 100&nbsp;AU from the Sun.
At the simplest level, one can examine the two orbits and see that they do not intersect.
It is possible that Pluto had a near-circular orbit about 33 AU from the Sun before Neptune's migration perturbed it into a resonant capture.
Pluto's density is .
A computer model created in 2004 by Alessandro Morbidelli of the Observatoire de la Côte d'Azur in Nice suggested that the migration of Neptune into the Kuiper belt may have been triggered by the formation of a 1:2 resonance between Jupiter and Saturn, which created a gravitational push that propelled both Uranus and Neptune into higher orbits and caused them to switch places, ultimately doubling Neptune's distance from the Sun.
Like other members of the Kuiper belt, Pluto is thought to be a residual planetesimal; a component of the original protoplanetary disc around the Sun that failed to fully coalesce into a full-fledged planet.
The Plutonian system is highly compact: the five known satellites orbit within the inner 3% of the region where prograde orbits would be stable.
Public reception to the IAU decision was mixed.
There are several other resonances and interactions that govern the details of their relative motion, and enhance Pluto's stability.
This is known as the ''1:1 superresonance''.
It's been a long time coming.
Computer processing of many such observations can be used to create a brightness map.
Notable geographical features include Tombaugh Regio, or the "Heart" (a large bright area on the side opposite Charon), Cthulhu Regio, or the "Whale" (a large dark area on the trailing hemisphere), and the "Brass Knuckles" (a series of equatorial dark areas on the leading hemisphere).
Vesto Melvin Slipher, the observatory director, summarily handed the job of locating Planet X to 23-year-old Clyde Tombaugh, who had just arrived at the Lowell Observatory after Slipher had been impressed by a sample of his astronomical drawings.
In 1992, Myles Standish used data from ''Voyager 2'''s flyby of Neptune in 1989, which had revised the estimates of Neptune's mass downward by 0.5%—an amount comparable to the mass of Mars—to recalculate its gravitational effect on Uranus.
Pluto's true place in the Solar System began to reveal itself only in 1992, when astronomers began to find small icy objects beyond Neptune that were similar to Pluto not only in orbit but also in size and composition.
The presence of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, in Pluto's atmosphere creates a temperature inversion, with the average temperature of its atmosphere tens of degrees warmer than its surface, though observations by ''New Horizons'' have revealed Pluto's upper atmosphere to be far colder than expected (70 K, as opposed to about 100 K).
Its orbital characteristics are substantially different from those of the planets, which follow nearly circular orbits around the Sun close to a flat reference plane called the ecliptic.
Using a blink comparator, he rapidly shifted back and forth between views of each of the plates to create the illusion of movement of any objects that had changed position or appearance between photographs.
Pluto is more than twice the diameter and a dozen times the mass of the dwarf planet Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt.
These arise principally from two additional mechanisms (besides the 2:3 mean-motion resonance).
The 2:3 resonance between the two bodies is highly stable, and is preserved over millions of years.
Though Pluto is the largest Kuiper belt object discovered, Neptune's moon Triton, which is slightly larger than Pluto, is similar to it both geologically and atmospherically, and is thought to be a captured Kuiper belt object.
The resultant expulsion of objects from the proto-Kuiper belt could also explain the Late Heavy Bombardment 600&nbsp;million years after the Solar System's formation and the origin of the Jupiter trojans.
To see it, a telescope is required; around 30&nbsp;cm (12&nbsp;in) aperture being desirable.
On July 14, 2015, NASA's ''New Horizons'' space probe flew through the Pluto system, and the information it gathered will be transmitted to Earth until late 2016.
A large number of Kuiper belt objects, like Pluto, are in a 2:3 orbital resonance with Neptune.
Observations were conducted using a remote sensing package that included imaging instruments and a radio science investigation tool, as well as spectroscopic and other experiments.
It has been claimed that if Pluto were placed as near to the Sun as Earth, it would develop a tail, as comets do.
With the new figures added in, the discrepancies, and with them the need for a Planet X, vanished.
To understand the nature of the libration, imagine a polar point of view, looking down on the ecliptic from a distant vantage point where the planets orbit counterclockwise.
Tombaugh urged Slipher to suggest a name for the new object quickly before someone else did.
The presence of atmospheric gases was traced up to 1670 kilometers high, although the atmosphere does not have a sharp upper boundary.
The name was announced on May 1, 1930.
Beyond Charon there are four much smaller circumbinary moons, Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra.
This method can also track changes in brightness over time.
The New Mexico House of Representatives passed a resolution in honor of Tombaugh, a longtime resident of that state, that declared that Pluto will always be considered a planet while in New Mexican skies and that March 13, 2007, was Pluto Planet Day.
Although computer simulations can be used to predict its position for several million years (both forward and backward in time), after intervals longer than the Lyapunov time of 10–20 million years, calculations become speculative: Pluto is sensitive to immeasurably small details of the Solar System, hard-to-predict factors that will gradually change Pluto's position in its orbit.
Each member of the Lowell Observatory was allowed to vote on a short-list of three: Minerva (which was already the name for an asteroid), Cronus (which had lost reputation through being proposed by the unpopular astronomer Thomas Jefferson Jackson See), and Pluto.
Pluto's diameter is  and its mass is , 17.7% that of the Moon (0.22% that of Earth).
Light from the Sun takes about 5.5 hours to reach Pluto at its average distance (39.5&nbsp;AU).
In 2006, in its 17th annual words of the year vote, the American Dialect Society voted ''plutoed'' as the word of the year.
After the observatory obtained further confirmatory photographs, news of the discovery was telegraphed to the Harvard College Observatory on March 13, 1930.
Tombaugh's task was to systematically image the night sky in pairs of photographs, then examine each pair and determine whether any objects had shifted position.
Like other Kuiper-belt objects (KBOs), Pluto shares features with comets; for example, the solar wind is gradually blowing Pluto's surface into space.
The most significant of these is that Pluto lies in the 2:3 mean-motion resonance with Neptune: for every two orbits that Pluto makes around the Sun, Neptune makes three.
In the long term, Pluto's orbit is chaotic.
This idea was eventually rejected after dynamical studies showed it to be impossible because Pluto never approaches Neptune in its orbit.
From 1992 onward, many bodies were discovered orbiting in the same area as Pluto, showing that Pluto is part of a population of objects called the Kuiper belt.
Pluto's orbital period is 248 years.
On July 14, 2015, NASA's ''New Horizons'' space probe flew through the Pluto system, providing much information about it.
The earliest maps of Pluto, made in the late 1980s, were brightness maps created from close observations of eclipses by its largest moon, Charon.
Subsequent searches for an alternative Planet X, notably by Robert Sutton Harrington, failed.
The resolution asserted that Pluto was "unfairly downgraded to a 'dwarf' planet" by the IAU.
'''Pluto''' (minor-planet designation: '''134340 Pluto''') is a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt, a ring of bodies beyond Neptune.
The satellites' orbits are circular (eccentricity < 0.006) and coplanar with Pluto's equator (inclination < 1°), and therefore tilted approximately 120° relative to Pluto's orbit.
''New Horizons'' made its closest approach to Pluto on July 14, 2015 after a 3,462-day journey across the Solar System.
After many such repetitions, Pluto is sufficiently slowed, and Neptune sufficiently speeded up, that Neptune begins to catch up with Pluto at the opposite side of its orbit (near the opposing node to where we began).
To "pluto" is to "demote or devalue someone or something".
Sputnik Planum, the western lobe of the "Heart", is a 1000-km-wide plain of frozen nitrogen and carbon monoxide ices, divided into polygonal cells which are interpreted as convection cells that carry floating blocks of water ice crust and sublimation pits towards their margins; there are obvious signs of glacial flows both into and out of the plain.
In 2012, it was hypothesized that  could be a quasi-satellite of Pluto, a specific type of co-orbital configuration.
Observations of Pluto in occultation with Charon allowed scientists to establish Pluto's diameter more accurately, whereas the invention of adaptive optics allowed them to determine its shape more accurately.
The collision released material that consolidated into the moons around Pluto.
Most languages use the name "Pluto" in various transliterations.
Determinations of Pluto's size had been complicated by its atmosphere, and hydrocarbon haze.
This made its official status as a planet controversial, with many questioning whether Pluto should be considered together with or separately from its surrounding population.
Pluto and Neptune's minimum separation is over 17&nbsp;AU, which is greater than Pluto's minimum separation from Uranus (11&nbsp;AU).
Because the decay of radioactive elements would eventually heat the ices enough for the rock to separate from them, scientists expect that Pluto's internal structure is differentiated, with the rocky material having settled into a dense core surrounded by a mantle of water ice.
In contrast, Pluto's orbit is moderately inclined relative to the ecliptic (over 17°) and moderately eccentric (elliptical).
Pluto received every vote.
These maps were produced by complex computer processing, which finds the best-fit projected maps for the few pixels of the Hubble images.
After passing the ascending node, Pluto is interior to Neptune's orbit and moving faster, approaching Neptune from behind.
When precession is accounted for, the orbital periods of Styx, Nix, and Hydra are in an exact 18:22:33 ratio.
Had Pluto been included upon its discovery in 1930, it would have likely been designated 1164, following 1163 Saga, which was discovered a month earlier.
There are fourteen other known prediscovery observations, with the oldest made by the Yerkes Observatory on August 20, 1909.
The diameter of the core is hypothesized to be approximately , 70% of Pluto's diameter.
The discovery of Pluto's satellite Charon in 1978 enabled a determination of the mass of the Pluto–Charon system by application of Newton's formulation of Kepler's third law.
(Pluto's albedo is  times that of Earth.)
Rather, it is considered a member of a linked population called the scattered disc.
On July 13, 2015, images from NASA's ''New Horizons'' mission Long Range Reconnaissance Imager (LORRI), along with data from the other instruments, determined Pluto's diameter to be , which was later revised to be  on July 24, and later to .
Pluto has five known moons: Charon (the largest, with a diameter just over half that of Pluto), Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra.
The Pluto–Charon system is one of the few in the Solar System whose barycenter lies outside the primary body; 617 Patroclus is a smaller example, and the Sun–Jupiter system is the only larger one.
First, Pluto's argument of perihelion, the angle between the point where it crosses the ecliptic and the point where it is closest to the Sun, librates around 90°.
Entitled "The Great Planet Debate", the conference published a post-conference press release indicating that scientists could not come to a consensus about the definition of planet.
Just before the conference, on June 11, 2008, the IAU announced in a press release that the term "plutoid" would henceforth be used to refer to Pluto and other objects that have an orbital semi-major axis greater than that of Neptune and enough mass to be of near-spherical shape.
This means that when Pluto is closest to the Sun, it is at its farthest above the plane of the Solar System, preventing encounters with Neptune.
Just like sweat cools the body as it evaporates from the skin, the sublimation of Pluto's atmosphere cools its surface.
At such densities, nitrogen could flow across the surface as liquid.
In 1978, the discovery of Pluto's moon Charon allowed the measurement of Pluto's mass for the first time: roughly 0.2% that of Earth, and far too small to account for the discrepancies in the orbit of Uranus.
The IAU further decided that bodies that, like Pluto, meet criteria 1 and 2 but do not meet criterion 3 would be called dwarf planets.
The object was officially named on May 25, 1930.
Researchers on both sides of the debate gathered on August 14–16, 2008, at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory for a conference that included back-to-back talks on the current IAU definition of a planet.
Pluto has five known natural satellites: Charon, first identified in 1978 by astronomer James Christy; Nix and Hydra, both discovered in 2005; Kerberos, discovered in 2011; and Styx, discovered in 2012.
This also means that the rotation period of each is equal to the time it takes the entire system to rotate around its barycenter.
The Hayden Planetarium reopened—in February 2000, after renovation—with a model of only eight planets, which made headlines almost a year later.
Some Indian languages use the name Pluto, but others, such as Hindi, use the name of ''Yama'', the God of Death in Hindu and Buddhist mythology.
The amount of light from the Sun on Pluto is weak, analogous to twilight on Earth.
Alan Stern, principal investigator with NASA's ''New Horizons'' mission to Pluto, publicly derided the IAU resolution, stating that "the definition stinks, for technical reasons".
By 1909, Lowell and William H. Pickering had suggested several possible celestial coordinates for such a planet.
A lesser-quality photograph taken on January 21 helped confirm the movement.
Pluto was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, and was originally considered the ninth planet from the Sun.
As Neptune migrated outward, it approached the objects in the proto-Kuiper belt, setting one in orbit around itself (Triton), locking others into resonances, and knocking others into chaotic orbits.
Constance Lowell proposed ''Zeus'', then ''Percival'' and finally ''Constance''.
Pluto's ascending and descending nodes, the points at which its orbit crosses the ecliptic, are currently separated from Neptune's by over 21°.
In March 2014, Lellouch, de Bergh et al.
In September 2016, astronomers announced that the reddish-brown cap of the north pole of Charon is composed of tholins, organic macromolecules that may be ingredients for the emergence of life, and produced from methane, nitrogen and related gases released from the atmosphere of Pluto and transferred over about  distance to the orbiting moon.
KBOs with this orbital resonance are called "plutinos", after Pluto.
When Pluto is closest to the Sun, and hence closest to Neptune's orbit as viewed from above, it is also the farthest above Neptune's path.
The strong gravitational pull between the two causes angular momentum to be transferred to Pluto, at Neptune's expense.
Polynesian languages also tend to use the indigenous god of the underworld, as in Maori ''Whiro''.
Some members of the public have also rejected the change, citing the disagreement within the scientific community on the issue, or for sentimental reasons, maintaining that they have always known Pluto as a planet and will continue to do so regardless of the IAU decision.
Nitrogen and carbon monoxide are most abundant on the anti-Charon face of Pluto (around 180° longitude, where Tombaugh Regio's western lobe, Sputnik Planum, is located), whereas methane is most abundant near 300° east.
He argued that all big spherical moons, including the Moon, should likewise be considered planets.
The Lowell Observatory, which had the right to name the new object, received more than 1,000 suggestions from all over the world, ranging from Atlas to Zymal.
This alone is not enough to protect Pluto; perturbations from the planets (especially Neptune) could alter aspects of Pluto's orbit (such as its orbital precession) over millions of years so that a collision could be possible.
The name Pluto, after the god of the underworld, was proposed by Venetia Burney (1918–2009), a then eleven-year-old schoolgirl in Oxford, England, who was interested in classical mythology.
The final choice of name was helped in part by the fact that the first two letters of ''Pluto'' are the initials of Percival Lowell.
Second, the longitudes of ascending nodes of the two bodies—the points where they cross the ecliptic—are in near-resonance with the above libration.
It is possible that such heating continues today, creating a subsurface ocean of liquid water some  thick at the core–mantle boundary.
Pluto's astronomical symbol ().
Percival's widow, Constance Lowell, entered into a ten-year legal battle with the Lowell Observatory over her late husband's legacy, and the search for Planet X did not resume until 1929.
On July 29, 2005, astronomers at Caltech announced the discovery of a new trans-Neptunian object, Eris, which was substantially more massive than Pluto and the most massive object discovered in the Solar System since Triton in 1846.
The similar sizes of Charon and Pluto has prompted some astronomers to call it a double dwarf planet.
Like other Kuiper belt objects, Pluto is primarily made of ice and rock and is relatively small—about one-sixth the mass of the Moon and one-third its volume.
Eris (see above) is about the same size as Pluto (though more massive) but is not strictly considered a member of the Kuiper belt population.
As objects increasingly closer in size to Pluto were discovered in the region, it was argued that Pluto should be reclassified as one of the Kuiper belt objects, just as Ceres, Pallas, Juno and Vesta eventually lost their planet status after the discovery of many other asteroids.
The whole process takes about 20,000 years to complete.
Lowell and his observatory conducted his search until his death in 1916, but to no avail.
After 1992, its planethood was questioned following the discovery of several objects of similar size in the Kuiper belt.
Mike Brown, the astronomer who discovered Eris, said "through this whole crazy circus-like procedure, somehow the right answer was stumbled on.
However, Kerberos has a much lower albedo than the other moons of Pluto, which is difficult to explain with a giant collision.
For example, eclipsing a bright spot on Pluto makes a bigger total brightness change than eclipsing a dark spot.
