Plutonium alloys can be produced by adding a metal to molten plutonium.
The δ phase plutonium–gallium and plutonium–aluminium alloys are produced by adding plutonium(III) fluoride to molten gallium or aluminium, which has the advantage of avoiding dealing directly with the highly reactive plutonium metal.
Separation of the isotopes is not feasible.
Isotopes and compounds of plutonium are radioactive and accumulate in bone marrow.
Exceptions include lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium and caesium of the alkali metals; and magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium of the alkaline earth metals; and europium and ytterbium of the rare earth metals.
The "hot particle" theory in which a particle of plutonium dust irradiates a localized spot of lung tissue is not supported by mainstream research—such particles are more mobile than originally thought and toxicity is not measurably increased due to particulate form.
The δ form has more typical metallic character, and is roughly as strong and malleable as aluminium.
The U.S. Department of Energy plans to dispose of 34&nbsp;tonnes of weapons-grade plutonium in the United States before the end of 2019 by converting the plutonium to a MOX fuel to be used in commercial nuclear power reactors.
Isotope analysis by Pacific Northwest National Laboratory indicated that the plutonium in the bottle was manufactured in the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge during 1944.
'''Plutonium–uranium–molybdenum''' has the best corrosion resistance, forming a protective film of oxides, but titanium and zirconium are preferred for physics reasons.
If the metal is exposed long enough to a limited amount of water vapor, a powdery surface coating of PuO2 is formed.
In December 1958, during a process of purifying plutonium at Los Alamos, a critical mass was formed in a mixing vessel, which resulted in the death of a chemical operator named Cecil Kelley.
Refractory metals such as tantalum and tungsten along with the more stable oxides, borides, carbides, nitrides and silicides can tolerate this.
High amounts of hafnium, holmium and thallium also allows some retention of the δ phase at room temperature.
From 1945 to 1947, eighteen human test subjects were injected with plutonium without informed consent.
The presence of plutonium-240 limits a plutonium sample's usability for weapons or its quality as reactor fuel, and the percentage of plutonium-240 determines its grade (weapons-grade, fuel-grade, or reactor-grade).
Construction of the Hanford B Reactor, the first industrial-sized nuclear reactor for the purposes of material production, was completed in March 1945.
Both plutonium-239 and plutonium-241 are fissile, meaning that they can sustain a nuclear chain reaction, leading to applications in nuclear weapons and nuclear reactors.
In a recent example, the Pacific Egret and Pacific Heron of Pacific Nuclear Transport Ltd. are taking 331&nbsp;kg (730&nbsp;lbs) of plutonium to a United States government facility in Savannah River, South Carolina.
Early research was continued at the secret Metallurgical Laboratory of the University of Chicago.
He chose the letters "Pu" as a joke, which passed without notice into the periodic table.
Supergrade plutonium, with less than 4% of plutonium-240, is used in U.S. Navy weapons stored in proximity to ship and submarine crews, due to its lower radioactivity.
On December 2, 1942, on a racket court under the west grandstand at the University of Chicago's Stagg Field, researchers headed by Enrico Fermi achieved the first self-sustaining chain reaction in a graphite and uranium pile known as CP-1.
Studies of the effects of these smaller releases, as well as of the widespread radiation poisoning sickness and death following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, have provided considerable information regarding the dangers, symptoms and prognosis of radiation poisoning, which in the case of the Japanese Hibakusha/survivors was largely unrelated to direct plutonium exposure.
It was the original element considered for δ phase stabilization, but its tendency to react with the alpha particles and release neutrons reduces its usability for nuclear weapon pits.
Regulations permit an airplane to transport 15 grams of fissionable material.
Any uranium or plutonium isotopes produced during those three years are left and the rod goes back into production.
In the case of human subjects, this involved injecting solutions containing (typically) five micrograms of plutonium into hospital patients thought to be either terminally ill, or to have a life expectancy of less than ten years either due to age or chronic disease condition.
Fuel-grade plutonium contains from 7% to less than 19%, and power reactor-grade contains 19% or more plutonium-240.
Pu2O3 spontaneously heats up and transforms into PuO2, which is stable in dry air, but reacts with water vapor when heated.
The Fat Man bombs used in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945, and in the bombing of Nagasaki in August 1945, had plutonium cores.
Most of this radioactive contamination over the years were part of normal operations, but unforeseen accidents did occur and plant management kept this secret, as the pollution continued unabated.
Special precautions are necessary to store or handle plutonium in any form; generally a dry inert gas atmosphere is required.
Plutonium is a reactive metal.
Plutonium-238 is synthesized by bombarding uranium-238 with deuterons (D, the nuclei of heavy hydrogen) in the following reaction:
Silicon, indium, zinc and zirconium allow formation of metastable δ state when rapidly cooled.
It is an actinide metal of silvery-gray appearance that tarnishes when exposed to air, and forms a dull coating when oxidized.
Plutonium expands up to 70% in volume as it oxidizes and thus may break its container.
MOX fuel has been in use since the 1980s, and is widely used in Europe.
Because of self-irradiation, a sample of plutonium fatigues throughout its crystal structure, meaning the ordered arrangement of its atoms becomes disrupted by radiation with time.
One kilogram of the isotope can generate about 570 watts of heat.
Also formed is plutonium hydride but an excess of water vapor forms only PuO2.
The U.S. Department of Energy estimates that the lifetime cancer risk from inhaling 5,000 plutonium particles, each about 3&nbsp;µm wide, to be 1% over the background U.S. average.
The desire to consume this plutonium and other transuranic fuels and reduce the radiotoxicity of the waste is the usual reason nuclear engineers give to make fast neutron reactors.
The implosion design of "the gadget", as the Trinity device was code-named, used conventional explosive lenses to compress a sphere of plutonium into a supercritical mass, which was simultaneously showered with neutrons from the "Urchin", an initiator made of polonium and beryllium (neutron source: (α, n) reaction).
The addition of the third element increases corrosion resistance, reduces flammability, and improves ductility, fabricability, strength, and thermal expansion.
Such plutonium transportation is without problems, according to a Senior Advisor (''seniorrådgiver'') at Statens strålevern.
Plutonium is not absorbed into the body efficiently when ingested; only 0.04% of plutonium oxide is absorbed after ingestion.
Plutonium-241 is the parent isotope of the neptunium decay series, decaying to americium-241 via beta or electron emission.
A commonly cited quote by Ralph Nader states that a pound of plutonium dust spread into the atmosphere would be enough to kill 8 billion people.
Several populations of people who have been exposed to plutonium dust (e.g.
A sheet of paper can be used to shield against the alpha particles emitted by plutonium-238.
Unlike most metals, it is not a good conductor of heat or electricity.
It reacts with carbon, halogens, nitrogen, silicon and hydrogen.
A paper documenting the discovery was prepared by the team and sent to the journal ''Physical Review'' in March 1941, but publication was delayed until a year after the end of World War II due to security concerns.
* '''Plutonium–zirconium''' alloy can be used as nuclear fuel.
Plutonium absorbed by the body is excreted very slowly, with a biological half-life of 200 years.
The U.S. reactors at Hanford and the Savannah River Site in South Carolina produced 103&nbsp;tonnes, and an estimated 170&nbsp;tonnes of military-grade plutonium was produced in the USSR.
Cerium is used as a chemical simulant of plutonium for development of containment, extraction, and other technologies.
The sample was actually a mixture of barium, krypton, and other elements, but this was not known at the time.
When exposed to moist air, it forms oxides and hydrides that can expand the sample up to 70% in volume, which in turn flake off as a powder that is pyrophoric.
Plutonium (specifically, plutonium-238) was first produced and isolated on December 14, 1940, and chemically identified on February 23, 1941, by Glenn T. Seaborg, Edwin McMillan, Joseph W. Kennedy, and Arthur Wahl by deuteron bombardment of uranium in the  cyclotron at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley.
Alpha decay, the release of a high-energy helium nucleus, is the most common form of radioactive decay for plutonium.
Plutonium-238 has also been used successfully to power artificial heart pacemakers, to reduce the risk of repeated surgery.
The nuclear properties of plutonium-239 were also studied; researchers found that when it is hit by a neutron it breaks apart (fissions) by releasing more neutrons and energy.
Around 11 metric tons of plutonium may be possessed by Japan alone, with 36 tons pending return after reprocessing in Britain and France.
Information from CP-1 was also useful to Met Lab scientists designing the water-cooled plutonium production reactors for Hanford.
With an implosion weapon, plutonium is compressed to a high density with explosive lenses—a technically more daunting task than the simple gun-type design, but necessary to use plutonium for weapons purposes.
The resulting investigation was undertaken by the president’s Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, and it uncovered much of the material about plutonium research on humans.
The ε phase, the highest temperature solid allotrope, exhibits anomalously high atomic self-diffusion compared to other elements.
Inside the safe were various items, including a large glass bottle containing a whitish slurry which was subsequently identified as the oldest sample of weapons-grade plutonium known to exist.
Nicknamed Queen Marys by the workers who built them, the separation buildings were awesome canyon-like structures 800 feet long, 65 feet wide, and 80 feet high containing forty process pools.
Care must be taken to avoid the accumulation of amounts of plutonium which approach critical mass, particularly because plutonium's critical mass is only a third of that of uranium-235.
In their final report the Commission put forth recommendations for developing a comprehensive strategy to pursue, including:
Much lower concentrations of radioactive isotopes were released throughout the operational life of the plant from 1952 to 1992.
The most alarming result was that there was significant deposition of plutonium in the liver and in the "actively metabolizing" portion of bone.
Melting in an electric arc furnace can be used to produce small ingots of the metal without the need for a crucible.
Near the melting point, the liquid plutonium has also very high viscosity and surface tension as compared to other metals.
All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 7,000&nbsp;years.
Furthermore, the rate of plutonium elimination in the excreta differed between species of animals by as much as a factor of five.
Neptunium is the only element that can stabilize the α phase at higher temperatures.
However, calculations show that one pound of plutonium could kill no more than 2 million people by inhalation.
Its pyrophoric nature and high susceptibility to corrosion to the point of self-igniting or disintegrating after exposure to air require alloying with other components.
Plutonium passes only slowly through cell membranes and intestinal boundaries, so absorption by ingestion and incorporation into bone structure proceeds very slowly.
During the decay of plutonium, three types of radiation are released—alpha, beta, and gamma.
By the end of January 1945, the highly purified plutonium underwent further concentration in the completed chemical isolation building, where remaining impurities were removed successfully.
The twin Voyager spacecraft were launched in 1977, each containing a 500 watt plutonium power source.
Within ten days, he discovered that reactor-bred plutonium had a higher concentration of the isotope plutonium-240 than cyclotron-produced plutonium.
For example, the α form exists at room temperature in unalloyed plutonium.
It is therefore used in radioisotope thermoelectric generators and radioisotope heater units such as those in the Cassini, Voyager, Galileo and New Horizons space probes, and the Curiosity Mars rover.
The most common chemical process, PUREX (''P''lutonium–''UR''anium ''EX''traction) reprocesses spent nuclear fuel to extract plutonium and uranium which can be used to form a mixed oxide (MOX) fuel for reuse in nuclear reactors.
SIPRI estimated the world plutonium stockpile in 2007 as about 500 tonnes, divided equally between weapon and civilian stocks.
Bulk plutonium ignites only when heated above 400&nbsp;°C.
This, the most common structural form of the element (allotrope), is about as hard and brittle as gray cast iron unless it is alloyed with other metals to make it soft and ductile.
The separation building in 200-East, B Plant, was completed in February 1945.
It is attacked by acids, oxygen, and steam but not by alkalis and dissolves easily in concentrated hydrochloric, hydroiodic and perchloric acids.
McMillan had recently named the first transuranic element neptunium after the planet Neptune, and suggested that element 94, being the next element in the series, be named for what was then considered the next planet, Pluto.
Over 30 years later, each source is still producing about 300 watts which allows limited operation of each spacecraft.
In January 1944, workers laid the foundations for the first chemical separation building, T Plant located in 200-West.
Criticality accidents have occurred in the past, some of them with lethal consequences.
The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission dictates that it must be solid instead of powder if the contents surpass 0.74&nbsp;TBq (20&nbsp;Curie) of radioactive activity.
Plutonium that reaches body organs generally stays in the body for decades and continues to expose the surrounding tissue to radiation and thus may cause cancer.
The original gun-type plutonium weapon, code-named "Thin Man", had to be abandoned as a result—the increased number of spontaneous neutrons meant that nuclear pre-detonation (fizzle) was likely.
Alpha, beta, and gamma radiation are all forms of ionizing radiation.
The results of the studies at Berkeley and Chicago showed that plutonium's physiological behavior differed significantly from that of radium.
Addition of titanium and/or zirconium significantly increases the melting point of the alloy.
Only two years had passed since Col. Franklin Matthias first set up his temporary headquarters on the banks of the Columbia River.
The radioactivity of the burning material is an additional hazard.
Plutonium can form alloys and intermediate compounds with most other metals.
This can result in an explosion large enough to destroy a city if enough of the isotope is concentrated to form a critical mass.
Hamilton was looking to answer questions about how plutonium would vary in the body depending on exposure mode (oral ingestion, inhalation, absorption through skin), retention rates, and how plutonium would be fixed in tissues and distributed among the various organs.
Only after the announcement of the first atomic bombs was the existence and name of plutonium made known to the public by the Manhattan Project's Smyth Report.
Plutonium shows enormous, and reversible, reaction rates with pure hydrogen, forming plutonium hydride.
Eventually, the lab at Chicago also conducted its own plutonium injection experiments using different animals such as mice, rabbits, fish, and even dogs.
B Reactor produced the fissile material for the plutonium weapons used during World War II.
* Plutonium–gallium is used for stabilizing the δ phase of plutonium, avoiding the α-phase and α–δ related issues.
Other sources of plutonium in the environment are fallout from numerous above-ground nuclear tests, now banned.
The presence of these many allotropes makes machining plutonium very difficult, as it changes state very readily.
Trace amounts of at least four plutonium isotopes (plutonium-238, -239, -240, and -244) can be found in nature.
In moist air or moist argon, the metal oxidizes rapidly, producing a mixture of oxides and hydrides.
"There were about 25 workers from Los Alamos National Laboratory who inhaled a considerable amount of plutonium dust during 1940s; according to the hot-particle theory, each of them has a 99.5% chance of being dead from lung cancer by now, but there has not been a single lung cancer among them."
''The Plutonium Files'' chronicles the lives of the subjects of the secret program by naming each person involved and discussing the ethical and medical research conducted in secret by the scientists and doctors.
Plutonium has a metallic taste.
These allotropes, which are different structural modifications or forms of an element, have very similar internal energies but significantly varying densities and crystal structures.
The element normally exhibits six allotropes and four oxidation states.
The second facility planned for 200-East was canceled.
Nuclear fission was discovered in Germany in 1939 by Fritz Strassmann and Otto Hahn.
It cools the burning material, acting as a heat sink, and also blocks off oxygen.
Crucibles used to contain plutonium need to be able to withstand its strongly reducing properties.
Self-irradiation can also lead to annealing which counteracts some of the fatigue effects as temperature increases above 100&nbsp;K.
This was reduced to one microgram in July 1945 after animal studies found that the way plutonium distributed itself in bones was more dangerous than radium.
Because it is deliberately manufactured for nuclear weapons and nuclear reactors, plutonium-239 is the most abundant isotope of plutonium by far.
Plutonium-240 has a high spontaneous fission rate, raising the overall background neutron level of the plutonium sample.
Finally, exceedingly small amounts of plutonium-238, attributed to the extremely rare double beta decay of uranium-238, have been found in natural uranium samples.
Plutonium-238 mixed with beryllium is used to generate neutrons for research purposes.
An identical design was used in the "Fat Man" atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki, Japan, on August 9, 1945, killing 35,000–40,000 people (most of whom were industrial workers) and destroying 68%–80% of war production at Nagasaki.
A fuel rod is reprocessed after three years of use to remove waste products, which by then account for 3% of the total weight of the rods.
Nine months later, another Los Alamos scientist, Louis Slotin, died from a similar accident involving a beryllium reflector and the same plutonium core (the so-called "demon core") that had previously claimed the life of Daghlian.
Being an alpha emitter, it combines high energy radiation with low penetration and thereby requires minimal shielding.
When inhaled, plutonium can pass into the bloodstream.
Its main use is in pits of implosion nuclear weapons.
Plutonium-240 exhibits a high rate of spontaneous fission, raising the neutron flux of any sample containing it.
Molten metal must be kept in a vacuum or an inert atmosphere to avoid reaction with air.
The size of the 5f shell is just enough to allow the electrons to form bonds within the lattice, on the very boundary between localized and bonding behavior.
These trace amounts of 239Pu originate in the following fashion: on rare occasions, 238U undergoes spontaneous fission, and in the process, the nucleus emits one or two free neutrons with some kinetic energy.
In a moist environment, plutonium forms hydrides on its surface, which are pyrophoric and may ignite in air at room temperature.
Uranium had been named after the planet Uranus and neptunium after the planet Neptune, and so element 94 was named after Pluto.
Pure plutonium-239 may have a multiplication factor (keff) larger than one, which means that if the metal is present in sufficient quantity and with an appropriate geometry (e.g., a sphere of sufficient size), it can form a critical mass.
Seaborg originally considered the name "plutium", but later thought that it did not sound as good as "plutonium."
An earlier version of the same technology powered five Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Packages, starting with Apollo 12 in 1969.
The interior had an eerie quality as operators behind seven feet of concrete shielding manipulated remote control equipment  by looking through television monitors and periscopes from an upper gallery.
Careless handling of tungsten carbide bricks around a 6.2&nbsp;kg plutonium sphere resulted in a fatal dose of radiation at Los Alamos on August 21, 1945, when scientist Harry Daghlian received a dose estimated to be 5.1&nbsp;sievert (510&nbsp;rems) and died 25&nbsp;days later.
This experiment was under the supervision of Harold Hodge.
With a half-life of 24,100 years, about  of its atoms decay each second by emitting a 5.157&nbsp;MeV alpha particle.
The skeleton, where plutonium accumulates, and the liver, where it collects and becomes concentrated, are at risk.
Nader's views were challenged in 1976 by Bernard Cohen, as described in the book ''Nuclear Power, Both Sides: The Best Arguments for and Against the Most Controversial Technology''.
The resistivity of plutonium at room temperature is very high for a metal, and it gets even higher with lower temperatures, which is unusual for metals.
Even with massive concrete lids on the process pools, precautions against radiation exposure were necessary and influenced all aspects of plant design.
The tests were used to create diagnostic tools to determine the uptake of plutonium in the body in order to develop safety standards for working with plutonium.
A critical mass of plutonium emits lethal amounts of neutrons and gamma rays.
The risk of lung cancer increases once the total radiation dose equivalent of inhaled plutonium exceeds 400 mSv.
Small traces of plutonium-239, a few parts per trillion, and its decay products are naturally found in some concentrated ores of uranium, such as the natural nuclear fission reactor in Oklo, Gabon.
Enrico Fermi and a team of scientists at the University of Rome reported that they had discovered element 94 in 1934.
Even smaller amounts of primordial plutonium-244 occur naturally due to its relatively long half-life of about 80&nbsp;million years.
The proximity of energy levels leads to multiple low-energy electron configurations with near equal energy levels.
Resistivity is a measure of how strongly a material opposes the flow of electric current.
The Fat Man plutonium bombs used explosive compression of plutonium to obtain significantly higher densities than normal, combined with a central neutron source to begin the reaction and increase efficiency.
Plutonium is more dangerous when inhaled than when ingested.
This leads to competing 5fn7s2 and 5fn−16d17s2 configurations, which causes the complexity of its chemical behavior.
The metal reacts with the halogens, giving rise to compounds with the general formula PuX3 where X can be F, Cl, Br or I and PuF4 is also seen.
This is probably enough to make 6,000 atomic bombs.
At 135&nbsp;°C the metal will ignite in air and will explode if placed in carbon tetrachloride.
Both the T Plant and its sister facility in 200-West, the U Plant, were completed by October.
The first atomic bomb test, codenamed "Trinity" and detonated on July 16, 1945, near Alamogordo, New Mexico, used plutonium as its fissile material.
Nicholas Kemmer of the Cambridge team independently proposed the same name, based on the same reasoning as the Berkeley team.
* '''Plutonium–gallium–cobalt''' alloy (PuCoGa5) is an unconventional superconductor, showing superconductivity below 18.5&nbsp;K, an order of magnitude higher than the highest between heavy fermion systems, and has large critical current.
The "reactor-grade" plutonium produced by a regular LWR burnup cycle typically contains less than 60% Pu-239, with up to 30% parasitic Pu-240/Pu-242, and 10–15% fissile Pu-241.
Most of the subjects, Eileen Welsome says, were  poor, powerless, and sick.
They calculated that element 94 would be fissile, and had the added advantage of being chemically different from uranium, and could easily be separated from it.
There are two aspects to the harmful effects of plutonium: the radioactivity and the heavy metal poison effects.
These logs are planned to be encased in stainless steel and stored as much as  underground in bore holes that will be back-filled with concrete.
Accidental neutron capture causes the amount of plutonium-242 and 240 to grow each time the plutonium is irradiated in a reactor with low-speed "thermal" neutrons, so that after the second cycle, the plutonium can only be consumed by fast neutron reactors.
Heat produced by the deceleration of these alpha particles makes it warm to the touch.
About 50&nbsp;micrograms of plutonium-239 combined with uranium and fission products was produced and only about 1&nbsp;microgram was isolated.
Breeder reactors are specifically designed to create more fissionable material than they consume.
The energy difference between the 6d and 5f subshells is very low.
Plutonium was first produced and isolated on December 14, 1940 by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Joseph W. Kennedy, Edwin M. McMillan, and Arthur C. Wahl by deuteron bombardment of uranium-238 in the 60-inch cyclotron at the University of California, Berkeley.
On August 20, 1942, a trace quantity of this element was isolated and measured for the first time.
Large stockpiles of weapons-grade plutonium were built up by both the Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War.
During the early stages of research, animals were used to study the effects of radioactive substances on health.
It is this energy that makes plutonium-239 useful in nuclear weapons and reactors.
Construction at the site began in mid-1943.
According to a 1972 study coauthored by Edward Martell, "In the more densely populated areas of Denver, the Pu contamination level in surface soils is several times fallout", and the plutonium contamination "just east of the Rocky Flats plant ranges up to hundreds of times that from nuclear tests."
The mixture is not sufficiently enriched for efficient nuclear weapons, but can be used once as MOX fuel.
Thus only 6.2&nbsp;kg of plutonium was needed for an explosive yield equivalent to 20 kilotons of TNT.
If fast neutron reactors are not available (the normal case), excess plutonium is usually discarded, and forms the longest-lived component of nuclear waste.
This amounts to 9.68 watts of power.
Such variation made it extremely difficult to estimate what the rate would be for human beings.
In fission weapons, the explosive shock waves used to compress a plutonium core will also cause a transition from the usual δ phase plutonium to the denser α form, significantly helping to achieve supercriticality.
A typical transport consists of one truck carrying one protected shipping container, holding a number of packages with a total weight varying from 80 to 200&nbsp;kg of plutonium oxide.
