Twenty-one was the assumed age of inheritance, as well, although the law respected the rights of the deceased to name an earlier age in his will.
Lacking the trade in furs provided by the local tribes, the Pilgrims lost their main source of income for paying off their debts to the Merchant Adventurers.
The living and working structures were built on the relatively flat top of Cole's Hill, and a wooden platform was constructed atop nearby Fort Hill to support the cannon that would defend the settlement.
As promised by Massasoit, numerous Native Americans arrived at Plymouth throughout the middle of 1621 with pledges of peace.
They looked at the eventual failure of the Wessagussett settlement as Divine Providence against a sinful people.
In consultation with Prince Charles, son of King James, Smith changed "Accomack" to New Plymouth.
He therefore decided on a pre-emptive strike, an event which historian Nathaniel Philbrick calls "Standish's raid".
In Plymouth Colony, it seems that a simple profession of faith was all that was required for acceptance.
, and took two weeks to complete in the harsh New England winter.
In September 1623, another ship arrived carrying settlers destined to refound the failed colony at Weymouth, and they stayed temporarily at Plymouth.
In 1688, New York, West Jersey, and East Jersey were added.
The General Society of Mayflower Descendants, or The Mayflower Society, is a genealogical organization of individuals who have documented their descents from one or more of the 102 passengers who arrived on the Mayflower in 1620.
Formal laws were not codified until 1636.
After nearly 40 years, Abraham Lincoln declared the first modern Thanksgiving to fall on the last Thursday in November in 1863.
The community remained close-knit, but their children began adopting Dutch language and customs, and some were also going into the Dutch Army.
Children generally remained in the direct care of their mothers until the age of about eight years old, after which time it was not uncommon for the child to be placed in the foster care of another family.
The proximate cause of the conflict was the death of a Praying Indian named John Sassamon in 1675.
The "Speedwell" was re-rigged with larger masts before leaving Holland and setting out to meet the "Mayflower" in Southampton, England, around the end of July 1620.
The ''Mayflower'' anchored at Provincetown Harbor on November 11, 1620.
Numerous other paintings have been created memorializing various scenes from the life of Plymouth Colony, including their landing and the "First Thanksgiving", many of which have been collected by Pilgrim Hall, a museum and historical society founded in 1824 to preserve the history of the Colony.
The memoirs of her capture provided historians with much information on Native American culture during this time period.
In July 1623, two more ships arrived: the ''Anne'', under the command of Captain "Master" William Peirce and Master John Bridges; and the ''Little James'', under the command of Captain Emanuel Altham.
After two months at sea, land was sighted on November 9 off the coast of Cape Cod.
The term was also used for many of the indentured servants.
By November 1621, only 53 pilgrims were alive to celebrate the harvest feast which modern Americans know as "The First Thanksgiving".
Some of the modern traditions which have developed alongside the Thanksgiving holiday are the National Football League's Thanksgiving Day games and the annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City.
It played a central role in King Philip's War (1675–1678), one of the earliest of the Indian Wars.
The seal was also used by the County of Plymouth until 1931.
It was common for brides-to-be (and not, notably, their fathers) to enter into contractual agreements on the consolidation of property upon marriage.
Perhaps the most notable use of the death penalty was in the execution of the Native Americans convicted of the murder of John Sassamon; this helped lead to King Philip's War.
English authorities came to Leiden to arrest William Brewster in 1618, after he published comments highly critical of the King of England and the Anglican Church.
For most of its history, the town was the primary administrative unit and political division of the colony.
The immigrants finally set foot on land at what became Provincetown on November 13.
However, none of the contemporary accounts of the actual landing makes any mention that the Rock was the specific place of landing.
Myles Standish was the military leader of Plymouth Colony from the beginning.
The holiday is meant to honor the First Thanksgiving, which was a harvest feast held in Plymouth in 1621, as first recorded in the book ''New England's Memorial'' by Nathaniel Morton, secretary of Plymouth Colony and nephew of Governor William Bradford.
He became sachem upon the sudden death of his older brother Wamsutta, also known as Alexander, in 1662.
The only positive effect of Standish's raid seemed to be the increased power of the Massasoit-led Wampanoag tribe, the Pilgrims' closest ally in the region.
When new land was granted to a freeman, it was directed that only the person to whom the land was granted was allowed to settle it.
The court records only show two formal accusations of witchcraft.
Dartmouth was the site of a significant massacre by the Indian forces during King Philip's War.
The original festival was probably held in early October 1621 and was celebrated by the 53 surviving Pilgrims, along with Massasoit and 90 of his men.
That number increased to 7.9 children by the third generation.
The resulting map completely omits most of the New England coast.
Civic recognitions of the holiday typically include parades and football games.
There were any number of reasons for a child to be "put-out" in this manner.
Sarah Josepha Hale, editor of Boston's ''Ladies' Magazine'', wrote editorials beginning in 1827 which called for the nationwide expansion of this annual day of thanksgiving to commemorate the Pilgrim's first harvest feast.
A Native American named Samoset, originally from Pemaquid Point in modern Maine, walked boldly into the midst of the settlement and proclaimed, "Welcome, Englishmen!"
Several laws dealt with indentured servitude, a legal status whereby a person would work off debts or be given training in exchange for a period of unrecompensed service.
Scrooby had been an agricultural community, whereas Leiden was a thriving industrial center, and the pace of life was hard on the Separatists.
Two ships followed shortly thereafter carrying sixty settlers, all men.
He was the first English child born to the Pilgrims in the New World.
A 1689 census of the town of Bristol shows that, of the 70 families that lived there, only one had a black slave.
In late July, a boy named John Billington became lost for some time in the woods around the colony.
In the latter four colonies, founded by Thomas Hooker, Roger Williams, and William Penn, respectively, religious freedom was added to democratic constitutions.
The town was the site of a major attack by King Philip's forces in 1676.
The following week, Susanna White gave birth to son Peregrine White on the ''Mayflower''.
The General Court established townships as a means of providing local government over settlements, but reserved for itself the right to control specific distribution of land to individuals within those towns.
These ships carried 96 new settlers, among them Leideners, including William Bradford's future wife Alice, and William and Mary Brewster's daughters Patience and Fear.
In matters of religious understanding, he proclaimed that it was the man's role to educate and "guide and go before" women.
The Mayflower was purchased in London.
:* Duxbury, founded by Myles Standish, it was incorporated in 1637.
The Native Americans in New England were organized into loose tribal confederations, sometimes called "nations".
He organized and led the first party to set foot in New England, an exploratory expedition of Cape Cod upon arrival in Provincetown Harbor.
The first identification of Plymouth Rock as the actual landing site was in 1741 by 90-year-old Thomas Faunce, whose father had arrived in Plymouth in 1623, three years after the supposed event.
The epidemic has traditionally been thought to be smallpox, but a recent analysis has concluded that it may have been a lesser-known disease called leptospirosis.
This treaty ensured that each people would not bring harm to the other, that Massasoit would send his allies to make peaceful negotiations with Plymouth, and that they would come to each other's aid in a time of war.
By the end of the month, five cannons had been defensively positioned on Fort Hill.
Many of the able-bodied men were too infirm to work; 45 out of 102 immigrants died and were buried on Cole's Hill.
A sort of land rush occurred as settlers from Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth colonies tried to beat the Dutch in settling the area; the influx of English settlers also threatened the Pequot.
The General Court also elected seven "Assistants" to form a cabinet to assist the governor.
They planted maize, squash, pumpkins, beans, and potatoes.
Women were also known to occasionally sit on juries in Plymouth, a remarkable circumstance in seventeenth century legal practice.
This negotiation did much to secure further peace with the Native Americans in the area.
They rejected several sites, including one on Clark's Island and another at the mouth of the Jones River, in favor of the site of a recently abandoned Native American settlement named Patuxet.
Ceded to Rhode Island in 1746 and is now part of Bristol County, Rhode Island.
The cause of the war stems from the increasing numbers of English colonists and their demand for land.
Most adults who reached marriageable age lived into their sixties, so effectively two-thirds of a person's life was spent married.
Full citizens, or "freemen", were accorded full rights and privileges in areas such as voting and holding office.
The Pilgrims agreed to reimburse the Nauset for the corn which they had taken in return for the Billington boy.
Squanto remained behind and traveled throughout the area to establish trading relations with several tribes.
Historians James and Patricia Scott Deetz cite a 1678 inquest into the death of Anne Batson's child, where the jury was composed of five women and seven men.
The church was undoubtedly the most important social institution in the colony.
'''Plymouth Colony''' (sometimes '''New Plymouth''' or '''Plymouth Bay Colony''') was an English colonial venture in North America from 1620 to 1691.
The importance of virtue, frugality, industry, and calling was at the heart of their moral code.
As early as 1623, a conflict broke out between the Pilgrims and the Strangers over the celebration of Christmas, a day of no particular significance to the Pilgrims.
They believed that the church was a community of Christians who made a covenant with God and with one another.
The colony was de facto a republic, since neither an English company nor the King and Parliament exerted any influence—a representative democracy governed on the principles of the Mayflower Compact ("self-rule").
King Philip was the younger son of Massasoit and the heir of Massasoit's position as sachem of the Pokanoket and supreme leader of the Wampanoag.
Several important transitions occurred at various ages, but none marked a single "coming of age" event.
It was forbidden for individual settlers to purchase land from Native Americans without formal permission from the General Court.
Women were considered equal to men before God from the perspective of the Church.
Women were parties to contracts in Plymouth, most notably prenuptial agreements.
As William Bradford wrote, "of these one hundred persons who came over in this first ship together, the greatest half died in the general mortality, and most of them in two or three months' time".
Most children experienced religious conversion around the age of eight as well, thus becoming church members.
The second, the Pequot War, resulted in the dissolution of the Pequot tribe and a major shift in the local power structure.
Child mortality also decreased over this time, with 7.2 children born to first-generation families living until their 21st birthday.
They employed a form of guerilla warfare that confounded the English.
The first task was to rebuild a shallop, a shallow draft boat that had been built in England and disassembled for transport aboard the ''Mayflower''.
Popham Colony, also known as Fort St. George, was organized by the Plymouth Company (unrelated to Plymouth Colony) and founded in 1607.
The Pilgrims themselves were a subset of an English religious movement known as Puritanism, which sought to "purify" the Anglican Church of its "Catholic" trappings.
When news of these events reached Plymouth, its magistrates reclaimed power.
Later works, such as "The Courtship of Miles Standish" by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, have provided a romantic and partially fictionalized account of life in Plymouth Colony.
Orphaned children were given the right to choose their own guardians at age 14.
As part of its judicial duties, it would periodically call a Grand Enquest, which was a grand jury of sorts, elected from the freemen, who would hear complaints and swear out indictments for credible accusations.
These territories became safe havens for persecuted religious minorities.
They attempted to sail south to the designated landing site at the mouth of the Hudson but ran into trouble in the region of Pollack Rip, a shallow area of shoals between Cape Cod and Nantucket Island.
The autumn celebration in late 1621 that has become known as "The First Thanksgiving" was not known as such to the Pilgrims.
The Congregation and the other colonists finally boarded the ''Speedwell'' in July 1620 in the Dutch port of Delfshaven.
On November 15, Captain Myles Standish led a party of sixteen men on an exploratory mission, during which they disturbed a Native American grave and located a buried cache of Indian corn.
On the one hand, there was the congregational democracy practiced now by all Protestant churches, including to a large extent the Anglicans.
They discovered remains of a European fort and uncovered a grave that contained the remains of both an adult European male and a Native American child.
After meals and an exchange of gifts, Massasoit agreed to an exclusive trading pact with the English; thus, the French were no longer welcome, though they were also frequent traders in the area.
The first settlement of the Plymouth Colony was at New Plymouth, a location previously surveyed and named by Captain John Smith.
The Pilgrims referred to themselves as the ''Saints'', ''First Comers'', ''Ancient Brethren'', or ''Ancient Men''.
Massachusetts Bay Colony experienced an outbreak of witchcraft scares in the 17th century, but there is little evidence that Plymouth was engulfed in anything similar.
The future site of the Pilgrim's first settlement was originally named "Accomack" by Smith.
The shallop was finished on November 27, and a second expedition was undertaken using it, under the direction of ''Mayflower'' master Christopher Jones.
However, the ship had arrived unexpectedly and also without many supplies, so the additional settlers put a strain on the resources of the colony.
There are also numerous films about the Pilgrims, including the several film adaptations of "''The Courtship of Miles Standish''"; the 1952 film ''Plymouth Adventure'' starring Spencer Tracy; and ''Desperate Crossings: The True Story of the Mayflower'', a 2006 television documentary produced by the History Channel.
The events surrounding the founding and history of Plymouth Colony have had a lasting effect on the art, traditions, mythology, and politics of the United States of America, despite its short history of fewer than 72 years.
The union was dissolved after news of the Glorious Revolution reached Boston in April 1689, and the citizens of Boston rose up and arrested Andros.
Patuxet, the native village upon which the town of Plymouth was later built, was shown by Champlain as a thriving settlement.
By placing children in the care of another family, there was little danger of them being spoiled.
In Massasoit's first contact with the English, several men of his tribe had been killed in an unprovoked attack by English sailors.
The new arrivals were allotted land in the area of the Eel River, known as Hobs Hole, which became Wellingsley, a mile south of Plymouth Rock.
''Of Plimoth Plantation'' by William Bradford and ''Mourt's Relation'' by Bradford, Edward Winslow, and others  are both accounts written by ''Mayflower'' passengers that provide much of the information which we have today regarding the trans-Atlantic voyage and early years of the settlement.
The group remained on board the ship through the next day, a Sunday, for prayer and worship.
The same scene was repainted by Robert Walter Weir in 1844, and hangs in the Rotunda of the United States Capitol building.
''The Sovereignty and Goodness of God'' provides an account of King Philip's War from the perspective of Mary Rowlandson, an Englishwoman who was captured and spent some time in the company of Native Americans during the war.
A 1627 division of cattle lists 156 colonists divided into twelve lots of thirteen colonists each.
Captain John Smith of Jamestown fame had explored the area in 1614 and is credited with naming the region of New England.
John Adams later considered the United Colonies to be the prototype for the Articles of Confederation, which was the first attempt at a national government.
In 1774, an attempt was made to excavate the rock, but it broke in two.
The name "Pilgrims" was actually not used by the separatists themselves.
The seal of the Plymouth Colony was designed in 1629 and is still used by the town of Plymouth.
They spent July and August in Plymouth before moving north to settle in modern Weymouth, Massachusetts at a settlement which they named Wessagussett.
The seas were not severe during the first month in the Atlantic but, by the second month, the ship was being hit by strong north-Atlantic winter gales, causing it to be badly shaken with water leaks from structural damage.
Slave ownership was not widespread and very few families possessed the wealth necessary to own slaves.
Plymouth Colony did not have a royal charter authorizing it to form a government, yet some means of governance was needed.
The local sachem named Obtakiest was pursued by Standish and his men but escaped with three English prisoners from Wessagussett, whom he then executed.
It was one of the earliest successful colonies to be founded by the English in North America, along with Jamestown and other settlements in Virginia, and the first sizable permanent English settlement in the New England region.
It was settled on the coast of Maine and was beset by internal political struggles, sickness, and weather problems.
The celebration lasted three days and featured a feast that included numerous types of waterfowl, wild turkeys and fish procured by the colonists, and five deer brought by the Native Americans.
Besides the crops themselves, the Pilgrims learned productive farming techniques from the Native Americans, such as proper crop rotation and the use of dead fish to fertilize the soil.
In 1625, the settlers had repaid their debts and thus gained complete possession of the colony.
Women in Plymouth Colony had more extensive legal and social rights compared to 17th-century European norms.
Benjamin Church wrote several accounts of King Philip's War, including ''Entertaining Passages Relating to Philip's War'', which remained popular throughout the 18th century.
Maternal mortality rates were fairly high; one birth in thirty resulted in the death of the mother, resulting in one in five women dying in childbirth.
Of the men who survived until the age of 21, the average life expectancy was 69.2 years.
The Governor and Assistants then appointed "Constables" who served as the chief administrators for the towns, and "Messengers" who were the main civil servants of the colony.
Besides the indigenous tribes, there had been nearly a century of exploration, fishing, and settlement by Europeans.
Plymouth Colony was not formally divided into counties until June 2, 1685, during the reorganization that led to the formation of the Dominion of New England.
After traveling for several days, they arrived at Massasoit's capital, the village of Sowams near Narragansett Bay.
Thus, only seven residences (of a planned nineteen) and four common houses were constructed during the first winter.
Other notable residents of Duxbury included John Alden, William Brewster, and Governor Thomas Prence.
The settlement of Wessagussett was short-lived, but it provided the spark for an event that dramatically changed the political landscape between the local Native American tribes and the English settlers.
Second marriages were not uncommon, and widows and widowers faced social and economic pressures to remarry.
Later, it was speculated that the crew of the ''Speedwell'' had intentionally sabotaged the ship to avoid having to make the treacherous trans-Atlantic voyage.
The second, of Mary Ingram in 1677, resulted in trial and acquittal.
Standish also organized the able-bodied men into military orders in February of the first winter.
The settlement served as the capital of the colony, and is the modern town of Plymouth, Massachusetts.
It made clear that the colony should be governed by "just and equal laws," and those who signed it promised to keep these laws.
The residents of Plymouth used terms to distinguish between the earliest settlers of the colony and those that came later.
The ''Mayflower''  dropped anchor in Plymouth Harbor on December 16 and spent three days looking for a settlement site.
Edward Winslow reports in his 1624 memoirs ''Good News from New England'' that "they forsook their houses, running to and fro like men distracted, living in swamps and other desert places, and so brought manifold diseases amongst themselves, whereof very many are dead".
These laws included the levying of "rates" or taxes and the distribution of colony lands.
It did, however, serve the purpose of relieving the concerns of many of the settlers.
The Pilgrims distinguished themselves from the Puritans in that they sought to "separate" themselves from the Anglican Church, rather than reform it from within.
As a legislative body, the General Court could make proclamations of law as needed.
It was modeled on the church covenants that  Congregationalists used to form new congregations.
Adolescence was not a recognized phase of life in Plymouth colony, and there was not a single rite of passage that marked transition from youth to adulthood.
In 1970, the United States Postal Service issued a three hundred and fiftieth year commemorative stamp recognizing the English dissenters first landing at the modern day settlement of Provincetown, Massachusetts in 1620.
The intent of the compact was to establish a means of governing the colony, though it did little more than confirm that the colony would be governed like any English town.
:* Taunton, the shire town of the county, incorporated 1639.
The English organized a party to return Billington to Plymouth.
The colony was able to establish a treaty with Chief Massasoit which helped to ensure its success; in this, they were aided by Squanto, a Native American of the Patuxet people.
:* Yarmouth, incorporated 1639.
Ships arrived throughout the period between 1629 and 1630 carrying new settlers, though the exact number is unknown; contemporaneous documents claimed that, by January 1630, the colony had almost 300 people.
He also knew of the Pilgrims' theft of the corn stores in their landings at Provincetown.
Nearby to, but distinct from the Rehoboth settlement of Roger Williams, which is now the town of Pawtucket, Rhode Island.
It was expected that the male head of the household would be responsible for the religious well-being of all its members, children and servants alike.
Censure was a formal reprimand for behavior that did not conform with accepted religious and social norms, while excommunication involved full removal from church membership.
Brewster escaped arrest, but the events spurred the congregation to move even farther from England.
Agriculture also made up an important part of the Plymouth economy.
Each year, the United States celebrates a holiday known as Thanksgiving on the fourth Thursday of November.
Standish and his men then stabbed and killed the two unsuspecting Native Americans.
The colonists adopted Native American agricultural practices and crops.
Three contemporaneous accounts of the event survive: ''Of Plymouth Plantation'' by William Bradford; ''Mourt's Relation'' probably written by Edward Winslow; and ''New England's Memorial'' by Plymouth Colony Secretary (and Bradford's nephew) Capt.
The General Court of Plymouth began using military force to coerce the sale of Wampanoag land to the settlers of the town.
:* Little Compton, incorporated as Sakonnet in 1682, ceded to Rhode Island in 1746 and is now part of Newport County, Rhode Island.
The colony traded throughout the region, establishing trading posts as far away as Penobscot, Maine.
It seems that there was a theological reason for fostering children, as with almost every decision in the colony.
He had learned some English from interacting with English fishermen and trappers (most probably from Bristol) operating in the region.
Sexual contact was prohibited between a betrothed couple, but the penalty for it was one-fourth of what it was for single persons, and records indicate a relatively high number of babies born less than nine months after a wedding ceremony.
There was no central governing body for the churches.
In Leiden, the congregation gained the freedom to worship as they chose, but Dutch society was unfamiliar to them.
The economic situation improved with the arrival of cattle in the colony.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Congress ultimately moved it to the fourth Thursday in November.
Robinson also dictated the proper methods of child rearing—he prescribed a strict upbringing with a strong emphasis on corporal punishment.
