Plymouth is an important centre for watersports, especially scuba diving and sailing.
The predominant wind direction is from the south-west.
The avant garde prepared guitarist Keith Rowe was born in the city before establishing the jazz free improvisation band AMM in London in 1965 and MIMEO in 1997.
The city's airport was Plymouth City Airport about  north of the city centre.
South West England has a favoured location when the Azores High pressure area extends north-eastwards towards the UK, particularly in summer.
During the English Civil War Plymouth sided with the Parliamentarians and was besieged for almost four years by the Royalists.
On average, 4.25 days of the year will report a maximum temperature of  or above.
On 26 January 1786, Benjamin Robert Haydon, an English painter who specialised in grand historical pictures, was born here.
It links itself with the group of English non-conformists that left Plymouth for the New World in 1620: its nickname is "The Pilgrims".
The army had substantially left the city by 1971, with barracks pulled down in the 1960s, however the city remains home to the 42 Commando of the Royal Marines.
Some of the greatest imports to Plymouth from the Americas and Europe during the latter half of the 19th century included maize, wheat, barley, sugar cane, guano, sodium nitrate and phosphate Aside from the dockyard in the town of Devonport, industries in Plymouth such as the gasworks, the railways and tramways and a number of small chemical works had begun to develop in the 19th century, continuing into the 20th century.
On 27 April 1944 Sir Patrick Abercrombie's ''Plan for Plymouth'' to rebuild the bomb-damaged city was published; it called for demolition of the few remaining pre-War buildings in the city centre to make way for their replacement with  wide, parallel, modern boulevards aligned east–west linked by a north–south avenue (Armada Way) linking the railway station with the vista of Plymouth Hoe.
Her Majesty's Courts Service provide a Magistrates' Court and a Combined Crown and County Court in the city.
Plymouth is also home to Plymouth Marjons Hockey Club, with their 1st XI playing in the National League last season.
Plymouth also has 71 state primary phase schools, 13 state secondary schools, eight special schools and three selective state grammar schools, Devonport High School for Girls, Devonport High School for Boys and Plymouth High School for Girls.
He was acquainted with engineer John Smeaton, the builder of the third Eddystone Lighthouse.
Between 1439 and 1934, Plymouth had a Mayor.
A peripheral road system connecting the historic Barbican on the east and Union Street to the west determines the principal form of the city centre, even following pedestrianisation of the shopping centre in the late 1980s, and continues to inform the present 'Vision for Plymouth' developed by a team led by Barcelona-based architect David MacKay in 2003 which calls for revivification of the city centre with mixed-use and residential.
The Plymouth City Museum and Art Gallery is operated by Plymouth City Council allowing free admission – it has six galleries.
There is a project involving the future relocation of Plymouth City Council's headquarters, the civic centre, to the current location of the Bretonside bus station; it would involve both the bus station and civic centre being demolished and a rebuilt together at the location with the land from the civic centre being sold off.
It is traditional that the position of the Lord Mayor alternates between the Conservative Party and the Labour Party annually and that the Lord Mayor chooses the Deputy Lord Mayor.
The campaign was not successful, and Plymouth ceased to be a county borough on 1 April 1974 with responsibility for education, social services, highways and libraries transferred to Devon County Council.
and the Plymouth Raiders basketball club.
Heading east, it connects Plymouth to the M5 motorway about  away near Exeter; and heading west it connects Cornwall and Devon via the Tamar Bridge.
Before the 19th century two leats were built in order to provide drinking water for the town.
Plymouth was the home port for successful maritime traders, among them Sir John Hawkins, who led England's first foray into the Atlantic slave trade, as well as Sir Francis Drake, Mayor of Plymouth in 1581 and 1593.
The Royal National Lifeboat Institution have an Atlantic 85 class lifeboat and Severn class lifeboat stationed at Millbay Docks.
The settlement that developed here was called "Dock" or "Plymouth Dock" at the time, and a new town, separate from Plymouth, grew up.
A band of Middle Devonian limestone runs west to east from Cremyll to Plymstock including the Hoe.
In 1914 three neighbouring independent towns, viz., the county borough of Plymouth, the county borough of Devonport, and the urban district of East Stonehouse were merged to form a single County Borough.
Antarctic explorers Robert Falcon Scott and Frank Bickerton both lived in the city.
Other sports clubs include Plymouth Albion R.F.C.
It received negative feedback before opening when David Mackay said it was already "ten years out of date".
It also cultivates algae that could be used to make biofuels or in the treatment of waste water by using technology such as photo-bioreactors.
The combined town took the name of Plymouth which, in 1928, achieved city status.
Plymouth has the first known reference to Jews in the South West from Sir Francis Drake's voyages in 1577 to 1580, as his log mentioned "Moses the Jew" – a man from Plymouth.
The city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe, in a series of 59 raids known as the Plymouth Blitz.
Plymouth Albion Rugby Football Club is a rugby union club that was founded in 1875 and are currently competing in the third tier of Professional English Rugby .
The Plymouth Marine Laboratory, which focuses on global issues of climate change and sustainability.
The University of Plymouth enrolls  total students as of  ( largest in the UK out of ).
The Exeter to Plymouth railway of the LSWR needs to be reopened to connect Cornwall and Plymouth to the rest of the UK railway system on an all weather basis.
November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, with June to August having the lightest winds.
First Great Western have come under fire recently, due to widespread rail service cuts across the south-west, which affect Plymouth greatly.
File:Plymouth Sound and Breakwater.jpg|Plymouth Sound and Breakwater
Each year a third of the council is up for election for three consecutive years – there are no elections on the following "fourth" year, which is when County Council elections take place.
Plymouth cricket club was formed in 1843, the current 1st XI play in the Devon Premier League.
Also on Sutton Pool is the National Marine Aquarium which displays 400 marine species and includes Britain's deepest aquarium tank.
Conservative councillor Dr John Mahony is the incumbent for 2015–16.
Since 1973 Plymouth has been supplied water by South West Water.
Other past residents include composer journalist and newspaper editor William Henry Wills, Ron Goodwin, and journalist Angela Rippon and comedian Dawn French.
The City College Plymouth provides courses from the most basic to Foundation degrees for approximately 26,000 students.
Plymouth's economy remains strongly influenced by shipbuilding and seafaring including ferry links to Brittany (Roscoff and St Malo) and Spain (Santander), but has tended toward a service-based economy since the 1990s.
In the 2015 general election all three constituencies returned Conservative MPs, who were Oliver Colvile (for Sutton and devonport), Gary Streeter (for Sutton and Devonport) and Johnny Mercer for Moor View.
The city's oldest church is Plymouth Minster, also known as St Andrew's Church, (Anglican) located at the top of Royal Parade—it is the largest parish church in Devon and has been a site of gathering since AD&nbsp;800.
On the northern outskirts of the city, Crownhill Fort is a well restored example of a "Palmerston's Folly".
Plymouth has about 150 churches and its Roman Catholic cathedral (1858) is in Stonehouse.
Designed by leading architect Henning Larsen, the building was opened in 2008 and houses the University's Arts faculty.
The 1971 Local Government White Paper proposed abolishing county boroughs, which would have left Plymouth, a town of 250,000 people, being administered from a council based at the smaller Exeter, on the other side of the county.
Artists include Beryl Cook whose paintings depict the culture of Plymouth and Robert Lenkiewicz, whose paintings investigated themes of vagrancy, sexual behaviour and suicide, lived in the city from the 1960s until his death in 2002.
Further west is Smeaton's Tower, which was built in 1759 as a lighthouse on rocks  off shore, but dismantled and the top two thirds rebuilt on the Hoe in 1877.
The main local newspapers serving Plymouth are ''The Herald'' and ''Western Morning News'' with Radio Plymouth, BBC Radio Devon, Heart South West, and Pirate FM being the main local radio stations.
The Plymouth urban area had a population of 260,203 in 2011 (the urban sprawl which extends outside the authority's boundaries).
File:Saltram House 2008.jpg|Saltram House remodelled by the architect Robert Adam
Plymouth has five fire stations located in Camel's Head, Crownhill, Greenbank, Plympton and Plymstock which is part of Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service.
As part of Devonport's millennium regeneration project, the '''Devonport Heritage Trail''' has been introduced, complete with over 70 waymarkers outlining the route.
The Atlantic depressions are more vigorous in autumn and winter and most of the rain which falls in those seasons in the south-west is from this source.
Plymouth College of Art offers a selection of courses including media.
Canadian politician and legal scholar Chris Axworthy hails from Plymouth.
Plymouth Raiders play in the British Basketball League – the top tier of British basketball.
who play at Haye Road, Vospers Oak Villa F.C.
At the time this village was called Sutton, meaning ''south town'' in Old English.
who play at Weston Mill and Plymstock United F.C.
The Tinside Pool is situated at the foot of the Hoe and became a grade II listed building in 1998 before being restored to its 1930s look for £3.4&nbsp;million.
Prior to the 1973 take over it was supplied by Plymouth County Borough Corporation.
Painter Sir Joshua Reynolds, founder and first president of the Royal Academy was born and educated in nearby Plympton, now part of Plymouth.
Representation, 2011
The Plymouth Gin Distillery has been producing Plymouth Gin since 1793, which was exported around the world by the Royal Navy.
who play at Deans Cross.
Since 1992 the Music of the Night has been performed in the Royal Citadel by the 29 Commando Regiment and local performers to raise money for local and military charities.
The total electorate for Plymouth was 188,924 in April 2015.
The A38 dual-carriageway runs from east to west across the north of the city.
It was an important embarkation point for US troops for D-Day.
In the nearby parish of Stoke Damerel the first dockyard, HMNB Devonport, opened in 1690 on the eastern bank of the River Tamar.
In suburban areas, post-War prefabs had already begun to appear by 1946, and over 1,000 permanent council houses were built each year from 1951–57 according to the Modernist zoned low-density garden city model advocated by Abercrombie.
The Lord Mayor's official residence is 3 Elliot Terrace, located on the Hoe.
Within the city it is designated as 'The Parkway' and represents the boundary between the urban parts of the city and the generally more recent suburban areas.
Taking over office from her husband Waldorf Astor, Lady Astor was a vibrantly active campaigner for her resident constituents .
He died of dysentery in 1596 off the coast of Puerto Rico.
Plymouth's early history extends to the Bronze Age, when a first settlement emerged at Mount Batten.
Devonport Dockyard is the UK's only naval base that refits nuclear submarines and the Navy estimates that the Dockyard generates about 10% of Plymouth's income.
In 2002 a mission to recover his body and bring it to Plymouth was allowed by the Ministry of Defence.
In 1919 Nancy Astor was elected the first ever female member of parliament to take office in the British Houses of Parliament for the constituency of Plymouth Sutton.
Plymouth is the regional television centre of BBC South West.
The bulk of the city is built upon Upper Devonian slates and shales and the headlands at the entrance to Plymouth Sound are formed of Lower Devonian slates, which can withstand the power of the sea.
58.1% of the population described themselves in the 2011 census return as being at least nominally Christian and 0.8% as Muslim with all other religions represented by less than 0.5% each.
The city has one of the Devon and Cornwall Area Crown Prosecution Service Divisional offices.
Plymouth City Council is formally twinned with: Brest, France (1963), Gdynia, Poland (1976), Novorossiysk, Russia (1990) San Sebastián, Spain (1990) and Plymouth, United States (2001).
Further docks were built here in 1727, 1762 and 1793.
It works alongside the Boots Group to investigate the use of algae in skin care protects, taking advantage of the chemicals they contain that adapt to protect themselves from the sun.
Before the latter half of the 18th century, grain, timber and then coal were Plymouth's main imports.
George Passmore of Turner Prize winning duo Gilbert and George was born in the city, as was Labour politician Michael Foot whose family reside at nearby Trematon Castle.
The university formed a joint venture with the fellow Devonian University of Exeter in 2000, establishing the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry.
The first record of the existence of a settlement at Plymouth was in the Domesday Book in 1086 as ''Sudtone'', Saxon for south farm, located at the present day Barbican.
This excludes the two new ethnic groups added to the 2011 census of Gypsy or Irish Traveller and Arab.
Collectively they were referred to as "The Three Towns".
Coastal areas have average annual sunshine totals over 1,600 hours.
A 2014 profile by the National Health Service showed Plymouth had higher than average levels of poverty and deprivation (26.2% of population among the poorest 20.4% nationally).
Plymouth has the largest cluster of marine and maritime businesses in the south west with 270 firms operating within the sector.
In contrast, the Theatre Royal's production and education centre, TR2, which was built on wasteland at Cattedown, was a runner-up for the RIBA Stirling Prize for Architecture in 2003.
He was the first Englishman to circumnavigate the world and was known by the Spanish as ''El Draco'' meaning "The Dragon" after he raided many of their ships.
The city was also home to the Royal Naval Engineering College; opened in 1880 in Keyham, it trained engineering students for five years before they completed the remaining two years of the course at Greenwich.
Although major units of the Royal Navy moved to the safety of Scapa Flow, Devonport was an important base for escort vessels and repairs.
In 1620, the Pilgrim Fathers departed Plymouth for the New World and established Plymouth Colony – the second English settlement in what is now the United States of America.
The city also includes five Baptist churches, over twenty Methodist chapels, and thirteen Roman Catholic churches.
It monitors the effects of ocean acidity on corals and shellfish and reports the results to the UK government.
The portion of people without a religion is 32.9%; above the national average of 24.7%.
America based actor Donald Moffat, whose roles include American Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson in the film ''The Right Stuff'', and fictional President Bennett in ''Clear and Present Danger'', was born in Plymouth.
The college closed in 1910, but in 1940 a new college opened at Manadon.
The local election of 7 May 2015 resulted in a political composition of 28 Labour councillors, 26 Conservative and 3 UKIP resulting in a Labour administration.
It is open to the public and has views over the Plymouth Sound and the city from the lantern room.
Its largest park is Central Park, with other sizeable green spaces including Victoria Park, Freedom Fields Park, Alexandra Park, Devonport Park and the Hoe.
The Civic Centre municipal office building in Armada Way became a listed building in June 2007 because of its quality and period features, but has become the centre of a controversy as the council planned for its demolition estimating that it could cost £40m to refurbish it, resulting in possible job losses.
Several employers have chosen to locate their headquarters in Plymouth, including Hemsley Fraser.
In 1914 the county boroughs of Plymouth and Devonport, and the urban district of East Stonehouse merged to form a single county borough of Plymouth.
On the outskirts of Plympton a combined cycle gas-powered station, the Langage Power Station, which started to produce electricity for Plymouth at the end of 2009.
South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust operates in Plymouth and the rest of the south west; its headquarters are in Exeter.
The Plymouth Pavilions has multiple uses for the city staging music concerts, basketball matches and stand-up comedy.
It is owned by the Landmark Trust and is open to the public.
Another period of notable snow occurred from 17–19 December 2010 when up to  of snow fell through the period – though only  would lie at any one time due to melt.
The city's first Lord Mayor was appointed in 1935 and its boundaries further expanded in 1967 to include the town of Plympton and the parish of Plymstock.
There are proposals to reopen the line from Tavistock to Bere Alston for a through service to Plymouth.
After the English Civil War the Royal Citadel was built in 1666 on the east end of Plymouth Hoe, to defend the port from naval attacks, suppress Plymothian Parliamentary leanings and to train the armed forces.
The Roland Levinsky building, the landmark building of the University of Plymouth, is located in the city's central quarter.
Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection.
File:War memorial, Plymouth.jpg|Naval War Memorial
The Plymouth Marine Laboratory is an offshoot of the MBA.
From 1961 to 2009 it also housed a theatre.
In April 2011, it was announced that the airport would close, which it did on 23 December.
In the Parliament of the United Kingdom, Plymouth is represented by the three constituencies of Plymouth Moor View, Plymouth Sutton and Devonport and South West Devon and within the European Parliament as South West England.
There are also three cinemas: Reel Cinema at Derrys Cross, Plymouth Arts Centre at Looe Street and a Vue cinema at the Barbican Leisure Park.
The Plymouth Synagogue is a Listed Grade II* building, built in 1762 and is the oldest Ashkenazi Synagogue in the English speaking world.
The city also has four Non-League football clubs; Plymouth Parkway F.C.
In 1620 the Pilgrim Fathers set sail for the New World from Plymouth, establishing Plymouth Colony – the second English colony in what is now the United States of America.
It was originally designed to carry water to Devonport town, but has since been shortened and now carries water to Burrator Reservoir, which feeds most of the water supply of Plymouth.
During the English Civil War the town was held by the Parliamentarians and was besieged between 1642 and 1646.
During the First World War, Plymouth was the port of entry for many troops from around the Empire and also developed as a facility for the manufacture of munitions.
The River Tamar forms the county boundary between Devon and Cornwall and its estuary forms the Hamoaze on which is sited Devonport Dockyard.
During this time the real source of wealth was from the neighbouring town of Plymouth Dock (renamed in 1824 to Devonport) and the major employer in the entire region was the dockyard.
In the late fifteenth century, Plymouth Castle, a "castle quadrate", was constructed close to the area now known as The Barbican; it included four round towers, one at each corner, as featured on the city coat of arms.
There is also a privately owned cemetery on the outskirts of the city, Drake Memorial Park which does not allow headstones to mark graves, but a brass plaque set into the ground.
The topography rises from sea level to a height, at Roborough, of about  above Ordnance Datum (AOD).
Plymouth is often used as a base by visitors to Dartmoor, the Tamar Valley and the beaches of south-east Cornwall.
Defences on St Nicholas Island also date from this time, and a string of six artillery blockhouses were built, including one on Fishers Nose at the south-eastern corner of the Hoe.
The position is elected each year by a group of six councillors.
Plymouth has 20 war memorials of which nine are on The Hoe including: Plymouth Naval Memorial, to remember those killed in World Wars I and II, and the Armada Memorial, to commemorate the defeat of the Spanish Armada.
The musician and film director Cosmo Jarvis has lived in several towns in South Devon and has filmed videos in and around Plymouth.
The castle served to protect Sutton Pool, which is where the fleet was based in Plymouth prior to the establishment of Plymouth Dockyard.
In 1945, Plymouth-born Michael Foot was elected Labour MP for the war-torn constituency of Plymouth Devonport and after serving as Secretary of State for Education and responsible for the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act, went on to become one of the most distinguished leaders of the Labour party.
The annual mean temperature is approximately .
There are also places of worship for Islam, Bahá'í, Buddhism, Unitarianism, Chinese beliefs and Humanism.
Plymouth Sound, Shores and Cliffs is a Site of Special Scientific Interest, because of its geology.
It was founded in 1992 from Polytechnic South West (formerly Plymouth Polytechnic) following the Further and Higher Education Act 1992.
The University of St Mark & St John (known as "Marjon" or "Marjons") specialises in teacher training, and offers training across the country and abroad.
In 1512 an Act of Parliament was passed for further fortifying Plymouth, and a series of fortifications were then built, including defensive walls at the entrance to Sutton Pool (across which a chain would be extended in time of danger).
The City of Plymouth is divided into 20 wards, 17 of which elect three councillors and the other three electing two councillors, making up a total council of 57.
Between 1951 and 1957 over 1000 homes were completed every year mostly using innovative prefabricated systems of just three main types; by 1964 over 20,000 new homes had been built transforming the dense overcrowded and unsanitary slums of the pre-war city into a low density, dispersed suburbia.
Illustrator and creator of children's series Mr Benn and King Rollo, David McKee, was born and brought up in South Devon and trained at Plymouth College of Art.
File:Britannia-Statue.jpg|National Armada memorial (Britannia)
In 1254 it gained status as a town and in 1439, became the first town in England to be granted a Charter by Parliament.
See Plympton for the derivation of the name ''Plym''.
In 1712 there were 318 men employed and by 1733 it had grown to a population of 3,000 people.
In terms of retail floorspace, Plymouth is ranked in the top five in the South West, and 29th nationally.
All four clubs play in the South West Peninsula League.
It became known as ''the servicemen's playground'', as it was where sailors from the Royal Navy would seek entertainment of all kinds.
Over the 1961–1990 period, annual snowfall accumulation averaged less than  per year.
The early port settlement of Plymouth, called "Sutton", approximates to the area now referred to as the Barbican and has 100 listed buildings and the largest concentration of cobbled streets in Britain.
His cousin and contemporary John Hawkins was a Plymouth man.
In 1403 the town was burned by Breton raiders.
As a result of this summer highs are lower than points further north in the UK, however the coldest month of February has mean minimum temperatures as mild as between .
Rocks brought down the Tamar from Dartmoor include ores containing tin, copper, tungsten, lead and other minerals.
Plymouth Devils are a speedway team in the British Premier League.
They play at the Brickfields.
Plymouth is home to Plymouth Argyle F.C., who play in the fourth tier of English football league known as Football League Two.
Other substantial employers include the university with almost 3,000 staff, as well as the Plymouth Science Park employing 500 people in 50 companies.
A watercourse, known as Plymouth or Drake's Leat, was opened on 24 April 1591 to tap the River Meavy.
At the time of the 2011 UK census, the ethnic composition of Plymouth's population was 96.2% White (of 92.9% was White British), with the largest minority ethnic group being Chinese at 0.5%.
Typically, 18.6 nights of the year will register an air frost.
File:Plymouth Barbican and harbour.jpg|The Parade, Barbican
The city's average household size was 2.3 persons.
Along with the rest of South West England, Plymouth has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen ''Cfb'') which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England.
A regular international ferry service provided by Brittany Ferries operates from Millbay taking cars and foot passengers directly to France (Roscoff) and Spain (Santander) on the three ferries, ''MV Armorique'', ''MV Bretagne'' and ''MV Pont-Aven''.
Notable athletes include swimmer Sharron Davies, diver Tom Daley, dancer Wayne Sleep, and footballer Trevor Francis.
Network Rail began repair work  and the line reopened on 4 April 2014.
Plymouth was granted city status on 18 October 1928.
Together with the National Marine Aquarium, the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Sciences, Plymouth University's Marine Institute and the Diving Diseases Research Centre, these marine-related organisations form the Plymouth Marine Sciences Partnership.
William Cookworthy born in Kingsbridge set up his successful porcelain business in the city and was a close friend of John Smeaton designer of the Eddystone Lighthouse.
Plymouth was one of the first ten British cities to trial the new Business Improvement District initiative.
The Devonport Leat was constructed to carry fresh drinking water to the expanding town of Devonport and its ever growing dockyard.
During the 1930s, there were 30 pubs and it attracted such performers as Charlie Chaplin to the New Palace Theatre.
This location was further strengthened by the building of a fort (later known as Drake's Fort) in 1596, which itself went on to provide the site for the Citadel, established in the 1660s (see below).
