The incidence in children has not been well studied, but is estimated to be between 5 and 10 cases per 100,000 person-years.
The results from VATS-based pleural abrasion are slightly worse than those achieved using thoracotomy in the short term, but produce smaller scars in the skin.
The diagnosis may be apparent to the veterinary physician because the animal exhibits difficulty breathing in, or has shallow breathing.
The size of the pneumothorax (i.e.
Hypoxemia (decreased blood-oxygen levels) is usually present and may be observed as cyanosis (blue discoloration of the lips and skin).
In a minority of cases the amount of air in the chest increases markedly when a one-way valve is formed by an area of damaged tissue, leading to a tension pneumothorax.
Surgery may need to be considered if someone has experienced pneumothorax on both sides ("bilateral"), sequential episodes that involve both sides, or if an episode was associated with pregnancy.
Medical procedures, such as the insertion of a central venous catheter into one of the chest veins or the taking of biopsy samples from lung tissue, may lead to pneumothorax.
This was known as "resting the lung".
A further use of CT is in the identification of underlying lung lesions.
The most common mechanism is due to the penetration of sharp bony points at a new rib fracture, which damages lung tissue.
An additional problem in these cases is that those with other features of decompression sickness are typically treated in a diving chamber with hyperbaric therapy; this can lead to a small pneumothorax rapidly enlarging and causing features of tension.
In traumatic pneumothorax, larger tubes (28&nbsp;F, 9.3&nbsp;mm) are used.
If the person normally performs heavy manual labor, several weeks may be required.
This is a medical emergency and may require immediate treatment without further investigations (see below).
Normally, the two layers are separated by a small amount of lubricating serous fluid.
Individuals who smoke at higher intensity are at higher risk, with a "greater-than-linear" effect; men who smoke 10 cigarettes per day have an approximate 20-fold increased risk over comparable non-smokers, while smokers consuming 20 cigarettes per day show an estimated 100-fold increase in risk.
Once a second episode has occurred, there is a high likelihood of subsequent further episodes.
Unless corrected, hypoxia (decreased oxygen levels) and respiratory arrest eventually follow.
The most common is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which accounts for approximately 70% of cases.
Sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, histiocytosis X, lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM)
Hypercapnia (accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood) is sometimes encountered; this may cause confusion and - if very severe - may result in comas.
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), tuberculosis, necrotizing pneumonia
Recurrence rates are approximately 1%.
Death from pneumothorax is very uncommon (except in tension pneumothoraces).
The word pneumothorax is from the Greek ''pneumo-'' meaning air and ''thorax'' meaning chest.
Not all pneumothoraces are uniform; some only form a pocket of air in a particular place in the chest.
This condition can cause a steadily worsening oxygen shortage and low blood pressure.
VATS may also be used to achieve chemical pleurodesis; this involves insufflation of talc, which activates an inflammatory reaction that causes the lung to adhere to the chest wall.
Therefore, a pneumothorax can only develop if air is allowed to enter, through damage to the chest wall or damage to the lung itself, or occasionally because microorganisms in the pleural space produce gas.
Underwater diving is considered unsafe after an episode of pneumothorax unless a preventative procedure has been performed.
Symptoms in SSPs tend to be more severe than in PSPs, as the unaffected lungs are generally unable to replace the loss of function in the affected lungs.
In secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces, vulnerabilities in the lung tissue are caused by a variety of disease processes, particularly by rupturing of bullae (large air-containing lesions) in cases of severe emphysema.
During the healing process, the lung adheres to the chest wall, effectively obliterating the pleural space.
The needle or cannula is left in place until a chest tube can be inserted.
A preventative procedure (thoracotomy or thoracoscopy with pleurodesis) may be recommended after an episode of pneumothorax, with the intention to prevent recurrence.
If a chest tube is already in place, various agents may be instilled through the tube to achieve chemical pleurodesis, such as talc, tetracycline, minocycline or doxycycline.
In a larger pneumothorax, or when there are marked symptoms, the air may be removed with a syringe or a chest tube connected to a one-way valve system.
Significantly above-average height is also associated with increased risk of PSP&mdash;in people who are at least 76 inches (1.93 meters) tall, the AAIR is about 200 cases per 100,000 person-years.
If pneumothorax occurs in a smoker, this is considered an opportunity to emphasize the markedly increased risk of recurrence in those who continue to smoke, and the many benefits of smoking cessation.
One or both lungs may be affected.
Small spontaneous pneumothoraces typically resolve without treatment and require only monitoring.
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax has for many years been thought to be caused by "blebs" (small air-filled lesions just under the pleural surface), which were presumed to be more common in those classically at risk of pneumothorax (tall males) due to mechanical factors.
As these healthy subjects do not all develop a pneumothorax later, the hypothesis may not be sufficient to explain all episodes; furthermore, pneumothorax may recur even after surgical treatment of blebs.
In PSP, blebs can be found in 77% of cases, compared to 6% in the general population without a history of PSP.
These procedures are often recommended after the occurrence of a second pneumothorax.
They are also encountered in patients already receiving mechanical ventilation for some other reason.
Lung cancer, sarcomas involving the lung
British professional guidelines have traditionally stated that the measurement should be performed at the level of the hilum (where blood vessels and airways enter the lung) with 2&nbsp;cm as the cutoff, while American guidelines state that the measurement should be done at the apex (top) of the lung with 3&nbsp;cm differentiating between a "small" and a "large" pneumothorax.
In 1941, the surgeons Tyson and Crandall introduced pleural abrasion for the treatment of pneumothorax.
In children, additional causes include measles, echinococcosis, inhalation of a foreign body, and certain congenital malformations (congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation and congenital lobar emphysema).
A chest tube (or intercostal drain) is the most definitive initial treatment of a pneumothorax.
The body compensates by increasing the respiratory rate and tidal volume (size of each breath), worsening the problem.
Percussion of the chest may be perceived as hyperresonant (like a booming drum), and vocal resonance and tactile fremitus can both be noticeably decreased.
Fishman cites AAIR's of 7.4 and 1.2 cases per 100,000 person-years in males and females, respectively.
While Itard and Laennec recognized that some cases were not due to tuberculosis (then the most common cause), the concept of spontaneous pneumothorax in the absence of tuberculosis (primary pneumothorax) was reintroduced by the Danish physician Hans Kjærgaard in 1932.
The symptoms of pneumothorax can be vague and inconclusive, especially in those with a small PSP; confirmation with medical imaging is usually required.
Its plural is pneumothoraces.
Compared to tube drainage, first-line aspiration in PSP reduces the number of people requiring hospital admission significantly, without increasing the risk of complications.
Recent studies have shown that the development of tension features may not always be as rapid as previously thought.
The sudden onset of breathlessness in someone with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis, or other serious lung diseases should therefore prompt investigations to identify the possibility of a pneumothorax.
If mechanical ventilation is required, the risk of tension pneumothorax is greatly increased and the insertion of a chest tube is mandatory.
Diagnosis of a pneumothorax by physical examination alone can be difficult (particularly in smaller pneumothoraces).
The administration of positive pressure ventilation, either mechanical ventilation or non-invasive ventilation, can result in barotrauma (pressure-related injury) leading to a pneumothorax.
A pneumothorax can be caused by physical trauma to the chest (including a blast injury), or as a complication of a healthcare intervention; in which case it is called a traumatic pneumothorax.
This is relevant to treatment, as smaller pneumothoraces may be managed differently.
Areas of necrosis (tissue death) may precipitate episodes of pneumothorax, although the exact mechanism is unclear.
It is often called a '''collapsed lung''', although that term may also refer to atelectasis.
Aspiration may also be considered in secondary pneumothorax of moderate size (air rim 1–2&nbsp;cm) without breathlessness, with the difference that ongoing observation in hospital is required even after a successful procedure.
Small spontaneous pneumothoraces do not always require treatment, as they are unlikely to proceed to respiratory failure or tension pneumothorax, and generally resolve spontaneously.
Symptoms typically include chest pain and shortness of breath.
Negative pressure suction (at low pressures of –10 to –20&nbsp;cmH2O) at a high flow rate may be attempted, particularly in PSP; it is thought that this may accelerate the healing of the leak.
COPD (especially when emphysema and lung bullae are present), acute severe asthma, cystic fibrosis
Chest pain and sometimes mild breathlessness are the usual predominant presenting features.
British statistics show an annual mortality rate of 1.26 and 0.62 deaths per million person-years in men and women, respectively.
Importantly, the volume of the pneumothorax can show limited correlation with the intensity of the symptoms experienced by the victim, and physical signs may not be apparent if the pneumothorax is relatively small.
Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome is caused by mutations in the ''FLCN'' gene (located at chromosome 17p11.2), which encodes a protein named folliculin.
The various suspected underlying mechanisms are discussed below.
The hereditary conditions&mdash;Marfan syndrome, homocystinuria, Ehlers&ndash;Danlos syndrome, alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency (which leads to emphysema), and Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome—have all been linked to familial pneumothorax.
Spontaneous pneumothoraces are divided into two types: ''primary'', which occurs in the absence of known lung disease, and ''secondary'', which occurs in someone with underlying lung disease.
Pleurodesis is a procedure that permanently eliminates the pleural space and attaches the lung to the chest wall.
If there has been significant reduction in the size of the pneumothorax on subsequent X-ray, the remainder of the treatment can be conservative.
An air rim of 2&nbsp;cm means that the pneumothorax occupies about 50% of the hemithorax.
In secondary spontaneous pneumothorax, the estimated annual AAIR is 6.3 and 2.0 cases per 100,000 person-years for males and females, respectively, with the risk of recurrence depending on the presence and severity of any underlying lung disease.
the volume of air in the pleural space) can be determined with a reasonable degree of accuracy by measuring the distance between the chest wall and the lung.
Not all episodes of pneumothorax require such interventions; the decision depends largely on estimation of the risk of recurrence.
If tension pneumothorax leads to cardiac arrest, needle decompression is performed as part of resuscitation as it may restore cardiac output.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces (SSPs), by definition, occur in individuals with significant underlying lung disease.
The Asherman seal is a specially designed device that adheres to the chest wall and, through a valve-like mechanism, allows air to escape but not to enter the chest.
This approach is most appropriate if the estimated size of the pneumothorax is small (defined as 50%), or in a PSP associated with breathlessness, some professional guidelines recommend that reducing the size by aspiration is equally effective as the insertion of a chest tube.
Traumatic pneumothorax most commonly occurs when the chest wall is pierced, such as when a stab wound or gunshot wound allows air to enter the pleural space, or because some other mechanical injury to the lung compromises the integrity of the involved structures.
It is rare for PSPs to cause tension pneumothoraces.
Evidence on the most effective treatment is still conflicting in some areas, and there is variation between treatments available in Europe and the US.
Tension pneumothorax is usually treated with urgent needle decompression.
Ultrasound is commonly used in the evaluation of people who have sustained physical trauma, for example with the FAST protocol.
Occasionally, surgery may be required if tube drainage is unsuccessful, or as a preventive measure, if there have been repeated episodes.
Generally, these conditions cause other signs and symptoms as well, and pneumothorax is not usually the primary finding.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the setting of a variety of lung diseases.
The latter method may overestimate the size of a pneumothorax if it is located mainly at the apex, which is a common occurrence.
On each side of the cavity, a pleural membrane covers the surface of lung (visceral pleura) and also lines the inside of the chest wall (parietal pleura).
Traditionally a plain radiograph of the chest, ideally with the X-ray beams being projected from the back (posteroanterior, or "PA"), has been the most appropriate first investigation.
Smoking may additionally lead to inflammation and obstruction of small airways, which account for the markedly increased risk of PSPs in smokers.
Air travel is discouraged for up to seven days after complete resolution of a pneumothorax if recurrence does not occur.
No long-term study (20 years or more) has been performed on its consequences.
A less invasive approach is thoracoscopy, usually in the form of a procedure called video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS).
Other findings may include quieter breath sounds on one side of the chest, low oxygen levels and blood pressure, and displacement of the trachea away from the affected side.
Local anesthetic is applied.
In trauma, where it may not be possible to perform an upright film, chest radiography may miss up to a third of pneumothoraces, while CT remains very sensitive.
The various methods correlate poorly, but are the best easily available ways of estimating pneumothorax size.
Small amounts of fluid may be noted on the chest X-ray (hydropneumothorax); this may be blood (hemopneumothorax).
A primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP) tends to occur in a young adult without underlying lung problems, and usually causes limited symptoms.
The annual age-adjusted incidence rate (AAIR) of PSP is thought to be three to six times as high in males as in females.
In horses, traumatic pneumothorax may involve both hemithoraces, as the mediastinum is incomplete and there is a direct connection between the two halves of the chest.
The thoracic cavity is the space inside the chest that contains the lungs, heart, and numerous major blood vessels.
They are connected to a one-way valve system that allows air to escape, but not to re-enter, the chest.
Spontaneous pneumothorax is, as in humans, classified as primary or secondary, while traumatic pneumothorax is divided into open and closed (with or without chest wall damage).
These are usually performed during maximal inspiration (holding one's breath); no added information is gathered by obtaining a chest X-ray in expiration (after exhaling).
In spontaneous pneumothorax, small-bore (smaller than 14&nbsp;F, 4.7&nbsp;mm diameter) tubes may be inserted by the Seldinger technique, and larger tubes do not have an advantage.
Aircraft pilots may also require assessment for surgery.
It is not unusual for the mediastinum (the structure between the lungs that contains the heart, great blood vessels and large airways) to be shifted away from the affected lung due to the pressure differences.
In some lung diseases, especially emphysema, it is possible for abnormal lung areas such as bullae (large air-filled sacs) to have the same appearance as a pneumothorax on chest X-ray, and it may not be safe to apply any treatment before the distinction is made and before the exact location and size of the pneumothorax is determined.
Pneumothoraces may arise from lung lesions (such as bullae) or from trauma to the chest wall.
This may include a bottle with water that functions like a water seal, or a Heimlich valve.
Rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, polymyositis and dermatomyositis, systemic sclerosis, Marfan's syndrome and Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
Ideally, a dressing called the "Asherman seal" should be utilized, as it appears to be more effective than a standard "three-sided" dressing.
They are not normally connected to a negative pressure circuit, as this would result in rapid re-expansion of the lung and a risk of pulmonary edema ("re-expansion pulmonary edema").
It may be advisable for someone to remain off work for up to a week after a spontaneous pneumothorax.
The lungs are fully inflated within the cavity because the pressure inside the airways is higher than the pressure inside the pleural space.
Ultrasound may be more sensitive than chest X-rays in the identification of pneumothorax after blunt trauma to the chest.
Connective tissue diseases
If the PA X-ray does not show a pneumothorax but there is a strong suspicion of one, lateral X-rays (with beams projecting from the side) may be performed, but this is not routine practice.
Two types of tubes may be used.
Chest tubes are used first-line when pneumothorax occurs in people with AIDS, usually due to underlying pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), as this condition is associated with prolonged air leakage.
Diseases of the airways
Failing this, surgery may be required, especially in SSP.
American professional guidelines state that all large pneumothoraces - even those due to PSP - should be treated with a chest tube.
Those who have undergone pleurodesis may need two to three weeks off work to recover.
A traumatic pneumothorax may result from either blunt trauma or penetrating injury to the chest wall.
Chest-wall defects are usually evident in cases of injury to the chest wall, such as stab or bullet wounds ("open pneumothorax").
Interstitial lung disease
The risk of contracting a first spontaneous pneumothorax is elevated among male and female smokers by factors of approximately 22 and 9, respectively, compared to matched non-smokers of the same sex.
This approach may be most appropriate in people who have no underlying lung disease.
Pneumothorax was described in 1803 by Jean Marc Gaspard Itard, a student of René Laennec, who provided an extensive description of the clinical picture in 1819.
Several particular features on ultrasonography of the chest can be used to confirm or exclude the diagnosis.
Murphy used the (then) recently discovered X-ray technology to create pneumothoraces of the correct size.
People who are affected by PSPs are often unaware of potential danger and may wait several days before seeking medical attention.
A primary pneumothorax is one that occurs without an apparent cause and in the absence of significant lung disease, while a secondary pneumothorax occurs in the presence of existing lung disease.
Results of chemical pleurodesis tend to be worse than when using surgical approaches, but talc pleurodesis has been found to have few negative long-term consequences in younger people.
In tension pneumothorax, X-rays are sometimes required if there is doubt about the anatomical location of the pneumothorax.
In addition to the genetic associations, the HLA haplotype A2B40 is also a genetic predisposition to PSP.
Good results in the short term are achieved with a thoracotomy (surgical opening of the chest) with identification of any source of air leakage and stapling of blebs followed by pleurectomy (stripping of the pleural lining) of the outer pleural layer and pleural abrasion (scraping of the pleura) of the inner layer.
Chest tubes are required in PSPs that have not responded to needle aspiration, in large SSPs  (>50%), and in cases of tension pneumothorax.
In presumed primary pneumothorax, it may help to identify blebs or cystic lesions (in anticipation of treatment, see below), and in secondary pneumothorax it can help to identify most of the causes listed above.
Professional guidelines suggest that pleurectomy be performed on both lungs and that lung function tests and CT scan normalize before diving is resumed.
If after 2–4&nbsp;days there is still evidence of an air leak, various options are available.
Although multiple definitions exist, a tension pneumothorax is generally considered to be present when a pneumothorax (primary spontaneous, secondary spontaneous, or traumatic) leads to significant impairment of respiration and/or blood circulation.
Despite the low pressure in the pleural space, air does not enter it because there are no natural connections to an air-containing passage, and the pressure of gases in the bloodstream is too low for them to be forced into the pleural space.
This involves the administration of local anesthetic and inserting a needle connected to a three-way tap; up to 2.5&nbsp;liters of air (in adults) are removed.
In traumatic pneumothorax, chest tubes are usually inserted.
Ultrasound may also provide a rapid diagnosis in other emergency situations, and allow the quantification of the size of the pneumothorax.
This may be required before transport to the hospital, and can be performed by an emergency medical technician or other trained professional.
Any open chest wound should be covered with an airtight seal, as it carries a high risk of leading to tension pneumothorax.
It was introduced by the Italian surgeon  Carlo Forlanini in 1888, and publicized by the American surgeon John Benjamin Murphy in the early 20th century (after discovering the same procedure independently).
Tension pneumothorax&mdash;the presence of which may be suspected due to rapidly deteriorating heart function, absent lung sounds throughout the thorax, and a barrel-shaped chest&mdash;is treated with an incision in the animal's chest to relieve the pressure, followed by insertion of a chest tube.
A '''pneumothorax''' is an abnormal collection of air in the pleural space that causes an uncoupling of the lung from the chest wall.
Once air has stopped entering the pleural cavity, it is gradually reabsorbed.
The pneumothorax can be occult (not readily apparent) in half of these cases, but may enlarge - particularly if mechanical ventilation is required.
Slim build also seems to increase the risk of PSP.
The cause of primary spontaneous pneumothorax is unknown, but established risk factors include male sex, smoking, and a family history of pneumothorax.
Rarely, there may be cyanosis (bluish discoloration of the skin due to low oxygen levels), altered level of consciousness, a hyperresonant percussion note on examination of the affected side with reduced expansion and decreased movement, pain in the epigastrium (upper abdomen), displacement of the apex beat (heart impulse), and resonant sound when tapping the sternum.
CT scanning (see below) can provide a more accurate determination of the size of the pneumothorax, but its routine use in this setting is not recommended.
Moderately sized iatrogenic traumatic pneumothoraces (due to medical procedures) may initially be treated with aspiration.
Divers breathing compressed air (such as when scuba diving) may suffer a pneumothorax as a result of barotrauma from ascending just  while breath-holding with their lungs fully inflated.
Catamenial pneumothorax (associated with the menstrual cycle and related to endometriosis in the chest)
Measures of the conduction of vocal vibrations to the surface of the chest may be altered.
It has therefore been suggested that PSP may also be caused by areas of disruption (porosity) in the pleural layer, which are prone to rupture.
11.5% of people with a spontaneous pneumothorax have a family member who has previously experienced a pneumothorax.
A significantly increased risk of death is seen in older victims and in those with secondary pneumothoraces.
Divers who breathe from an underwater apparatus are supplied with breathing gas at ambient pressure, which results in their lungs containing gas at higher than atmospheric pressure.
PSPs more commonly occur during changes in atmospheric pressure, explaining to some extent why episodes of pneumothorax may happen in clusters.
The most common findings in people with tension pneumothorax are chest pain and respiratory distress, often with an increased heart rate (tachycardia) and rapid breathing (tachypnea) in the initial stages.
Compared to open thoracotomy, VATS offers a shorter in-hospital stays, less need for postoperative pain control, and a reduced risk of lung problems after surgery.
This approach has been shown to be effective in over 50% of cases.
In some cases, the only significant abnormality may be the "deep sulcus sign", in which the normally small space between the chest wall and the diaphragm appears enlarged due to the abnormal presence of fluid.
Infections of the lung
The surgical treatments usually involve pleurodesis (in which the layers of pleura are induced to stick together) or pleurectomy (the surgical removal of pleural membranes).
Unless reversed by effective treatment, it can result in death.
Deviation of the trachea to one side and the presence of raised jugular venous pressure (distended neck veins) are not reliable as clinical signs.
Upon physical examination, breath sounds (heard with a stethoscope) may be diminished on the affected side, partly because air in the pleural space dampens the transmission of sound.
This is ''not'' equivalent to a tension pneumothorax, which is determined mainly by the constellation of symptoms, hypoxia, and shock.
Post-thoracotomy pain is relatively common.
These are typically inserted in an area under the axilla (armpit) called the "safe triangle", where damage to internal organs can be avoided; this is delineated by a horizontal line at the level of the nipple and two muscles of the chest wall (latissimus dorsi and pectoralis major).
Tension pneumothorax may also occur in someone who is receiving mechanical ventilation, in which case it may be difficult to spot as the person is typically receiving sedation; it is often noted because of a sudden deterioration in condition.
Like a pleural effusion (liquid buildup in that space), a pneumothorax may interfere with normal breathing.
It is possible for a patient with a chest tube to be managed in an ambulatory care setting by using a Heimlich valve, although research to demonstrate the equivalence to hospitalization has been of limited quality.
Prior to the advent of anti-tuberculous medications, iatrogenic pneumothoraces were intentionally given to people with tuberculosis in an effort to collapse a lobe, or entire lung, around a cavitating lesion.
''FLCN'' mutations and lung lesions have also been identified in familial cases of pneumothorax where other features of Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome are absent.
Tension pneumothorax tends to occur in clinical situations such as ventilation, resuscitation, trauma, or in patients with lung disease.
The tube is left in place until no air is seen to escape from it for a period of time, and X-rays confirm re-expansion of the lung.
Traumatic pneumothoraces have been found to occur in up to half of all cases of chest trauma, with only rib fractures being more common in this group.
