The methods for creating poetic rhythm vary across languages and between poetic traditions.
Some ancient poetic traditions; such as, contextually, Classical Chinese poetry in the case of the ''Shijing'' (''Classic of Poetry''), which records the development of poetic canons with ritual and aesthetic importance.
West-östlicher Diwan of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe that is a collection of lyrical poems, has been inspired by the Persian poet Hafez.
In addition to two or three alliterations, the odd numbered lines had partial rhyme of consonants with dissimilar vowels, not necessarily at the beginning of the word; the even lines contained internal rhyme in set syllables (not necessarily at the end of the word).
The arrangement of dróttkvætts followed far less rigid rules than the construction of the individual dróttkvætts.
Lyric poetry is a genre that, unlike epic and dramatic poetry, does not attempt to tell a story but instead is of a more personal nature.
A notable example is the Roman poet Juvenal's satires.
Some 20th-century literary theorists, relying less on the opposition of prose and poetry, focused on the poet as simply one who creates using language, and poetry as what the poet creates.
Among the most common forms of poetry, popular from the Late Middle Ages on, is the sonnet, which by the 13th century had become standardized as fourteen lines following a set rhyme scheme and logical structure.
An elegy may also reflect something that seems to the author to be strange or mysterious.
Narrative poetry may be the oldest type of poetry.
Many scholars of Homer have concluded that his ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'' were composed from compilations of shorter narrative poems that related individual episodes.
During this period, there was also substantially more interaction among the various poetic traditions, in part due to the spread of European colonialism and the attendant rise in global trade.
* trochee – one stressed syllable followed by an unstressed syllable (e.g.
Odes have a formal poetic diction, and generally deal with a serious subject.
Examples of dramatic poetry in Persian literature include Nizami's two famous dramatic works, ''Layla and Majnun'' and ''Khosrow and Shirin'', Ferdowsi's tragedies such as ''Rostam and Sohrab'', Rumi's ''Masnavi'', Gorgani's tragedy of ''Vis and Ramin'', and Vahshi's tragedy of ''Farhad''.
With the advent of printing, poets gained greater control over the mass-produced visual presentations of their work.
Such repetition can add a sombre tone to a poem, or can be laced with irony as the context of the words changes.
English, with its irregular word endings adopted from other languages, is less rich in rhyme.
Latin American poets of the 20th century who wrote prose poems include Octavio Paz and Giannina Braschi
Some commentators view genres as natural forms of literature.
''Aesop's Fables'', repeatedly rendered in both verse and prose since first being recorded about 500 B.C., are perhaps the richest single source of allegorical poetry through the ages.
Classical Chinese poetics identifies four tones: the level tone, rising tone, departing tone, and entering tone.
Since the rise of Modernism, some poets have opted for a poetic diction that de-emphasizes rhetorical devices, attempting instead the direct presentation of things and experiences and the exploration of tone.
* iamb – one unstressed syllable followed by a stressed syllable (e.g.
The strophe and antistrophe look at the subject from different, often conflicting, perspectives, with the epode moving to a higher level to either view or resolve the underlying issues.
There is generally a shift in tone and subject matter between the upper 5-7-5 phrase and the lower 7-7 phrase.
Examples of epic poems are Homer's ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'', Virgil's Aeneid, the ''Nibelungenlied'', Luís de Camões' ''Os Lusíadas'', the ''Cantar de Mio Cid'', the ''Epic of Gilgamesh'', the ''Mahabharata'', Valmiki's ''Ramayana'', Ferdowsi's ''Shahnama'', Nizami (or Nezami)'s Khamse (Five Books), and the ''Epic of King Gesar''.
(a reference to Thomas Shadwell).
In Chinese poetry, tones as well as stresses create rhythm.
Poets from the earliest centuries of the sonnet to the present have utilized the form to address topics related to politics (John Milton, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Claude McKay), theology (John Donne, Gerard Manley Hopkins), war (Wilfred Owen, e. e. cummings), and gender and sexuality (Carol Ann Duffy).
They may be used as an independent structural element in a poem,  to reinforce rhythmic patterns, or as an ornamental element.
Notably, the existing fragments of Aristotle's ''Poetics'' describe three genres of poetry—the epic, the comic, and the tragic—and develop rules to distinguish the highest-quality poetry in each genre, based on the underlying purposes of the genre.
The couplets with parallel lines contain contrasting content but an identical grammatical relationship between words.
Similarly figures of speech such as metaphor, simile and metonymy create a resonance between otherwise disparate images—a layering of meanings, forming connections previously not perceived.
In skaldic poetry, the dróttkvætt stanza had eight lines, each having three "lifts" produced with alliteration or assonance.
These basic units of poetic form are often combined into larger structures, called ''poetic forms'' or poetic modes (see following section), as in the sonnet or haiku.
Assonance, where the use of similar vowel sounds within a word rather than similar sounds at the beginning or end of a word, was widely used in skaldic poetry, but goes back to the Homeric epic.
Further, postmodern authors such as Ted Berrigan and John Berryman have challenged the traditional definitions of the sonnet form, rendering entire sequences of "sonnets" that often lack rhyme, a clear logical progression, or even a consistent count of fourteen lines.
The richness results from word endings that follow regular forms.
Tanka was originally the shorter form of Japanese formal poetry (which was generally referred to as "waka"), and was used more heavily to explore personal rather than public themes.
Parallelism lent itself to antiphonal or call-and-response performance, which could also be reinforced by intonation.
Forms of odes appear in many of the cultures that were influenced by the Greeks and Latins.
Poetry has a long history, dating back to the Sumerian ''Epic of Gilgamesh''.
Among major structural elements used in poetry are the line, the stanza or verse paragraph, and larger combinations of stanzas or lines such as cantos.
Tanka are still widely written today.
Many modern poets eschew recognisable structures or forms, and write in free verse.
The types and use of differing rhyming schemes is discussed further in the main article.
:fuji no kaze ya oogi ni nosete Edo miyage
The remaining lines of the poem have an a-b alternating rhyme.
Examples of Egyptian epic poetry include ''The Story of Sinuhe'' (c. 1800 BC).
Other forms of poetry developed directly from folk songs.
Generally written in a single vertical line, the haiku contains three sections totalling 17 ''onji'', structured in a 5-7-5 pattern.
Old English poetry used a metrical pattern involving varied numbers of syllables but a fixed number of strong stresses in each line.
The underlying concept of the poet as creator is not uncommon, and some modernist poets essentially do not distinguish between the creation of a poem with words, and creative acts in other media.
These lines may or may not relate to each other by rhyme or rhythm.
The ghazal (also ghazel, gazel, gazal, or gozol) is a form of poetry common in Arabic, Persian, Turkish, Azerbaijani, Urdu and Bengali poetry.
Verse fables have used a variety of meter and rhyme patterns.
An example of his writing:
Actual rhythm is significantly more complex than the basic scanned meter described above, and many scholars have sought to develop systems that would scan such complexity.
Later aestheticians identified three major genres: epic poetry, lyric poetry, and dramatic poetry, treating comedy and tragedy as subgenres of dramatic poetry.
Classical thinkers employed classification as a way to define and assess the quality of poetry.
English, Russian and, generally, German are stress-timed languages.
The earliest entries in the ancient compilation ''Shijing'', were initially lyrics, preceding later entries intended to be read.
From the mid-20th century, poetry has sometimes been more generally regarded as a fundamental creative act employing language.
Visual elements have become an important part of the poet's toolbox, and many poets have sought to use visual presentation for a wide range of purposes.
Many medieval poems were written in verse paragraphs, even where regular rhymes and rhythms were used.
The Yuefu is a folk ballad or a poem written in the folk ballad style, and the number of lines and the length of the lines could be irregular.
* Iambic tetrameter (Andrew Marvell, "To His Coy Mistress"; Aleksandr Pushkin, ''Eugene Onegin'', Robert Frost, ''Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening'')
In all cases, rhyming is obligatory.
Poetic diction can include rhetorical devices such as simile and metaphor, as well as tones of voice, such as irony.
Among the masters of the form is Rumi, a 13th-century Persian poet.
While there was a substantial formalist reaction within the modernist schools to the breakdown of structure, this reaction focused as much on the development of new formal structures and syntheses as on the revival of older forms and structures.
Vladimir Nabokov noted that overlaid on top of the regular pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables in a line of verse was a separate pattern of accents resulting from the natural pitch of the spoken words, and suggested that the term "scud" be used to distinguish an unaccented stress from an accented stress.
This does not imply that poetry is illogical or lacks narration, but rather that poetry is an attempt to render the beautiful or sublime without the burden of engaging the logical or narrative thought process.
Such poetry appears regularly in modern science fiction and horror fiction magazines.
Alliteration is the repetition of letters or letter-sounds at the beginning of two or more words immediately succeeding each other, or at short intervals; or the recurrence of the same letter in accented parts of words.
Poetry as an art form may predate literacy.
Meter is the definitive pattern established for a verse (such as iambic pentameter), while rhythm is the actual sound that results from a line of poetry.
* spondee – two stressed syllables together (e.g.
Japanese is a mora-timed language.
* anapest – two unstressed syllables followed by one stressed syllable (e.g.
In some cases, particularly lengthier formal poetry such as some forms of epic poetry, stanzas themselves are constructed according to strict rules and then combined.
Lines can separate, compare or contrast thoughts expressed in different units, or can highlight a change in tone.
Another master of 17th-century English satirical poetry was John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester.
Languages are often described as having timing set primarily by accents, syllables, or moras, depending on how rhythm is established, though a language can be influenced by multiple approaches.
They can also carry a meaning separate from the repetitive sound patterns created.
Haiku is a popular form of unrhymed Japanese poetry, which evolved in the 17th century from the ''hokku'', or opening verse of a renku.
The oldest surviving epic poem is the ''Epic of Gilgamesh'', from the 3rd millenniumBC in Sumer (in Mesopotamia, now Iraq), which was written in cuneiform script on clay tablets and, later, papyrus.
The degree of richness of a language's rhyming structures plays a substantial role in determining what poetic forms are commonly used in that language.
Prose poetry is a hybrid genre that shows attributes of both prose and poetry.
Languages which utilize vowel length or intonation rather than or in addition to syllabic accents in determining meter, such as Ottoman Turkish or Vedic, often have concepts similar to the iamb and dactyl to describe common combinations of long and short sounds.
Prosody is the study of the meter, rhythm, and intonation of a poem.
Alliteration and assonance played a key role in structuring early Germanic, Norse and Old English forms of poetry.
Thus a collection of two lines is a couplet (or distich), three lines a triplet (or tercet), four lines a quatrain, and so on.
The Romans had a strong tradition of satirical poetry, often written for political purposes.
Each of these types of feet has a certain "feel," whether alone or in combination with other feet.
Tonal languages include Chinese, Vietnamese and most Subsaharan languages.
In the classical languages, on the other hand, while the metrical units are similar, vowel length rather than stresses define the meter.
* Dactylic hexameter (Homer, ''Iliad;'' Virgil, Aeneid)
But poetry remains distinguished from prose by its form; some regard for basic formal structures of poetry will be found in even the best free verse, however much such structures may appear to have been ignored.
This "romantic" approach views form as a key element of successful poetry because form is abstract and distinct from the underlying notional logic.
The juxtaposition of unexpected or impossible images is, for example, a particularly strong element in surrealist poetry and haiku.
Poetic form is more flexible in modernist and post-modernist poetry, and continues to be less structured than in previous literary eras.
The alliterative patterns of early Germanic poetry interweave meter and alliteration as a key part of their structure, so that the metrical pattern determines when the listener expects instances of alliteration to occur.
One of the masters of the form was Du Fu, who wrote during the Tang Dynasty (8th century).
The ghazal often reflects on a theme of unattainable love or divinity.
For example, the strophe, antistrophe and epode of the ode form are often separated into one or more stanzas.
Devices such as assonance, alliteration, onomatopoeia and rhythm are sometimes used to achieve musical or incantatory effects.
Recently, postmodernism has come to convey more completely prose and poetry as distinct entities, and also among genres of poetry, as having meaning only as cultural artifacts.
Lines of poems are often organized into stanzas, which are denominated by the number of lines included.
Acrostic poems conveyed meanings in the initial letters of lines or in letters at other specific places in a poem.
Regularity can vary between language.
Poems considered "light" are usually brief, and can be on a frivolous or serious subject, and often feature word play, including puns, adventurous rhyme and heavy alliteration.
An elegy is a mournful, melancholy or plaintive poem, especially a lament for the dead or a funeral song.
Some rhyming schemes have become associated with a specific language, culture or period, while other rhyming schemes have achieved use across languages, cultures or time periods.
It may be indistinguishable from the micro-story (a.k.a.
Notable practitioners of elegiac poetry have included Propertius, Jorge Manrique, Jan Kochanowski, Chidiock Tichborne, Edmund Spenser, Ben Jonson, John Milton, Thomas Gray, Charlotte Turner Smith, William Cullen Bryant, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Evgeny Baratynsky, Alfred Tennyson, Walt Whitman, Louis Gallet, Antonio Machado, Juan Ramón Jiménez, Giannina Braschi, William Butler Yeats, Rainer Maria Rilke, and Virginia Woolf.
Jintishi often have a rich poetic diction, full of allusion, and can have a wide range of subject, including history and politics.
Notable verse fabulists have included Aesop, Vishnu Sarma, Phaedrus, Marie de France, Robert Henryson, Biernat of Lublin, Jean de La Fontaine, Ignacy Krasicki, Félix María de Samaniego, Tomás de Iriarte, Ivan Krylov and Ambrose Bierce.
This has been challenged at various levels by other literary scholars such as Bloom who has stated in summary form concerning the early 21st century that: "The generation of poets who stand together now, mature and ready to write the major American verse of the twenty-first century, may yet be seen as what Stevens called 'a great shadow's last embellishment,' the shadow being Emerson's."
Rhyme, alliteration, assonance and consonance are ways of creating repetitive patterns of sound.
There is debate over how useful a multiplicity of different "feet" is in describing meter.
Poems in this genre tend to be shorter, melodic, and contemplative.
The most famous exponent of the haiku was Matsuo Bashō (1644–1694).
Varying intonation also affects how rhythm is perceived.
A tablet dating to c.2000BC describes an annual rite in which the king symbolically married and mated with the goddess Inanna to ensure fertility and prosperity, and is considered the world's oldest love poem.
Traditionally, haiku contain a kireji, or cutting word, usually placed at the end of one of the poem's three sections, and a kigo, or season-word.
Postmodernism goes beyond modernism's emphasis on the creative role of the poet, to emphasize the role of the reader of a text (Hermeneutics), and to highlight the complex cultural web within which a poem is read.
Although a few free verse poets have excelled at light verse outside the formal verse tradition, light verse in English is usually formal.
By convention, sonnets in English typically use iambic pentameter, while in the Romance languages, the hendecasyllable and Alexandrine are the most widely used meters.
For the other variations of ''shi'' poetry, generally either a four line (quatrain, or ''jueju'') or else an eight line poem is normal; either way with the even numbered lines rhyming.
The choriamb is derived from some ancient Greek and Latin poetry.
The number of metrical feet in a line are described using Greek terminology: tetrameter for four feet and hexameter for six feet, for example.
Robinson Jeffers, Marianne Moore, and William Carlos Williams are three notable poets who reject the idea that regular accentual meter is critical to English poetry.
The elegy, as a reflection on a death, on a sorrow more generally, or on something mysterious, may be classified as a form of lyric poetry.
The chief device of ancient Hebrew Biblical poetry, including many of the psalms, was ''parallelism'', a rhetorical structure in which successive lines reflected each other in grammatical structure, sound structure, notional content, or all three.
In addition to a boom in translation, during the Romantic period numerous ancient works were rediscovered.
The formal patterns of meter used in Modern English verse to create rhythm no longer dominate contemporary English poetry.
Satirical poets outside England include Poland's Ignacy Krasicki, Azerbaijan's Sabir and Portugal's Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage.
East Asian verse dramas also include Japanese Noh.
The lines are generally end-stopped, considered as a series of couplets, and exhibit verbal parallelism as a key poetic device.
Among its other rules, the jintishi rules regulate the tonal variations within a poem, including the use of set patterns of the four tones of Middle Chinese The basic form of jintishi (lushi) has eight lines in four couplets, with parallelism between the lines in the second and third couplets.
Languages vary in the richness of their rhyming structures; Italian, for example, has a rich rhyming structure permitting maintenance of a limited set of rhymes throughout a lengthy poem.
While light poetry is sometimes condemned as doggerel, or thought of as poetry composed casually, humor often makes a serious point in a subtle or subversive way.
The rejection of traditional forms and structures for poetry that began in the first half of the 20th century coincided with a questioning of the purpose and meaning of traditional definitions of poetry and of distinctions between poetry and prose, particularly given examples of poetic prose and prosaic poetry.
While some examples of earlier prose strike modern readers as poetic, prose poetry is commonly regarded as having originated in 19th-century France, where its practitioners included Aloysius Bertrand, Charles Baudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud and Stéphane Mallarmé.
Greek tragedy in verse dates to the 6th century B.C., and may have been an influence on the development of Sanskrit drama, just as Indian drama in turn appears to have influenced the development of the ''bianwen'' verse dramas in China, forerunners of Chinese Opera.
Kindred forms of resonance may exist, between individual verses, in their patterns of rhyme or rhythm.
Another element of poetic diction can be the use of vivid imagery for effect.
Much narrative poetry—such as Scottish and English ballads, and Baltic and Slavic heroic poems—is performance poetry with roots in a preliterate oral tradition.
Aristotle wrote in the ''Poetics'' that "the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor."
des'''cribe''', In'''clude''', re'''tract''')
Some classical poetry forms, such as Venpa of the Tamil language, had rigid grammars (to the point that they could be expressed as a context-free grammar) which ensured a rhythm.
Vivid images are often endowed with symbolism or metaphor.
Some forms of poetry carry a consistent and well-defined rhyming scheme, such as the chant royal or the rubaiyat, while other poetic forms have variable rhyme schemes.
Odes are often intended to be recited or sung by two choruses (or individuals), with the first reciting the strophe, the second the antistrophe, and both together the epode.
In Arabic, Hebrew and Chinese poetry, the visual presentation of finely calligraphed poems has played an important part in the overall effect of many poems.
Iambic pentameter and dactylic hexameter were later used by a number of poets, including William Shakespeare and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, respectively.
Today, throughout the world, poetry often incorporates poetic form and diction from other cultures and from the past, further confounding attempts at definition and classification that were once sensible within a tradition such as the Western canon.
Languages can rely on either pitch, such as in Vedic Sanskrit or Ancient Greek, or tone.
More recently, thinkers have struggled to find a definition that could encompass formal differences as great as those between Chaucer's ''Canterbury Tales'' and Matsuo Bashō's ''Oku no Hosomichi'', as well as differences in context spanning Tanakh religious poetry, love poetry, and rap.
Sonnets are particularly associated with high poetic diction, vivid imagery, and romantic love, largely due to the influence of Petrarch as well as of early English practitioners such as Edmund Spenser (who gave his name to the Spenserian sonnet), Michael Drayton, and Shakespeare, whose sonnets are among the most famous in English poetry, with twenty being included in the ''Oxford Book of English Verse''.
Poetry uses forms and conventions to suggest differential interpretation to words, or to evoke emotive responses.
Within this form of poetry the most important variations are "folk song" styled verse (''yuefu''), "old style" verse (''gushi''), "modern style" verse (''jintishi'').
Consonance occurs where a consonant sound is repeated throughout a sentence without putting the sound only at the front of a word.
Registers in poetry can range from strict employment of ordinary speech patterns, as favoured in much late-20th-century prosody, through to highly ornate uses of language, as in medieval and Renaissance poetry.
Similarly, in the best poetry written in classic styles there will be departures from strict form for emphasis or effect.
Syllable-timed languages include Latin, Catalan, French, Leonese, Galician and Spanish.
Thus, "iambic pentameter" is a meter comprising five feet per line, in which the predominant kind of foot is the "iamb".
However, a number of variations to the established meter are common, both to provide emphasis or attention to a given foot or line and to avoid boring repetition.
Similarly, "dactylic hexameter", comprises six feet per line, of which the dominant kind of foot is the "dactyl".
The villanelle has been used regularly in the English language since the late 19th century by such poets as Dylan Thomas, W. H. Auden, and Elizabeth Bishop.
Described below are some common forms of poetry widely used across a number of languages.
The antistrophes of the ode possess similar metrical structures and, depending on the tradition, similar rhyme structures.
Different traditions and genres of poetry tend to use different meters, ranging from the Shakespearean iambic pentameter and the Homeric dactylic hexameter to the anapestic tetrameter used in many nursery rhymes.
Broadly it subsumes epic poetry, but the term "narrative poetry" is often reserved for smaller works, generally with more appeal to human interest.
Poetry is often separated into lines on a page.
Tanka were written as early as the Asuka period by such poets as Kakinomoto no Hitomaro, at a time when Japan was emerging from a period where much of its poetry followed Chinese form.
''Shi'' () Is the main type of Classical Chinese poetry.
For example, a couplet may be two lines with identical meters which rhyme or two lines held together by a common meter alone.
In addition to specific forms of poems, poetry is often thought of in terms of different genres and subgenres.
Emerson had maintained that in the debate concerning poetic structure where either "form" or "fact" could predominate, that one need simply "Ask the fact for the form."
Each line has an identical meter.
Edgar Allan Poe is sometimes seen as the "father of speculative poetry".
Metrical rhythm generally involves precise arrangements of stresses or syllables into repeated patterns called feet within a line.
Many poetic dictions use repetitive phrases for effect, either a short phrase (such as Homer's "rosy-fingered dawn" or "the wine-dark sea") or a longer refrain.
Epic poetry is a genre of poetry, and a major form of narrative literature.
Dactylic hexameter was the traditional meter of Greek epic poetry, the earliest extant examples of which are the works of Homer and Hesiod.
His life and poems have been the subject of much analysis, commentary and interpretation, influencing post-fourteenth century Persian writing more than any other author.
In more developed, closed or "received" poetic forms, the rhyming scheme, meter and other elements of a poem are based on sets of rules, ranging from the relatively loose rules that govern the construction of an elegy to the highly formalized structure of the ghazal or villanelle.
In the Petrarchan sonnet, the turn tends to fall around the division between the first two quatrains and the sestet, while English sonnets usually place it at or near the beginning of the closing couplet.
In many forms of poetry, stanzas are interlocking, so that the rhyming scheme or other structural elements of one stanza determine those of succeeding stanzas.
Much modern poetry reflects a critique of poetic tradition, playing with and testing, among other things, the principle of euphony itself, sometimes altogether forgoing rhyme or set rhythm.
Some Modernist poets have made the placement of individual lines or groups of lines on the page an integral part of the poem's composition.
One of the most famous poet in this type of poetry is Hafez.
Thus, Biblical poetry relies much less on metrical feet to create rhythm, but instead creates rhythm based on much larger sound units of lines, phrases and sentences.
Common forms include the limerick, the clerihew, and the double dactyl.
At times, this complements the poem's rhythm through visual caesuras of various lengths, or creates juxtapositions so as to accentuate meaning, ambiguity or irony, or simply to create an aesthetically pleasing form.
Derek Walcott won a Nobel prize to a great extent on the basis of his epic, ''Omeros''.
