Adult male polar bears weigh  and measure  in total length.
Companies such as Coca-Cola, Polar Beverages, Nelvana, Bundaberg Rum, and Good Humor-Breyers have used images of the polar bear in advertising, while Fox's Glacier Mints have featured a polar bear named Peppy as the brand mascot since 1922.
Nevertheless, polar bears are listed as "Vulnerable" under criterion A3c, which indicates an expected population decrease of ≥30% over the next three generations (~34.5 years) due to "decline in area of occupancy, extent of occurrence and/or quality of habitat".
Although seal predation is the primary and an indispensable way of life for most polar bears, when alternatives are present they are quite flexible.
These alternatives may reduce the rate of weight loss of bears when on land.
Then they begin the long walk from the denning area to the sea ice, where the mother can once again catch seals.
He chose the scientific name ''Ursus maritimus'', the Latin for 'maritime bear', due to the animal's native habitat.
In September 2015, the polar bear range states agreed upon a "circumpolar action plan" describing their conservation strategy for polar bears.
Polar bears are especially susceptible to ''Trichinella'', a parasitic roundworm they contract through cannibalism, although infections are usually not fatal.
The bear family, Ursidae, is thought to have split off from other carnivorans about 38 million years ago.
Member countries agreed to place restrictions on recreational and commercial hunting, ban hunting from aircraft and icebreakers, and conduct further research.
During this time, cubs playfully imitate the mother's hunting methods in preparation for later life.
When stalking land animals, such as muskox, reindeer, and even willow ptarmigan (''Lagopus lagopus''), polar bears appear to make use of vegetative cover and wind direction to bring them as close to their prey as possible before attacking.
The claws are deeply scooped on the underside to assist in digging in the ice of the natural habitat.
Environment Canada also banned the export from Canada of fur, claws, skulls and other products from polar bears harvested in Baffin Bay as of 1 January 2010.
tyrannus'' was significantly larger than the living subspecies.
Unlike brown and black bears, polar bears are capable of fasting for up to several months during late summer and early fall, when they cannot hunt for seals because the sea is unfrozen.
The most accurate counts require flying a helicopter in the Arctic climate to find polar bears, shooting a tranquilizer dart at the bear to sedate it, and then tagging the bear.
They also in places prey heavily upon the harp seal (''Pusa groenlandica'') or the harbor seal.
Polar bear population sizes and trends are difficult to estimate accurately because they occupy remote home ranges and exist at low population densities.
Polar bears are thought to have diverged from a population of brown bears that became isolated during a period of glaciation in the Pleistocene or from the eastern part of Siberia, (from Kamchatka and the Kolym Peninsula).
Subadults may also be forced to accept a half-eaten carcass if they kill a seal but cannot defend it from larger polar bears.
When kept in captivity in warm, humid conditions, the fur may turn a pale shade of green due to algae growing inside the guard hairs.
Yet, they have often been seen playing together for hours at a time and even sleeping in an embrace, and polar bear zoologist Nikita Ovsianikov has described adult males as having "well-developed friendships."
The skulls of killed polar bears were buried at specific sacred sites and altars, called ''sedyangi'', were constructed out of the skulls.
They can occasionally drift widely with the sea ice, and there have been anecdotal sightings as far south as Berlevåg on the Norwegian mainland and the Kuril Islands in the Sea of Okhotsk.
Freshwater is limited in these environments because it is either locked up in snow or saline.
Unlike grizzly bears, polar bears are not territorial.
A boar (adult male) weighs around , while a sow (adult female) is about half that size.
Polar bears have a wide range of vocalisations, including bellows, roars, growls, chuffs and purrs.
This study illustrates the polar bear's dietary flexibility but it does not represent its life history elsewhere.
Constantine John Phipps was the first to describe the polar bear as a distinct species in 1774.
The cheek teeth are smaller and more jagged than in the brown bear, and the canines are larger and sharper.
Because of their dependence on the sea ice, polar bears are classified as marine mammals.
(0.8% in the 1970s, 7.1% in the 1980s, and 14.6% in the 1990s) Nunavut polar bear biologist, Mitchell Taylor, who was formerly responsible for polar bear conservation in the territory, has insisted that bear numbers are being sustained under current hunting limits.
In their southern range, especially near Hudson Bay and James Bay, Canadian polar bears endure all summer without sea ice to hunt from.
The Yupik also refer to the bear as ''nanuuk'' in Siberian Yupik.
For thousands of years, the polar bear has been a key figure in the material, spiritual, and cultural life of circumpolar peoples, and polar bears remain important in their cultures.
After the mother leaves, sibling cubs sometimes travel and share food together for weeks or months.
The human-like posture of bears when standing and sitting, and the resemblance of a skinned bear carcass to the human body, have probably contributed to the belief that the spirits of humans and bears were interchangeable.
The United States began regulating hunting in 1971 and adopted the Marine Mammal Protection Act in 1972.
In Hudson Bay, James Bay, and some other areas, the ice melts completely each summer (an event often referred to as "ice-floe breakup"), forcing polar bears to go onto land and wait through the months until the next freeze-up.
The polar bear is among the most sexually dimorphic of mammals, surpassed only by the pinnipeds such as elephant seals.
The polar bear's biology is specialized to require large amounts of fat from marine mammals, and it cannot derive sufficient caloric intake from terrestrial food.
In Russia, polar bear furs were already being commercially traded in the 14th century, though it was of low value compared to Arctic fox or even reindeer fur.
This has supported the popularity of the polar bear, and it has since become one of a collection of creatures who are associated with Christmas, including penguins, reindeer and the European robin.
In 2010, the 2005 increase was partially reversed.
The causes of death in wild adult polar bears are poorly understood, as carcasses are rarely found in the species's frigid habitat.
The bear is ''umka'' in the Chukchi language.
These areas, known as the "Arctic ring of life", have high biological productivity in comparison to the deep waters of the high Arctic.
While most of that quota is hunted by the indigenous Inuit people, a growing share is sold to recreational hunters.
The 42 teeth of a polar bear reflect its highly carnivorous diet.
Hunters commonly used teams of dogs to distract the bear, allowing the hunter to spear the bear or shoot it with arrows at closer range.
In the wild, old polar bears eventually become too weak to catch food, and gradually starve to death.
The oldest wild bears on record died at age 32, whereas the oldest captive was a female who died in 1991, age 43.
In recent years, polar bears in the Arctic have undertaken longer than usual swims to find prey, possibly resulting in four recorded drownings in the unusually large ice pack regression of 2005.
On average, each litter has two cubs.
In Alaska, the effects of sea ice shrinkage have contributed to higher mortality rates in polar bear cubs, and have led to changes in the denning locations of pregnant females.
The evidence from DNA analysis is more complex.
Unlike the brown bear, polar bears in captivity are rarely overweight or particularly large, possibly as a reaction to the warm conditions of most zoos.
Between 1987 and 2004, the Western Hudson Bay population declined by 22%, although the population is currently listed as "stable".
Their distinctive appearance and their association with the Arctic have made polar bears popular icons, especially in those areas where they are native.
Researchers tracked 52 sows in the southern Beaufort Sea off Alaska with GPS system collars; no boars were involved in the study due to males' necks being too thick for the GPS-equipped collars.
The polar bear is the mascot of Bowdoin College in Maine and the University of Alaska Fairbanks (see also Alaska Nanooks) and was chosen as mascot for the 1988 Winter Olympics held in Calgary.
Cubs are especially playful as well.
Adult females are roughly half the size of males and normally weigh , measuring  in length.
However, since polar bear fur has always played a marginal commercial role, data on the historical harvest is fragmentary.
Due to the absence of human development in its remote habitat, it retains more of its original range than any other extant carnivore.
Polar bears hunt their preferred food of seals from the edge of sea ice, often living off fat reserves when no sea ice is present.
Only once the spirit was appeased would the skull be separated from the skin, taken beyond the bounds of the homestead, and placed in the ground, facing north.
The white coat usually yellows with age.
Annual ice contains areas of water that appear and disappear throughout the year as the weather changes.
The body condition of polar bears has declined during this period; the average weight of lone (and likely pregnant) female polar bears was approximately  in 1980 and  in 2004.
Researchers do not know whether or not this is a new behaviour; before polar ice shrinkage, they opined that there was probably neither the need nor opportunity to swim such long distances.
Estimates of total historical harvest suggest that from the beginning of the 18th century, roughly 400 to 500 animals were being harvested annually in northern Eurasia, reaching a peak of 1,300 to 1,500 animals in the early 20th century, and falling off as the numbers began dwindling.
The Western Hudson Bay subpopulation is unusual in that its female polar bears sometimes wean their cubs at only one and a half years.
The Canadian Toonie (two-dollar coin) features the image of a polar bear and both the Northwest Territories and Nunavut license plates in Canada are in the shape of a polar bear.
The Soviet Union banned the harvest of polar bears in 1956; however, poaching continued and is estimated to pose a serious threat to the polar bear population.
The polar bear's most common hunting method is called ''still-hunting'': The bear uses its excellent sense of smell to locate a seal breathing hole, and crouches nearby in silence for a seal to appear.
The fur was used in particular to make trousers and, by the Nenets, to make galoshes-like outer footwear called ''tobok''; the meat is edible, despite some risk of trichinosis; the fat was used in food and as a fuel for lighting homes, alongside seal and whale blubber; sinews were used as thread for sewing clothes; the gallbladder and sometimes heart were dried and powdered for medicinal purposes; the large canine teeth were highly valued as talismans.
Problematic interactions between polar bears and humans, such as foraging by bears in garbage dumps, have historically been more prevalent in years when ice-floe breakup occurred early and local polar bears were relatively thin.
By 2080, they could disappear from Greenland entirely and from the northern Canadian coast, leaving only dwindling numbers in the interior Arctic Archipelago.
While they are rare north of 88°, there is evidence that they range all the way across the Arctic, and as far south as James Bay in Canada.
However, because neither species can survive long in the other's ecological niche, and because they have different morphology, metabolism, social and feeding behaviours, and other phenotypic characteristics, the two bears are generally classified as separate species.
The polar bear is the most carnivorous member of the bear family, and throughout most of its range, its diet primarily consists of ringed (''Pusa hispida'') and bearded seals (''Erignathus barbatus'').
The dental formula is
Until 2005 Greenland placed no limit on hunting by indigenous people.
Whereas brown bears often maul a person and then leave, polar bear attacks are more likely to be predatory and are almost always fatal.
Most brown bears have about 2 percent genetic material from polar bears, but one population, the ABC Islands bears has between 5 percent and 10 percent polar bear genes, indicating more frequent and recent mating.
However, evidence of hybrids between polar bears and brown bears, and of the recent evolutionary divergence of the two species, does not support the establishment of this separate genus, and the accepted scientific name is now therefore ''Ursus maritimus'', as Phipps originally proposed.
They were also diving to feed on blue mussels and other underwater food sources like the green sea urchin.
As of 2015, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) reports that the global population of polar bears is 22,000 to 31,000, and the current population trend is unknown.
During the same time periods, DDT was notably lower in the Western Hudson Bay population only.
Polar bears sometimes like to go fishing where they swim underwater to catch fish like the Arctic charr or the fourhorn sculpin.
The Inuit and Alaska Natives have many folk tales featuring the bears including legends in which bears are humans when inside their own houses and put on bear hides when going outside, and stories of how the constellation that is said to resemble a great bear surrounded by dogs came into being.
In Greenland, hunting restrictions were first introduced in 1994 and expanded by executive order in 2005.
This distinction has since been invalidated.
The bear may lay in wait for several hours.
After several years of negotiations, Russia and the United States signed an agreement in October 2000 to jointly set quotas for indigenous subsistence hunting in Alaska and Chukotka.
In two areas where harvest levels have been increased based on increased sightings, science-based studies have indicated declining populations, and a third area is considered data-deficient.
After feeding, polar bears wash themselves with water or snow.
However, in 2006 it imposed a limit of 150, while also allowed recreational hunting for the first time.
There are 19 generally recognized, discrete subpopulations, though polar bears are thought to exist only in low densities in the area of the Arctic Basin.
Rising temperatures cause the sea ice to melt earlier in the year, driving the bears to shore before they have built sufficient fat reserves to survive the period of scarce food in the late summer and early fall.
Polar bear fieldwork can also be hazardous to researchers.
They were traded in the villages of the lower Yenisei and Khatanga rivers to the forest-dwelling peoples further south, who would sew them into their hats as protection against brown bears.
Polar bear fur consists of a layer of dense underfur and an outer layer of guard hairs, which appear white to tan but are actually transparent.
For the polar bears that currently den on multi-year ice, increased ice mobility may result in longer distances for mothers and young cubs to walk when they return to seal-hunting areas in the spring.
While not unheard of but still uncommon, polar bears have been sighted increasingly in larger numbers ashore, staying on the mainland for longer periods of time during the summer months, particularly in North Canada, traveling farther inland.
Scientists have responded by noting that hungry bears may be congregating around human settlements, leading to the illusion that populations are higher than they actually are.
Ringed seals are born weighing  and grown to an estimated average weight of only .
Although the United States government has proposed that polar bears be transferred to Appendix I of CITES, which would ban all international trade in polar bear parts, polar bears currently remain listed under Appendix II.
It has been claimed that polar bears will be able to adapt to terrestrial food sources as the sea ice they use to hunt seals disappears.
t. platyrhynchus''), which weigh only  as adults, as well as the barren-ground caribou (''R.
Many chemicals, such as PCBs and DDT, have been internationally banned due to the recognition of their harm on the environment.
As predicted by Allen's rule for a northerly animal, the legs are stocky and the ears and tail are small.
Almost all parts of captured animals had a use.
Thawing of permafrost would affect the bears who traditionally den underground, and warm winters could result in den roofs collapsing or having reduced insulative value.
The numbers taken grew rapidly in the 1960s, peaking around 1968 with a global total of 1,250 bears that year.
Importing products made from polar bears had been prohibited from 1972 to 1994 under the Marine Mammal Protection Act, and restricted between 1994 and 2008.
Ten of the sows had a cub swim with them and after a year, six cubs survived.
Since then, the trend seems to have discontinued, with tissue concentrations of PCBs declining between studies performed from 1989 to 1993 and studies performed from 1996 to 2002.
In the den, she enters a dormant state similar to hibernation.
As the distance increases between the pack ice and the coast, females must swim longer distances to reach favored denning areas on land.
Steven Amstrup and other U.S. Geological Survey scientists have predicted two-thirds of the world's polar bears may disappear by 2050, based on moderate projections for the shrinking of summer sea ice caused by climate change, though the validity of this study has been debated.
The permit process required that the bear be taken from an area with quotas based on sound management principles.
Maternity dens, used by pregnant females and by females with infants, can also be disturbed by nearby oil exploration and development.
Adult male bearded seals, at  are too large for a female bear to overtake, and so are potential prey only for mature male bears.
Here, their food ecology shows their dietary flexibility.
The hollow guard hairs of a polar bear coat were once thought to act as fiber-optic tubes to conduct light to its black skin, where it could be absorbed; however, this hypothesis was disproved by a study in 1998.
The Inuit refer to the animal as ''nanook'' (transliterated as ''nanuq'' in the Inupiat language).
Because of the way polar bear hunting quotas are managed in Canada, attempts to discourage sport hunting would actually increase the number of bears killed in the short term.
Canada has allowed sport hunters accompanied by local guides and dog-sled teams since 1970, but the practice was not common until the 1980s.
The key danger posed by climate change is malnutrition or starvation due to habitat loss.
At up to  and a typical adult mass range of , a walrus can be more than twice the bear's weight, and has up to -long ivory tusks that can be used as formidable weapons.
Polar bears have long provided important raw materials for Arctic peoples, including the Inuit, Yupik, Chukchi, Nenets, Russian Pomors and others.
When the ice floes break up in the fall, ending the possibility of hunting, each pregnant female digs a ''maternity den'' consisting of a narrow entrance tunnel leading to one to three chambers.
The effects of climate change are most profound in the southern part of the polar bear's range, and this is indeed where significant degradation of local populations has been observed.
Compared with its closest relative, the brown bear, the polar bear has a more elongated body build and a longer skull and nose.
A widespread legend tells that polar bears cover their black noses with their paws when hunting.
Polar bears exposed to oil spill conditions have been observed to lick the oil from their fur, leading to fatal kidney failure.
Polar bears diverged from brown bears 400,000–600,000 years ago and have survived past periods of climate fluctuation.
However, it is the only living marine mammal with powerful, large limbs and feet that allow them to cover miles on foot and run on land.
The Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 afforded polar bears some protection in the United States.
The relationship between ringed seals and polar bears is so close that the abundance of ringed seals in some areas appears to regulate the density of polar bears, while polar bear predation in turn regulates density and reproductive success of ringed seals.
For decades, large-scale hunting raised international concern for the future of the species, but populations rebounded after controls and quotas began to take effect.
If the seal does not notice, the bear creeps to within  of the seal and then suddenly rushes forth to attack.
The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of the polar bear diverged from the brown bear, ''Ursus arctos'', roughly 150,000 years ago.
An oil spill in the Arctic would most likely concentrate in the areas where polar bears and their prey are also concentrated, such as sea ice leads.
However, due to the very small human population around the Arctic, such attacks are rare.
In August 2011, Environment Canada published a national polar bear conservation strategy.
It was believed that the "little nephew" (the brown bear) would not dare to attack a man wearing the tooth of its powerful "big uncle" (the polar bear).
The Eurasian population is broken up into the eastern Greenland, Barents Sea, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, and Chukchi Sea subpopulations, though there is considerable uncertainty about the structure of these populations due to limited mark and recapture data.
This status was re-evaluated and confirmed in April 1999, November 2002, and April 2008.
Modern methods of tracking polar bear populations have been implemented only since the mid-1980s, and are expensive to perform consistently over a large area.
The earliest recorded birth of polar bears in captivity was on 11 October 2011 in the Toronto Zoo.
Their concentrations in polar bear tissues continued to rise for decades after being banned as these chemicals spread through the food chain.
A study in Hudson Bay indicated that both the reproductive success and the maternal weight of females peaked in their mid-teens.
Polar bears have a generally polygynous mating system; recent genetic testing of mothers and cubs, however, has uncovered cases of litters in which cubs have different fathers.
Norway passed a series of increasingly strict regulations from 1965 to 1973, and has completely banned hunting since then.
The length of these swims ranged from most of a day to ten days.
The guard hair is  over most of the body.
Polar bears are also popular in fiction, particularly in books aimed at children or teenagers.
Current estimates put the global population at between 20,000 and 25,000 or 22,000 and 31,000.
Although stereotyped as being voraciously aggressive, they are normally cautious in confrontations, and often choose to escape rather than fight.
t. groenlandicus''), which is about twice as heavy as that.
Brown bears tend to dominate polar bears in disputes over carcasses, and dead polar bear cubs have been found in brown bear dens.
Most maternity dens are in snowdrifts, but may also be made underground in permafrost if it is not sufficiently cold yet for snow.
When pregnant, however, females can weigh as much as .
Compared to the Antarctic, where there is no major surface predator, Arctic seals use more breathing holes per individual, appear more restless when hauled out on the ice, and rarely defecate on the ice.
In 2007, the Russian government made subsistence hunting legal for indigenous Chukotkan peoples only, a move supported by Russia's most prominent bear researchers and the World Wide Fund for Nature as a means to curb poaching.
Polar bears are studied to gain understanding of what is happening throughout the Arctic, because at-risk polar bears are often a sign of something wrong with the Arctic marine ecosystem.
The guiding of sport hunters provides meaningful employment and an important source of income for northern communities in which economic opportunities are few.
Around the Beaufort Sea, however, mature males reportedly average .
The dump in Churchill, Manitoba was closed in 2006 to protect bears, and waste is now recycled or transported to Thompson, Manitoba.
Among young males in particular, play-fighting may be a means of practicing for serious competition during mating seasons later in life.
Of the 19 recognized polar bear subpopulations, three are declining, six are stable, one is increasing, and nine have insufficient data, as of 2014.
Whereas northern communities kill all the polar bears they are permitted to take each year, only half of sport hunters with permits actually manage to kill a polar bear.
Risks to the polar bear include climate change, pollution in the form of toxic contaminants, conflicts with shipping, oil and gas exploration and development, and human-bear interactions including harvesting and possible stresses from recreational polar-bear watching.
Due to warming air temperatures, ice-floe breakup in western Hudson Bay is currently occurring three weeks earlier than it did 30 years ago, reducing the duration of the polar bear feeding season.
When the seal exhales, the bear smells its breath, reaches into the hole with a forepaw, and drags it out onto the ice.
After killing the animal, its head and skin were removed and cleaned and brought into the home, a feast was held in the hunting camp in its honor.
This kind of social interaction is uncommon; it is far more typical for polar bears to behave aggressively towards dogs.
They still manage to consume some seals, but they are food-deprived in summer as only marine mammal carcasses are an important alternative without sea ice, especially carcasses of the beluga whale.
Since 1994, hundreds of sport-hunted polar bear trophies have been imported into the U.S.
Warnings about the future of the polar bear are often contrasted with the fact that worldwide population estimates have increased over the past 50 years and are relatively stable today.
It banned hunting (except by indigenous subsistence hunters), banned importing of polar bear parts (except polar bear pelts taken legally in Canada), and banned the harassment of polar bears.
Polar bears are superbly insulated by up to  of adipose tissue, their hide and their fur; they overheat at temperatures above , and are nearly invisible under infrared photography.
In 2010, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment published a strategy for polar bear conservation in Russia.
Between November and February, cubs are born blind, covered with a light down fur, and weighing less than , but in captivity they might be delivered in the earlier months.
The largest polar bear on record, reportedly weighing , was a male shot at Kotzebue Sound in northwestern Alaska in 1960.
A comparison of the nuclear genome of polar bears with that of brown bears revealed a different pattern, the two forming genetically distinct clades that diverged approximately 603,000 years ago, although the latest research is based on analysis of the complete genomes (rather than just the mitochondria or partial nuclear genomes) of polar and brown bears, and establishes the divergence of polar and brown bears at 400,000 years ago.
When sea ice is unavailable during summer and early autumn, some populations live off fat reserves for months at a time, as polar bears do not 'hibernate' any time of the year.
Yet, polar bears will very seldom attack full-grown adult walruses, with the largest male walrus probably invulnerable unless otherwise injured or incapacitated.
Fifty long-distance swims were recorded; the longest at , with an average of .
A male may follow the tracks of a breeding female for  or more, and after finding her engage in intense fighting with other males over mating rights, fights that often result in scars and broken teeth.
Agreements have been made between countries to co-manage their shared polar bear subpopulations.
In recent years, polar bears have approached coastal villages in Chukotka more frequently due to the shrinking of the sea ice, endangering humans and raising concerns that illegal hunting would become even more prevalent.
The polar bear's claws are short and stocky compared to those of the brown bear, perhaps to serve the former's need to grip heavy prey and ice.
In 2005, the government of Nunavut increased the quota from 400 to 518 bears, despite protests from the IUCN Polar Bear Specialist Group.
