The electricity generation sector in Poland is largely fossil-fuel–based.
Therefore, the country is a net importer of oil and natural gas.
The inter-war period heralded in a new era of Polish politics.
This homogeneity is a result of post World War II deportations ordered by the Soviet authorities, who wished to remove the sizeable Polish minorities from Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine and repatriation of Ukrainians from Poland to the Soviet Union (see territorial changes of Poland and historical demography of Poland for details).
They will attend this school for three years during classes 7, 8, and 9.
The armed forces are being re-organised according to NATO standards, and since 2010, the transition to an entirely contract-based military has been completed.
Currently, it is the line with highest railway speed in Poland.
At the end of the 18th century, Polish classical music evolved into national forms like the polonaise.
They included the notorious Treblinka, Majdanek and Auschwitz killing centers.
Nonetheless, a number of ancient structures has survived: castles, churches, and stately homes, often unique in the regional or European context.
This can be said to stem largely from the reign of King Casimir III the Great and his acceptance of Poland's Jewish community, in a time when most of Europe recessed into antisemitic moods and actions.
In addition to these newly built roads, many local and regional roads are being fixed as part of a national programme to rebuild all roads in Poland.
A 2010 article in ''Rzeczpospolita'' reported that in a 2008 study three-quarters of Poles were against gay marriage and the adoption of children by gay couples.
The most important mission of the armed forces is the defence of Polish territorial integrity and Polish interests abroad.
Over 40 research and development centers and 4,500 researchers make Poland the biggest research and development hub in Central and Eastern Europe.
In 2012, the process of converting to Digital terrestrial television started, to be compatible with the rest of Europe.
In 2015, the nation had  of railway track.
Since the opening of the labor market in the European Union, Poland experienced a mass emigration of over 2.3 million abroad, mainly due to higher wages offered abroad, and due to the raise in levels of unemployment following the global Great Recession of 2008.
To date only the first instance has occurred.
Afterwards no major uprising was witnessed in the Russian-controlled Congress Poland, and Poles resorted instead to fostering economic and cultural self-improvement.
State subsidised healthcare is available to all Polish citizens who are covered by this general health insurance program.
According to a 2007 survey, 72% of respondents were not opposed to religious instruction in public schools; alternative courses in ethics are available only in one percent of the entire public educational system.
Poland was the 15th (12th sovereign) country to introduce universal women's suffrage.
The second highest mountain group in Poland is the Beskids, whose highest peak is Babia Góra, at .
Some estimates put the number of Poles involved in rescue efforts at up to 3 million, and credit Poles with sheltering up to 450,000 Jews.
The current position of the Polish Air Force is much the same; it has routinely taken part in Baltic Air Policing assignments, but otherwise, with the exception of a number of units serving in Afghanistan, has seen no active combat since the end of the Second World War.
The lake districts form part of the Baltic Ridge, a series of moraine belts along the southern shore of the Baltic Sea.
The country now has a developing expressway network composed of motorways such as the A1, A2, A4, A8, A18 and express roads such as the S1, S3, S5, S7, S8.
All of Chopin's works involve the piano and are technically demanding, emphasising nuance and expressive depth.
The country's largest agglomeration is the Silesian Metropolis.
The highest part of the Carpathians is the Tatra Mountains, along Poland's southern border.
Famous sites of Roman Catholic pilgrimage in Poland include the Monastery of Jasna Góra in the southern Polish city of Częstochowa, Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń, Divine Mercy Sanctuary, Kraków.
In 2004, GDP growth equaled 5.4%, in 2005 3.3% and in 2006 6.2%.
Poland is the sixth most populous member state of the European Union and has a grand total of 51 representatives in the European Parliament.
With almost ten thousand closed bodies of water covering more than  each, Poland has one of the highest numbers of lakes in the world.
Today Poland has a very active music scene, with the jazz and metal genres being particularly popular among the contemporary populace.
Restructuring and privatisation of "sensitive sectors" such as coal, steel, rail transport and energy has been continuing since 1990.
Important opera composers of the era were Karol Kurpiński and Stanisław Moniuszko whilst the list of famous soloists and composers included Henryk Wieniawski, Juliusz Zarębski.
This tolerance allowed the country to avoid most the religious turmoil that spread over Europe during the 16th century.
As a result of the Holocaust and the post–World War II flight and expulsion of German and Ukrainian populations, Poland has become overwhelmingly Roman Catholic.
Despite widespread objections, the new Polish government accepted the Soviet annexation of the pre-war eastern regions of Poland (in particular the cities of Wilno and Lwów) and agreed to the permanent garrisoning of Red Army units on Poland's territory.
There are over 120 areas designated as landscape parks, along with numerous nature reserves and other protected areas (e.g.
Poland's current constitution was adopted by the National Assembly of Poland on 2 April 1997, approved by a national referendum on 25 May 1997, and came into effect on 17 October 1997.
The Kraków-Częstochowa Upland, the Pieniny, and the Western Tatras consist of limestone, while the High Tatras, the Beskids, and the Karkonosze are made up mainly of granite and basalts.
These lake districts are the Pomeranian Lake District, the Greater Polish Lake District, the Kashubian Lake District, and the Masurian Lake District.
In a 2013 opinion poll conducted by CBOS, 60% of Poles were against homosexual civil partnerships, 72% were against same-sex marriage, 88% were against adoption by same-sex couples, and 68% were against gays and lesbians publicly showing their way of life.
The January Uprising started out as a spontaneous protest by young Poles against conscription into the Imperial Russian Army.
Despite this, the country has for a long time been regarded as having a very tolerant society, which affords equal rights to all people no matter what their ethnic background.
The significance of the event was documented by Gallus Anonymus in his 1118 chronicle.
Serfdom was banned in 1588.
The list of famous Poles begins in earnest with the polymath Mikołaj Kopernik (Nicolaus Copernicus), who studied at the Jagiellonian University founded in 1364 by Casimir the Great from proceeds of his Wieliczka Salt Mine.
The Polish forces in the west were commanded by Lieutenant General Władysław Anders, who had received his command from prime minister of the exiled government Władysław Sikorski.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the seven largest cities in Poland
Outstanding Polish mathematicians formed the Lwów School of Mathematics (with Stefan Banach, Stanisław Mazur, Hugo Steinhaus, Stanisław Ulam) and Warsaw School of Mathematics (with Alfred Tarski, Kazimierz Kuratowski, Wacław Sierpiński).
Tourist destinations include the Baltic Sea coast in the north; the Masurian Lake District and Białowieża Forest in the east; on the south Karkonosze, the Table Mountains and the Tatra Mountains, where Rysy, the highest peak of Poland, and the famous Orla Perć mountain trail are located.
Also, the Polish Navy played a more international role as part of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, providing logistical support for the United States Navy.
In the High Tatras lies Poland's highest point, the north-western summit of Rysy,  in elevation.
However, after World War II, the redrawing of Poland's borders and resulting 'shift' of the country's borders left it with an expanded coastline, thus allowing for far greater access to the sea than was ever previously possible.
The stilt house settlement of Biskupin, occupied by more than one thousand residents, was founded before the 7th century BC by people of the Lusatian culture.
Throughout the period of the partitions, political and cultural repression of the Polish nation led to the organisation of a number of uprisings against the authorities of the occupying Russian, Prussian and Austrian governments.
The Golden Liberty of the nobles began to develop under Casimir's rule, when in return for their military support, the king made a series of concessions to the nobility, and establishing their legal status as superior to that of the townsmen.
Throughout the occupation, many members of the Armia Krajowa, supported by the Polish government in exile, and millions of ordinary Poles – at great risk to themselves and their families – engaged in rescuing Jews from the Nazi Germans.
The results of an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) survey from 2004 showed that Poles worked the second most hours per week of any nationality worldwide.
These reserves are exploited by energy supply companies such as PKN Orlen ("the only Polish company listed in the Fortune Global 500").
The resistance was, however, largely loyal to the exiled government and generally resented the idea of a communist Poland; for this reason, in the summer of 1944 they initiated Operation Tempest, of which the Warsaw Uprising that begun on 1 August 1944 was the best known operation.
As a great composer, Chopin invented the musical form known as the instrumental ballade and made major innovations to the piano sonata, mazurka, waltz, nocturne, polonaise, étude, impromptu and prélude, he was also the composer of a number of polonaises which borrowed heavily from traditional Polish folk music.
During the later part of the 18th century, the Commonwealth made attempts to implement fundamental internal reforms; with the second half of the century bringing a much improved economy, significant population growth and far-reaching progress in the areas of education, intellectual life, art, and especially toward the end of the period, evolution of the social and political system.
After the defeat, the semi-independent Congress Poland lost its constitution, army and legislative assembly, and was integrated more closely with the Russian Empire.
Prior to the last Partition in 1795, tax-paying females were allowed to take part in political life.
The Polish army consists of 65,000 active personnel, whilst the navy and air force respectively employ 14,300 and 26,126 servicemen and women.
In 1939–41, the Soviets had deported hundreds of thousands of Poles out to the most distant parts of the Soviet Union.
The current president is Andrzej Duda and the prime minister is Beata Szydło.
The main course usually includes a serving of meat, such as roast, chicken, or ''kotlet schabowy'' (breaded pork cutlet), vegetables, side dishes and salads, including ''surówka''  – shredded root vegetables with lemon and sugar (carrot, celeriac, seared beetroot) or sauerkraut (, ).
In addition, foreign investors have controlling stakes in nearly 40 commercial banks, which make up 68% of the banking capital.
However, its sole commander-in-chief is the President of the Republic.
Despite this, its text influenced many later democratic movements across the globe.
It is one of only five natural deserts in Europe.
Poland has a long-standing tradition of tolerance towards minorities, as well as an absence of discrimination on the grounds of religion, nationality or race.
The Nazi crimes against the Polish nation claimed the lives of 2.9 million Polish Jews, and 2.8 million ethnic Poles, including Polish academics, doctors, lawyers, nobility, priests and numerous others.
In 2015, more than 50% of Poles declared to speak English - Russian came second and German came third, other commonly spoken languages include French, Italian and Spanish.
As a result, Poland's territory was reduced by 20%, or .
Its major institutions include the Supreme Court of the Republic of Poland (''Sąd Najwyższy''); the Supreme Administrative Court of the Republic of Poland (''Naczelny Sąd Administracyjny''); the Constitutional Tribunal of the Republic of Poland (''Trybunał Konstytucyjny''); and the State Tribunal of the Republic of Poland (''Trybunał Stanu'').
The biggest privatisations have been the sale of the national telecoms firm Telekomunikacja Polska to France Télécom in 2000, and an issue of 30% of the shares in Poland's largest bank, PKO Bank Polski, on the Polish stockmarket in 2004.
His efforts to create an institution of higher learning in Poland were finally rewarded when Pope Urban V granted him permission to open the University of Kraków.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, Poland suffered from a number of dynastic crises during the reigns of the Vasa kings Sigismund III and Władysław IV and found itself engaged in major conflicts with Russia, Sweden and the Ottoman Empire, as well as a series of minor Cossack uprisings.
Alexandre Tansman lived in Paris but had strong connections with Poland.
Finding itself subjected to almost constant warfare and suffering enormous population losses as well as massive damage to its economy, the Commonwealth fell into decline.
Many power plants nationwide use Poland's position as a major European exporter of coal to their advantage by continuing to use coal as the primary raw material in production of their energy.
The richness of Polish forest (per SoEF 2011 statistics) is more than twice as high as European average (with Germany and France at the top), containing 2.304 billion cubic metres of trees.
The classical Silesian baroque is represented by the University in Wrocław.
Until recent decades Russian was commonly learned as a second language, but has been replaced by English as the most common second language studied and spoken.
The Old Town of Poland's capital, Warsaw, was reconstructed after its wartime destruction.
Corporal punishment of children was officially prohibited in 1783.
In 2013, Poland scored 48 out of 129 states in the Energy Sustainability Index.
The Confederation then took over the government.
Despite the political unrest experienced during the partitions, Poland did benefit from large-scale industrialisation and modernisation programs, instituted by the occupying powers, which helped it develop into a more economically coherent and viable entity.
On 10 April 2010, the President of the Republic of Poland, Lech Kaczyński, along with 89 other high-ranking Polish officials died in a plane crash near Smolensk, Russia.
Rising above these lowlands is a geographical region comprising the four hilly districts of moraines and moraine-dammed lakes formed during and after the Pleistocene ice age.
Also, in the 16th century, Anabaptists from the Netherlands and Germany settled in Poland—after being persecuted in Western Europe—and became known as the Vistula delta Mennonites.
Larger and more specialised medical complexes tend only to be found in larger cities, with some even more specialised units located only in the capital, Warsaw.
Poland's national security goal is to further integrate with NATO and European defence, economic, and political institutions through the modernisation and reorganisation of its military.
As agreed earlier in the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, Poland was split into two occupied zones, one subdivided by Nazi Germany, while the other, including all of eastern Kresy fell under the control of the Soviet Union.
The Polish expeditionary corps, which was controlled by the exiled pre-war government based in London, played an important role in the Italian and North African Campaigns.
A total of 2 million Polish troops fought with the armies of the three occupying powers, and 450,000 died.
Russia was aided in achieving its goal when the Targowica Confederation, an organisation of Polish nobles, appealed to the Empress for help.
In the first half of the 20th century, Poland was a flourishing centre of mathematics.
Kraków was the former capital and a relic of Poland's Golden Age of Renaissance.
The military was temporarily, but severely, affected by the loss of many of its top commanders in the wake the 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash near Smolensk, Russia, which killed all 96 passengers and crew, including, among others, the Chief of the Polish Army's General Staff Franciszek Gągor and Polish Air Force commanding general Andrzej Błasik.
Languages having the status of national minority's language are Armenian, Belarusian, Czech, German, Yiddish, Hebrew, Lithuanian, Russian, Slovak and Ukrainian.
The top Ekstraliga division has one of the highest average attendances for any sport in Poland.
In 1807, Napoleon I of France temporarily recreated a Polish state as the satellite Duchy of Warsaw, after a successful Greater Poland Uprising of 1806 against Prussian rule.
In the forests, one also encounters game animals, such as red deer, roe deer and wild boars.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, Poland became a destination for German, Flemish and to a lesser extent Scottish, Danish and Walloon migrants.
Traditional Polish folk music has had a major effect on the works of many well-known Polish composers, and no more so than on Fryderyk Chopin, a widely recognised national hero of the arts.
Salaries vary between the regions: the median wage in the capital city Warsaw was 4,603 PLN (1,177 euro or 1,680 US dollars) while in Kielce it was 3,083 PLN (788 euro or 1125 US dollars).
It is the leading producer in Europe of potatoes and rye (world's second largest in 1989) the world's largest producer of triticale, and one of the more important producers of barley, oats, sugar beets, flax, and fruits.
Structural reforms in health care, education, the pension system, and state administration have resulted in larger-than-expected fiscal pressures.
In 1109, Prince Bolesław III Wrymouth defeated the King of Germany Henry V at the Battle of Hundsfeld, stopping the German march into Poland.
Poland was the first country in the world to prohibit corporal punishment in all its forms.
In 2014, the Prime Minister of Poland, Donald Tusk, was chosen to be President of the European Council.
However, secondary motives for the uprising sought to see Warsaw liberated before the Soviets could reach the capital, so as to underscore Polish sovereignty by empowering the Polish Underground State before the Soviet-backed Polish Committee of National Liberation could assume control.
The government structure centers on the Council of Ministers, led by a prime minister.
Trafficking women is 'illegal and rare' (top results worldwide).
It is called the Błędów Desert, located in the Silesian Voivodeship in southern Poland.
Primarily, it was designed to redress long-standing political defects of the federative Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and its Golden Liberty.
'''Polish''' (''język polski'', ''polszczyzna'') is a Slavic language spoken primarily in Poland and the native language of Poles.
In Poland, freedom of expression is guaranteed by the Article 25 (section I.
This was followed by the 'Deluge', a Swedish invasion of Poland, which marched through the Polish heartlands and ruined the country's population, culture and infrastructure.
At the end of the 6th class when students are 13, students take a compulsory exam that will determine their acceptance and transition into a specific lower secondary school (''gimnazjum, pronounced gheem-nah-sium'') (Middle School/Junior High).
Emergency medical services in Poland are, unlike other services, provided for by local and regional government.
Meanwhile, the Polish Navy was active in the protection of convoys in the North Sea and Atlantic Ocean.
In addition to the lake districts in the north (in Masuria, Pomerania, Kashubia, Lubuskie, and Greater Poland), there is also a large number of mountain lakes in the Tatras, of which the Morskie Oko is the largest in area.
The Polish Tatras, which consist of the High Tatras and the Western Tatras, is the highest mountain group of Poland and of the entire Carpathian range.
Richly decorated attics and arcade loggias are the common elements of the Polish Renaissance architecture, as evident in the City Hall in Poznań.
German planners had in November 1939 called for "the complete destruction" of all Poles and their fate, as well as many other Slavs, was outlined in genocidal ''Generalplan Ost''.
Since the fall of Communism, Poland has become a major venue for large-scale music festivals, chief among which are the Open'er Festival, Opole Festival and Sopot Festival.
Poland has forged a special relationships with Ukraine, with whom it co-hosted the UEFA Euro 2012 football tournament, in an effort to firmly anchor the country within the Western world and provide it with an alternative to aligning itself with the Russian Federation.
An unsuccessful attempt at defending Poland's sovereignty took place in 1794 during the Kościuszko Uprising, where a popular and distinguished general Tadeusz Kosciuszko, who had several years earlier served under Washington in the American Revolutionary War, led Polish insurrectionists against numerically superior Russian forces.
It is largely thanks to him that the such pieces gained great popularity throughout Europe during the 19th century.
Ever since joining the union in 2004, successive Polish governments have pursued policies to increase the country's role in European and regional affairs.
History has not been kind to Poland's architectural monuments.
Also, in the east Poland created the LITPOLUKRBRIG battle groups with Lithuania and Ukraine.
Poland's largest trading partner is Germany.
From 1953 to 2009 Poland was a large contributor to various United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Unlike in many other countries, the ethnic minority rights in Poland are guaranteed directly by the Constitution of Poland (art.
Furthermore, according to the Global Peace Index for 2014, Poland is one of the safest countries in the world to live in.
The country had a particularly large Jewish population prior to World War II, when the Nazi Germany's regime led to the Holocaust.
At its foot lies the mountain lakes of Czarny Staw pod Rysami (Black Lake below Mount Rysy), and Morskie Oko (the Marine Eye).
The first Polish Formula One driver, Robert Kubica, has brought awareness of Formula One racing to Poland.
Three more national parks are projected for Masuria, the Kraków-Częstochowa Upland, and the eastern Beskids.
This continual erosion and deposition has formed cliffs, dunes, and spits, many of which have migrated landwards to close off former lagoons, such as Łebsko Lake in Słowiński National Park.
The largest sea harbours are Szczecin, Świnoujście, Gdańsk, Gdynia, Police and Kołobrzeg and the main coastal resorts - Świnoujście, Międzyzdroje, Kołobrzeg, Łeba, Sopot, Władysławowo and the Hel Peninsula.
The lake with the greatest depth—of more than —is Lake Hańcza in the Wigry Lake District, east of Masuria in Podlaskie Voivodeship.
According to the 2002 census, 36,983,700 people, or 96.74% of the population, consider themselves Polish, while 471,500 (1.23%) declared another nationality, and 774,900 (2.03%) did not declare any nationality.
The 1926 May Coup of Józef Piłsudski turned rule of the Second Polish Republic over to the Sanacja movement.
In 2013, the average life expectancy at birth was 76.45 years
State television operates two mainstream channels, TVP 1 and TVP 2, as well as regional programs for each of the country's 16 voivodeships.
Though rates of religious observance are lower, at 52% or 51% of the Polish Catholics, Poland remains one of the most devoutly religious countries in Europe.
Today, the service is a modern state-owned company that provides a number of standard and express delivery as well as home-delivery services.
In September 1939, World War II started with the invasions of Poland by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union (as part of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact).
The side dishes are usually potatoes, rice or ''kasza'' (cereals).
Despite many positive developments in the region, Poland has found itself in a position where it must seek to defend the rights of ethnic Poles living in the former Soviet Union; this is particularly true of Belarus, where in 2005 the Lukashenko regime launched a campaign against the Polish ethnic minority.
Among the first lakes whose shores were settled are those in the Greater Polish Lake District.
Russia and Prussia, fearing the mere existence of a Polish state, arranged for, and in 1793 executed, the Second Partition of the Commonwealth, which left the country deprived of so much territory that it was practically incapable of independent existence.
In 1466, after the Thirteen Years' War, King Casimir IV Jagiellon gave royal consent to the Peace of Thorn, which created the future Duchy of Prussia, a Polish vassal.
During World War I, all the Allies agreed on the reconstitution of Poland that United States President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed in Point 13 of his Fourteen Points.
On the approval of the Senat, the Sejm also appoints the ombudsman or the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (''Rzecznik Praw Obywatelskich'') for a five-year term.
In 2003, the F-16C Block 52 was chosen as the new general multi-role fighter for the air force, the first deliveries taking place in November 2006.
However, the national government has set targets for the development of renewable energy sources in Poland which should see the portion of power produced by renewable resources climb to 7.5% by 2010 and 15% by 2020.
It is an example of the transition from a centrally planned to a primarily market-based economy.
Polish art has always reflected European trends while maintaining its unique character.
The team won a gold medal in football at the 1972 Summer Olympics and two silver medals, in 1976 and in 1992.
The shift forced the migration of millions of other people, most of whom were Poles, Germans, Ukrainians, and Jews.
At the war's conclusion in 1945, Poland's borders were shifted westwards, resulting in considerable territorial losses.
Some of them have been painstakingly restored, like Wawel Castle, or completely reconstructed after being destroyed in the Second World War, including the Old Town and Royal Castle of Warsaw and the Old Town of Gdańsk.
In 1863, a new Polish uprising against Russian rule began.
Poland has made a distinctive mark in motorcycle speedway racing thanks to Tomasz Gollob, a highly successful Polish rider.
Poland is the birthplace of many distinguished personalities among whom are: Fryderyk Chopin, Maria Skłodowska Curie, Tadeusz Kościuszko, Kazimierz Pułaski, Józef Piłsudski, Lech Wałęsa and Pope John Paul II (Karol Wojtyła).
The Polish Armed Forces took part in the 2003 invasion of Iraq, deploying 2,500 soldiers in the south of that country and commanding the 17-nation Multinational force in Iraq.
During the Spring of Nations (a series of revolutions which swept across Europe), Poles took up arms in the Greater Poland Uprising of 1848 to resist Prussian rule.
Passenger ferries link Poland with Scandinavia all year round; these services are provided from Gdańsk and Świnoujście by Polferries, Stena Line from Gdynia and Unity Line from the Port of Świnoujście.
Since the beginning of the transition to a primarily market-based economy that took place in the early 1990s, Poland has achieved a "very high" ranking on the Human Development Index, as well as gradually improving economic freedom.
Eventually, after several battles the uprising was suppressed by the Prussians, and the Grand Duchy of Posen was striped of its autonomy and completely incorporated into the German Confederation.
The Polish king Władysław II Jagiełło, however, was pressed by the Catholic Church to issue the Edict of Wieluń (1424), outlawing early Protestant Hussitism.
Diomedes Cato, a native-born Italian who lived in Kraków from about the age of five, became a renowned lutenist at the court of Sigismund III, and not only imported some of the musical styles from southern Europe, but blended them with native folk music.
During the war, Poland made the fourth-largest troop contribution to the Allied war effort, after the Soviets, the British, and the Americans.
Kraków Jagiellonian University
One of the most popular video game series developed in Poland includes The Witcher.
In Europe, only Finland has a greater density of lakes.
The area was a point of contention between the Polish and Czechoslovak governments in the past and the two countries fought a brief seven-day war over it in 1919.
Other early compositions, such as the melody of ''Bogurodzica'' and ''Bóg się rodzi'' (a coronation polonaise for Polish kings by an unknown composer), may also date back to this period, however, the first known notable composer, Mikołaj z Radomia, was born and lived in the 15th century.
The president is elected by popular vote every five years.
There were an estimated 3 million Jews living in Poland before the war—less than 300,000 survived.
It is also characteristic in its use of various kinds of noodles the most notable of which are kluski as well as cereals such as ''kasha'' (from the Polish word kasza).
Hospitals in Poland are organised according to the regional administrative structure, resultantly most towns have their own hospital ''(Szpital Miejski)''.
Previously, the speed record had been  since 1985.
Poland's first historically documented ruler, Mieszko I, accepted Christianity with the Baptism of Poland in 966, as the new official religion of his subjects.
The total area of Poland is , making it the 69th largest country in the world and the 9th largest in Europe.
This coast is marked by several spits, coastal lakes (former bays that have been cut off from the sea), and dunes.
This union formed the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the largest and most populous countries of 16th and 17th century Europe.
