Between mid-July and mid-October, ''P.
This species differs from ''P.
annularis'' queens have the tendency to outlive all of the subordinate cofoundresses of their associations.
exclamans'' and ''P.
A limiting factor to nest building is the presence of a suitable overhang that minimizes sun exposure.
Should a foreign organism attempt to land, a female on the nest will engage the arriving wasp with her antennae.
It clusters its nests together in large aggregations, and consumes nectar and other insects.
annularis'' generally takes its food from wooded areas, and not from fields.
Hydrocarbons are present on the surface of workers, males, eggs, and larvae, as well as the surface of the nest and its pedicel.
Should the queen disappear, the previous beta subordinate takes over as the new queen, leading to increased aggression, which may result from the competition to lay eggs.
At that point, the co-foundresses have finished their work of foraging, and remain on the nest from then on.
'''''Polistes annularis''''' (''P.
Typically, the largest and top-ranking female founds a nest and lays the largest percentage of eggs, while subordinates forage.
Through the genotypes of stored sperm, alleles of dead fathers are recovered.
annularis ''seems to nest in aggregations only because viable nesting locations are greatly limited.
Group nesting is especially prevalent and varied in ''P.
This behavior exposes ''P.
The moment that a foundress is established in the association of a new nest, she will from then on never leave that nest and join up with foundresses of a separate nest unless her proper nest is wrecked.
annularis'' tends to form nests in crowded clumps.
annularis'' preys on caterpillars from a large number of lepidopteran families, including the Arctiidae, Saturniidae, Geometridae, Limacodidae, Lymantriidae, Notodontidae, Nymphalidae, Sphingidae, Erebidae, Noctuidae, Amphisbatidae, and Elachistidae.
annularis'' follow that of ''P.
After workers emerge from the eggs, many of the subordinate foundresses disappear; the nest usually loses its original queen before more eggs can be laid at the end of the season.
Ideally, the overhanging structure should block exposure to sunlight for most of the day.
This difference in behavior may be s a direct consequence of the dominance hierarchy.
A common misconception is that the mandibular gland is the anatomical portion shaped like a sac.
In the north, the thorax of ''P.
In males, the most common component is 3-methylnonacosane (21%); in eggs, 3-methylnonacosane makes up 23% of lipids; in larvae 13- and 15-methylnonacosane are the most common (15%).
annularis'' fly back to their nests to consume their stored nectar (which is now honey) and to interact with their  nestmates.
Gland cells are shaped like polygons.
The nest pedicel contains lipids that provoke a necrophoric response from ants, protecting the nest from ant invasion.
Its species name is Latin for "ringed" and it is known for its distinct red body color.
exclamans'' and ''P.
This pattern is also observed in ''P.
This clash may last for several minutes and may escalate into grappling.
This is stored in highly concentrated form in the cells of the nest.
However, queens do develop far larger and more developed ovaries than their subordinates, and often have more mature eggs within.
This allows scientists to access the genotypes of very young embryos and even sperm from spermathecae.
Nest paper and pedicel have much larger hydrocarbon units, between 27 and 31 carbons in length.
annularis'' is very similar in appearance to ''P.
This puzzle is currently unsolved, though it may deal with senescence.
annularis'' cannot tolerate frost, though it has been shown to be able to survive at temperatures below the minimum temperature in the area in which it resides.
However, prey represents only 20% of food resources; the other 80% is liquid.
The queen may lay up to 55% of eggs, while her direct subordinates, named beta subordinates, lay most of the remaining eggs.
Its initial metasomal segment is narrow, a feature that it has in common with ''P.
They may be “making the best of a bad job”, though evidence to indicate this is scant.
Another minor component is N-acetylglucosamine, which is probably bound to the pedicel protein.
2) The real mothers may already have died, increasing the risk of assigning offspring to the wrong surviving mothers.
Additionally, wasps with nests containing honey are significantly more likely to survive the cold winter than those wasps whose nests do not contain honey.
It is currently placed in the New World subgenus ''Aphanilopterus''.
The wasps may either gorge on the honey, or ration it, given that they are social insects.
Queens overwinter, whereas workers do not.
There is geographical variation in coloration between northern and southern populations.
However, it is also known to group its nests in large colonies called aggregations.
The lipids in the nest paper probably function in kin recognition among workers, while those in the pedicel likely deter predators.
This comes at the cost of being able to especially aid closer relatives and thereby improve inclusive fitness.
Unlike other wasps in the genus, ''P.
To distinguish ''P.
Foundresses can be discriminated from workers on the basis of their differential behaviors.
However, selective pressure tends to eliminate any additional foundresses once workers emerge.
The first generation of offspring is composed mainly of female workers, but some males may be present.
annularis'' tends to more severe consequences after worker emergence, despite this change in behavior.
The ability of a foundress to found a nest on her own is likely in correlation to the length of her wings (her body size), the mass of her dehydrated body, and the mass of her body fat.
Lastly, the relatedness between workers and their eggs versus those of the foundress - workers would be more related to their sisters than their own offspring.
Notably, lone foundresses (with no other foundresses in the association) tend to produce far more offspring than do the subordinate co-foundresses of other nests.
Queens are more active on larger and newer nests.
The duct is opened by sclerotized bars in conjunction with the hypopharynx.
Colonies are on average 60 to 65% successful at producing workers and reproductives, respectively.
They can be readily amplified using the polymerase chain reaction, and the samples of DNA can be minuscule.
When pupae appear, queens are less aggressive towards their subordinates, as compared to the times at which only larvae are present.
annularis ''defends itself with venomous stingers.
Strangely, the inclusive fitness of subordinate foundresses is lower than their fitness in the case where they established a nest alone; it remains unclear why such subordinates do not leave the nest to establish their own.
The probability of a given female developing as a worker or as a reproductive likely depends more on ambient conditions than on predetermined factors.
Both males and females are red-faced, which makes intersex determination less straightforward; however, it also makes it easier to recognize members of this species compared to other closely related species.
annularis'' prefers cliffs by riversides.
In addition, workers can perform all the same functions as foundresses with minimal competition.
It was moved to the genus ''Polistes'' by Johan Christian Fabricius in 1804, two years after Pierre André Latreille had erected the new genus.
Therefore, preferentially helping one’s super-sisters is much better for inclusive fitness, but ''P.
Each of the foundresses has spermathecae that are fully loaded with sperm, since they have just mated the previous winter.
Some other social insects, such as ants, evict queens, while others, such as termites, seem to permit multiple queens.
This occurs promptly once the nest has been initiated, and at this time the foundresses establish a dominance hierarchy among themselves.
Unlike other polistine wasps, ''P.
Their ovaries are full of mature oocytes.
Wasps at normal foraging temperature showed significantly lower carbohydrate levels than wasps treated at colder temperatures.
Foundresses appear to have greater glycogen storage capability than workers, helping them survive low temperatures.
They are much larger, with around 500 cells, and are wide, rather than the slender, elongated nests seen in some other species.
Invading insects are attacked.
Despite aggression after the removal of a queen, brood care does not decrease.
In so doing, she causes the ovaries of other workers to decrease in size, to the point that they will be eliminated following the hatching of new workers.
exclamans'' is 0.39, and since ''P.
Their composition tends to be unique to each species of wasp.
Multiple foundresses may create a nest; some studies have shown that four or five foundresses may inhabit a ''P.
Where females reuse the natal nest, between seven and eight foundresses typically may be seen on the nest, a significantly greater number than those seen on new nests (4.34).
In general, foundresses have greater inclusive fitness if they are associated with smaller colonies.
Like poisonous structures in formicine ants, gland cells are continuous with the gland reservoir, but no filaments extend from the gland or sac as they do in the ants.
major, P. buysonni,'' and others in the subgenus Aphanilopterus, and slightly less related to the more common ''P.
The workers acting in such a manner may create a direct cost upon which selection can act.
Cellulose makes up most of the nest paper.
The species name ''annularis'' is the Latin word that means “ringed”.
Individuals that are ranked differently demonstrate different behaviors; higher ranked wasps have a propensity for “tailwagging” and “checking cells” as compared to lower ranked workers, similar to ''Polistes dominula''.
One cost of this crowding is direct reproductive competition between colonies.
It is a primitively eusocial wasp, meaning that all individuals develop the capacity for reproduction, regardless of social caste.
bellicosus, P. carolina, P. metricus,'' and ''P.
These serve to protect the wasps from dehydration.
Super sisters are related to each other genetically by three-fourths due to the specific sexual reproduction process among the Hymenoptera.
Decreased foraging also accompanies decreased aggression.
Members of the brood are highly related to the queen, but are less related to the subordinates and their mates, aligning more with a 1:1 sex ratio.
The actual gland is pressed up against the sac surface.
These tend to be built on the underside of overhangs (rocky cliffs, for example) in close proximity to bodies of water.
Microsatellite markers have been demonstrated to nullify these problems in ''P.
The pedicel suspends the nest high in the air and precludes many predators from getting close to the nest.
Adult males have the hydrocarbon compounds as the workers, but they are present in different amounts.
In addition, its mesosomal yellow markings show less development.
annularis'', many behavioral characteristics from the prior nest are taken to the new one.
However, birds often try to knock nests off the cliff, and colonies that hang low toward the ground can be attacked and eaten by raccoons.
First, given the scarcity of space and resources, the foundresses compete with each other to raise the best offspring.
When a foundress succeeds as the new queen, no additional aggression is observed, but if a worker becomes queen, aggression rises, likely because the dominance hierarchy is not as well established on these nests.
In the springtime, mated females called foundresses join together in groups to start a new nest.
The duct opening is encircled by a sphincter muscle controlling the gland’s secretions.
In the meantime, the other foundresses serve as foragers and nest-builders.
It builds its nest under overhangs near bodies of water that minimize the amount of sunlight penetration.
The new queen will lay more eggs than her cofoundresses, and dominate them as explained above.
annularis'' diverged from ''P.
annularis'', a eusocial animal, demonstrates a dominance hierarchy, due to group competition over scarce resources.
Over the course of the colony season, the number of mated workers with the ability to lay eggs increases, while queens’ dominance shows a trend of becoming stronger and more pronounced.
Subordinate foundress mortality has been found to significantly increase following worker emergence when compared to mortality rates prior to worker emergence.
annularis'' tends to forage primarily in trees.
''annularis'' has no yellow mark on its mesopleuron and usually also has no yellow apical tergum band.
Many of these behaviors are the result of high reproductive competition between females.
Earlier queen death corresponds to an earlier arrest in rearing brood, which may be due to a decrease in relatedness between the new queen and the nascent females, or due to internal conflict on the nest.
They emerge from cracks within the rocky cliff wall where they have spent the winter in hibernation, and return to their natal nests from the previous fall season.
annularis'' preys on moths, butterflies, flies, and other insects.
In the natural environment, ''P.
A worker with fully developed ovaries takes over the nest and becomes a gyne.
No selfish herd advantage is seen for a colony to be in the center of the aggregation, whereby the center would be safer than the periphery from predators, whereas in ''Ropalidia plebeiana'', another species that forms nest aggregations, the entire nest aggregation is protected more so from predators.
It has a nitrogen content of 11% and is mainly carbohydrates and proteins.
This constraint means only a few locations are suitable for nesting.
Females from different nests exhibit considerable variation in these factors, while females originating from the same nest are quite similar to each other in these factors.
As queens or foundresses evict other females, the aggregations begin to dissolve.
annularis'' has been noted to engage in altruistic behavior.
Queens, the highest ranked individual in a nest, will usually lay the highest percentage of eggs, though subordinates are sometimes allowed to lay eggs as well.
In addition, exposing ''P.
annularis'' from ''P.
In the absence of a queen, dominance conflicts arise between foundresses on the nest.
Males often have higher glucose, fructose, and trehalose levels higher than those of queens, indicating that mating may continue into autumn or winter.
Despite the fact that birds are common enemies of polistine wasps, none has been observed attacking nests for honey.
annularis'', with reports of foundresses per nest ranging from one to 28, with an arithmetic mean of 3.82 to 4.93, depending on the year.
annularis'', subordinates decrease foraging rate following worker emergence.
This subfamily likely arose in the mid- to late Jurassic period, around 145 to 175 million years ago.
annularis'' is classified as part of the kingdom Animalia, the phylum Arthropoda, the subphylum Hexapoda, the class Insecta, the order Hymenoptera, the suborder Aculeata, the superfamily Vespoidea, and the family Vespidae.
When it comes to identifying how related a worker is to other workers, in'' P. annularis'', this ability seems to be largely absent, or they are unable to make use of it to good effect.
A super-sister relationship is one where sisters come from the same set of two parents (the same mother and father).
The most common chemicals are 13,17- dimethylhentriacontane (18%) 3-methyl-nonacosane (13%), 3-methylheptacosane (11%), and n-heptacosane (8%).
Antigen 5, which is present in their venom, is a major allergen.
Despite the hierarchy and its dependence on queen size, larger queens do not necessarily inhibit egg laying by subordinates better than smaller queens.
Strangely, it seems, they do not show any preference for the nest whose members to which they are most genetically related.
annularis'' has a usurpation rate around 9%.
For example, despite the lack of drastic morphological differentiation between workers and foundresses, and the benefits procured by a worker becoming a foundress on a new nest, a worker may lay less than 10% as many eggs as her queen, independent of the number of females on the nest.
The site is often within several meters of the previous one.
The word “cells” is used to describe the room-like excavations or depressions built by the foundresses and workers that house the wasps, their larvae, and their food stores.
annularis'' was published by Carl Linnaeus in his 1763 ''Centuria Insectorum'', where he named the species ''Vespa annularis''.
This range is similar to that of ''P.
In their abdominal cavities, large amounts of white-colored fat are stored beneath the intersegmental membrane.
annularis'' abandons its nest and resides in hibernacula, which are locations of shelter at which animals hibernate.
Foundress number plays a major role in determining the success of a colony.
The pedicel also contains hexadecanoic acid and octadecanoic acid.
Larval silk is a protein with high amounts of serine and alanine.
A foreign female can arrive at the nest, fight the reigning queen to the death or until the current queen is banished or becomes a subordinate, and then takes over the role of reproducing the majority of offspring in the colony.
Other animals, such as moths, may use the empty nest during the winter.
This primitive eusociality has been seen in bees as well, including the sweat bee, ''Lasioglossum zephyrum''.
However, ''Polistes'' species have evolved to hide their nests from most mammals or put them in areas as to make them inaccessible.
3) The father’s genome is inaccessible because males mate and pass away before their offspring are even born.
bahamensis'', one should notice that ''P.''
The wasps store the honey over the winter to facilitate their survival in colder months and assist in the recognition of sisters, which will help construct new nests near their original one.
annularis'' has been used as a model species to investigate the power of microsatellite markers in maternity assignment of social insects.
Notably, related siblings tend to aggregate together and go to the same nest.
annularis'' has ferruginous (rust-red) markings on a predominantly black background, while in the south, the thorax is mostly ferruginous, with black markings.
carolinus'', but not ''P.
These factors may combine to result in the expulsion of the subordinate foundresses.
It is closely related to ''P.
The novel nests in springtime come from the same natal nests of the preceding fall, and generally the population of wasps in a new nest all have the common background of being from the same natal nest, but when two or more spring nests are derived from the same fall natal nest, workers may choose whichever nest they wish to join in the spring.
These are composed of a complex mixture containing dimethylalkanes, n-alkanes, and monomethylalkanes.
Large aggregations of foundresses are seen when females reuse the nest in which they were born, either by reusing the cells themselves (uncommon) or by building a new nest on top of the old one.
Larvae spin cocoons that enclose themselves into their cell in the nest.
bellicosus'' between 10 and 80 million years ago.
annularis'' demonstrates behavior typical of other polistine wasps, and has a dominance hierarchy, relatively small colony size, and a female-biased sex ratio.
As such, it is to the benefit of the wasp to be a reproductive queen as opposed to a worker, if feasible.
The queen typically remains on the nest while subordinates search for wood.
annularis'' is the red paper wasp, due to its distinctive red  coloration.
metricus'' in terms of the coloration of the antennae and thorax.
Generally, several generations of female worker offspring emerge (hatch) from the nest over the course of the summer, and then reproductives start to be produced.
Of all the foundresses in an association, only one foundress assumes the role of queen.
Northern wasps tent to have biased ratios, while southern wasps are less biased, in large part because southern wasp sisters have lower relatedness.
However, variation by year only explains 2% of the variance in the grouping size of foundresses.
A common name for ''P.
Proline is a major component of structural proteins and likely contributes to the structural strength of the pedicel in holding up the rest of the nest.
They can then combine these data with the maternal genotype to improve the accuracy of the maternity assignment.
Being a paper wasp, ''P.
As new nests are established by ''P.
However, unlike in other Hymenoptera (eusocial insects), these wasps tend to act as independent agents; while the queen is at the top of the dominance hierarchy, the other wasps may lay eggs and forage for themselves as they see fit.
The caching begins in early to midautumn, after which time the wasps retreat from the nest to hibernacula when the temperature drops below about 5°C.
