Investigations often take weeks or months to complete, during which time detectives spend much of their time away from the streets, in interviews and courtrooms, for example.
In 2005, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that police do not have a constitutional duty to protect a person from harm.
Policing has included an array of activities in different situations, but the predominant ones are concerned with the preservation of order.
This practice is controversial, with for example, New York State banning this practice in 1996 on the grounds that it endangered motorists who might be pulled over by people impersonating police officers.
Due to a long-term decline in public confidence for law enforcement in the United States, body cameras worn by police officers are under consideration.
This would, for example, allow police to establish a restaurant guest's identity and forward it to the innkeeper in a case where the guest cannot pay the bill at nighttime because his wallet had just been stolen from the restaurant table.
Police vehicles are used for detaining, patrolling and transporting.
Rotating officers also promotes cross-training in a wider variety of skills, and serves to prevent "cliques" that can contribute to corruption or other unethical behavior.
Colquhoun's innovations were a critical development leading up to Robert Peel's "new" police three decades later.
The Kansas City Preventive Patrol study in the 1970s found this approach to policing to be ineffective.
The study showed that transnational police information sharing was routinized in the cross-Channel region from 1968 on the basis of agreements directly between the police agencies and without any formal agreement between the countries concerned.
Alternative names for police force include constabulary, gendarmerie, police department, police service, crime prevention, protective services, law enforcement agency, civil guard or civic guard.
Other countries where jurisdiction of multiple police agencies overlap, include Guardia Civil and the Policía Nacional in Spain, the Polizia di Stato and Carabinieri in Italy and the Police Nationale and National Gendarmerie in France.
), and surveillance of prices.
* Above all else, an effective authority figure knows trust and accountability are paramount.
As this report points out, and the existing academic literature on transnational policing seems to confirm, this is a secretive area and one not open to civil society involvement.
Meanwhile, the authorities in Glasgow, Scotland successfully petitioned the government to pass the Glasgow Police Act establishing the City of Glasgow Police in 1800.
The famous Royal Northwest Mounted Police was founded in 1873.
From about 1500, private watchmen were funded by private individuals and organisations to carry out police functions.
For example, in the UK, policing is primarily the responsibility of a regional police force; however specialist units exist at the national level.
Before Terry, every police encounter constituted an arrest, giving the police officer the full range of search authority.
To ensure that the police would not interfere in the regular competencies of the courts of law, some police acts require that the police may only interfere in such cases where protection from courts cannot be obtained in time, and where, without interference of the police, the realization of the private right would be impeded.
As one of their first acts after end of the War of the Castilian Succession in 1479, Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile established the centrally-organized and efficient ''Holy Brotherhood'' as a national police force.
Although it still lacks a universally accepted definition, the crux of intelligence-led policing is an emphasis on the collection and analysis of information to guide police operations, rather than the reverse.
The Macdaniel affair added further impetus for a publicly salaried police force that did not depend on rewards.
Moreover, he went so far as to praise the French system, which had reached "the greatest degree of perfection" in his estimation.
Police forces also find themselves under criticism for their use of force, particularly deadly force.
In some cases this type of policing shares aspects with espionage.
The agency has made allegations of insufficient cooperation from various police services hindering their investigations.
Police departments and the local governments that oversee them in some jurisdictions have attempted to mitigate some of these issues through community outreach programs and community policing to make the police more accessible to the concerns of local communities, by working to increase hiring diversity, by updating training of police in their responsibilities to the community and under the law, and by increased oversight within the department or by civilian commissions.
They can also be armed with non-lethal (more accurately known as "less than lethal" or "less-lethal") weaponry, particularly for riot control.
For instance, the New York Sheriff's Office was founded in 1626, and the Albany County Sheriff's Department in the 1660s.
Police detectives are responsible for investigations and detective work.
In Hong Kong, any allegations of corruption within the police will be investigated by the Independent Commission Against Corruption and the Independent Police Complaints Council, two agencies which are independent of the police force.
The idea of a police, as it then existed in France, was considered as a potentially undesirable foreign import.
Police forces are often defined as being separate from military or other organizations involved in the defense of the state against foreign aggressors; however, gendarmerie are military units charged with civil policing.
In Jin, dozens of prefects were spread across the state, each having limited authority and employment period.
To distance the new police force from the initial public view of it as a new tool of government repression, Peel publicised the so-called Peelian principles, which set down basic guidelines for ethical policing:
The constabulary was regularised as a military body in 1337.
The word, and the concept of police itself, were "disliked as a symbol of foreign oppression" (according to ''Britannica 1911'').
Modern police forces make extensive use of radio communications equipment, carried both on the person and installed in vehicles, to co-ordinate their work, share information, and get help quickly.
Specifically, tension increases when a police officer of one ethnic group harms or kills a suspect of another one.
In 1808, the Portuguese royal family relocated to Brazil, because of the French invasion of Portugal.
Patrick Colquhoun's influential work, ''A Treatise on the Police of the Metropolis'' (1797) was heavily influenced by Benthamite thought.
Terminology varies from country to country.
In the 1980s and 1990s, many law enforcement agencies began to adopt community policing strategies, and others adopted problem-oriented policing.
By the 17th century, most captaincies already had local units with law enforcement functions.
The level of government responsible for policing varies from place to place, and may be at the national, regional or local level.
His other contribution was the concept of preventive policing; his police were to act as a highly visible deterrent to crime by their permanent presence on the Thames.
Nonetheless, In 1828, there were privately financed police units in no fewer than 45 parishes within a 10-mile radius of London.
Detectives, in contrast to uniformed police, typically wear 'business attire' in bureaucratic and investigative functions where a uniformed presence would be either a distraction or intimidating, but a need to establish police authority still exists.
The marshalcy dates back to the Hundred Years' War, and some historians trace it back to the early 12th century.
The Special Investigations Unit of Ontario, Canada, is one of only a few civilian agencies around the world responsible for investigating circumstances involving police and civilians that have resulted in a death, serious injury, or allegations of sexual assault.
In the UK, they are often referred to by the name of their department, the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).
Patrol officers in cars were disconnected from the community, and had insufficient contact and interaction with the community.
Police vehicles are usually marked with appropriate logos and are equipped with sirens and flashing light bars to aid in making others aware of police presence.
James Sheptycki has analyzed the effects of the new information technologies on the organization of policing-intelligence and suggests that a number of 'organizational pathologies' have arisen that make the functioning of security-intelligence processes in transnational policing deeply problematic.
In the Republic of Ireland the Garda Síochána is investigated by the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission, an independent commission that replaced the Garda Complaints Board in May 2007.
Edwin Chadwick's 1829 article, "Preventive police" in the ''London Review'', argued that prevention ought to be the ''primary'' concern of a police body, which was not the case in practice.
In Canada, the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary was founded in 1729, making it the first police force in present-day Canada.
With the initial investment of £4,200, the new trial force of the Thames River Police began with about 50 men charged with policing 33,000 workers in the river trades, of whom Colquhoun claimed 11,000 were known criminals and "on the game."
The Statute of Winchester of 1285 is also cited as the primary legislation regulating the policing of the country between the Norman Conquest and the Metropolitan Police Act 1829.
Some countries, such as Chile, Israel, the Philippines, France, Austria, New Zealand and South Africa, use a centralized system of policing.
The London Metropolitan police's Specialist Firearms Command (CO19) is a group of armed police used in dangerous situations including hostage taking, armed robbery/assault and terrorism.
"Plainclothes" officers dress in attire consistent with that worn by the general public for purposes of blending in.
The U.S. Coast Guard carries out many police functions for boaters.
It is also generally agreed that in the post–Cold War era this type of practice became more significant and frequent (Sheptycki, 2000).
Bentham espoused the guiding principle of "the greatest good for the greatest number:
In recent years, vehicle-installed computers have enhanced the ability of police communications, enabling easier dispatching of calls, criminal background checks on persons of interest to be completed in a matter of seconds, and updating officers' daily activity log and other, required reports on a real-time basis.
It is also the only police force that requires its recruits to undertake university studies at the recruit level and has the recruit pay for their own education.
Atypically, Brazil's preventive police are known as Military Police.
Broken windows policing was another, related approach introduced in the 1980s by James Q. Wilson and George L. Kelling, who suggested that police should pay greater attention to minor "quality of life" offenses and disorderly conduct.
In Ireland, the Irish Constabulary Act of 1822 marked the beginning of the Royal Irish Constabulary.
The Act established a force in each barony with chief constables and inspectors general under the control of the civil administration at Dublin Castle.
In the colonial period, policing was provided by elected sheriffs and local militias.
Police forces use an array of specialty vehicles such as helicopters, airplanes, watercraft, mobile command posts, vans, trucks, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, and armored vehicles.
In some places there may be multiple police forces operating in the same area, with different ones having jurisdiction according to the type of crime or other circumstances.
Perhaps the greatest question regarding the future development of transnational policing is: in whose interest is it?
The Posse Comitatus Act severely restricts the use of the military for police activity, giving added importance to police SWAT units.
In some countries separate organizations outside the police exist for such purposes, such as the British Independent Police Complaints Commission.
The 1829 Metropolitan Police Act created a modern police force by limiting the purview of the force and its powers, and envisioning it as merely an organ of the judicial system.
This was very different to the "continental model" of the police force that had been developed in France, where the police force worked within the parameters of the absolutist state as an extension of the authority of the monarch and functioned as part of the governing state.
The Assize of Arms of 1252, which required the appointment of constables to summon men to arms, quell breaches of the peace, and to deliver offenders to the sheriffs or reeves, is cited as one of the earliest creation of the English police.
There was also a system investigative "juries".
On prescribed satisfactory service in the SPS, the officers are nominated to the Indian Police Service.
As police are often interacting with individuals, slang terms are numerous.
In 1863, the Metropolitan Police were issued with the distinctive custodian helmet, and in 1884 they switched to the use of whistles that could be heard from much further away.
Members may be referred to as police officers, troopers, sheriffs, constables, rangers, peace officers or civic/civil guards.
Colquhoun's utilitarian approach to the problem – using a cost-benefit argument to obtain support from businesses standing to benefit – allowed him to achieve what Henry and John Fielding failed for their Bow Street detectives.
The Army often provided some policing alongside poorly resourced sheriffs and temporarily organized posses.
Not a lot of empirical work on the practices of inter/transnational information and intelligence sharing has been undertaken.
Parks Police (1791) and U.S. Mint Police (1792).
Wilson, a student of Vollmer, helped reduce corruption and introduce professionalism in Wichita, Kansas, and later in the Chicago Police Department.
Along with this, police ranks did not include military titles, with the exception of Sergeant.
In some societies, in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, these developed within the context of maintaining the class system and the protection of private property.
This office was first held by Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie, who had 44 ''commissaires de police'' (police commissioners) under his authority.
In Australia and Britain, patrol personnel are also known as "general duties" officers.
In 1749 Henry Fielding began organizing a force of quasi-professional constables known as the Bow Street Runners.
The scheme of the Paris police force was extended to the rest of France by a royal edict of October 1699, resulting in the creation of lieutenants general of police in all large French cities and towns.
Magistrates such as ''procurators fiscal'' and ''quaestors'' investigated crimes.
In addition to conventional urban or regional police forces, there are other police forces with specialized functions or jurisdiction.
Thus, its functions largely overreached simple law enforcement activities and included public health concerns, urban planning (which was important because of the miasma theory of disease; thus, cemeteries were moved out of town, etc.
He argues that transnational police information circuits help to "compose the panic scenes of the security-control society".
In recent years, in addition to federal, state, and local forces, some special districts have been formed to provide extra police protection in designated areas.
The word "police" was borrowed from French into the English language in the 18th century, but for a long time it applied only to French and continental European police forces.
In British North America, policing was initially provided by local elected officials.
Local watchmen were hired by cities to provide some extra security.
These units are typically called Inspectorate-General, or in the US, "internal affairs".
Historical studies reveal that policing agents have undertaken a variety of cross-border police missions for many years (Deflem, 2002).
Under each prefect were "subprefects" who helped collectively with law enforcement in the area.
Before the 19th century, the first use of the word "police" recorded in government documents in the United Kingdom was the appointment of Commissioners of Police for Scotland in 1714 and the creation of the Marine Police in 1798.
In cases in which such measures have been lacking or absent, civil lawsuits have been brought by the United States Department of Justice against local law enforcement agencies, authorized under the 1994 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act.
Many slang terms for police officers are decades or centuries old with lost etymology.
In the Roman empire, the army, rather than a dedicated police organization, provided security.
Police forces include both preventive (uniformed) police and detectives.
Since 1855, the Supreme Court of the United States has consistently ruled that law enforcement officers have no duty to protect any individual, despite the motto "protect and serve".
Peel, widely regarded as the father of modern policing, was heavily influenced by the social and legal philosophy of Jeremy Bentham, who called for a strong and centralized, but politically neutral, police force for the maintenance of social order, for the protection of people from crime and to act as a visible deterrent to urban crime and disorder.
When criminals see the abandoned vehicles, trash, and deplorable property, they assume that authorities do not care and do not take active approaches to correct problems in these areas.
Because their situational mandate typically focuses on removing innocent bystanders from dangerous people and dangerous situations, not violent resolution, they are often equipped with non-lethal tactical tools like chemical agents, "flashbang" and concussion grenades, and rubber bullets.
Police Magistrate John Fielding, head of the Bow Street Runners, argued that "...it is much better to prevent even one man from being a rogue than apprehending and bringing forty to justice."
The English system of maintaining public order since the Norman conquest was a private system of tithings, led by a constable, which was based on a social obligation for the good conduct of the others; more common was that local lords and nobles were responsible for maintaining order in their lands, and often appointed a constable, sometimes unpaid, to enforce the law.
Many police forces suffer from police corruption to a greater or lesser degree.
* Every police officer should be issued an warrant card with a unique identification number to assure accountability for his actions.
Other Scottish towns soon followed suit and set up their own police forces through acts of parliament.
Building upon these earlier models, intelligence-led policing has emerged as the dominant philosophy guiding police strategy.
* Whether the police are effective is not measured on the number of arrests but on the lack of crime.
On March 12, 1829, a government decree created the first uniformed police in France, known as ''sergents de ville'' ("city sergeants"), which the Paris Prefecture of Police's website claims were the first uniformed policemen in the world.
Their powers include the legitimized use of force.
There was no concept of public prosecution, so victims of crime or their families had to organize and manage the prosecution themselves.
The Vehmic courts of Germany provided some policing in the absence of strong state institutions.
Other countries have multiple police forces, but for the most part their jurisdictions do not overlap.
Law enforcement in ancient China was carried out by "prefects" for thousands of years since it developed in both the Chu and Jin kingdoms of the Spring and Autumn period.
Initially the Dominion Police provided security for parliament, but its responsibilities quickly grew.
A national force, the Dominion Police, was founded in 1868.
This is done in part based upon the perception that the most important and essential police work is accomplished on patrol in which officers become acquainted with their beats, prevent crime by their presence, respond to crimes in progress, manage crises, and practice their skills.
Peel decided to standardise the police force as an official paid profession, to organise it in a civilian fashion, and to make it answerable to the public.
The service color is usually dark blue and red, while the uniform color is ''Khaki''.
This method was first introduced and made popular by New York City Mayor, Rudy Giuliani, in the early 1990s.
All police officers in the United Kingdom, whatever their actual rank, are 'constables' in terms of their legal position.
Prefects could also be women.
The court further held that during an investigatory stop a police officer's search " is confined to what is minimally necessary to determine whether a suspect is armed, and the intrusion, which is made for the sole purpose of protecting himself and others nearby, is confined to ascertaining the presence of weapons" (U.S. Supreme Court).
Unmarked vehicles are used primarily for sting operations or apprehending criminals without alerting them to their presence.
Likewise, some state and local jurisdictions, for example, Springfield, Illinois have similar outside review organizations.
In major cities, there may be a separate police agency for public transit systems, such as the New York City Port Authority Police or the MTA police, or for major government functions, such as sanitation, or environmental functions.
A '''police''' force is a constituted body of persons empowered by the state to enforce the law, protect property, and limit civil disorder.
Therefore, correcting the small problems prevents more serious criminal activity.
Intelligence-led policing is now common practice in most advanced countries (Ratcliffe, 2007) and it is likely that police intelligence sharing and information exchange has a common morphology around the world (Ratcliffe, 2007).
National agencies, such as the FBI, only have jurisdiction over federal crimes or those with an interstate component.
Search authority during a Terry stop (investigatory stop) is limited to weapons only.
Royal assent to the Metropolitan Police Act 1829 was given and the Metropolitan Police Service was established on September 29, 1829 in London as the first modern and professional police force in the world.
Development of modern police forces around the world was contemporary to the formation of the state, later defined by sociologist Max Weber as achieving a "monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force" and which was primarily exercised by the police and the military.
Political crimes are excluded from its competencies.
There are also many interesting examples of cross-border policing under private auspices and by municipal police forces that date back to the 19th century (Nadelmann, 1993).
They may, for example, legally search any suspect who has been arrested, or their vehicles, home or business premises, without a warrant, and may seize anything they find in a search as evidence.
Colquhoun published a book on the experiment, ''The Commerce and Policing of the River Thames''.
Other duties associated with modern policing, such as investigating crimes, were left to the citizens themselves.
In India, the police is under the control of respective States and union territories and is known to be under State Police Services (SPS).
British police officers are governed by similar rules, such as those introduced to England and Wales under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE), but generally have greater powers.
In the US, there is typically a state police force, but crimes are usually handled by local police forces that usually only cover a few municipalities.
The original brotherhoods continued to serve as modest local police-units until their final suppression in 1835.
The first city police services were established in Philadelphia in 1751, Richmond, Virginia in 1807, Boston in 1838, and New York in 1845.
Motorcycles are also commonly used, particularly in locations that a car may not be able to reach, to control potential public order situations involving meetings of motorcyclists and often in escort duties where motorcycle police officers can quickly clear a path for escorted vehicles.
The German ''Polizeiwissenschaft'' (Science of Police) first theorized by Philipp von Hörnigk a 17th-century Austrian Political economist and civil servant and much more famously by Johann Heinrich Gottlob Justi who produced an important theoretical work known as Cameral science on the formulation of police.
The fact that this trend has occurred contemporaneously with the rise of the US civil rights movement, the "War on Drugs", and a precipitous rise in violent crime from the 1960s to the 1990s has made questions surrounding the role, administration and scope of police authority increasingly complicated.
The extent that police have these functions varies among countries, with police in France, Germany, and other continental European countries handling such tasks to a greater extent than British counterparts.
::''It is better to prevent crimes than to punish them.
The Utilitarian philosopher, Jeremy Bentham, promoted the views of Italian Marquis Cesare Beccaria, and disseminated a translated version of "Essay on Crime in Punishment".
To appear neutral, the uniform was deliberately manufactured in blue, rather than red which was then a military colour, along with the officers being armed only with a wooden truncheon and a rattle to signal the need for assistance.
This is derived from πόλις (''polis''), "city".
Unlike the stipendiary system at Bow Street, the river police were full-time, salaried officers prohibited from taking private fees.
In colloquial English,
Studies of this kind outside of Europe are even rarer, so it is difficult to make generalizations, but one small-scale study that compared transnational police information and intelligence sharing practices at specific cross-border locations in North America and Europe confirmed that low visibility of police information and intelligence sharing was a common feature (Alain, 2001).
Interpol does not conduct investigations or arrests by itself, but only serves as a central point for information on crime, suspects and criminals.
The merger of these two police forces in 1920 formed the world-famous Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
A notable exception is James Sheptycki's study of police cooperation in the English Channel region (2002), which provides a systematic content analysis of information exchange files and a description of how these transnational information and intelligence exchanges are transformed into police case-work.
Public organizations were supplemented by private contractors, notably the Pinkerton National Detective Agency, which was hired by individuals, businessmen, local governments and the federal government.
In addition, there are Federal law enforcement agencies in the United States whose mission includes providing protection for executives such as the President and accompanying family members, visiting foreign dignitaries, and other high-ranking individuals.
The average police patrol vehicle is a specially modified, four door sedan (saloon in British English).
The terms international policing, transnational policing, and/or global policing began to be used from the early 1990s onwards to describe forms of policing that transcended the boundaries of the sovereign nation-state (Nadelmann, 1993), (Sheptycki, 1995).
London was fast reaching a size unprecedented in world history, due to the onset of the Industrial Revolution.
The U.S. Secret Service was founded in 1865 and was for some time the main investigative body for the federal government.
In building the case for the police in the face of England's firm anti-police sentiment, Colquhoun framed the political rationale on economic indicators to show that a police dedicated to crime prevention was "perfectly congenial to the principle of the British constitution."
This includes a variety of practices, but international police cooperation, criminal intelligence exchange between police agencies working in different nation-states, and police development-aid to weak, failed or failing states are the three types that have received the most scholarly attention.
The resulting force was also known as the Maréchaussée, or, formally, the Constabulary and Marshalcy of France.
In Saudi Arabia, the Mutaween actively prevent the practice or proselytizing of non-Islamic religions within Saudi Arabia, where they are banned.
This is the chief aim of every good system of legislation, which is the art of leading men to the greatest possible happiness or to the least possible misery, according to calculation of all the goods and evils of life.''
Bicycle patrols are used in some areas because they allow for more open interaction with the public.
The Metropolitan Police became a model for the police forces in most countries, such as the United States, and most of the British Empire.
Police functions include protecting life and property, enforcing criminal law, criminal investigations, regulating traffic, crowd control, and other public safety duties.
The use of firearms or deadly force is typically a last resort only to be used when necessary to save human life, although some jurisdictions (such as Brazil) allow its use against fleeing felons and escaped convicts.
Some prefects were responsible for handling investigations, much like modern police detectives.
The paradoxical effect is that, the harder policing agencies work to produce security, the greater are feelings of insecurity.
In contrast to a deterrent of punishment, a preventive police force would deter criminality by making crime cost-ineffective - "crime doesn't pay".
Police cars may also contain fire extinguishers or defibrillators.
Detectives may be called Investigations Police, Judiciary/Judicial Police, and Criminal Police.
The concept behind this method is simple: broken windows, graffiti, and other physical destruction or degradation of property, greatly increases the chances of more criminal activities and destruction of property.
Some police forces use unmarked or minimally marked cars for traffic law enforcement, since drivers slow down at the sight of marked police vehicles and unmarked vehicles make it easier for officers to catch speeders and traffic violators.
In the United States since the 1960s, concern over such issues has increasingly weighed upon law enforcement agencies, courts and legislatures at every level of government.
Under the reign of Augustus, when the capital had grown to almost one million inhabitants, 14 wards were created; the wards were protected by seven squads of 1,000 men called ''"vigiles"'', who acted as firemen and nightwatchmen.
King João VI established the "Intendência Geral de Polícia" (General Police Intendancy) for investigations.
