This was one of three forms of hockey in Manipur, the other ones being field hockey (called Khong Kangjei) and wrestling-hockey (called Mukna Kangjei).
In the meantime it gained further interest in other German cities.
County Polo has had a resurgence in recent years, although the original County Polo Association was formed in 1898* to look after the interests of the country clubs and to run the County Cup Tournaments), the three London polo clubs—Hurlingham, Ranelagh and Roehampton—and from all associations within the Empire where polo was being played.
Female players often use lighter mallets than male players.
Its invention is dated variously from the 6th century BC to the 1st century AD.
The traditional or 'free style' ''Polo'' or ''Pulu'' of Northern Pakistan is still played very avidly in its native region, and the annual Shandur Polo Festival at Shandur Top in in Chitral District.
Polo sticks were features on the Mameluke precursor to modern day playing cards.
However it was the first Mughal emperor, Babur, who popularised the sport in India and ultimately made a significant influence on England.
Optional equipment includes one or two gloves, wristbands, kneepads (mandatory in some clubs), spurs, face mask, and a whip.
The sport is played in a  enclosed arena, much like those used for other equestrian sports; the minimum size is .
The weight of the mallet head is of important consideration for the more seasoned players.
Most fouls and penalty shots are related to players improperly crossing the line of the ball or the right of way.
In the early 1900s in the United States, cars were used instead of horses in the sport of Auto polo.
The three major polo tournaments in Argentina, known as "Triple Corona" ("Triple Crown"), are Hurlingham Polo Open, Tortugas Polo Open, Palermo Polo Open.
Players are only required to use one pony, which may be hired, or owned.
Many polo players genuinely desire to broaden public participation in the sport, both as an end in itself and to increase the standard of play, while others value and seek to preserve the social and economic exclusivity of the sport.
Arena polo (or indoor polo) is an affordable option for many who wish to play the sport, with rules similar to the regular version.
The stirrup irons are heavier than most, and the stirrup leathers are wider and thicker, for added safety when the player stands in the stirrups.
In Pattaya alone, there are 3 active polo clubs: Polo Escape, Siam Polo Park and Thai Polo and Equestrian Club.
The sticks are made of cane, and the balls are made from the roots of bamboo.
For some polo players, the length of the mallet depends on the size of the horse: the taller the horse, the longer the mallet.
Temperament is critical; the horse must remain responsive under pressure and not become excited or difficult to control.
Polo was played at the 2007 Southeast Asian Games.
More recently, Janek Gazecki and Ruki Baillieu have organised polo matches in parks "around metropolitan Australia, backed by wealthy sponsors."
Naqsh-i Jahan Square in Isfahan is a polo field which was built by king Abbas I in the 17th century.
It was largely played by royalty and the political and business elite.
The rules are enforced in the game by the umpires who blow whistles when a penalty occurs.
The Denison team sent a letter to James Gordon Bennett challenging him to a match game.
Jumping (open front) or gallop boots are sometimes used along with the polo wraps for added protection.
Today Thoroughbreds are being increasingly used alongside the Kurdish and Persian Arabian horses.
Herbert, James Gordon Bennett and August Belmont financed the original New York Polo Grounds.
While he was playing a game of polo on horseback (also called chougan in Persia), his horse fell and Aibak was impaled on the pommel of his saddle.
The only piece of equipment required by the United States Polo Association (USPA) rules is the helmet or cap with a chin strap.
The name ''polo'' is said to have been derived from the Balti word "pulu", meaning ball.
The "line of the ball" changes each time the ball changes direction.
The tournament's gold medal was won by the Malaysian team, followed by Singapore with silver and Thailand with bronze.
The popularity of polo has grown steadily since the 1980s.
In the late 1950s, champion polo player and Director of the Long Island Polo Association, Walter Scanlon, introduced the "short form", or "European" style, four period match, to the game of polo.
Aibak's son Aram died in 1211&nbsp;CE 2, so Shams-ud-din Iltutmish, another ex-slave of Turkic ancestry who was married to Aibak's daughter, succeeded him as Sultan of Delhi.
The history of this pologround is contained in the royal chronicle "Cheitharol Kumbaba" starting from AD 33.
The Shandur polo ground is said to be the highest polo ground in the world, at approximately 3,734 metres,
The indoor polo ball is leather-covered and inflated, and is about  in diameter.
It uses parts of the polo rules but has its own specialities, as e.g.
The tie-down is usually supported by a neck strap.
Forms of arena polo include beach polo, played in many countries between teams of three riders on a sand surface, and cowboy polo, played almost exclusively in the western United States by teams of five riders on a dirt surface.
The polo pony is selected carefully for quick bursts of speed, stamina, agility and manoeuvrability.
The British are credited with spreading polo worldwide in the late 19th century and the early 20th century.
In both cases, the gag or shank rein will be the bottom rein in the rider's hands, while the snaffle rein will be the top rein.
Players may well continue to play polo at this level for many years, or players with more ambition could benefit from the tuition if they move onto more competitive polo.
The oldest polo ground in the world is the Imphal Polo Ground in Manipur State.
Unsafe hooking is a foul that will result in a penalty shot being awarded.
A popular combination of the sports of polo and lacrosse is the game of polocrosse, which was developed in Australia in the late 1930s.
The mallet head weighs from 160 grams (5.6 ounces) to 240 grams (8.4 ounces), depending on player preference and the type of wood used, and the shaft can vary in weight and flexibility depending on the player's preference.
There are five polo clubs in Iran: Ghasr-e Firoozeh, Nowroozabad, Army Ground Forces, Kanoon-e Chogan and Nesf-e Jahan.
Iran possesses some of the best grass polo fields in the region.
The saddle has a flat seat and no knee support; the rider adopting a forward-leaning seat and closed knees dissimilar to a classical dressage seat.
Composite materials are not preferred by top players, because the shaft of composite mallets can't absorb vibrations as well as traditional cane mallets.
Polo has been played in Malaysia and Singapore, both of which are former British colonies, since being introduced to Malaya in during the late 19th century.
The rules of polo are written and used to provide for the safety of both players and horses.
This version of polo played in the 19th century was different from the faster form that was played in Manipur.
A player may not purposely touch another player, his tack or pony with his mallet.
The sport spread fast between the skilful gauchos and several clubs opened in the following years in the towns of Venado Tuerto, Cañada de Gómez, Quilmes, Flores and later (1888) Hurlingham.
Weekly games called Hapta Kangjei (Weekly Polo) were also played in a polo ground outside the current Palace.
The pony's mane is most often roached (hogged), and its tail is docked or braided so that it will not snag the rider's mallet.
In Manipur, the game was played even by commoners who owned a pony.
As players approach the ball, they ride on either side of the line of the ball giving each access to the ball.
This line traces the ball's path and extends past the ball along that trajectory.
The Hobby Horse variant started 1998 as a fun sport in south western Germany and lead 2002 to the foundation of the First Kurfürstlich-Kurpfälzisch Polo-Club in Mannheim.
The origins of the game in Manipur are traced to early precursors of Sagol Kangjei.
Valuable for training cavalry, the game was played from Constantinople to Japan by the Middle Ages.
The traditional sport of polo is played on a grass field up to .
Polo is ridden with double reins for greater accuracy of signals.
The playing field is carefully maintained with closely mowed turf providing a safe, fast playing surface.
If the ball goes wide of the goal, the defending team is allowed a free 'knock-in' from the place where the ball crossed the goal line, thus getting the ball back into play.
A player's "string" of polo ponies may number 2 or 3 in Low Goal matches (with ponies being rested for at least a chukka before reuse), 4 or more for Medium Goal matches (at least one per chukka), and even more for the highest levels of competition.
'''Polo''' (Persian: چوگان chogān)  is a team sport played on horseback.
The country currently has over 100 registered players of which approximately 15% are women.
Since then the sport has continued to grow with a further seven clubs opening around the country.
Polo season usually last from October to December.
The game was learnt by the neighbouring Byzantine Empire at an early date.
Play is continuous and is only stopped for penalties, broken tack (equipment) or injury to horse or player.
Players protected their legs by attaching leather shields to their saddles and girths.
Later on, polo was passed from Persia to other parts of Asia including the Indian subcontinent, especially in the Northern Areas of present-day Pakistan (including Gilgit, Chitral, Hunza and Baltistan) since at least the 15th-16th century and China, where it was very popular during the Tang Dynasty and frequently depicted in paintings and statues.
Polo saddles are English-style, close contact, similar to jumping saddles; although most polo saddles lack a flap under the billets.
The other basic defensive play is called the bump or ride-off.
When a player has the line of the ball on his right, he has the right of way.
A "ride-off" is when a player moves another player off the line of the ball by making shoulder-to-shoulder contact with the other players’ horses.
Notable sultans such as Saladin and Baybars were known to play it and encourage it in their court.
Argentina was host of the ninth edition of the World Polo Championship (for teams of up to 14 goals) at the Estancia Grande Polo Club, in the province of San Luis in October 2011.
It was formerly an Olympic sport.
Players are not permitted to carry the ball, although blocking the ball with any part of the body except the open hand is permitted.
The objective is to score goals against an opposing team.
By the time the article came out on 2 June the Denison Club had already received a letter from Bennett indicating the challenge was offered before the "first" games in New York.
The 10th Hussars at Aldershot, Hants, introduced polo to England in 1834.
The format of snow polo varies depending on the space available.
If a gag bit is used, there will be a drop noseband in addition to the cavesson, supporting the tie-down.
The legs of the pony are wrapped with polo wraps from below the knee to the fetlock to prevent hurting.
During half-time of a match, spectators are invited to go onto the field to participate in a polo tradition called "divot stamping", which has developed to not only help replace the mounds of earth (divots) that are torn up by the horses' hooves, but to afford spectators the opportunity to walk about and socialise.
Often, these wraps match the team colours.
Polo is played professionally in 16 countries.
Most horses reach full physical maturity at about age five, and ponies are at their peak of athleticism and training at around age 6 or 7.
In the Olympic Games held in Paris in 1924 a team composed by Juan Miles, Enrique Padilla, Juan Nelson, Arturo Kenny, G. Brooke Naylor and A. Peña obtained the first gold medal for the country's olympic history; this also occurred in Berlín 1936 with players Manuel Andrada, Andrés Gazzotti, Roberto Cavanagh, Luis Duggan, Juan Nelson, Diego Cavanagh and Enrique Alberdi.
Emperor Basil I (r. 867–886) excelled at it; Emperor Alexander (r. 912–913) died from exhaustion while playing and John I of Trebizond (r. 1235–1238) died from a fatal injury during a game.
Hobby Horse Polo is using hobby horses instead of ponies.
Players score by driving a small white plastic or wooden ball into the opposing team's goal using a long-handled mallet.
Local rituals such as those connected to the Marjing, the Winged-Pony God of Polo and the creation-ritual episodes of the Lai Haraoba festival enacting the life of his son, Khori-Phaba, the polo-playing god of sports.
However, without any accidents, polo ponies may have the ability to play until they are 18 to 20 years of age.
Arena polo is played with a small air-filled ball, similar to a small football.
These may indicate an origin earlier than the historical records of Manipur.
Public games were held, as they are still today, at the Mapan Kangjei Bung (literally "Outer Polo Ground"), a polo ground just outside the Kangla.
The sport has also been made more accessible by these clubs by the creation of more affordable training programmes such as from beginner to pro programme at Polo Wicklow.
courtiers on horseback playing a game
In the United States and Canada, collegiate polo is arena polo; in the UK, collegiate polo is both.
The modern sport has had difficulty grappling with the traditional social and economic exclusivity associated with a game that is inevitably expensive when played at a serious level.
White lines on the polo field indicate where the mid-field, sixty, forty and thirty yard penalties are taken.
For example, it is a foul for a player to reach over an opponent's mount in an attempt to hook.
The official set of rules and rules interpretations are reviewed and published each year by each country's polo association.
County Polo is best complemented with regular stick-and-ball sessions, and regular wooden horse practice.
Polo is not played exclusively on horseback.
County Polo creates more affordable parameters for newcomers to the sport.
Each team generally consists of three players and a bright coloured light plastic ball is preferred.
Historically, Kurdish and Persian Arabian horses were the most widely used for polo.
Two players following the line of the ball and riding one another off have the right of way over a single man coming from any direction.
These rules are created and enforced to ensure the welfare of players and their horses.
The surface of a polo field requires careful and constant grounds maintenance to keep the surface in good playing condition.
The object is to score goals by hitting the ball between the goal posts, no matter how high in the air.
Another modern variant is snow polo, which is played on compacted snow on flat ground or a frozen lake.
The defending player has a variety of opportunities for his team to gain possession of the ball.
Goals are posts which are set eight yards apart, centred at each end of the field.
In arena polo, only three players are required per team and the game usually involves more manoeuvreing and shorter plays at lower speeds due to space limitations of arenas.
Some players have also been experimenting with Anglo-Arabians.
The major differences between the outdoor and indoor games are: speed (outdoor being faster), physicality/roughness (indoor/arena is more physical), ball size (indoor is larger), goal size (because the arena is smaller the goal is smaller), and some penalties.
In a ride-off, a player rides his pony alongside an opponent's mount in order to move an opponent away from the ball or to take him out of a play.
A well trained horse will carry its rider smoothly and swiftly to the ball and can account for 60 to 75 percent of the player's skill and net worth to his team.
The kings of Manipur had a royal polo ground within the ramparts of their Kangla Fort.
The basic dress of a player is a protective equestrian helmet (usually of a distinctive colour, to be distinguished at the considerable distance from which onlookers are watching the game), riding boots to just below the knees, white trousers (often ordinary denim jeans), and a coloured shirt bearing the number of the player's position.
'punitive sherries'.
During the early part of the 20th century, under the leadership of Harry Payne Whitney, polo changed to become a high-speed sport in the United States, differing from the game in England, where it involved short passes to move the ball towards the opposition's goal.
There are no goal posts, and a player scores simply by hitting the ball out of either end of the field.
The outdoor polo ball is made of a high-impact plastic, but was formerly made of either bamboo or willow root.
A new Chinese Equestrian Association has been formed and two new clubs have been formed in China itself: the Beijing Sunny Time Polo Club, founded by Xia Yang in 2004 and the Nine Dragons Hill Polo Club in Shanghai, founded in 2005.
The player who hit the ball generally has the right of way, and other players cannot cross the line of the ball in front of that player.
In 1862 the first polo club, Calcutta Polo Club, was established by two British soldiers, Sherer and Captain Robert Stewart.
Iranians still refer to the game of polo by its original Persian name of "Chogan", which means mallet.
A ''tzykanisterion'' (stadium for playing ''tzykanion'', the Byzantine name for polo) was built by emperor Theodosius II (r. 408–450) inside the Great Palace of Constantinople.
Polo in Iran is governed by the Polo Federation of Iran.
Another common defensive play is called "hooking."
Persian Emperor Shapur II learnt to play polo when he was seven years old in 316&nbsp;AD.
This form of polo is usually played with three players per side—as opposed to the standard four-player polo—and therefore allows each player to get more involved and develop.
Neither players nor horses were trained to play a fast, nonstop game.
For many people, this requires a very large financial investment, which can be too costly for some.
While a player is taking a swing at the ball, his opponent can block the swing by using his mallet to hook the mallet of the player swinging at the ball.
Field polo is played with a solid plastic ball which has replaced the wooden version of the ball in much of the sport.
Lord Curzon, the Viceroy of India visited the state in 1901 and measured the polo ground as .
There is, however, ample evidence that the first to play polo in America was actually the English Texans.
There is a four-minute interval between chukkas and a ten-minute halftime.
Such polo variants are mostly played for recreational or tourist purposes; they include canoe polo, cycle polo, camel polo, elephant polo, golfcart polo, Segway polo and yak polo.
Snow polo is not the same sport as ice polo, which was popular in the US in the late 1890s.
Players strike the ball with the long side of the mallet head, not the end.
Later they spread the game to their peers in England.
In 1892 The River Plate Polo Association was founded and constituted the basis for the current Asociación Argentina de Polo.
The players are mounted on the indigenous Manipuri pony, which stands less than .
Polo then found popularity throughout the rest of the Americas like Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and the United States of America.
The oldest polo club in the modern country of Malaysia is Selangor Polo Club, founded in 1902.
of polo, 1546&nbsp;AD
Further regular playing of this game commenced in 1605 during the reign of King Khagemba under newly framed rules of the game.
One of the rein sets may alternately be draw reins.
These sports are considered as separate sports because of the differences in the composition of teams, equipment, rules, game facilities etc.
Polo pony training generally begins at age three and lasts from about six months to two years.
There are many arena clubs in the United States, and most major polo clubs, including the Santa Barbara Polo & Raquet Club, have active arena programmes.
In Manipur, polo is traditionally played with seven players to a side.
Five great teams were able to ensemble together four 10 handicap players in order to make a 40 handicap team: Coronel Suárez, 1975, 1977–1979 (Alberto Heguy, Juan Carlos Harriott, Alfredo Harriot and Horacio Heguy); La Espadaña, 1989–1990 (Carlos Gracida, Gonzalo Pieres, Alfonso Pieres y Ernesto Trotz Jr.); Indios Chapaleufú, 1992–1993 (Bautista Heguy, Gonzalo Heguy, Horacio Heguy Jr. and Marcos Heguy); La Dolfina, 2009–2010 (Adolfo Cambiaso Jr., Lucas Monteverde, Mariano Aguerre y Bartolomé Castagnola); Ellerstina, 2009 (Facundo Pieres, Gonzalo Pieres Jr., Pablo Mac Donough and Juan Martín Nero).
With this format, including shorter chukkas, with breaks in between, the ponies are not getting over tired, so there is no need for such a large "string".
Many are Thoroughbreds or Thoroughbred crosses.
Each polo team consists of four riders and their mounts.
At the end of each 7 minute chukka, play continues for an additional 30 seconds or until a stoppage in play, whichever comes first.
It's similar to a body check in hockey.
The game consists of four to eight 7 minute chukkas, between or during which players change mounts.
This contradicts the historical record of the club being established before the Jerome Park game..
Lieutenant (later Major General) Joseph Ford Sherer, the father of modern polo visited the state and played on this polo ground in the 1850s.
A standing martingale must be used: so, a breastplate is a necessity for safety.
Military officers imported the game to Britain in the 1860s.
Strategic plays in polo are based on the "line of the ball", an imaginary line created by the ball as it travels down the field.
The heads of the mallet are generally a cigar shape made from a hardwood called tipa, approximately 9" inches long.
He was buried near the Anarkali bazaar in Lahore (in modern-day Pakistan).
This was probably also the case in ancient times.
Whitney and his teammates used the fast break, sending long passes downfield to riders who had broken away from the pack at a full gallop.
Herbert stated in a 1913 article that they formed the Westchester Club ''after'' the "first" outdoor game was played on 13 May 1876.
Iranians still maintain some of the ancient rituals of the game in official polo matches.
Many saddles also have an overgirth.
A player can cross the line of the ball when it does not create a dangerous situation.
The Galveston News reported on 2 May 1876 that Denison Texas had a Polo Club which was before James Gordon Bennett established his Westchester Club or attempted to play the "first" game.
The establishment of polo clubs throughout England and western Europe followed after the formal codification of rules.
A player may hook only if he is on the side where the swing is being made or directly behind an opponent.
There is also an urban legend that the first game of polo in America was played in Boerne, Texas at retired British officer Captain Glynn Turquand's famous Balcones Ranch The Boerne, Texas legend also has plenty of evidence pointing to the fact that polo was played in Boerne before James Gordon Bennett Jr. ever picked up a polo mallet.
The shaft is made of manau-cane (not bamboo because it is hollowed) although a small number of mallets today are made from Composite materials.
The recent surge of excitement in south-east Asia around the game has resulted in its popularity in cities such as Pattaya, Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta.
The modern game lasts roughly two hours and is divided into periods called chukkas (occasionally rendered as "chukkers").
The game's governing body in the United Kingdom is the Hurlingham Polo Association, which drew up the first set of formal British rules in 1874, many of which are still in existence.
The outdoor ball is about  in diameter and weighs about four ounces (113.4&nbsp;g).
