The most common catalysts consist of titanium(III) chloride, the so-called Ziegler-Natta catalysts.
It feels waxy when touched.
It also is less notch-sensitive than HDPE; stress-cracking resistance is better than HDPE.
The high molecular weight makes it a very tough material, but results in less efficient packing of the chains into the crystal structure as evidenced by densities of less than high-density polyethylene (for example, 0.930–0.935&nbsp;g/cm3).
When these combine, a crosslinked network is formed.
In contrast to peroxide crosslinking, the process is carried out in the solid state.
Thus, an almost linear relationship exists between density and crystallinity.
Depending on thermal history and film thickness PE can vary between almost clear (transparent), milky-opaque (translucent) or opaque.
*High-density cross-linked polyethylene (HDXLPE)
(In HDPE synthesis, the radical sites are at the ends of the PE chains, because the catalyst stabilizes their formation at the ends.)
The ingredient or monomer is ethylene (IUPAC name ethene), a gaseous hydrocarbon with the formula C2H4, which can be viewed as a pair of methylene groups (=) connected to each other.
Polyethylene can also be made from other feedstocks, including wheat grain and sugar beet.
Metallocene polyethylene has a low proportion of low molecular weight (extractable) components and a low welding and sealing temperature.
''Acinetobacter'' sp.
Addition of ethylene monomers to the secondary or tertiary sites creates branching.
Then, two radical chains can either directly crosslink (bottom left) or indirectly by silane compounds (bottom right).
The annual global production is around 80 million tonnes.
The properties of polyethylene can be divided into mechanical, chemical, electrical, optical and thermal properties.
LDPE is created by free-radical polymerization.
1-butene or 1-hexene) may be added, which are incorporated in the polymer chain during polymerization.
LDPE has a high degree of short- and long-chain branching, which means that the chains do not pack into the crystal structure as well.
Transparency is reduced by crystallites, if they are larger than the wavelength of visible light.
One of the main problems of polyethylene is that without special treatment it is not readily biodegradable, and thus accumulates.
Although ethylene can be produced from renewables, polyethylene is mainly made from petroleum or natural gas.
Because the compound is highly reactive, the ethylene must be of high purity.
Each time an ethylene monomer is added, it creates a primary radical, but often these will rearrange to form more stable secondary or tertiary radicals.
Polyethylene can be produced through radical polymerization, but this route has only limited utility and typically requires high-pressure apparatus.
PEX is used in some potable-water plumbing systems because tubes made of the material can be expanded to fit over a metal nipple and it will slowly return to its original shape, forming a permanent, water-tight connection.
The chain branches in turn depend on the process used: either the high-pressure process (only PE-LD) or the low-pressure process (all other PE grades).
Retrieved from cane sugar, i.e.
Another common catalyst is the Phillips catalyst, prepared by depositing chromium(VI) oxide on silica.
16 Catalysts such as dibutyltin dilaurate may accelerate the reaction.
The individual macromolecules are not covalently linked.
These copolymers introduce short side chains, thus crystallinity and density are reduced.
VLDPE is defined by a density range of 0.880–0.915&nbsp;g/cm3.
Chlorinated polyethylene can be crosslinked peroxidically to form an elastomer which is used in cable and rubber industry.
LLDPE is used in packaging, particularly film for bags and sheets.
Metallocene polyethylene has a relatively narrow molecular weight distribution, exceptionally high toughness, excellent optical properties and a uniform comonomer content.
In the so-called ''Engel process'', a mixture of HDPE and 2 % peroxide is at first mixed at low temperatures in an extruder and then crosslinked at high temperatures (between 200 and 250&nbsp;°C).
MDPE is defined by a density range of 0.926–0.940&nbsp;g/cm3.
HDPE is defined by a density of greater or equal to 0.941&nbsp;g/cm3.
The name is abbreviated to '''PE'''.
When PE is subjected to thermo- and photo-oxidization, products including alkanes, alkenes, ketones, aldehydes, alcohols, carboxylic acid, keto-acids, dicarboxylic acids, lactones, and esters are released.
It shows strong creep under persistent force, which can be reduced by addition of short fibers.
In each method, a radical is generated in the polyethylene chain (top center), either by radiation (h·ν) or by peroxides (R-O-O-R).
Chlorinated Polyethylene (PE-C) is an inexpensive material having a chlorine content from 34 to 44%.
The polymer chains are represented linearly.
The less the polymer chains are branched, and the smaller the molecular weight, the higher the crystallinity of polyethylene.
Because polyethylene was found to have very low-loss properties at very high frequency radio waves, commercial distribution in Britain was suspended on the outbreak of World War II, secrecy imposed and the new process was used to produce insulation for UHF and SHF coaxial cables of radar sets.
The higher molecular weight fractions form linking molecules between crystallites, thereby increasing toughness and stress crack resistance.
They consist of equal proportions higher and lower molekularerer polymer fractions.
In 2014, a Chinese researcher discovered that Indian mealmoth larvae could metabolize polyethylene from observing that plastic bags at his home had small holes in them.
HDPE has high tensile strength.
According to DIN 16892 (quality requirement for pipes made of PE-X) at least the following degree of crosslinking must be achieved:
plant biomass renewable feedstock, Brazil is the first country to develop the product.
*'''Peroxide crosslinking (PE-Xa)''': The crosslinking of polyethylene using peroxides (e. g. dicumyl or di-tert-butyl peroxide) is still of major importance.
Polyethylene can not be imprinted or stuck together without pretreatment.
*with silane crosslinking (PE-Xb): 65%
It is used for cable coverings, toys, lids, buckets, containers, and pipe.
However, they are more sensitive to heat and oxidation than ethylene homopolymers.
like a thermoplastic elastomer.
By crosslinking low-temperature impact strength, abrasion resistance and environmental stress cracking resistance can be increased significantly, whereas hardness and rigidity are somewhat reduced.
Ethylene/acrylic acid copolymers are used as adhesion promoters.
In addition, it also increases the weather resistance.
Because the reaction had been initiated by trace oxygen contamination in their apparatus, the experiment was, at first, difficult to reproduce.
With higher proportions it approaches to the one of polyvinyl acetate (1.17 g/cm3).
The basic compounds used as polar comonomers are vinyl alcohol (Ethenol, an unsaturated alcohol), acrylic acid (propenoic acid, an unsaturated acid) and esters containing one of the two compounds.
*'''Azo crosslinking (PE-Xd)''': In the so-called ''Lubonyl process'' polyethylene is crosslinked preadded azo compounds after extrusion in a hot salt bath.
It offers good tracking resistance, however, it becomes easily electrostatically charged (which can be reduced by additions of graphite, carbon black or antistatic agents).
Because of their symmetric molecular structure, they tend to crystallize; overall polyethylene is partially crystalline.
Molecular weight and crystallinity are having the biggest impact, the crystallinity in turn depends on molecular weight and degree of branching.
PE is usually a mixture of similar polymers of ethylene with various values of ''n''.
Polyethylene is classified by its density and branching.
HDPE can be produced by chromium/silica catalysts, Ziegler-Natta catalysts or metallocene catalysts; by choosing catalysts and reaction conditions, the small amount of branching that does occur can be controlled.
trimethoxyvinylsilane) polyethylene can initially be Si-functionalized by irradiation or by a small amount of a peroxide.
The Phillips catalyst is less expensive and easier to work with, however, and both methods are heavily used industrially.
In 2013, the global LDPE market had a volume of almost US$33 billion.
The degree of crosslinking (and hence the extent of the change) is different in intensity depending on the process.
Secondary radicals (in the middle of a chain) are more stable than primary radicals (at the end of the chain), and tertiary radicals (at a branch point) are more stable yet.
The first industrially practical polyethylene synthesis (diazomethane is a notoriously unstable substance that is generally avoided in industrial application) was discovered in 1933 by Eric Fawcett and Reginald Gibson, again by accident, at the Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) works in Northwich, England.
PE-X does not melt anymore (analogous to elastomers) and is thermally resistant (over longer periods of up to 120&nbsp;°C, for short periods without mechanical load up to 250&nbsp;°C).
Polyethylene burns slowly with a blue flame having a yellow tip and gives off an odour of paraffin (similar to candle flame).
The polar side groups change the chemical properties significantly (compared to polyethylene): weather resistance, adhesiveness and weldability rise with comonomer content, while the chemical resistance decreases.
Many kinds of polyethylene are known, with most having the chemical formula (C2H4)''n''.
Such resins, in the form of UHMWPE fibers, have (as of 2005) begun to replace aramids in many high-strength applications.
Various methods can used to prepare cross-linked polyethylene (PE-X) from thermoplastic polyethylene (PE-LD, PE-LLD or PE-HD).
Crystalline samples do not dissolve at room temperature.
PE can become brittle when exposed to sunlight, carbon black is usually used as a UV stabilizer.
Polyethylene may either be modified in the polymerization by polar or non-polar comonomers or after polymerization through polymer-analogous reactions.
Cyclic olefin copolymers are prepared by copolymerization of ethene and cycloolefins (usually norbornene) produced by using metallocene catalysts.
The scientific name ''polyethene'' is systematically derived from the scientific name of the monomer.
Its primary use is in packaging (plastic bags, plastic films, geomembranes, containers including bottles, etc.).
Furthermore, it is used for softening PVC foils, without risking the migrate of plasticizers.
Copolymer of ethylene and unsaturated carboxylic acids (such as acrylic acid) are characterized by good adhesion to different materials, by resistance to stress cracking and high flexibility.
B. ethene / hexene).
LLDPE is defined by a density range of 0.915–0.925&nbsp;g/cm3.
The degree of branching of the different types of polyethylene can be schematically represented as follows:
Because of its outstanding toughness and its cut, wear, and excellent chemical resistance, UHMWPE is used in a diverse range of applications.
In the United Kingdom the polymer is commonly called '''polythene''', from the ICI trade name, although this is not recognized scientifically.
The resulting polymer network is uniform, of low tension and high flexibility, whereby it is softer and tougher than (the irradiated) PE-Xc.
These developments are using renewable resources rather than fossil fuel, although the issue of plastic source is currently negligible in the wake of plastic waste and in particular polyethylene waste as shown above.
The usefulness of polyethylene is limited by its softening point of  (HDPE, types of low crystalline softens earlier).
Catalytic systems based on soluble catalysts, the metallocenes, were reported in 1976 by Walter Kaminsky and Hansjörg Sinn.
351 can degrade lower molecular-weight PE oligomers.
Higher crystallinity increases density and mechanical and chemical stability.
Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers are prepared similarly to LD-PE by high pressure polymerization.
In 2013, the world LLDPE market reached a volume of US$40 billion.
PE-LD thereby owns the largest, PE-LLD slightly lower and PE-HD the least transparency.
Due to decreasing crystallinity ethylene vinyl acetate copolymers are getting softer with increasing comonomer content.
*with electron beam crosslinking (PE-Xc): 60%
With increasing crosslinking density also the maximum shear modulus increases (even at higher temperatures).
This crosslinked polyethylene (PE-X) is chemically seen a thermoset, it shows above the melting point rubber-elastic behavior and can not be processed in the melt anymore.
The melting point for average, commercial, low-density polyethylene is typically .
*Ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE)
In addition to copolymerization with alpha-olefins, ethylene can also be copolymerized with a wide range of other monomers and ionic composition that creates ionized free radicals.
The figure shows polyethylene backbones, short-chain branches and side chain branches.
*Ultra-low-molecular-weight polyethylene (ULMWPE or PE-WAX)
Thereby, the cross-linking takes place primarily in the amorphous regions, while the crystallinity remains largely intact.
Ethylene is a rather stable molecule that polymerizes only upon contact with catalysts.
*High-molecular-weight polyethylene (HMWPE)
In HDPE, a relatively small number of these branches, perhaps one in 100 or 1,000 branches per backbone carbon, can significantly affect the rheological properties of the polymer.
*Medium-density polyethylene (MDPE)
Product examples range from agricultural films, Saran wrap, and bubble wrap, to multilayer and composite films.
HDPE has a low degree of branching.
The difference in names between the two systems is due to the ''opening up'' of the monomer's double bond upon polymerization.
Short chain branches are formed by intramolecular chain transfer reactions, they are always butyl or ethyl chain branches because the reaction proceeds after the following mechanism:
Not only could the bacteria from the guts of the ''Plodia interpunctella'' moth larvae metabolize polyethylene, they degraded it significantly, dropping its tensile strength by 50%, its mass by 10% and the molecular weights of its polymeric chains by 13%.
The properties of polyethylene are highly dependent on type and number of chain branches.
By the end of the 1950s both the Phillips- and Ziegler-type catalysts were being used for HDPE production.
The thermophilic bacterium ''Brevibacillus borstelensis'' (strain 707) was isolated from a soil sample and found to use low-density polyethylene as a sole carbon source when incubated together at 50&nbsp;°C.
In 2007, the global HDPE consumption reached a volume of more than 30 million tons.
The peroxide decomposes to peroxide radicals (RO•), which abstract (remove) hydrogen atoms from the polymer chain, leading to radicals.
Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution consists of several polymer fractions, which are homogeneously mixed.
However, due to high capital and operating costs radiation crosslinking plays only a minor role compared with the peroxide crosslinking.
There are several types of polyethylene:
Thus, it is particularly suitable for the food industry.
In May 2008, Daniel Burd, a 16-year-old Canadian, won the Canada-Wide Science Fair in Ottawa after discovering that ''Pseudomonas fluorescens'', with the help of ''Sphingomonas'', can degrade over 40% of the weight of plastic bags in less than three months.
The individual macromolecules are not linked and no covalent network is formed yet.
The diverse material behavior of different types of polyethylene can be explained by their molecular structure.
It has, therefore, less strong intermolecular forces as the instantaneous-dipole induced-dipole attraction is less.
The mostly linear molecules pack together well, so intermolecular forces are stronger than in highly branched polymers.
If unsaturated esters are copolymerized with ethylene, either the alcohol moiety may be in the polymer backbone (as it is the case in ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer) or of the acid moiety (e. g. in ethylene-ethyl acrylate copolymer).
Common polymer-analogous reactions are in case of polyethylene crosslinking, chlorination and sulfochlorination.
A low degree of crosslinking leads initially only to a multiplication of the molecular weight.
Polyethylene that consists of those large molecules behaves similar to polyethylene of ultra high molecular weight (PE-UHMW), i.e.
The radical polymerization process used to make LDPE does not include a catalyst that "supervises" the radical sites on the growing PE chains.
If salts of an unsaturated carboxylic acid are present in the polymer, thermo-reversible ion networks are formed, they are called ionomers.
Therefore, its chemical behavior is similar to paraffin.
As EVOH is hygroscopic (water-attracting), it absorbs water from the environment, whereby it loses its barrier effect.
UHMWPE is polyethylene with a molecular weight numbering in the millions, usually between 3.5 and 7.5 million.
Coordination polymerization is the most pervasive technology, which means that metal chlorides or metal oxides are used.
As fiber, it competes with aramid in bulletproof vests.
VLDPE is most commonly produced using metallocene catalysts due to the greater co-monomer incorporation exhibited by these catalysts.
Polyethylene (other than cross-linked polyethylene) usually can be dissolved at elevated temperatures in aromatic hydrocarbons such as toluene or xylene, or in chlorinated solvents such as trichloroethane or trichlorobenzene.
Lower thickness may be used compared to LDPE.
Since 2008, Japan has rapidly increased the recycling of plastics, but still has a large amount of plastic wrapping which goes to waste.
Its mechanical properties depend significantly on variables such as the extent and type of branching, the crystal structure, and the molecular weight.
*'''Irradiation crosslinking (PE-Xc)''': The crosslinking of polyethylene is also possible by a downstream radiation source (usually a electron accelerator, occasionally a isotopic radiator).
The Ziegler- and metallocene-based catalysts families have proven to be very flexible at copolymerizing ethylene with other olefins and have become the basis for the wide range of polyethylene resins available today, including very low density polyethylene and linear low-density polyethylene.
One-third of all toys are manufactured from HDPE.
*Very-low-density polyethylene (VLDPE)
Upon further crosslinking (crosslinking degree about 80%), the individual macromolecules are eventually connected to a network.
Chlorosulfonated PE (CSM) is used as starting material for ozone resistant synthetic rubber.
The alkene monomer converts to a long, sometimes ''very'' long, alkane in the polymerization process.
β-radiation possesses a penetration depth of 10 mm, ɣ-radiation 100&nbsp;mm.
PE-X is used as insulating material for medium and high voltage cable insulation, for hot water pipes and molded parts in electrical engineering, plant engineering and in automotive industry.
*High-density polyethylene (HDPE)
Because of the narrow molecular weight distribution it behaves less pseudoplastic (especially under larger shear rates).
In a similar manner polypropylene and polystyrene are shortened to PP and PS, respectively.
Polyethylene with multimodal molecular weight distribution can be prepared either in two-stage reactors, by catalysts with two different active centers on a carrier or by blending in extruders.
Deducing that the hungry larvae must have digested the plastic somehow, he and his team analyzed their gut bacteria and found a few that could use plastic as their only carbon source.
Biodegradation increased with time exposed to ultraviolet radiation.
The conversion is highly exothermic.
These temperatures vary strongly with the type of polyethylene.
The proportion of comonomer has a decisive influence on the behaviour of the polymer.
Applications of acrylic copolymer include packaging and sporting goods, and superplasticizer, used for cement production.
As explained above, mechanical and thermal properties are changed thereby.
In particular, PE-LLD is produced this way.
In Japan, getting rid of plastics in an environmentally friendly way was the major problem discussed until the Fukushima disaster in 2011.
In the 1970s, the Ziegler system was improved by the incorporation of magnesium chloride.
Polyethylene is a good electrical insulator.
PE products are crosslinked below the crystalline melting point by splitting off hydrogen atoms.
In 1953 the German chemist Karl Ziegler developed a catalytic system based on titanium halides and organoaluminium compounds that worked at even milder conditions than the Phillips catalyst.
Ethylene-ethyl acrylate copolymers behave similarly to ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers.
MDPE is typically used in gas pipes and fittings, sacks, shrink film, packaging film, carrier bags, and screw closures.
EVOH is used in multilayer films for packaging as a barrier layer (barrier plastic).
UHMWPE can be made through any catalyst technology, although Ziegler catalysts are most common.
Polyethylene consists of nonpolar, saturated, high molecular weight hydrocarbons.
Such polyethylene types offer extremely high stiffness, toughness, strength, stress crack resistance and an increased crack propagation resistance.
In 2010, a Japanese researcher, Akinori Ito, released the prototype of a machine which creates oil from polyethylene using a small, self-contained vapor distillation process.
The high-temperature properties of the polymer are improved, its flow is reduced, and its chemical resistance is enhanced.
*Chlorinated polyethylene (CPE)
VLDPEs are used for hose and tubing, ice and frozen food bags, food packaging and stretch wrap as well as impact modifiers when blended with other polymers.
*in azo crosslinking (PE-Xd): 60%
For common commercial grades of medium- and high-density polyethylene the melting point is typically in the range .
As PE-X is infusible, always the final pre-products or the mold part are cross-linked.
In certain circumstances it is useful to use a structure-based nomenclature; in such cases IUPAC recommends poly(methylene) (poly(methanediyl) is a non-preferred alternative).
They cause new ethylene monomers to add to the ends of the molecules, rather than along the middle, causing the growth of a linear chain.
The resulting polymers are amorphous polymers and particularly transparent and heat resistant.
It is used in blends with PVC because the soft, rubbery chloropolyethylene is embedded in the PVC matrix, thereby increasing the impact resistance.
