Controversy followed when polygamy became a social cause, writers began to publish works condemning polygamy.
About 1000 CE he called a synod which decided the following particulars: (1) prohibition of polygamy; (2) necessity of obtaining the consent of both parties to a divorce; (3) modification of the rules concerning those who became apostates under compulsion; (4) prohibition against opening correspondence addressed to another.
He notes Dorjahn's (1959) comparison of East and West Africa, showing higher female agricultural contributions in East Africa and higher polygyny rates in West Africa, especially in the West African savannah, where one finds especially high male agricultural contributions.
Divorce and remarriage can thus result in serial monogamy.
For most of his career, Smith denied that his father had been involved in the practice and insisted that it had originated with Brigham Young.
He gave two examples of such relationships: ''dominus-servus'' - master-servant (in older translation: ''slave'') and ''God-soul''.
In many Western countries divorce rates roughly approach 50%.
Augustine taught that the reason patriarchs had many wives was not because of fornication, but because they wanted more children.
The LDS Church believed that their religiously based practice of plural marriage was protected by the United States Constitution, however, the unanimous 1878 Supreme Court decision ''Reynolds v. United States'' declared that polygamy was not protected by the Constitution, based on the longstanding legal principle that "laws are made for the government of actions, and while they cannot interfere with mere religious belief and opinions, they may with practices."
This provides support for the widow and her children (usually also members of the brothers' kin group) and maintains the tie between the husband and wives' kin groups.
Even so, many plural husbands and wives continued to cohabit until their deaths in the 1940s and 1950s.
''Fraternal polyandry'' was traditionally practiced among nomadic Tibetans in Nepal, parts of China and part of northern India, in which two or more brothers are married to the same wife.
Polygamy is contrary to conjugal love which is undivided and exclusive."
They can thus be described as a "series of linked nuclear families with a 'father' in common".
Among Karaite Jews, who do not adhere to Rabbinic interpretations of the Torah, polygamy is almost non-existent today.
Augustine wrote: ''That the good purpose of marriage, however, is better promoted by one husband with one wife, than by a husband with several wives, is shown plainly enough by the very first union of a married pair, which was made by the Divine Being Himself.''
After Joseph Smith was killed by a mob on 27 June 1844, the main body of Latter Day Saints left Nauvoo and followed Brigham Young to Utah where the practice of plural marriage continued.
The men were admonished to behave honorably, provide for their wives properly, and prevent animosity among them."
Smith served many missions to the western United States where he met with and interviewed associates and women claiming to be widows of his father, who attempted to present him with evidence to the contrary.
Prior to 1955, polygamy was permitted for Hindus.
In most Muslim-majority countries, polygyny is legal with Kuwait being the only one where no restrictions are imposed on it.
Bigamy is illegal in the United Kingdom, unlike polygamy, which is not mentioned as a criminal offence in the United Kingdom.
Serial monogamy creates a new kind of relative, the "ex-".
Usually the wives have little to no contact with each other and lead separate, individual lives in their own houses, and sometimes in different cities, though they all share the same husband.
For, as it is written, 'The two will become one flesh.
Supporters of polygamy claim this indicates that the term refers to a physical, rather than spiritual, union.
Because of these two biblical limitations and because most countries outlaw it, polygamy is considered highly impractical, and there are only a few known cases of it among Karaite Jews today.
Other forms of marriage are also present, like group marriage and monogamous marriage.
According to him, these "unclear families" do not fit the mould of the monogamous nuclear family.
On the contrary, he argued that the polygamy of the Fathers, which was tolerated by the Creator because of fertility, was a diversion from His original plan for human marriage.
Common people were only allowed a second marriage if the first wife could not bear a son.
Until 2010, polygyny was legally recognized in Thailand.
It is said in the Parabhava Sutta that "a man who is not satisfied with one woman and seeks out other women is on the path to decline".
Polyandry is the practice wherein a woman has more than one husband at the same time.
She, however, may never cohabit with him, taking multiple lovers instead; these men must acknowledge the paternity of their children (and hence demonstrate that no caste prohibitions have been breeched) by paying the midwife.
Polyandry is much less popular than polygyny and is illegal in virtually every state in the world.
In many polygynous marriages the husband's wives may live in separate households .
He stated: "''Marriage, as its ultramodern critics would like to say, is indeed about choosing one's partner, and about freedom in a society that values freedom.
However polygamy may still occur in non-European Jewish communities that exist in countries where it is not forbidden, such as Jewish communities in Yemen and the Arab world.
In Sri Lanka, polyandry was practiced (though not widespread) until recent times.
A House of Commons Briefing Paper states ''Treating second and subsequent partners in polygamous relationships as separate claimants could in some situations mean that polygamous households receive more under Universal Credit than they do under the current rules for means-tested benefits and tax credits.
In 1852, Brigham Young, the second president of the LDS Church, publicly acknowledged the practice of plural marriage through a sermon he gave.
Although the New Testament is largely silent on polygamy, some point to Jesus's repetition of the earlier scriptures, noting that a man and a wife "shall become one flesh".
Conjugal communion is radically contradicted by polygamy; this, in fact, directly negates the plan of God that was revealed from the beginning, because it is contrary to the equal personal dignity of men and women who in matrimony give themselves with a love that is total and therefore unique and exclusive."
Tzvi Zohar, a professor from the Bar-Ilan University, recently suggested that based on the opinions of leading halachic authorities, the concept of concubines may serve as a practical Halachic justification for premarital or non-marital cohabitation.
The history of Mormonism and polygamy (specifically polygyny) began with Joseph Smith, who stated he received a revelation on 17 July 1831 that "plural marriage" should be practiced by some Mormon men who were specifically commanded to do so.
The chief consort had to be of an equal caste.
It is purely a secular affair and the monks do not participate in it, though in some sects priests and monks do marry.
In a written answer to the House of Commons, ''In Great Britain, polygamy is only recognised as valid in law in circumstances where the marriage ceremony has been performed in a country whose laws permit polygamy and the parties to the marriage were domiciled there at the time.
It is associated with ''partible paternity'', the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father.
Further on he notices that the Church's attitude goes much further than the secular law regarding monogamy: It forbids remarrying, considering such to be a form of fornication: ''And yet, save in the City of our God, in His Holy Mount, the case is not such with the wife.
A non-Muslim woman captured during war by Muslims, can also remarry, as her marriage with her non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved at capture by Muslim soldiers.
Polyandry (especially fraternal polyandry) is also common among Buddhists in Bhutan, Ladakh, and other parts of the Indian subcontinent.
Like other Jews, Karaites interpret  to mean that a man can only take a second wife if his first wife gives her consent (Keter Torah on Leviticus, pp.&nbsp;96–97) and Karaites interpret Exodus 21:10 to mean that a man can only take a second wife if he is capable of maintaining the same level of marital duties due to his first wife; the marital duties are 1) food, 2) clothing, and 3) sexual gratification.
Despite its prevalence in the Hebrew Bible, scholars do not believe that polygyny was commonly practiced in the biblical era because it required a significant amount of wealth.
The Mishneh Torah, while maintaining the right to multiple spouses, and the requirement to provide fully for each as indicated in previously cited sources, went further: "He may not, however, compel his wives to live in the same courtyard.
The Dharmashastras permit a man to marry women of lower castes provided that the first wife was of equal caste.
In such a case, the husband cannot marry another woman as long as he is married to his wife.
If every brother married separately and had children, family land would be split into unsustainable small plots.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, there has often been a tension between the Christian insistence on monogamy and traditional polygamy.
In Sudan, the government encouraged polygyny in 2001 to increase the population.
The Bible often equates worshiping multiple gods, i.e.
Periodically, Christian reform movements that have aimed at rebuilding Christian doctrine based on the Bible alone (''sola scriptura'') have at least temporarily accepted polygyny as a Biblical practice.
It is a rare form of marriage that exists not only among poor families, but also the elite.
Despite Smith's revelation, the 1835 edition of the 101st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, written after the doctrine of plural marriage began to be practiced, publicly condemned polygamy.
Instead, each one is entitled to her own household".
The illegality of polygamy in certain areas creates, according to certain Bible passages, additional arguments against it.
This was later published in the Doctrine and Covenants by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
This scripture was used by John Taylor in 1850 to quash Mormon polygamy rumors in Liverpool, England.
Lastly, the decree stated that every man was allowed to marry up to ten women.
Forms of marriage consequently vary from country to country.
''Non-fraternal polyandry'' occurs when the wives' husbands are unrelated, as among the Nayar tribe of India.
Anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas demonstrated an historical correlation between the practice of extensive shifting horticulture and polygamy in the majority of sub-Saharan African societies.
''The Salt Lake Tribune'' stated in 2005 there were as many as 37,000 fundamentalists with less than half of them living in polygamous households.
Polyandry in Tibet as well was common traditionally, as was polygyny, and having several wives or husbands was never regarded as having sex with inappropriate partners.
The Apastamba Dharmasutra and Manusmriti allow a second wife if the first one is unable to discharge her religious duties or is unable to bear a son.
The Rig Veda mentions that during the Vedic period, a man could have more than one wife.
The verse also emphasizes on transparency, mutual agreement and financial compensation as prerequisites for matrimonial relationship as opposed to prostitution; it says:
Polygamy was made illegal in the state of Illinois during the 1839–44 Nauvoo era when several top Mormon leaders, including Smith, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball took multiple wives.
Polygyny may also result from the practice of levirate marriage.
Such fundamentalists often use a purported 1886 revelation to John Taylor as the basis for their authority to continue the practice of plural marriage.
Some Mizrahi Jewish communities (particularly Yemenite Jews and Persian Jews) discontinued polygyny more recently, after they immigrated to countries where it was forbidden or illegal.
(1 Peter 2:13,14) Pro-polygamists argue that, as long as polygamists currently do not obtain legal marriage licenses nor seek "common law marriage status" for additional spouses, no enforced laws are being broken any more than when monogamous couples similarly co-habitate without a marriage license.
The Hindu Marriage Act was enacted in 1955 by the Indian Parliament and made polygamy illegal for everyone in India except for Muslims.
Augustine saw marriage as a non-sacrament-friendly covenant between one man and one woman, which may not be broken.
Such marriage was confirmed by the Saviour in the Gospel of Matthew (Mat 19:9) and by His presence at the wedding in Cana (John 2:2).
Polygyny is legally accepted in many Muslim majority countries and some countries with a sizeable Muslim minority; it's also accepted in some secular countries in varying degrees.
But Mizrahi Jews are not permitted to enter into new polygamous marriages in Israel.
However, in the case of a divorce or their husbands' death they can remarry after the completion of Iddah, as divorce is legal in Islamic law.
Polygyny is the practice wherein a man has more than one wife at the same time.
But, that the laws of the Gentiles are otherwise, who is there that knows not'' .
This is a form of ''de&nbsp;facto'' polygyny that is referred to as concubinage.
On 13 December 2013, US Federal Judge Clark Waddoups ruled in ''Brown v. Buhman'' that the portions of Utah's anti-polygamy laws which prohibit multiple cohabitation were unconstitutional, but also allowed Utah to maintain its ban on multiple marriage licenses.
Increasingly harsh anti-polygamy legislation in the US led some Mormons to emigrate to Canada and Mexico.
But that's not the only thing it is about.
Polygamy is also common among some animals, such as the common fruit-fly, ''Drosophila melanogaster''.
In January 2015, Pastor Neil Patrick Carrick of Detroit, Michigan brought a case (Carrick v. Snyder) against the State of Michigan that the state's ban of polygamy violates the Free Exercise and Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
In the Babylonian Talmud (BT), Kiddushin 7a, its states, "Raba said:  'Be thou betrothed to half of me,' she is betrothed: 'half of thee be betrothed to me,' she is not betrothed."
In sociobiology and zoology, researchers use ''polygamy'' in a broad sense to mean any form of multiple mating.
As tribal populations grew, fertility was no longer a valid justification of polygamy: it "was lawful among the ancient fathers: whether it be lawful now also, I would not hastily pronounce (utrum et nunc fas sit, non temere dixerim).
In some instances in recent times there have been moves for accommodation; in other instances, churches have resisted such moves strongly.
It occurs only in remote communities.
In chapter 7, Augustine pointed out that the Roman Empire forbad polygamy, even if the reason of fertility would support it: ''For it is in a man's power to put away a wife that is barren, and marry one of whom to have children.
The Community of Christ, known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS Church) prior to 2001, has never sanctioned polygamy since its foundation in 1860.
It is most common in societies marked by high male mortality.
They were: Mahisi who was the chief consort, Parivrkti who had no son, Vaivata who is considered the favorite wife and the Palagali who was the daughter of the last of the court officials.
He had a total of nine wives, but not all at the same time, depending on the sources in his lifetime.
Hence it receives no religious sanction.
Pre-existing polygynous unions among Jews from Arab countries (or other countries where the practice was not prohibited by their tradition and was not illegal) are not subject to this Israeli law.
Some fifteen years earlier, in a letter to the Saxon Chancellor Gregor Brück, Luther stated that he could not "forbid a person to marry several wives, for it does not contradict Scripture."
If a marriage includes multiple husbands and wives, it can be called a group marriage.
Muslim women aren't allowed to marry more than one husband at once.
Augustine relates to that: ''On this account there is no True God of souls, save One: but one soul by means of many false gods may commit fornication, but not be made fruitful''.
In some of the sparsely populated regions where shifting cultivation takes place in Africa, women do much of the work.
Marriage is the moment at which a new household is formed, but different arrangements may occur depending upon the type of marriage and some polygamous marriages do not result in the formation of a single household.
Stanley Kurtz, a Conservative fellow at the Hudson Institute rejects the decriminalization and legalization of polygamy.
For there is not now necessity of begetting children, as there then was, when, even when wives bear children, it was allowed, in order to a more numerous posterity, to marry other wives in addition, which now is certainly not lawful."
The Roman Catholic Church condemns polygamy; the ''Catechism of the Catholic Church'' lists it in paragraph 2387 under the head "Other offenses against the dignity of marriage" and states that it "is not in accord with the moral law."
It was the Creator who established monogamy: ''Therefore, the first natural bond of human society is man and wife.''
Some modern Celtic pagan religions accept the practice of polygamy to varying degrees, though how widespread the practice is within these religions is unknown.
In 1890, LDS Church president Wilford Woodruff issued a public declaration (the Manifesto) announcing that the LDS Church had discontinued new plural marriages.
And in a place where it is customary to marry only one wife, he is not permitted to take another wife on top of his present wife."
As can be seen, while the tradition of the Rabbinic period began with providing legal definition for the practice of polygamy (although this does not indicate the frequency with which polygamy in fact occurred) that corresponded to precedents in the tanakh, by the time of the Codices the Rabbis had greatly reduced or eliminated sanction of the practice.
The double marriage was to be done in secret, however, to avoid public scandal.
He also discusses more male-dominated though relatively extensive farming systems such as those that exist in much of West Africa, in particular the West African savannah, where polygyny is desired more for the creation of sons, whose labor is valued.
Polyandry is believed to be more likely in societies with scarce environmental resources, as it is believed to limit human population growth and enhance child survival.
The BT during a discussion of Levirate marriage in Yevamot 65a appears to repeat the precedent found in Exodus 21:10: "Raba said: a man may marry wives in addition to the first wife; provided only that he possesses the means to maintain them".
Michael Coogan, in contrast, states that "Polygyny continued to be practised well into the biblical period, and it is attested among Jews as late as the second century&nbsp;CE".
In such cases, the deceased man's heir may inherit his assets and wife; or, more usually, his brothers may marry the widow.
Traditional Hindu law allowed polygamy if the first wife could not bear a son.
The other practice though not well documented is polyandry, where a woman marries more than one man.
The "ex-wife", for example, can remain an active part of her "ex-husband's" life, as they may be tied together by legally or informally mandated economic support, that can last for years, including by alimony, child support, and joint custody.
Group marriage is a form of non-monogamy and polyamory.
The sororate is like the levirate, in that a widower must marry the sister of his dead wife.
Despite these nuances to the biblical perspective on polygamy, many important figures had more than one wife, such as in the instances of Esau (Gen 26:34; 28:6-9), Jacob (Gen 29:15-28), Elkanah (1 Samuel 1:1-8), David (1 Samuel 25:39-44; 2 Samuel 3:2-5; 5:13-16), and Solomon (1 Kings 11:1-3).
However, many members of the Community of Christ, and some of the groups that were formerly associated with it are not convinced that Joseph Smith practiced plural marriage, and feel that the evidence that he did is flawed.
The Bible states in the New Testament that polygamy should not be practiced by certain church leaders.
A similar form of matrilineal, de facto polyandry can be found in the institution of walking marriage among the Mosuo tribe of China.
Maimonides, in his Mishneh Torah maintained that polygamous unions were permissible from a legal point of view, which was contrary to his personal opinion.
Ashkenazi Jews have continued to follow Rabbenu Gershom's ban since the 11th century.
A hard-won lesson of Western history is that genuine democratic self-rule begins at the hearth of the monogamous family.''"
He refrained from judging the patriarchs, but did not deduce from their practice the ongoing acceptability of polygyny.
According to Vishnu Smriti, the number of wives is linked to the caste system:
Muhammad was monogamously married to Khadija, his first wife, for 25 years, until she died.
For a Brahmana, only one wife could rank as the chief consort who performed the religious rites (''dharma-patni'') along with the husband.
Most notable in the Rabbinic period on the issue of polygamy, though more specifically for Ashkenazi Jews, was the synod of Rabbeinu Gershom.
If a man married several women from the same caste, then eldest wife is the chief consort.
Despite its existence, it was most usually practiced by men of higher castes and higher status.
'''Polygamy''' (from Late Greek , ''polygamia'', "state of marriage to many spouses") involves marriage with more than one spouse.
Polygamy in all its forms is a recipe for social structures that inhibit and ultimately undermine social freedom and democracy.
In Malaysia and Morocco, a man must justify taking an additional wife at a court hearing before he is allowed to do so.
The monogamy of the Roman Empire was the cause of two explanatory notes in the writings of Josephus describing how the polygamous marriages of Herod the Great were permitted under Jewish custom.
However, the wife can set a condition, in the marriage contract, that the husband cannot marry another woman during their marriage.
Group marriage is a marriage wherein the family unit consists of more than two partners, any of whom share parental responsibility for any children arising from the marriage.
Anthropologists Douglas R. White and Michael L. Burton discuss and support Jack Goody's observation regarding African male farming systems in "Causes of Polygyny: Ecology, Economy, Kinship, and Warfare" where these authors note: "Goody (1973) argues against the female contributions hypothesis.
Furthermore, former chief rabbi Ovadia Yosef has come out in favor of legalizing polygamy and the practice of pilegesh (concubine) by the Israeli government.
The practice is attested in epics like Ramayana and Mahabharata.
For example, during the Protestant Reformation, in a document referred to simply as ''"Der Beichtrat"'' (or ''"The Confessional Advice"'' ), Martin Luther granted the Landgrave Philip of Hesse, who, for many years, had been living "constantly in a state of adultery and fornication", a dispensation to take a second wife.
The practice is illegal in Muslim-majority Turkey, Tunisia, Albania, Kosovo and Central Asian countries.
Most Christian theologians argue that in  and referring to  Jesus explicitly states a man should have only one wife:
In the Church—the City of God—marriage is a sacrament and may not and cannot be dissolved as long as the spouses live: ''But a marriage once for all entered upon in the City of our God, where, even from the first union of the two, the man and the woman, marriage bears a certain sacramental character, can in no way be dissolved but by the death of one of them.''.
On 7 June 1844 the ''Nauvoo Expositor'' criticized Smith for plural marriage.
Hindu kings commonly had more than one wife and are regularly attributed four wives by the scriptures.
In the modern day, polygamy is almost nonexistent in Rabbinic Judaism.
Paul the Apostle writes "submit to the authorities, not only because of possible punishment but also because of conscience" (Romans 13:5), for "the authorities that exist have been established by God."
In practice, however, the law is loosely enforced, primarily to avoid interference with Bedouin culture, where polygyny is practiced.
Unlawful cohabitation, where prosecutors did not need to prove that a marriage ceremony had taken place (only that a couple had lived together), had been the primary tool used to prosecute polygamy in Utah since the 1882 Edmunds Act.
Goody says, "The reasons behind polygyny are sexual and reproductive rather than economic and productive" (1973:189), arguing that men marry polygynously to maximize their fertility and to obtain large households containing many young dependent males."
In Europe, this was prevented through the social practice of impartible inheritance (the disinheriting of most siblings, many of whom went on to become celibate monks and priests).
idolatry to fornication.
A non-Muslim woman who flees from her non-Muslim husband and accepts Islam can remarry without divorce from her previous husband, as her marriage with non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved on her fleeing.
1 Timothy states that certain Church leaders should have but one wife: "A ''bishop'' then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach" (chapter 3, verse 2; see also verse 12 regarding deacons having only one wife).
However, some look to Paul's writings to the Corinthians: "Do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her?
Israel has made polygamy illegal.
(Romans 13:1) St Peter concurs when he says to "submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority, or to governors, who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right."
Other fragments in the Buddhist scripture can be found that seem to treat polygamy unfavorably, leading some authors to conclude that Buddhism generally does not approve of it or alternatively that it is a tolerated, but subordinate marital model.
Countries that allow polygyny typically also require a man to obtain permission from his previous wives before marrying another, and require the man to prove that he can financially support multiple wives.
Priests and ministers not bound by any monastery were allowed to marry.
"polygamy is not in accord with the moral law.
Anti-Mormon sentiment waned, as did opposition to statehood for Utah.
Bob Simpson notes that in the British case, it creates an "extended family", that is, a number of households tied together in this way, including mobile children, noting that Britons may have ex‑wives or ex‑brothers‑in‑law, but not an ''ex‑child''.
("''Ego sane fateor, me non posse prohibere, si quis plures velit uxores ducere, nec repugnat sacris literis.''")
Multiple marriage was considered a realistic alternative in the case of famine, widowhood, or female infertility like in the practice of levirate marriage, wherein a man was required to marry and support his deceased brother's widow, as mandated by .
Joseph Smith&nbsp;III, the first Prophet-President of the RLDS Church following the Reorganized of the church, was an ardent opponent of the practice of plural marriage throughout his life.
This favours polygamous marriages in which men sought to monopolize the production of women "who are valued both as workers and as child bearers".
Both levirate and sororate may result in a man having multiple wives.
The Roman Catholic Church teaches in its Catechism that
Provisions were instituted to allow for existing polygamous families immigrating from countries where the practice was legal.
One reason cited for polygyny is that it allows a man to give financial protection to multiple women, who might otherwise not have any support (e.g.
Some pre-Christian Celtic pagans were known to practice polygamy, although the Celtic peoples wavered between it, monogamy and polyandry depending on the time period and area.
The women remain in their maternal home, living with their brothers, and property is passed matrilineally.
Most typically, fraternal polyandry is practiced, but sometimes father and son have a common wife, which is a unique family structure in the world.
Polygamy is widely accepted among different societies worldwide.
In this case, a woman undergoes a ritual marriage before puberty, and he is acknowledged as the father of all her children.
The Qur'an does not give preference in marrying more than one wife.
He supported his premise by showing that their marriages, in which husband was the head, were arranged according to the rules of good management: those who are ''in command'' (''quae principantur'') in their society were always singular, while ''subordinates'' (''subiecta'') were multiple.
In contrast, monogamy is marriage consisting of only two parties.
The Jewish Codices began a process of restricting polygamy in Judaism.
The Torah may distinguish concubines and "sub-standard" wives with the prefix "to" (e.g., lit.
Smith typically responded to such accusations by saying that he was "not positive nor sure that  was innocent", and that if, indeed, the elder Smith had been involved, it was still a false practice.
