Within the US federal government, a polygraph examination is also referred to as a psychophysiological detection of deception (PDD) examination.
The NAS found that the majority of polygraph research was "unreliable, unscientific and biased", concluding that 57 of the approximately 80 research studies that the American Polygraph Association relies on to come to their conclusions were significantly flawed.
A polygraph cannot differentiate anxiety caused by dishonesty and anxiety caused by something else.
Lie detector evidence is currently inadmissible in New South Wales courts under the ''Lie Detectors Act''.
Article 20(3) of the Indian Constitution-"No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself."
In 2013 the U.S. federal government had begun indicting individuals who stated that they were teaching methods on how to defeat a polygraph test.
He does that by putting a nail through the sole of his shoe and pushing it inside of his heel while answering every question in order to even out the readings.
Polygraphs measure arousal, which can be caused by anxiety, anxiety disorders such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), nervousness, fear, confusion, hypoglycemia, psychosis, depression, substance induced (nicotine, stimulants), substance withdrawal state (alcohol withdrawal) or other emotions; polygraphs do not measure "lies."
Even where the evidence seems to indicate that polygraph testing detects deceptive subjects better than chance, significant error rates are possible, and examiner and examinee differences and the use of countermeasures may further affect validity.”'''
In the movie ''Harsh Times'' the protagonist, played by actor Christian Bale, is caught trying to "beat" a polygraph test during a pre-employment screening for a federal law enforcement job.
In addition, persons being considered for a government position or job may be denied the employment, if the position specifically requires successful completion of a polygraph examination.
Prolonged polygraph examinations are sometimes used as a tool by which confessions are extracted from a defendant, as in the case of Richard Miller, who was persuaded to confess largely by polygraph results combined with appeals from a religious leader.
The scientific premise upon which his assessment was based had not been proved in any Court in Australia.
He entered Harvard Law School and graduated in 1918, re-publishing his earlier work in 1917.
Those who are unable to think of a lie related to the relevant question, will automatically fail the test.
During the interrogation the subject is supposed to carefully control their breathing while answering the relevant questions, and to try to artificially increase their heart rate during the control questions, for example by thinking of something scary or exciting, or by pricking themselves with a pointed object concealed somewhere on their body.
Law enforcement agencies and intelligence agencies in the United States are by far the biggest users of polygraph technology.
The polygrapher is immediately suspicious and threatens to terminate the test.
Ana Belen Montes, a Cuban spy, passed a counterintelligence scope polygraph test administered by DIA in 1994.
One technique suggested to Nina is visualizing her KGB superior in the room, as well as clenching her anus.
However, researchers have found limitations to these tests as subjects voluntarily control their reaction time, deception can still occur within the response deadline, and the test itself lacks physiological recording.
In the interim he had killed seven additional women.
Early devices for lie detection include an 1895 invention of Cesare Lombroso used to measure changes in blood pressure for police cases, a 1904 device by Vittorio Benussi used to measure breathing, and an abandoned project by American William Moulton Marston which used blood pressure to examine German prisoners of war (POWs).
This administration is considered more valid by supporters of the test because it contains many safeguards to avoid the risk of the administrator influencing the results.
As part of his plea bargain agreement for his case of espionage for the Soviet Union Robert Hanssen would be made to undergo a polygraph at any time as a means of damage assessment.
#The veracity of the accused and the weight to be given to his evidence, and other witnesses called in the trial, was a matter for the jury.
"According to Marston’s son, it was his mother Elizabeth, Marston’s wife, who suggested to him that 'When she got mad or excited, her blood pressure seemed to climb'" (Lamb, 2001).
Then a "stim test" is often conducted: the subject is asked to deliberately lie and then the tester reports that he was able to detect this lie.
However, fMRIs are limited by being expensive, immobile, and having inconsistent lying responses.
In Canada, the 1987 decision of ''R v Béland'', the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the use of polygraph results as evidence in court.
The NAS concluded that the polygraph "...may have some utility" but that there is "little basis for the expectation that a polygraph test could have extremely high accuracy."
In Wichita, Kansas in 1986, because he failed two polygraph tests (one police administered, the other given by an expert that he had hired), Bill Wegerle had to live under a cloud of suspicion of murdering his wife Vicki Wegerle, although he was neither arrested nor convicted of her death.
Daytime talk shows, such as Maury Povich and Steve Wilkos, frequently use polygraphs to tell if someone is cheating on their significant other.
Lie detection has a long history in mythology and fairy tales; the polygraph has allowed modern fiction to use a device more easily seen as scientific and plausible.
The test is passed if the physiological responses to the diagnostic questions are larger than those during the relevant questions (RQ).
The show also noted the opinion that, when done properly, polygraphs are correct 80–99% of the time.
However, there have been no empirical theories established to explain how a polygraph measures deception.
Michael Martin correctly identified each guilty and innocent subject.
Later, they must sit in front of a studio audience that including their friends and family for the televised portion of the show.
Although the CQT Control Question Test may be useful as an investigative aid and tool to induce confessions, it does not pass muster as a scientifically credible test.
The Department of Defense ordered its use be limited to non-U.S. persons, in overseas locations only.
Marston’s machine indicated a strong positive correlation between systolic blood pressure and lying.
AntiPolygraph.org argues that the NSA-produced video omits some information about the polygraph process; it produced a video responding to the NSA video.
However, the New South Wales District Court rejected the use of the device in a criminal trial.
In the 1998 Supreme Court case, ''United States v. Scheffer'', the majority stated that "There is simply no consensus that polygraph evidence is reliable" and "Unlike other expert witnesses who testify about factual matters outside the jurors' knowledge, such as the analysis of fingerprints, ballistics, or DNA found at a crime scene, a polygraph expert can supply the jury only with another opinion..." In 2005 the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals stated that "polygraphy did not enjoy general acceptance from the scientific community".
In most cases, polygraph tests are voluntarily taken by a defendant in order to substantiate his or her defense.
The device will be used first in Afghanistan by U.S. Army troops.
The utility among sex offenders is also poor with insufficient evidence to support accuracy or improved outcomes in this population.
However, CIA spy Harold James Nicholson failed his polygraph examinations, which aroused suspicions that led to his eventual arrest.
During a voice-over, Profit explains the theory behind the polygraph and the flaws he intends to exploit in it.
In the high-profile disappearance of 7-year-old Danielle van Dam of San Diego in 2002, police suspected neighbor David Westerfield; he became the prime suspect when he allegedly failed a polygraph test.
The accuracy of the polygraph has been contested almost since the introduction of the device.
Although defense attorneys often attempt to have the results of friendly CQTs admitted as evidence in court, there is no evidence supporting their validity and ample reason to doubt it.
In 1938 he appeared in advertising by the Gillette company claiming that the polygraph showed Gillette razors were better than the competition.
The administrator tests the participant on their knowledge of the crime that would not be known to an innocent person.
In episode 93 of the USA popular science show ''MythBusters'', they attempted to fool the polygraph by using pain to try to increase the readings when answering truthfully (so the machine will supposedly interpret the truthful and non-truthful answers as the same.)
In 2001, a significant fraction of the scientific community considered polygraphy to be pseudoscience.
It is difficult to precisely determine the effectiveness of polygraph results for the detection or deterrence of spying.
However Ames did fail several tests while at the CIA that were never acted on.
A device which recorded muscular activity accompanying changes in blood pressure was developed in 1945 by John E. Reid, who claimed that greater accuracy could be obtained by making these recordings simultaneously with standard blood pressure-pulse-respiration recordings.
Guilty subjects are likely to become more anxious when they are reminded of the test's validity.
The video, ten minutes long, is titled "The Truth About the Polygraph" and was posted to the website of the Defense Security Service.
The efficacy of polygraphs is debated in the scientific community.
Depending on whether or not the beneficiary signed an agreements clause, and whether the test was already taken or not, such a refusal usually has no ill effects; at worst, the court will simply order the person to take the test as agreed.
The American Polygraph Association sets standards for courses of training of polygraph operators, though it does not certify individual examiners.
Ames was given two polygraph examinations while with the CIA, the first in 1986 and the second in 1991.
This indicates that deception may involve inhibition of truthful responses.
Further work on this device was done by Leonarde Keeler.
This decision did not, however, affect the use of the polygraph in criminal investigations.
In other decisions, polygraph results were ruled inadmissible in criminal trials.
In March 2004, evidence surfaced connecting her death to the serial killer known as BTK, and in 2005 DNA evidence from the Wegerle murder confirmed that the BTK Killer was Dennis Rader and established Bill Wegerle's innocence.
It is also worth noting that polygraph tests may not deter espionage.
Although it is not possible to adequately assess the error rate of the CQT, both of these conclusions are supported by published research findings in the best social science journals (Honts et al., 1994; Horvath, 1977; Kleinmuntz & Szucko, 1984; Patrick & Iacono, 1991).
#The test purported to be expert evidence by the witness who was not qualified as an expert, he was merely an operator and assessor of a polygraph.
Another suspect allegedly failed a given lie detector test, whereas Ridgway passed.
The different types of questions alternate.
It relies heavily on interpretation by the examiner, so human error (which could be caused by examiner inexperience) and bias can result in the examiner drawing the wrong conclusion.
RT based tests differ from polygraphs in stimulus presentation duration, and can be conducted without physiological recording as subject response time is measured via computer.
Contestants are given a polygraph test administered by a polygraph expert in a pre-screening session during which they answer over 50 questions.
From the 2004 surveys on the use of the Ewent Knowledge Test (new version of the Concealed Information Test) for criminal investigation.
The physiological reactions that "distinguish" liars, may also occur in individuals who fear a false detection, or feel passionately that they did not commit the crime.
However, a person's access to sensitive information may be denied if the polygraph results are not favorable.
Some of the questions asked are "irrelevant" or IR ("Is your name Fred?
When polygraphs are used as a screening tool (in national security matters and for law enforcement agencies for example) the level of accuracy drops to such a level that "Its accuracy in distinguishing actual or potential security violators from innocent test takers is insufficient to justify reliance on its use in employee security screening in federal agencies."
The Supreme Court of Israel, in Civil Appeal 551/89 (Menora Insurance Vs. Jacob Sdovnik), ruled that as the polygraph has not been recognized as a reliable device.
During one of those investigations, upwards of 30 federal agencies were involved in investigations of almost 5000 people who had various degrees of contact with those being prosecuted or who had purchased books or DVDs on the topic of beating polygraph tests.
While polygraph tests are commonly used in police investigations in the US, no defendant or witness can be forced to undergo the test.
In this way the results will not show a significant reaction to any of the relevant questions.
In the United States alone most federal law enforcement agencies either employ their own polygraph examiners or use the services of examiners employed in other agencies.
Oleg describes the machine as being similar to a camera in that it doesn't know if the subject's smiles convey genuine happiness.
DIA uses computerized Lafayette polygraph systems for routine counterintelligence testing.
Courts themselves do not order or facilitate polygraph testing.
The Court cited, with approval, the Canadian case of ''Phillion v R'' 1978 1SCR 18.
But we find a lot of Europeans and Asiatics can handle that polygraph without a blip, and you know they are lying and you have evidence that they are lying."
If they react strongly to the guilty information, then proponents of the test believe that it is likely that they know facts relevant to the case.
On May 5, 2010, The Supreme Court of India declared use of narcoanalysis, brain mapping and polygraph tests on suspects as illegal and against the constitution.
His device was then purchased by the FBI, and served as the prototype of the modern polygraph.
#The polygraph "expert" sought to express an opinion as to ultimate facts in issue, which is peculiarly the province of the jury.
According to a Senate investigation, an FBI review of the first examination concluded that the indications of deception were never resolved.
In 2002, a review by the National Academies of Science found that in populations untrained in countermeasures, polygraph testing can discriminate lying from truth telling at rates above chance, though below perfection.
The second examiner concluded that there were no further indications of deception.
Americans are not very good at it, because we are raised to tell the truth and when we lie it is easy to tell we are lying.
A device recording both blood pressure and breathing was invented in 1921 by Dr. John Augustus Larson of the University of California and first applied in law enforcement work by the Berkeley Police Department under its nationally renowned police chief August Vollmer.
The polygraph was used in Lithuania for the first time in 1992.
FOX has taken this one step further with their game show ''The Moment of Truth'', which pits people's honesty against their own sense of modesty, propriety and other values.
The CQT may be vulnerable to being conducted in an interrogation-like fashion.
In the 1970s the show was hosted by Jack Anderson.
He stores a tack in the toe of his shoe and uses the pain sensation to mask his true apprehension of certain questions.
Further examination of the probable lie test has indicated that it is biased against innocent subjects.
Polygraph examination and background checks failed to detect Nada Nadim Prouty, who was not a spy but was convicted for improperly obtaining US citizenship and using it to obtain a restricted position at the FBI.
Marston wrote a second paper on the concept in 1915, when finishing his undergraduate studies.
It could also explain which parts of the brain are active when subjects use artificial memories.
However, it is common practice for lawyers to advise people who signed such contracts to refuse to take the test.
Effectiveness may also be worsened by countermeasures.
Jonathan Pollard was advised by his Israeli handlers that he was to resign his job from American intelligence if he was ever told he was subject to a polygraph test.
In 2010 the NSA produced a video explaining its polygraph process.
The CIA reported that he passed both examinations after experiencing initial indications of deception.
Earlier societies utilized elaborate methods of lie detection which mainly involved torture; for instance, the Middle Ages used boiling water to detect liars as it was believed honest men would withstand it better than liars.
In 2001 William Iacono, Professor of Psychology and Neuroscience concluded that
The polygraph is more often used as a deterrent to espionage rather than detection.
#Devoid of any proved or accepted scientific basis, the evidence of the operator is hearsay which is inadmissible.
Although the relevant questions in the probable lie test are used to obtain a reaction from liars, it can also gain a reaction from the innocent subject who is afraid of false detection.
In the 20th episode of ''The Americans'', "Arpanet", Nina, a KGB double agent, misleads her FBI handler after receiving coaching on how to beat the polygraph from Oleg, her Soviet superior.
Other suggestions for countermeasures include for the subject to mentally record the control and relevant questions as the examiner reviews them before the interrogation begins.
Polygraphy is widely criticized.
To test its reliability, MacGyver asked a passenger on the train a few "placebo" questions.
Polygraph examiners also prefer to use their own individual scoring method, as opposed to computerized techniques, as they may more easily defend their own evaluations.
Allegations of abusive polygraph practices were brought forward by former NRO polygraph examiners.
In the United States, the State of New Mexico admits polygraph testing in front of juries under certain circumstances.
In most cases, however, polygraphs are more of a tool to "scare straight" those who would consider espionage.
Susan McCarthy of ''Salon'' said in 2000 that "The polygraph is an American phenomenon, with limited use in a few countries, such as Canada, Israel and Japan"
In the television series ''Profit'', there is a memorable sequence at the end of episode "Healing" where the eponymous character, Jim Profit, manages to fool a polygraph.
It is inadmissible as evidence in most federal courts and military courts martial.
In 1998 TV producer Mark Phillips with his Mark Phillips Philms & Telephision put ''Lie Detector'' back on the air on the FOX Network—on that program Dr. Ed Gelb with host Marcia Clark questioned Mark Fuhrman about the allegation that he "planted the bloody glove".
Psychologists cannot ascertain what emotions one has, with or without the use of polygraph.
The control question test, also known as the probable lie test, was developed to combat the issues with the relevant-irrelevant testing method.
Conversely, innocent people have been known to fail polygraph tests.
indicate that the polygraph is neither scientifically valid nor especially effective beyond its ability to generate admissions..".
This is made possible by using an analog sphygmomanometer to monitor blood pressure change, and an electronic alarm clock to detect sweat.
:"We discovered there were some Eastern Europeans who could defeat the polygraph at any time.
Therefore, since one cannot reliably measure human emotions (especially when one has an interest in hiding his/her emotions), the idea of valid detection of truth or falsehood through measuring respiratory rate, blood volume, pulse rate and galvanic skin response is a mere pretense.
Despite his predecessor's contributions,  Marston styled himself the "father of the polygraph" .
These studies did show that specific-incident polygraph testing, in a person untrained in counter-measures, could discern the truth at "a level greater than chance, yet short of perfection".
In 2003, the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) issued a report entitled "The Polygraph and Lie Detection".
In 2012, a McClatchy investigation found that the National Reconnaissance Office was possibly breaching ethical and legal boundaries by encouraging its polygraph examiners to extract personal and private information from DoD personnel during polygraph tests that purported to be limited to counterintelligence issues.
An alternative is the Guilty Knowledge Test (GKT), or the Concealed Information Test (CIT), which is being used in Japan.
The culprit was only discovered when he was trying to hide his crime, thus his sweat triggered the alarm clock and blood pressure climbed up.
Marston remained the device's primary advocate, lobbying for its use in the courts.
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988 (EPPA) generally prevents employers from using lie detector tests, either for pre-employment screening or during the course of employment, with certain exemptions.
A police force does have the authorization to use a polygraph in the course of the investigation of an offence.
Several devices similar to Keeler's polygraph version included the Berkeley Psychograph, a blood pressure-pulse-respiration recorder developed by C. D. Lee in 1936 and the Darrow Behavior Research Photopolygraph, which was developed and intended solely for behavior research experiments.
They need only answer 21 answers truthfully "as determined by the polygraph" to win $500,000.
Additionally, Ames explained, "There's no special magic....Confidence is what does it.
The Preliminary Credibility Assessment Screening System, or PCASS, captures less physiological information than a polygraph, and uses an algorithm, not the judgment of a polygraph examiner, to render a decision whether it believes the person is being deceptive or not.
Polygraph examiners, or polygraphers, are licensed or regulated in some jurisdictions.
Recalling artificial memories are known to activate the posterior cingulate cortex.
The questions are in multiple choice and the participant is rated on how they react to the correct answer.
However, neither technique was successful for a number of reasons.
He also uses the asp killing Cleopatra as a metaphor, stating it only killed her when she moved.
She appears to utilize and benefit from these techniques as she passes the test.
In 1995, Nicholson had undergone his periodic five year reinvestigation where he showed a strong probability of deception on questions regarding relationships with a foreign intelligence unit.
Polygraphy has been faulted for failing to trap known spies such as double-agent Aldrich Ames, who passed two polygraph tests while spying for the Soviet Union.
However, due to several flaws, the levels of accuracy shown in these studies "are almost certainly higher than actual polygraph accuracy of specific-incident testing in the field".
Likewise, John Anthony Walker was advised by his handlers not to engage in espionage until he had been promoted to the highest position for which a polygraph test was not required, to refuse promotion to higher positions for which polygraph tests were required, and to retire when promotion was mandated.
He was ultimately tried and convicted of kidnapping and first degree murder.
Polygraph testing is designed to analyze the physiological reactions of subjects.
From 1945 to the present, at least six Americans have committed espionage while successfully passing polygraph tests.
Although Elizabeth is not listed as Marston’s collaborator in his early work, Lamb, Matte (1996), and others refer directly and indirectly to Elizabeth’s work on her husband’s deception research.
Asked how he passed the polygraph test, Aldrich Ames explained that he sought advice from his Soviet handler and received the simple instruction to: "Get a good night's sleep, and rest, and go into the test rested and relaxed.
These results apply only to specific events and not to screening where it is assumed that polygraph would work less well.
"), others are "diagnostic" questions, and the remainder are the "relevant questions", or RQ, that the tester is really interested in.
In the 1960s Andrews produced a series of specials hosted by Melvin Belli.
Later Phillips produced ''Lie Detector'' as a series for PAX/ION—some of the guests included Paula Jones, Reverend Paul Crouch accuser Lonny Ford, Ben Rowling, Jeff Gannon and Swift Boat Vet, Steve Garner.
This expansion of polygraph screening at DIA occurred while DIA polygraph managers ignored documented technical problems discovered in the Lafayette computerized polygraph system.
The most notable polygraph TV show is ''Lie Detector'', which first aired in the 1950s created and hosted by Ralph Andrews.
Criticisms have been given regarding the validity of the administration of the Control Question Technique (CQT).
Motions by prosecution or defense for polygraph tests to be exercised will be declined under any circumstance.
Despite claims of 90% validity by polygraph advocates, the National Research Council has found no evidence of effectiveness.
Ridgway passed a polygraph in 1984; he confessed almost 20 years later when confronted with DNA evidence.
Members of scientific organizations who have the requisite background to evaluate the CQT are overwhelmingly skeptical of the claims made by polygraph proponents.
Some researchers believe that reaction time (RT) based tests may replace polygraphs in concealed information detection.
In ''Raymond George Murray'' 1982 7A Crim R48 Sinclair DCJ refused to admit polygraph evidence tending to support the defense.
The validity of polygraph testing is again called in to question with the relevant-irrelevant testing technique, designed to gauge reactions of subjects against crime questions and other non-crime related questions.
The administration of this test is given to prevent potential errors that may arise from the questioning style.
The judge rejected the evidence because
In one ''MacGyver'' episode 'Slow Death', MacGyver assists the Indian tribesmen by improvising a polygraph to weed out the crooked doctor.
She also appears in a picture taken in his polygraph laboratory in the 1920s (reproduced in Marston, 1938)."
In 1938 he published a book, ''The Lie Detector Test,'' wherein he documented the theory and use of the device.
Notable instances of polygraph usage include uses in crime and espionage themed television shows and some daytime television talk shows, cartoons and films.
In retaliation for his perceived unjust punishment for minor offenses, he later sold his knowledge of CIA operations to the Soviet Union.
Polygraph tests are still legal if the defendant requests one.
In ''Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.'' (1993), the old Frye standard was lifted and all forensic evidence, including polygraph, had to meet the new Daubert standard in which "underlying reasoning or methodology is scientifically valid and properly can be applied to the facts at issue."
Most brain activity occurs in both sides of the prefrontal cortex, which is linked to response inhibition.
US law enforcement and federal government agencies such as the FBI and the CIA and many police departments such as the LAPD use polygraph examinations to interrogate suspects and screen new employees.
The questions get more personal or revealing as they advance.
Several countermeasures designed to pass polygraph tests have been described.
The examiner typically begins polygraph test sessions with a pre-test interview to gain some preliminary information which will later be used to develop diagnostic questions.
In the province of Ontario, the use of polygraphs is not permitted by the use of an employer.
, polygraph testimony was admitted by stipulation in 19 states, and was subject to the discretion of the trial judge in federal court.
Then the tester will explain how the polygraph is supposed to work, emphasizing that it can detect lies and that it is important to answer truthfully.
