The eastern coast and the interior of Pontus plus the Bosporan Kingdom became client kingdoms under Pharnaces II of Pontus, the son of Mithridates who had rebelled against his father and gone over to the Romans.
In 'The Life of Crassus', Plutarch did not mention this repeal and, as mentioned above, he only wrote that Pompey and Crassus disagreed on everything and that as a result their consulship did not achieve anything.
The senate disagreed and he dismissed it without coming to a resolution.
When Sertorius was murdered the formerly disaffected soldiers now grieved for the loss of their commander whose bravery had been their salvation and were angry with Perpenna.
Plutarch also thought that with the civil wars in Rome the Romans left the sea unguarded, which gave the pirates the confidence to lay waste islands and coastal cities in addition to attacking ships at sea.
This was a reference to the fact that Pompey claimed that he had ended the slave rebellion led by Spartacus, whereas in actual fact it was achieved by Crassus.
He could not reach his troops in Hispania because Caesar controlled Gaul, which was on the way.
In 63 BC Pompey went to Damascus.
Plutarch wrote that Pompey "had determined to restore the authority of the tribunate, which Sulla had overthrown, and to court the favour of the many and commented that "there was nothing on which the Roman people had more frantically set their affections, or for which they had a greater yearning, than to behold that office again."
Pompey, who was in Galatia, prepared for war.
Pompey's father, Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo, was a wealthy equestrian from Picenum (in south and north of the modern regions of the Marche and Abruzzo, in central Italy, on the Adriatic coast).
The commander of the garrison handed him the city.
Curio went to Rome with a letter Caesar wrote to the senate and gave it to the two newly elected consuls, Gaius Claudius Marcellus Maior and Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus.
Appian gave the same number of infantry and cavalry, but the number of ships was 270.
Commissioners were sent to investigate and the soldiers mocked Lucullus in front of the commission.
This was related to a measure regarding the plebeian tribunes, the representatives of the plebeians.
He then made a sortie, passed through the enemy lines and joined his new force.
It gave the Roman charge an advantage.
Neither wanted to be the first to do so.
Pompey greatly expanded the province of Cilicia along the coast (adding Pamphylia to its west) and inland.
Jewish law did not allow the Jews to meddle with the enemy if they were not attacking them on the day of the Sabbath.
This disrupted trade and some lands remained untilled.
Cornelia thought that Pompey was going to be killed, but he boarded the boat.
Gaza and Raphia adopted the Pompeian era when reconstruction was completed, in 61 BC and in 57 BC respectively.
Each city-state was autonomous.
He routed the rebels.
Some of the enemy forces, which were in hot pursuit, also ended up through their ranks and were killed.
However, Mithridates managed to escape with his best men.
Perpenna hid in a thicket and feared his troops more than the enemy.
According to Plutarch, some advised to drive Pompey away, and others to welcome him.
Pompey’s political clout was based on his popularity as a military commander, the political patronage and the purchase of votes for his supporters or himself which his wealth could afford, and the support of his war veterans: "prestige, wealth, clients, and loyal, grateful veterans who could be readily mobilised - these were the opes which could guarantee Pompey's brand of power."
He was applauded and 'pelted him with garlands and flowers'.
Cato changed his mind and supported this on the ground that any government was better than no government.
He felt that this was overshadowing his own exploits.
Pompey was marching towards Candavia, a mountain district in Illyria.
When harvest time came close Caesar's troops were going to have plenty of grain.
Julius Caesar was a prominent popularis (plural of populares) politician who favoured land redistributions and a was a resolute man.
Pompey was going to have his superior cavalry outflank Caesar's left wing and rout his army.
Much of what had been prepared would not find a place and would have been enough for another procession.
His brother Antiochus VII gained the support of the Maccabees, regained the submission of the once vassal kingdoms of Cappadocia and Armenia, drove back the Parthians and retook Mesopotamia, Babylon, and Media.
Pompey moved his camp to a wooded area for protection.
He assigned the son only Sophene.
Plutarch described Gabinius as one of Pompey's intimates and claimed that he "drew up a law which gave him, not an admiralty, but an out-and‑out monarchy and irresponsible power over all men."
Pompey hurried to defend Dyrrachium and arrived there first.
The optimates were unhappy about so much power being given to Pompey and saw this as the establishment of a tyranny.
Hyrcanius claimed that he was the rightful king as the elder brother and that he had been usurped.
Pompey repelled him until the ships returned and set sail at night.
He discovered that this was committed by one of his father's freedmen.
There were detachments of Pompey standing around the senate house.
Caesar, accustomed to celerity and audacity, decided to advance with just the one legion, anticipating his enemy and seizing advantageous positions in Italy.
No senator voted for Pompey to give up his arms because his troops were in the suburbs.
However, Pompey opposed this and ensured Sulla's burial with honours.
Pompey should be required to give up his troops, and if not, Caesar should retain his.
On his way to Italy he went to Mytilene on the island of Lesbos.
Plutarch remarked that he arrived in Rome with such a large crowd that he would not have needed an army for a revolution.
The supporters of Caesar were unhappy and therefore Crassus and Pompey extended Caesar's command in Gaul.
The two commanders refused to disband their armies and kept them stationed near the city.
Sertorius intervened there, rallied his men, stopped their retreat and routed the other enemy wing.
In the next few days he pushed his lines closer to the hill where Pompey's camp was.
The object of contention between the two men was the issue of the troops they both commanded.
Pompey did not contest Cato's view.
He also proposed that unless both obeyed, both should be declared public enemies and troops should be levied against them.
When they got close Artaxata (the capital) Tigranes, knowing Pompey’s leniency, surrendered and allowed a Roman garrison in his palace.
He went to Syria with his army.
Pliny the Elder wrote that Pompey displayed "a chess-board made of two precious stones, three feet in width by two in length ... and remarked that his displays were ... more the triumph of luxury than the triumph of conquest"  Plutarch wrote: " that which most enhanced his glory and had never been the lot of any Roman before, was that he celebrated his third triumph over the third continent."
He then sentenced him to death.
As his position became weaker and that of the Romans stronger some of his associates became estranged.
Additional contributions from the allied cities were also hastily collected.
He did not mention whether he actually reached Petra before turning to Judea.
Pompey then decided to move south because it was too difficult to try to reach Mithridates in the Cimmerian Bosporus and thus he did not want to ‘wear out his own strength in a vain pursuit.’ He was content with preventing merchant ships reaching the Cimmerian Bosporus through his blockade and preferred other pursuits.
Pompey's family first gained the position of Consul in 141 BC.
The ragged part of the Cilician coast became their main area for anchorage and encampment and the Crags of Cilicia (the promontory of Coracesium) became their main base.
This calendar counted the years from 63 BC, the year when self-government started.
Cassius Dio commented that Pompey was "always in the habit of pretending as far as possible not to desire the things he really wished."
The people booed him loudly.
The senate thought that the arrival of Caesar’s army from Gaul would take time and that Caesar would not rush with a small force.
He boarded a ship with many bronze coins.
When he heard that Caesar was approaching he left and went to Mitylene on the island of Lesbos to take on board his wife Cornelia and his son.
Pompey and Sertorius then hastily engaged in an indecisive battle by the River Sucro in order to fight before the arrival of Caecilius Metellus.
He wanted to just surround the enemy camp to prevent an escape in the darkness, but his officers convinced him it to charge.
However, in the Live of Cato, Plutarch did not mention any calls for a dictator and instead he wrote that there were calls for Pompey to preside over the elections.
Clodius managed to have Cicero exiled, but soon Pompey decided to have Cicero recalled to Rome because Clodius turned against him.
They were then to secure the command of provinces and armies for themselves and confirm his provinces for a further five years.
There was unrest among the scared deserters.
However, Pompey was held a limited amount of land and this created shortages of fodder for his animals.
When he got there 7,000 of the enemy forces went over to him.
However, Pharsalus was his only decisive defeat.
Caesar proposed that both he and Pompey lay down their arms at the same time and said that if Pompey retained his he would not expose himself to his enemies.
They defeated some Roman naval commanders.
Caesar’s soldiers were very loyal to him.
According to Plutarch, Pompey brought to an end all piracy in less than three months.
Livy wrote: "Having subdued the Cretans, Quintus Metellus gave laws to their island, which had until then been independent."
Curio, who was also a bitter enemy of Caesar, became one of the new plebeian tribunes.
According to Caesar it was two legions.
It survived only because none of its neighbours took it over.
However, the Parthian threat to Syria did not materialise and the legions were sent to Capua.
At first they scoured the sea with a few small boats.
Pompey rode off the camp and went to Larissa.
However, much of Cilicia Paedia belonged to the kingdom of Armenia.
However, Mark Antony and Caesar brought in reinforcements and pushed them back.
There were in that temple the golden table, the holy candlestick, and the pouring vessels, and a great quantity of spices; and besides these there were among the treasures two thousand talents of sacred money: yet did Pompey touch nothing of all this, on account of his regard to religion; and in this point also he acted in a manner that was worthy of his virtue."
Cassius Dio wrote that 'Pompey arbitrated disputes and managed other business for kings and potentates who came to him.
However, in 79 BC when Pompey canvassed for Lepidus and succeed in making him a consul against Sulla's wishes, Sulla warned Pompey to watch out because he had made an adversary stronger than him.
This brought the first triumvirate to an end.
The rest was surrounded and routed.
The flight from Rome was disorderly.
There he heard the cases of Hyrcanius, Aristobulus and those who did not want a monarchy and wanted to return to the tradition of being under the high priest.
He learnt about the death of Mithridates when he was marching towards Jerusalem.
He reorganized it into six parts: Cilicia Aspera, Cilicia Campestris, Pamphylia, Pisidia (north of Pamphylia), Isauria (east of Pisidia), Lycaconia (north of Cilicia Trachea) and the greater part of Phrygia (north of Pisidia and Isauria).
His twenty-year-old son Pompey inherited his estates, and the loyalty of his legions.
There was a false rumour that Caesar was marching on Rome.
Pompey's troops heavily outnumbered the enemy.
Publius Servilius Vatia Isauricus was given the command of to fight piracy in Cilicia in 78-74 BC.
Two deserters form Caesar's camp told him about a weak point in Caesar's fortifications where two palisades near the sea had not been joined together and there was a gap.
The next day he ordered the men in charge of the Tempe purify it and to bring offerings to god as Jewish law required.
Therefore, he ordered his fleet to blockade Mithridates and turned on the Albanians.
He also gave rewards to philosophers in Athens and gave the city money towards its restoration (it had been damaged by Lucius Cornelius Sulla during the First Mithridatic War).
Pompey and Mucia had three children: Gnaeus Pompey (Pompey the Younger) the eldest child, daughter Pompeia Magna, a daughter, and Sextus Pompey, the younger son.
Then, as Perpenna did not think that his men would remain loyal for long, the two men fought a decisive battle.
Caesar tied Pompey to himself by marrying him to his daughter Julia even though she was betrothed to another man.
They reached the island and were barred from the port.
He began to arm himself against Caesar and got closer to Crassus because he thought he could not challenge Caesar on his own.
The supporters of Caesar argued that Caesar deserved an extension of his command so that the fruit of his success would not be lost.
He stood for election for one of the two consulships for 59 BC and could provide the kind of support needed for the land bill to be passed.
He waited for seven months after his return to Italy.
He received his agnomen of Isaurus because he defeated the Isauri who lived in the core of the Taurus Mountains which bordered on Cilicia.
During the campaign of Greece, he managed to regain the initiative, join his forces to that of Metellus Scipio (something that Caesar wanted to avoid) and trap his enemy.
Pompey restored Hyrcanius to the high priesthood "both because he had been useful to him in other respects, and because he hindered the Jews in the country from giving Aristobulus any assistance in his war against him."
Contributions were also to be levied from the allied cities as quickly as possible.
Ptolemy Mennaeus was the ruler of Calchis (Qinnasrin, in northern Syria) and Iturea (a region north of Galilee).
He had stopped at Amphipolis where he held a meeting with friends to collect money.
Despite this impasse, the senate did pass a decree that Caesar and Pompey should send a legion to Syria to defend it against the Parthians who had defeated Crassus.
Pompey's military glory was second to none for a few decades.
Cassius Dio wrote that Pompey displayed his "trophies beautifully decked out to represent each of his achievements, even the smallest; and after them all came one huge one, decked out in costly fashion and bearing an inscription stating that it was a trophy of the inhabited world."
Cassius Dio wrote that she was the sister of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer and that Metellus Celer was angry because he had divorced her despite of having had children by her.
However, Metellus approached and Sertorius withdrew as he often did as part of his guerrilla tactics.
The enemy refused to negotiate.
Some cities surrendered and some were taken by storm.
Aristobulus went to talk to Pompey and returned to the fortress three times to pretend he was complying to him.
He begun a march through Epirus and Athamania.
He annexed Syria because it had no legitimate kings.
In the latter case the two men would remain a match for each other and would not cause trouble.
Claudius Marcellus called Caesar a robber and urged for him to be voted a public enemy unless he should lay down his arms.
Artoces had no chance to array his forces.
Most were resettled in Dyme in Achaea, Greece, which was underpopulated and had plenty of good land.
Pompey tried to enter the city on a chariot drawn by four of the many elephants he had captured in Africa, but the city gate was too narrow and he changed over to his horses.
In 72 BC there were only skirmishes.
They secretly sabotaged him and meted out severe punishments on the Hispanic allies, pretending that this was ordered by Sertorius.
In Rome there were rumours that Pompey would march his army against the city and establish a monarchy.
He wanted to postpone the war until after the winter.
Gabinius had him freed.
When Pompey was joined by more Roman forces Mithridates fled to the 'Armenia of Tigranes.'
However, some Gallic scouts who had defected from Caesar to Pompey spotted some Gallic scouts of Domitius and informed them about the situation after Dyrrachium.
He fought Social War (90–88 BC) against Rome's Italian allies.
Cassius Dio gave a brief account of Pompey's campaign in Judea and wrote that after this he went to Pontus, which fits with Plutarch writing that he went to Amisus.
Pompey wrote to the senate that Crassus had conquered the rebels in a pitched battle, but that he himself had extirpated the war entirely.
As Pompeii rushed away, he hastily levied troops from the Italian cities on the road, setting up garrisons as he went.
He cited the praetors Sextilius and Bellinus and the daughter of Antonius among the important Romans who were seized for a ransom.
However, while Sertorius left his right wing Afrianius routed this wing.
He wrote to the governors of the provinces in the east and the kings and cities he had won over in the Third Mithridatic War asking to send aid.
In the Life of Crassus, Plutarch wrote that Caesar met Pompey and Crassus and agreed that the two of them would stand for the consulship and that he would support them by sending soldiers to Rome to vote for them.
Pompey set fire to the city walls and retreated to Metellus.
He secured the obedience of his troops, but not their true loyalty.
They agreed to oppose the law, but they were fearful of the mood of the people.
Pompey was not a consul and had never held public office.
The latter were fortified and difficult to take by storm.
In the Life of Pompey Plutarch wrote that the plebeian tribune Lucilius proposed to elect Pompey dictator.
He tried to prevent Sertorius from seizing a commanding hill, but the latter got there first.
An edict was issued in his name that all the youth of the province of Macedonia (i.e.
Instead, he did not.
Cilicia had been a haven for pirates for a long time.
Rome was affected through shortages of imports and in the supply of corn, but the Romans did not pay proper attention to the problem.
They had been treated harshly by Perpenna and Pompey treated them with kindness.
He thought that he was in a precarious situation.
Pompey took the mountain and had wells sunk.
In both versions the violence between the three factions continued and the elections could not be held.
He rebuilt the city of Garara and restored seven inland cities and four coastal ones to its inhabitants.
Pompey went to Rome.
Pompey was annoyed about the increasing admiration of Caesar due to his success in the Gallic Wars.
Caesar was not aware of this.
Caesar also pursued a policy of conciliating Marcus Licinius Crassus and Pompey, who had been at variance politically.
He also mentioned Strato’s Tower (later called Caesarea Maritima), Arethusa (now replaced by Al-Rastan) in Syria, and the city of Gaza as being restored to its peoples.
In the constitutional reforms Sulla carried out after his second civil war he curbed the power of the plebeian tribunes.
He undertook an expedition during which he destroyed Apameia and took over the country of Ptolemy Mennaeus.
Pompey promised to give up his governorship and armies and claimed that Caesar would do the same.
A number of the cities in Judea and Galilee also adopted the Pompeian area.
They saw him as a threat to the supremacy of the senate and as a potential tyrant.
They lost 3000 men.
Cassius Dio also wrote that Pompey faced some delays in the distribution of grain because many slaves had been freed prior to the distribution and Pompey wanted to take a census to ensure they received it in an orderly way.
Perpenna begun to fear for his safety and conspired to murder Sertorius.
Memmius, the most capable of Pompey's commanders, also fell.
The besieged towns or took them by storm and plundered them.
Antistia had recently lost both her parents.
He did not obtain satisfaction and planned to escape.
Pompey wanted to raise money and levy troops during the winter.
However, on his journey back to Rome he examined this more carefully and filed for divorce.
Soon after this Phraates asked to be given the son in exchange for an agreement to set the River Euphrates as the boundary between Parthia and Rome.
Pompey and Caesar set Publius Clodius Pulcher against Marcus Tullius Cicero, who was an opponent of the triumvirate.
He and his wife, Metella, persuaded Pompey to divorce Antistia and marry his stepdaughter Aemilia Scaura.
He routed them, killing 9,000 of them and taking 10,000 prisoners.
