In 1963, Pontiac replaced the 215 with a "new" 326 which was really a 336 with a bore of 3.78 and stroke of 3.75 ( same stroke as the 389 ), an iron block mill that had the same external dimensions and shared parts with the 389, but an altered, reduced bore.
While the GM car was fully tested the Pontiac concept was not.
This was the last year for the 5th-generation Grand Prix.
This feature also made it possible for Pontiac to invent the modern muscle car, by the relatively simple process of placing its second largest-displacement engine, the 389 cid, into its mid-size car, the Le Mans, creating the Pontiac LeMans GTO.
Interestingly, the enlarged 1956 Pontiac V8 found its way into light-duty GMC pickup trucks.
Pontiac was sold in the United States, Canada, and Mexico by GM.
Introduced in 1982, the wedge shaped Firebird was the first major redesign of the venerable pony car since 1970.
So, in addition to building a new Pontiac Engineering building in 1949–1951, the decision to re-direct the V8 to an OHV design delayed its introduction until the 1953 model year, however Buick division was introducing its new engine (nailhead V-8) in 1953 and asked the corporation to hold back or delay Pontiac's V-8 introduction until the 1955 model year which it did.
These new chassis allowed for reduced weight and smaller body sizes.
Rear-wheel drive began its slow demise with the introduction of the first front-wheel drive Pontiac, the 1980 Phoenix (a version of the Chevrolet Citation).
The Chief sold 39,000 units within six months of its appearance at the 1926 New York Auto Salon, hitting 76,742 at twelve months.
Pontiac was advertised as the performance division of General Motors for many years, while specializing in mainstream vehicles.
The year 2000 marked the first redesign of the Bonneville, since 1992.
All new models were produced but at more lengthy intervals.
as the 389 and 421.
A three-speed column-mounted stick shift was standard on all Pontiacs.
This, coupled with trying to build cars as plush as GM's more luxurious Buicks and Oldsmobiles, contributed to the start of a slow decline of Pontiac in 1971.
The TransAm received the LS-1 motor which produced .
Full size buyers, disappointed by the lack of an available big Bonneville, complained, resulting in Pontiac's importing the Canadian-market Pontiac Parisienne, which featured the Bonneville's deluxe trim.
The car's body and suspension was also changed to be lower, longer and wider.
It had an independent front and rear suspension and an upscale full leather interior.
The last Pontiac, a 2010 model year G6, was built at the Orion Township Assembly Line in January, 2010.
While new car buyers could buy a Cadillac for that price, the Bonneville raised new interest in what Pontiac now called "America's No.
This body style brought some attention to the marque.
Though the Tempest's transaxle was similar to the one in the Corvair, introduced the year before, it shared virtually no common parts.
Anti-lock brakes, GM's Quad-4 engine, airbags and composite materials all became standard on Pontiacs during this time.
It was later announced that the G8 may not see a second generation.
'Spread-bore' refers to the difference in sizes between the primaries and secondaries, using smaller primaries paired with larger secondaries for increased airflow at wider throttle with fuel delivery changes akin to the two-plus-four benefit of Tri-Power but with a single carburetor.
In 1998 the Firebird was updated.
This went through various permutations as it was only a factory installed option in from 1957-1966.
But he disapproved of the front facelift.
The Sunbird was offered in its rear-wheel-drive configuration through the 1980 model year.
GM adapted the J-body cars.
The Solstice concept shown in 2002 was approved for production as a roadster (2006-2009) and, for a few months, a hard-top coupe (2009), which is considered to be quite rare, as a total of only 1,266 coupes made it off the assembly line in Wilmington, DE before it was shut down due to the demise of Pontiac.
The remainder of the 1970s and the early 1980s saw the continued rise of luxury, safety and economy as the key selling points in Pontiac products.
A new  overhead valve V8 engine was introduced.
The GTO was also initially powered by the 350 HP LS-1 V8 in 2004.
All automatics were four-speed Super-Hydra-Matics or, as Hydramatic Division who designed and built them called them, "Controlled coupling HydraMatic".
One holdout to this industry-wide slide was the Super Duty 455 engine of 1973–1974.
This strategy helped keep the price of the cars to a minimum, as was needed in the then less-affluent Canadian marketplace.
Bonneville and Star Chief were built on a  wheelbase with the exception of the Bonneville wagon and all Catalina models and Bonneville wagon that rode on a 122-inch wheelbase.
This was the brand's entry into the fuel economy segment of the market.
Pontiac was relatively more popular in Canada, where for much of its history it was marketed as a low-priced vehicle.
In 1966 Oldsmobile finally offered a TriPower ( J-2 ) for its 442 and it was nixed also.
Produced from 1977 through 1981, these engines had the distinction of being the last V8s produced by Pontiac; GM merged its various brands' engines into one collectively shared group in 1980, entitled General Motors Powertrain.
Dyno tests over the years since release have confirmed that all trim levels with the LS1 have closer to 350&nbsp;hp.
It was the first popular-priced, mass-produced engine in America utilizing an overhead-camshaft configuration.
Full-sized Pontiacs were also substantially restyled but retained the same basic under-body structure and chassis that debuted with the 1965 model - in fact the roof-lines for the four-door pillared sedans and Safari wagons were the same as the 1965 models, while the two-door semi-fastback design gave way to a squared-off notch-back style and four-door hardtop sedans were also more squared off than 1967-68 models.
Pontiac dealers in Canada also sold smaller Chevrolet-based cars under the Acadian and Beaumont badges.
Additional upgrades also consisted of stainless steel dual exhaust outlets, larger Corvette sourced PBR brakes with EBD, larger front vented rotors with vented rear rotors, and functional heat extractor hood scoops.
Because of these changes, ''Motor Trend'' magazine picked the entire Pontiac line as 1959 Car of the Year.
The Tempest, was dropped, after being renamed 'T-37' and 'GT-37' for 1971.
This single model line continued until 1954 when the Star Chief was added.
With the 1959 model year, Pontiac came out with its "Arrowhead" emblem, with the star design in the middle.
In 1967 came the ban from the corporation led by Ed Cole, however it is interesting how internal corporate politics' enter the equation because the father of the Corvair and the Corvette ( Ed Cole )who was a corporate vice president and soon to be GM president exempted his two beloved cars from the ban
There have been many test when a Tri-Power set-up was added to a 400" or 428" engine that they made even more H.P.
For an extended period of time—prewar through the early 1950s—the Pontiac was a quiet, solid car, but not especially powerful.
Continuing the Native American theme of Pontiac, the Chieftain line was introduced to replace the Torpedo.
His replacement was F. James McDonald.
Due to the popularity of the GTO option, it was split from being an option on the Tempest LeMans series to become the separate GTO series.
The turn which he performed throughout the show were all his own stunts and came to be known as the Rockford turn or J turn.
The entire Pontiac lineup was honored as Motor Trend's Car of the Year for 1965, the third time for Pontiac to receive such honors.
The Buick 215 V8 would remain in production for more than thirty five years, being used by Britain's Rover Group after it had bought the rights to it.
The Bonneville, a sub-series of the Star Chief introduced with the 1957 models, then became its own line.
The Fiero was also an instant success and was partially responsible for Pontiac seeing its first increase in sales in four years.
1975 would also see the end of Pontiac convertibles for the next decade.
In addition in the late-1960s, GM directed their GM and Pontiac divisions to develop concept mini-cars called ''commuter car'' for urban drivers.
On April 27, 2009, GM announced that Pontiac would be dropped and that all of its remaining models would be phased out by the end of 2010.
(Sunbird Safari wagon through 1979.)
In November 1961, Knudsen had moved to Chevrolet.
By the end of the muscle car era, the Quadrajet setup had become the nearly ubiquitous choice on PMD engines.
Although updating and revamping continued throughout the 1990s, the vast change seen during the 1980s did not.
1992 saw the introduction of a brand-new Bonneville.
In addition to speeding up decisions on Saturn, Saab and Hummer, GM would be left with four brands—Chevrolet, Buick, GMC and Cadillac.
On December 2, 2008, General Motors announced that it was considering eliminating numerous brands, including Pontiac, in order to appease Congress in hope of receiving a $25 billion loan.
The '59s have a five-inch (127&nbsp;mm) wider track, Front at 63 7/8" front track and 64.0" rear track because Knudsen noticed the new, wider bodies looked awkward on the carried-over 1958 frames.
Partly due to the hugely successful NBC television series Knight Rider, it was an instant success and provided Pontiac with a foundation on which to build successively more performance oriented models over the next decade.
In the late 1930s, Pontiac used the so-called torpedo body of the Buick for one of its models, just prior to its being used by Chevrolet.
Based was on the G-Body, shared with the Oldsmobile Aurora and Buick LeSabre.
Pontiacs built in the late 1960s conformed to new U.S. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.
Padded vinyl roofs were options on almost every model.
Pontiac also became the ninth North American automobile brand since 1987 to be phased out, after Merkur, Mercury, Passport, Asüna, Geo, Plymouth, American Motors (AMC) (renamed Eagle in 1988, and phased out in 1999), and Oldsmobile.
An unusual feature of the "torpedo" body exhibition car, was that with push of a button the front half of the car body would open showing the engine and the car's front seat interior.
This was the first in a series of NASCAR-ready pre- Super-Duty V8 engines and introduced the long line of multi-carburetor equipped engines that saw Pontiac become a major player during the muscle car and pony car era of the 1960s.
However, GM had already decided to retire the brand as it has begun to sell off its remaining inventory and said that, unlike Saturn, Hummer, and Saab, Pontiac  was not for sale.
Sizes ranged from 287 cubic inch to 455 cubic inch.
Approximately 630 Bonnevilles were built for 1957, each with a retail price of nearly $5,800.
Completely new bodies and chassis were introduced for 1955.
(see Engines section below).
The design's father was none other than John DeLorean, and its advantage was twofold: first, the car achieved close to a 50/50 weight balance that drastically improved handling; and second, it enabled four-wheel independent suspension.
GM attempted to buy the rights back, however, Rover wished, instead, to sell the engines directly.
The Quadrajet design continued until 1990 for Oldsmobile V8 applications, along with added computer controls to meet emissions and fuel economy standards.
Both continued Knudsen's work of making Pontiac a performance-car brand.
The Chieftain line was renamed Catalina; Star Chief was downgraded to replace the discontinued Super Chief series and for the first time did not have a two-door hardtop, only a two-door sedan along with a four-door hardtop and four-door sedan, in addition there was no Star Chief wagon.
This scheme was used well into the 1980s, and the Caprice-based 1984 and later Parisienne made it into U.S. Pontiac showrooms to replace the recently discontinued Bonneville.
It was named after the famous Ottawa chief who had also given his name to the city of Pontiac, Michigan where the car was produced.
In mid-1971 Pontiac introduced the compact, budget-priced Ventura II (based on the third generation Chevrolet Nova).
Although it was originally supposed to be available in GTOs and Firebirds, only a few SD 455 engines made it into Firebird Trans Ams that year.
The only non-traditional Pontiac V8 engines were the 301 cubic inch and the smaller displacement 265 cubic inch V8s.
The February, 1965 issue of Motor Trend was almost entirely devoted to Pontiac's Car of the Year award and included feature stories on the division's marketing, styling, engineering and performance efforts along with road tests of several models.
Again, power dropped across all engines as more emissions requirements came into effect.
In early May 2009, Jim Waldron, a Davison, Michigan, Pontiac dealer, announced that he was interested in purchasing the Pontiac brand and logos, and had found financing to purchase them and some soon-to-be shuttered GM plants in order to build cars.
For 1977, Pontiac replaced the Ventura with the Phoenix, a version of Chevrolet's fourth generation Nova.
Pete Estes now became general manager of Pontiac and Delorean was promoted to Pontiac Chief engineer.
The period between 1989 and 1997 can best be described as one of continuous refinement.
1971–1976 model full-size station wagons featured a 'Clamshell' design where the rear power-operated glass slid up into the roof as the tailgate (manually or with power assist), dropped below the load floor.
It was the final year for the overhead cam six-cylinder engine in Firebirds and intermediates, and the Firebird convertible (until 1991).
This was updated to the Native American red arrowhead design for 1957.
This later feature originated with the 1963 Grand Prix, and although the '62 Grand Prix also had rear grillework, the taillight lenses were not behind it.
This was particularly hard on performance fans of Olds of finally getting J-2 after a long absence since the last J-2 before 1966 was 1958!
GM developed a gasoline-electric drive hybrid the XP-833 and the Pontiac X-4 a rear-wheel drive mid-engine car that was powered by a radical X-shaped aircraft type air-cooled two-stroke radial engine where the standard crankshaft was replaced by a unit called a Scotch yoke.
This was done by using many components from the 6-cylinder Chevrolet Master, such as the body, but installing a large chrome strip on the top and center of the front hood Pontiac called the "Silver Streak".
This carburetor was later replaced by the Quadrajet, a spread bore.
This same year, Pontiac completely restyled its full-sized cars, moved the Bonneville, and replaced it with a higher luxury model named the Grand Ville, while Safari wagons got a new clamshell tailgate that lowered into the body while the rear window raised into the roof.
In 2002 both the Firebird/Trans Am and Camaro were discontinued as a result of declining sales and a saturated sport market.
In addition to this, The Rockford Files, which lasted for 6 years used an Esprit Firebird.
The Tri-Power setup included one center carburetor with idle control and two end carburetors that did not contribute until the throttle was opened more than half way.
The next year, the 326 would become a true 326 with a new bore size of 3.72.
The Pontiac cars overtook its Oakland parent in popularity and supplanted the Oakland brand entirely by 1933.
This model proved popular and continued in production into the 21st century.
This is in stark contrast to the over 64,000 Solstice Convertibles that were manufactured on that same line.
The redesigned Grand Prix made its appearance, and featured a GT and GTP trim level.
Although it was not directly replaced, the RWD G8 served as an initial replacement.
Today, the 215 cars are among the most sought-after of all Tempests.
It was powered by either a 3.4L V6 with , or in TransAm guise a  LT-1, a 5.7L (350c.i.)
James MacDonald left the post of general manager to be replaced by Martin J. Caserio in late 1972.
Next came the 1984 Fiero.
The split grille returned, as well as all-new bodies and a new design of a perimeter-frame chassis for all its full-size models (something which would be adopted for all of GM's intermediate-sized cars in 1964, and all its full-sized cars in 1965).
Besides the logo, another identifying feature of Pontiacs were their "Silver Streaks"—one or more narrow strips of stainless steel which extended from the grille down the center of the hood.
In 1981, the full-size Bonneville was discontinued, the name reassigned to the "A" body intermediate platform.
For 1969, Pontiac moved the Grand Prix from the full-sized lineup into a G-body model of its own based on the A-body intermediate four-door modified from 116 inches to 118 inches wheelbase chassis, but with distinctive styling and long hood/short deck proportions to create yet another niche product - the intermediate-sized personal-luxury car that offered the luxury and styling of the higher priced personal cars such as the Buick Riviera and Ford Thunderbird and the old Grand Prix and Olds Starfire but for a much lower price tag.
With the introduction of this V8, the six-cylinder engines were discontinued; a six-cylinder engine would not return to the full-size Pontiac line until the GM corporate downsizing of 1977.
From 2004 onwards, new Pontiacs had cleaner, more premium styling, but retained the traditional split grille.
However, in this application, inexpensive (yet very quiet) flatheads were not a liability.
This concave rear window would be duplicated on all Tempest/LeMans four-door intermediates in 1964-1965.
Significantly, an all new Firebird bowed in 1993.
In spite of a GM unwritten edict against engines larger than 330 Ci in intermediate cars, DeLorean (with support from Jim Wangers from Pontiac's ad agency), came up with the idea to offer the GTO as an option package that included a 389 Ci engine rated at 325 or .
Pontiac engines were not available in Canada, however, but were replaced with Chevrolet engines of similar size and power, resulting in such interesting and unusual (at least to American car fans) models as the Beaumont SD-396 with a Chevrolet big-block 396 cubic inch V8.
Pontiac engineers ran early tests of this motor by literally cutting off the left bank of pistons and adding counterweights to the crankshaft, and were surprised to find it easily maintained the heaviest Pontiacs at over .
All other models including the big cars and Firebirds received only minor updates.
The GTP's new 3.8L supercharged V6 now made , up 20 from the previous generation.
Though these ratings have been proven to fall short.
Wire-spoked wheel covers returned for the first time since the 1930s.
During the early 1960s, Pontiacs featured the controversial "X" frame used on the big Chevys, as well as the complete Chevy lineup of OHV straight Sixes, small-block 283 and 327 cubic inch V8s, and the big-block 348 and 409 V8s.
The Tempest won the Motor Trend "Car of the Year" award in 1961—for Pontiac, the second time in three years.
These included energy-absorbing interior parts such as steering columns, steering wheels, knobs and handles, dual-circuit hydraulic brake systems, shoulder belts, side marker lights, and headrests.
In 1940, Pontiac introduced a new vehicle called the Pontiac Torpedo, and two years later, on 2 February 1942 a Pontiac was the last civilian automobile manufactured in the United States during World War II, as all automobile factories converted to military production.
But a complete departure in 1961 was the new Tempest, one of the three BOP (Buick-Olds-Pontiac) "compacts" introduced that year, the others being the Buick Special and Skylark and Oldsmobile F-85 and Cutlass.
On the technology front, 1966 saw the introduction of a completely new overhead camshaft 6-cylinder engine in the Tempest, and in an industry first, plastic grilles were used on several models.
It is interesting to note that the similarly styled Chevrolet still used the radically different "X" frame in the early 1960s.
In 1950, the Catalina pillarless hardtop coupe was introduced as a "halo" model, much like the Chevrolet Bel Air of the same year.
The 1969 Firebirds.
It was also manufactured from knock-down kits at GM's short-lived Japanese factory at Osaka Assembly in Osaka, Japan from 1927-1941.
Sales did not reach the 18,000 units that GM predicted.
Pontiac's second generation V8 engines shared numerous similarities, allowing many parts to interchange from its advent in 1959 to its demise in 1979.
More station wagons than ever were being offered.
All three were uni-body cars, dubbed the "Y-body" platform, combining the frame and the body into a single construction, making them comparatively lighter and smaller.
The 1976 Sunbird, based on the Chevrolet Vega and Monza's equivalent, joined the line.
Within months of its introduction, Pontiac was outselling Oakland, which was essentially a 1920s Chevrolet with a six cylinder engine installed.
The power tailgate, the first in station wagon history, ultimately supplanted the manual tailgate, which required marked effort to lift from storage.
The Ventura featured the luxury features of the Bonneville in the shorter, lighter Catalina body.
All three put into production new technology that GM had been working on for several years prior, but the Tempest was by far the most radical.
Neither was placed in production.
Unless customers checked an option, the Tempest's power-plant was a 194.5 Ci inline-slant-four-cylinder motor, derived from the right bank of the venerable Pontiac 389 V8, enabling it to be run down the same production line as the 389, saving costs for both the car's customers and Pontiac.
The Tempest's popularity helped move Pontiac into third place among American car brands in 1962, a position Pontiac would hold through 1970.
The new "Wide-Track" Pontiacs not only had improved styling, but also handled better—a bonus that tied into Pontiac's resurgence in the marketplace.
Intermediate sized cars (Tempest, LeMans, GTO) were mildly face-lifted but all full size cars and GTO lost their Tri-Power engine option though it did get a larger 400 cubic-inch V8 that replaced the previous 389.
The coupe version of the Grand Prix was also discontinued.
The last Pontiac badged cars were built in December of 2009, with one final vehicle built in January, 2010.
One of the first steps involved the removal of the famous trademark "silver streaks" from the hood and deck lid of the 1957 models just weeks before the 1957s were introduced.
TAPshift was also introduced as well as a Competition Group package (Comp G).
The new Bonnevilles and Catalinas continued to be best-sellers, although their styling similarity to the Chevrolet Caprice was seen by some buyers as a "cheapening" of Pontiac's image.
But testing comparisons to the OHV Oldsmobile V8 revealed the L-head could not compete performance-wise.
Eventually they extended from the rear window to the rear bumper as well, and finally; along the tops of the fins.
However, some Chevrolet were badged as Pontiacs later on in Canada.
By 1933, it had moved up to producing the least expensive cars available with straight eight-cylinder (inline eight) engines.
Pontiac became a companion make for Chevrolet.
Although GM officially ended factory support for all racing activities across all of its brands in January 1963, Pontiac continued to cater to performance car enthusiasts by making larger engines with more power available across all model lines.
The 1960 models saw a complete re-skinning with the exception of the body's canopies which remained identical to the 59's, but removed the tail fins and the distinctive split grille (which Ford copied on the final Edsel models for 1960).
This year also saw De Lorean leaving the post of general manager to accept a similar position at GM's Chevrolet division.
Pontiac's drive to bring in more youthful buyers was working as the median age of Pontiac owners dropped from 46 in 1981 to 38 in 1988.
But the pendulum had swung, and the SD 455 only hung on one more year in the Trans Am.
Although originally conceived as a 303 cubic inch model to compete directly in the Trans Am racing series, in a cost-saving move the Pontiac Trans Am debuted with the standard 400-cubic-inch performance engines.
At the height of the horsepower era, Pontiac engines reached a powerful 390 rated horsepower (SAE gross), though other engines achieved considerably higher outputs in actuality.
The largest engine was a massive 455 cubic inch V8 that was available in most of their mid-size, full-size and sports car models.
After this year, all GM models would go through "downsizing" and shrink in length, width, weight and available engine size.
These models are often referred to as Pontiacs, but in fact were never marketed as such, nor did they ever wear Pontiac badges (although the Acadian and Beaumont emblem was in fact, similar to the Pontiac Arrowhead).
The exception would be the Indian head high beam indicator light in the instrument cluster.
Aside of the displacement advantage the new engine had redesigned cylinder heads with different valve angles and larger ports.
Catalina models included a two-door hardtop, two-door sedan, four-door sedan, four-door hardtop vista and two wagons, one a six passenger and one a nine passenger wagon.
These were built on the  wheelbase of the A-body platform.
The Pontiac brand was pulled after the 2009 model year in Mexico and the brand was renamed Matiz, selling only one vehicle, the Matiz G2 (Matiz's logo is similar to Pontiac's).
Toward the end of the 1961 model year, a fancier version of the Tempest, called "LeMans", was introduced.
A seven-foot flexible steel shaft, rotating at the speed of the engine, delivered power from the front-mounted engine to a rear-mounted trans-axle through a "torque tube."
In 2005 the Sunfire was discontinued, replaced by the new Pontiac Pursuit (later named G5).
The Star Chief was created by adding an  extension to the A-body platform creating a  wheelbase.
For 1964, the Tempest and LeMans' trans-axle design was dropped and the cars were redesigned under GM's new A body platform; frame cars with a conventional front-engine, rear-wheel-drive layout.
Initial dealer mark ups, slow shipping transit from Australia, and lack of advertisement by GM were to blame.
It was first used in the 1977 Astre, replacing Astre's aluminum-block 140 cubic inch Vega engine.
The Bonneville was now the top of the line, coming in three body styles of two-door hardtop, four-door vista and four-door wagon.
