The lion cut, popular in the UK, is a disaster: an exposed flank makes the dog an easy mark for mosquitoes, black flies, and cuts, and, because poodles have lost much body fat over the past 150 years, exposed skin in cold weather can make them very sick.
Of note is this breed's keen sense for instinctive behavior.
Addison's is often undiagnosed because early symptoms are vague and easily mistaken for other conditions.
In most cases, whether a poodle is in a pet or show clip, the hair is completely brushed out.
GDV risk is increased with faster eating and a raised feeding bowl.
The hair on the head is left to form a "topknot", fixed in place using latex bands, because in most European countries, hair spray is banned.
Poodle show clips require many hours of brushing and care per week, about 10&nbsp;hours/week for a Standard Poodle.
Miniature and Toy varieties tend to have less patience with young children and might find certain children's antics too much to handle, especially because young  children are much larger than they are and may attempt to grab them without understanding how their attempt to hug the pooch is terrifying to a small dog.
Incomplete color of nose, lips and eye rims, or a "mismatched" color are considered faults by registries.
Addison's disease is (as of 20 August 2007) the illness most commonly reported to the Poodle Health Registry.
File:Gradowiki.jpg|Standard Poodle catching a ball
This is frequently present in the somewhat darker feathering of the ears and in the tipping of the ruff.
The rest of the body is shaved for less drag in the water.
When the dog has markings that resemble those of a tuxedo, it is called a "tuxedo" poodle.
Either can cause longer hair to become a matted mess or cause ice and slush to become impacted into the fur, not to mention the upkeep of repairing the damage at the groomer's shop becomes prohibitively expensive and time-consuming.
A Standard Poodle will be fine in a family with many children provided the environment is stable, orderly, and relaxed, with enough room for the dog to go out and retire to if needed.
A dog with GDV requires immediate veterinary care.
Standard Poodles are also susceptible to some health issues usually too minor to report to the health registry.
The Kennel Club (UK)
Addison's can cause fatal sodium/potassium imbalances, but if caught early and treated with lifelong medication, most dogs can live a relatively normal life.
Currently only the United Kennel Club in the US recognizes the Standard Poodle as a Sporting dog, thus in spite of this subtype of poodle being ineligible for field competitions more and more are appearing in the field as waterfowl dogs and hunters of pheasant in tall grass, the latter especially in the Midwest.
Toy Poodles won "Best in Show" at Crufts in 1966 and 1982.
Pet clips are much less elaborate than show and require much less maintenance.
Because they are highly intelligent, harsh training methods do not work with this dog breed in the field-corrections must be timely, given with precision and the trainer must have a firm but kind hand; an overbearing owner training his dog to hunt will find his Standard poodle fearful of his master and the entire experience, and refusing to budge an inch towards the water or into the brush.
Recognised FCI colourations are black, white, brown, gray, apricot, and red.
According to the American Kennel Club, the Standard Poodle is the oldest of the three varieties, and was later bred down to the miniature and toy sizes.
Poodles are usually clipped down into lower-maintenance cuts as soon as their show careers are over.
The upper half of the front legs is shaved, leaving "fluffy pompons" around the ankles.
Though once as common as the curly poodle, corded poodles are now rare.
Poodle crossbreds (also called hybrids) are not recognized by any major breed registry, as crossbreds are not one breed of dog, but two.
Brown and ''cafe-au-lait'' poodles have liver-colored noses, eye rims and lips, dark toenails and dark amber eyes.
In particular, marking and hunting drives are more readily observable in poodles than in most other breeds.
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale holds that the poodles descends from the French dog Barbet and might have been crossed with the Hungarian water dog.
The poodle does shed, but instead of the fur coming off the dog, it becomes tangled in the surrounding hair.
File:Standard poodle apricot.jpg|Cream Standard Poodle Lamb clip with high-shaved feet
Standard poodle owners should take special note of the high incidence of GDV in this breed.
All the Kennel Club poodles are in the Utility Group.
For solid-coloured poodles, the coat is an even and solid color at the skin.
The English saddle clip is similar to the continental, except for the hindquarters, which are not shaved except for a small, curved area on each flank (just behind the body), the feet, and bands just below the stifle (knee) and above the hock, leaving four (4) pompons.
They  could be considered hypoallergenic (though not completely allergen free).
The United Kennel Club places the miniature and toy in the Companion Group and the standard poodle in the Gundog Group.
Standard Poodles have been winning titles against the more widely used native breeds like the Chesapeake Bay Retriever, Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever, American Water Spaniel and Labrador Retriever.
France had toy poodles as pampered favorites during the reign of Louis XVI at about the same period.
Corded coats are difficult to keep clean and take a long time to dry after washing.
Dogs under 12 months old may be shown with a "puppy clip".
Breed size is correlated with litter size and Standard Poodles have the highest litter size followed by Medium, Miniature, and Toy.
Brown and white parti poodles have liver-colored noses, eye rims and lips, dark or self-colored toenails and amber eyes.
File:Heidipuppy.jpg|11-month-old white Standard Poodle modern clip
In the mid to late 19th century, the trade in dyeing and affixing their fur to unusual proportions began with the need to compliment the Victorian and Georgian sensibilities of these women, to the point that their status as a dog of the middle and upper classes was quite solid by the time of the founding of the Kennel Club in the 1870s as they were one of the first dog breeds registered.
The poodle is an active, intelligent and elegant dog, squarely built, and well proportioned.
Poodles are highly trainable dogs that typically excel in obedience training.
New Zealand Kennel Club
File:Bullet 2010.jpg|Silver male Standard Poodle pet clip.
It is the most common one in all sizes for shows in Europe, and is allowed for adult poodles to be shown in the FCI countries.
Poodles are bred in a variety of sizes, distinguished by adult shoulder (withers) height.
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) recognizes four sizes of one breed: standard, medium, miniature, and toy.
Ear problems can be minimized by proper ear care, including regular cleaning and plucking of hair within the ear canal.
Towards the second half of the nineteenth century their use in hunting declined in favour of their use in circuses and status symbols of the wealthy, so that by the 20th century they were only found as companions or circus
Like Dobermans, phantom poodles have either a black or brown main coat with a tan (usually apricot or red) lighter colorings around the eyebrows, muzzle, throat, legs, feet, and below their tail.
A poodle will do well at many dog sports, including dog agility, flyball, dock diving, field tracking, and even schutzhund, and can follow owners on hiking trips or any trip involving swimming, as long as the dog is accustomed to water and swimming.
The '''poodle''' is a group of formal dog breeds, the '''Standard Poodle''', '''Miniature Poodle''' and '''Toy Poodle'''.
Dyeing a white Standard Poodle's hair flamboyant colours  and putting bows in their hair has been a habit since the days well-to-do French ladies got their hands on them and circus acts made huge profits on them, but is unnecessary in the field for hiding in blinds.
File:CH Renaissance Hopeful Impulse.jpg|Black Miniature Poodle Continental clip
Texture ranges from coarse and woolly to soft and wavy.
File:Jackie Vasteras 20070721-1.JPG|Poodle Scandinavian clip
In Miniatures, the leading cause of death was old age (39%).
The stillborn rate and early neonatal mortality (death within 1 week from birth) in poodles are lower than the average across all breeds.
American Kennel Club
File:Toy Poodle in Riga 3.JPG|Toy Poodle Scandinavian clip
Twisting of the stomach (volvulus or "torsion") causes or is caused by excess gas.
Image:Blond Older Poodle Enjoying Water.JPG|Toy Poodle aged 16 still has an active life
Thus far 13 Standard Poodles have won Master Hunt titles (12 in the United States, 1 in Canada) and several more have won senior and junior titles on both sides of the border.
Generally, the owners clip their dogs as they want; however, if they want their dogs in conformation shows, a show clip is a requirement.
All three sizes of poodles for the Australian National Kennel Council and the New Zealand Kennel Club are in the Non-sporting Group.
They have a kindly demeanor and a love of playing games.
In Toys, the leading causes of death were old age (25%), and kidney failure (20%).
Due to the breed's popularity in France, it became established as its national breed.
The terms royal standard, teacup, and tiny teacup are marketing names, and are not recognized by any major kennel club.
It was the principal pet dog of the late 18th century in Spain, as shown by the paintings of the Spanish artist Francisco Goya.
The sizes of the official AKC-recognized Poodle breeds are determined by height, not by weight.
Poodles shed hair in minimal amounts, and also release dander, but are not as likely to trigger allergies as much as many other breeds.
The continental clip is the most popular show clip today.
To ensure the desirable squarely built appearance, the length of body measured from the breastbone to the point of the rump approximates the height from the highest point of the shoulders to the ground.
Parti-coloured poodles are recognized in poodle history as the original colouring of the poodle.
Toy Poodles have one of the smallest litter size of all breeds.
Addison's disease is characterized by insufficient production of glucocorticoid and/or mineralocortoid in the adrenal cortex (near the kidneys).
All the Fédération Cynologique Internationale Poodles are in Group 9 Companion and Toy, Section 2 Poodle.
File:Pudel Klein apricotred.jpg|Apricot and red Poodles
Ranked second most intelligent dog breed just behind the Border Collie, the poodle is skillful in many dog sports and activities, including agility, obedience, tracking to herding, circus performers or assistance dogs.
Standard Poodles with unexplained lethargy, frequent gastric disturbances, or an inability to tolerate stress should be tested for it.
The upper coat is solid: head, back, tail; and the lower coat is white: neck, chest, abdomen, and legs, making up usually 40% or more of the coat.
Most hunters have their dogs sport a low-maintenance modification of the Puppy, Sporting, or Continental clip The cut typically shears the dog all over evenly a quarter inch to an inch and a half off the skin, depending on the time of year, and usually leaves the face shaven so the dog can see well.
In 1942, the Poodle was one of 32 breeds officially classified as war dogs by the Army.
Miniature and Toy Poodles in UK surveys had median lifespans of 14 to 14.5 years.
This can lead to matting without proper care.
File:Freddie (8467901543).jpg|Black Poodle
The  Canadian Kennel Club admitted the Standard Poodle for hunting trials in 1996 and the American Kennel Club in 1998, respectively.
The coat will usually be white and colored in equal amounts, though it can vary with a larger percent of white.
As of July 2014, the end results of 20 years of breeding to reawaken the hunting instinct have been dogs that are very eager to please their masters.
Recognition of particolor (spotted) Poodles varies by registry.
In the US and Canada, most hunters are male, lower to upper middle class, and strongly dislike being seen with a dog that has had an effete reputation.
Excess gas trapped in the dog's stomach causes "bloat".
Black/white, Blue/white, and silver/white poodles have black noses, eye rims and lips, black or self-colored toenails and very dark eyes.
Poodle owners are perceived stereotypically as fussy, frivolous, and impractical.
In his column he quoted Mrs. Milton S. (Arlene) Erlanger, owner of Pillicoc Kennels, a premier breeder of Poodles "The dog must play a game in this thing."
The breed has been used for fowl hunting in US and Canada since the early 1990s, in and out of hunting tests.
Many breed registries allow only certain clips for poodles shown in conformation.
The poodle has been bred in at least three sizes, including '''Standard''', '''Miniature''', and '''Toy'''.
Standard Poodles in UK, Denmark and USA/Canada surveys had a median lifespan of 11.5 to 12 years.
Most of the literature like the FCI states that the poodle descends from the old French Barbet breed, others state that the breed might come from Germany as a type of water dog.
An insulated orange jacket in cold weather is preferred and recommended, as the very bright colour makes the dog easily seen from a distance and the insulation compensates for colder temperatures.
Hunting and working dogs were typically of the standard variety, though some reports suggest that smaller varieties such as the miniature may have been popular for truffle hunting, as their feet were less likely to damage the delicate fungi.
Some hair on the ankles and on top of the head may be left longer for warmth in the water, and all that is required thereafter is a scrubbing in warm water with a mild soap after a day on the hunt and a little patience to remove the burrs the dog's hair collects in the bushes.
Standard Poodles achieved the award in 1955, 1985, 2002 and 2014.
The most common of these minor issues is probably ear infection.
Poodles have taken top honors in many conformation shows, including "Best in Show" at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1991 and 2002, and at the World Dog Show in 2007 and 2010.
Poodles are commonly known as extensively groomed show dogs and companions with a distinctive clip, to such a degree that poodles in short pet clips often go unrecognised or mistaken as Poodle crosses ("Doodles").
Black, blue, gray, silver, cream and white poodles have black noses, eye rims and lips, black or self-colored toenails and very dark eyes.
The French name '''Caniche''' comes from the word ''cane'' (the female of the duck) since this type of breed was used as a water retriever mainly for duck hunting thanks to its swimming ability.
Unlike other spaniels and retrievers, Standard Poodles will attempt to solve a problem independently and need to be told specifically what is wanted when tracking and retrieving a bird.
Beyond these sanitary requirements, desired clips depend on owners' preferences.
They require both physical and intellectual activities.
Poodles exist in many coat colors.
In the apricots, while the foregoing coloring is preferred, liver-colored noses, eye rims and lips, and amber eyes are permitted, but are not desirable.
Miniature - Dwarf, ''Nain''
In addition, most poodles are frequently brushed and bathed to keep them looking their best; this not only removes hair and dander, but also controls the other potent allergen, saliva.
File:My dog back in Korea.png|Toy Poodle
Drawings by German artist Albrecht Dürer established the popular image of the breed in the 15th and 16th centuries.
It was invented by Swedish and Norwegian show groomers in the 1970s.
Registries prefer that parti poodles have the same points as its correlating solid-colored descendants.
This clip is now rarely seen in standard poodles.
Non-FCI kennel clubs generally recognize three sizes, standard, miniature, and toy, sometimes as sizes of the same breed and sometimes as separate breeds.
During WWII, Roland Kilbon of the New York Sun, reported that other countries had used dogs in their armies for many years.
Of the size varieties, Standard Poodles are the most highly recommended for families with children.
Eventually, "With the blessing of the American Kennel Club, the Professional Handlers Association, obedience training clubs across the country, and Seeing Eye, Inc., a nationwide program known as Dogs for Defense, Inc. was initiated and became the official procurement agency for all war dogs used in the Army, Navy and Coast Guard."
The second puppy clip is also called the Scandinavian clip or puppy clip.
An air cleaner, air duct outlet and vacuuming with a vacuum cleaner with a HEPA filter can help clear dander floating in the air.
The face, throat, belly, feet and the base of the tail are shaved five to seven days before the show to get a nice, smooth appearance of the shaved areas.
Some sources believe the show clips evolved from working clips, which originally provided warmth to major joints when the dogs were immersed in cold water.
The Canadian Kennel Club and the American Kennel Club place standard and miniature sizes in the Non-sporting Group, and the toy size in the Toy Group.
File:No Fight - JM Staniforth.png|1898 political cartoon: Great Britain as the English Bulldog; France as the French Poodle
Most owners also keep the feet and face clipped short to prevent dirt from matting between toes, tear stains on lighter-coated poodles and food from matting around the dog's muzzle.
Some owners maintain a longer clip in winter than summer.
Traditionally the '''Standard Poodle''', the largest of the breed, was a retriever or gun dog, used in particular for duck hunting and sometimes upland bird hunting.
The modern Standard retains many of the traits prized by their original owners: a keen working intelligence that makes the dog easy to command, webbed feet that make it an agile swimmer (all of the poodle's ancestors and descendants had or share the love of water) athletic stamina, and a moisture-resistant, curly coat that acts like a wool jumper in damp conditions.
File:Pudel Zwerg SilberShow.jpg|Mature grey Poodle
Standard, ''Grand''
In a UK survey, the most common causes of death were cancer (30%), old age (18%), GDV (6%), and cardiac disease (5%).
Poodles are often cited as a hypoallergenic dog breed.
They are likely to bite out of fear and thus are better suited to homes with teenagers or older children.
In the past 20 years in North America, Standard Poodles have begun to be put back to their original purpose as duck and game bird hunters.
Fédération Cynologique Internationale
The breed was standardized in France, where it was commonly used as a water retriever.
File:Pudel ZwergHarlekin.jpg|Miniature Harlequin Poodle
The number of reported cases is nearly twice as high as the next most common problem (GDV).
Despite the Standard Poodle's claim to greater age than the other varieties, some evidence shows the smaller types developed only a short time after the breed assumed the general type by which it is recognized today.
Only the FCI describes a maximum size for Standard Poodles.
Although hair, dander, and saliva can be minimized, they are still present and can stick to "clothes and the carpets and furnishings in your home"; inhaling them, or being licked by the dog, can trigger a reaction in a sensitive person.
If both parents are registered purebreds but of different breeds, it is still not possible to register a puppy as two different breeds.
Any poodle with a normal coat can be corded when its adult coat is in.
+ ''Comparison of poodle sizes defined by major kennel clubs''
File:Poodle, cropped.JPG|White Standard Poodle Scandinavian clip, tail not docked
However, in the past 20 years, some breeders in the United States and Canada have been selecting for dogs with drive for birds in order to revive the breed for hunting, with some success.
Snappy, vicious behavior is considered a serious fault in the breed.
The AKC recognises Poodles in either solid-colored or parti-colored coats.
It has resulted in a gun dog with extreme intelligence, a relentless drive to catch its quarry, and strong swimming skills that requires special training: their aptitude is second only to the British Border Collie and thus the hunting Standard Poodle requires the gunman to be quite specific as to what he wants and how he wants it done.
The AKC allows the "Sporting" clip in Stud Dog and Brood Bitch classes, as well.
The eyes should be very dark, oval in shape, and have an alert and intelligent expression.
Pet clips can be as simple or as elaborate as owners wish.
File:Maisiepuppydog.jpg|Brown Standard Poodle at five weeks
The ears should fold over close to the head, set at, or slightly below, eye level.
The hair under the tail should always be kept short to keep feces from matting in the dog's curls.
As with all dogs and babies, introductions should be gradual, though most Standards will tolerate a baby and learn to be gentle and will respect toddlers so long as the child is supervised.
A pet owner can anticipate grooming a poodle every six to eight weeks.
The Poodle has a wide variety of colouring, including white, black, brown, parti, silver, gray, silver beige, apricot, red, cream, sable, and patterns such as phantom and brindle.
Dogs for Defense procured the dogs who were then trained by the Army.
Poodle hair can also be "corded" with rope-like mats similar to those of a Komondor or human dreadlocks.
The coat should be of naturally curly texture, dense throughout, although most AKC-registered show dogs have a lion-cut or other, similarly shaven look.
Others express skepticism at this theory, instead citing the French circus as the origin of the entertaining and unique clips.
The breed was standardized in France.
Additionally, poodle maintenance must include some amount of regular shaving, which releases hair dust in the air.
In American Kennel Club (AKC) shows, adults must be shown in the "Continental" or "English saddle" clips.
Australian National Kennel Council
Phantom poodles have the colouring of a Doberman Pinscher, with a lighter color appearing on their "eyebrows", muzzle and throat, legs and feet and below their tail.
Poodles are known as a highly intelligent, energetic, and sociable breed.
The 2002 winner came from Norway and was the first overseas exhibit to win the Crufts best in show award.
In blues, grays, silvers, browns, ''cafe-au-laits'', apricots and creams, the coat may show varying shades of the same color.
File:Corded Standard Poodle black.jpg|Corded Standard Poodle
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) recognizes four sizes of one breed: standard, medium, miniature, and toy.
Miniature and Toy varieties tend to be bred primarily for companionship.
The smallest, or Toy variety, was developed in England in the 18th century.
The clips otherwise do not guard against the pitfalls of chasing after ducks, geese, turkey, and pheasant: Continental clips, for example, shave the rump of the dog too close to the skin to provide enough warmth in water below 10&nbsp;°C in a Quebec or New England winter, and the fancier cuts that require the hair to be blown straight can easily get the dog stuck in bramble like a fly in a spiderweb.
The dog's abdomen may be visibly swollen, but bloat or torsion can occur without visible swelling.
The word hypoallergenic, when referring to a dog, is also a misconception; all dogs shed.
In the continental clip, the face, throat, feet and part of the tail are shaved.
Their individual hair follicles have an active growth period that is longer than that of many other breeds of dogs; combined with the tightly curled coat, which slows the loss of dander and dead hair by trapping it in the curls, an individual poodle may release less dander and hair into the environment.
Poodles have been used as working dogs in the military since at least the 17th century.
The word ''Pudel'' is derived from the Low German verb meaning "to splash about", and the word ''Hund'' (dog).
Poodles dislike being left alone or left out of the family fun and some get anxious at being left in the house alone, but sign of nervousness or neurosis is atypical and not how a poodle of any size is meant to behave.
File:Heidishow.jpg|White Standard Poodle Continental clip
