John Paul II was followed by election of the German-born Pope Benedict XVI, who was in turn followed by Argentine-born Pope Francis.
Alexandria had been a center of Jewish learning and became a center of Christian learning.
Pepin the Short subdued the Lombards and donated Italian land to the papacy.
Briefly in the 15th century, three separate lines of popes claimed authenticity (see Papal Schism).
Other titles commonly used are "His Holiness" (either used alone or as an honorific prefix "His Holiness Pope Francis"; and as "Your Holiness" as a form of address), "Holy Father".
Since the pope is Bishop of Rome, only those who can be ordained a bishop can be elected, which means that any male baptized Catholic is eligible.
Both sides agree ... that Rome, as the Church that 'presides in love' according to the phrase of St Ignatius of Antioch, occupied the first place in the ''taxis'', and that the bishop of Rome was therefore the ''protos'' among the patriarchs.
The earliest recorded use of the title "pope" in English dates to the mid-10th century, when it was used in reference to Pope Vitalian in an Old English translation of Bede's ''Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum''.
The official's great-grandson, Pope John XII, held orgies of debauchery in the Lateran Palace.
Popes like Alexander VI, an ambitious if spectacularly corrupt politician, and Pope Julius II, a formidable general and statesman, were not afraid to use power to achieve their own ends, which included increasing the power of the papacy.
#Marcellus II (9 April&nbsp;– 1 May 1555): reigned for 23 calendar days
On 22 March 2006, the Vatican released a statement explaining this omission on the grounds of expressing a "historical and theological reality" and of "being useful to ecumenical dialogue".
Another renowned part of the coronation was the lighting of a bundle of flax at the top of a gilded pole, which would flare brightly for a moment and then promptly extinguish, as he said, ''Sic transit gloria mundi'' ("Thus passes worldly glory").
One of the most common reasons for holding this belief is the idea that the reforms of the Second Vatican Council, and especially the reform of the Tridentine Mass with the Mass of Paul VI, are heretical and that those responsible for initiating and maintaining these changes are heretics and not true popes.
#John Paul I (26 August&nbsp;– 28 September 1978): reigned for 34 calendar days.
This status as a secular and civil ruler was vividly displayed by Pope Leo I's confrontation with Attila in 452.
96, about the persecution of Christians in Rome as the "struggles in our time" and presented to the Corinthians its heroes, "first, the greatest and most just columns", the "good apostles" Peter and Paul.
In 1059 the electorate was restricted to the Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, and the individual votes of all Cardinal Electors were made equal in 1179.
First he asks, "Do you freely accept your election as Supreme Pontiff?"
During this period, the pope was effectively an ally of the Kingdom of France, alienating France's enemies, such as the Kingdom of England.
#Boniface VI (April 896): reigned for 16 calendar days
Although the description "servant of the servants of God" () was also used by other Church leaders, including Augustine of Hippo and Benedict of Nursia, it was first used extensively as a papal title by Pope Gregory I, reportedly as a lesson in humility for the Patriarch of Constantinople, John the Faster, who had assumed the title "Ecumenical Patriarch".
Its foundations were laid early in the 13th century, and it culminated in the 15th century.
This title "Vicar of Christ" is thus not used of the pope alone and has been used of all bishops since the early centuries.
* Ring of the Fisherman, a gold or gilt ring decorated with a depiction of St. Peter in a boat casting his net, with the pope's name around it.
Gregory's successors were largely dominated by the Exarch of Ravenna, the Byzantine emperor's representative in the Italian Peninsula.
Celebration of Easter on a Sunday, as insisted on by the pope, is the system that has prevailed (see computus).
The office of the Pope is the '''papacy'''.
When Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne (800) as Roman Emperor, he established the precedent that, in Western Europe, no man would be emperor without being crowned by a pope.
Theologically, he represents the shift from the classical to the medieval outlook; his popular writings are full of dramatic miracles, potent relics, demons, angels, ghosts, and the approaching end of the world.
Max" or "P.M." The office of Pontifex Maximus, or head of the College of Pontiffs, was held by Julius Caesar and thereafter, by the Roman emperors, until Gratian (375–383) relinquished it.
Other scholars and historians disagree, citing the historical records of St. Ignatius of Antioch (d 107) and St. Irenaeus who recorded the linear succession of Bishops of Rome (the popes) up until their own times.
Some Protestant writers have maintained that the "rock" that Jesus speaks of in this text is Jesus himself or the faith expressed by Peter.
Some writers claim that the emergence of a single bishop in Rome probably did not occur until the middle of the 2nd century.
Popes had galled the Byzantine emperors by siding with the king of the Franks, crowning a rival Roman emperor, appropriating the Exarchate of Ravenna, and driving into Greek Italy.
Given this and other evidence, many scholars agree that Peter was martyred in Rome under Nero, although some scholars argue that he may have been martyred in Palestine.
#Leo XI (1–27 April 1605): reigned for 28 calendar days
This name, based on the black colour of his cassock, was used to suggest a parallel between him and the "White Pope" (since the time of Pope Pius V the popes dress in white) and the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples (formerly called the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith), whose red cardinal's cassock gave him the name of the "Red Pope" in view of the authority over all territories that were not considered in some way Catholic.
In liturgical ceremonies the pope wears an episcopal mitre (an erect cloth hat).
With his long journey, he restored the prestige of the papacy in Northern Europe.
* Crosier topped by a crucifix, a custom established before the 13th century (see Papal ferula).
In the Middle Ages, they played a role of secular importance in Western Europe, often acting as arbitrators between Christian monarchs.
The body lies in state for several days before being interred in the crypt of a leading church or cathedral; all popes who have died in the 20th and 21st centuries have been interred in St. Peter's Basilica.
* "Keys to the Kingdom of Heaven", the image of two keys, one gold and one silver.
Protestants contend that the New Testament offers no proof that Jesus established the papacy nor even that he established Peter as the first bishop of Rome.
To combat this and other practices that had corrupted the Church between the years 900 and 1050, centres emerged promoting ecclesiastical reform, the most important being the Abbey of Cluny, which spread its ideals throughout Europe.
The consensus among scholars has been that, at the turn of the 1st and 2nd centuries, local congregations were led by bishops and presbyters whose offices were overlapping or indistinguishable.
* Pallium, or pall, a circular band of fabric worn around the neck over the chasuble.
They disagree, however, on the interpretation of the historical evidence from this era regarding the prerogatives of the Bishop of Rome as ''protos'', a matter that was already understood in different ways in the first millennium."
Though the tiara was omitted in the pope's personal coat of arms; the coat of arms of the Holy See, which includes the tiara, remained unaltered.
From the 6th century, the imperial chancery of Constantinople normally reserved this designation for the Bishop of Rome.
By the mid-16th century, the electoral process had evolved into its present form, allowing for variation in the time between the death of the pope and the meeting of the cardinal electors.
The concept that a monetary fine or donation accompanied contrition, confession, and prayer eventually gave way to the common assumption that indulgences depended on a simple monetary contribution.
The use of the term to refer to bishops in general is reflected in the terms "Roman Pontifical" (a book containing rites reserved for bishops, such as confirmation and ordination), and "pontificals" (the insignia of bishops).
Some say that there was probably "no single 'monarchical' bishop in Rome before the middle of the 2nd century ... and likely later."
Papal bulls are headed ''N.
Clement of Rome wrote in a letter to the Corinthians, ''c.''
This practice had become common because often the prelates and secular rulers were also participants in public life.
Popes, who originally had no temporal powers, in some periods of history accrued wide powers similar to those of temporal rulers.
The chemical compound is more reliable than the straw.)
It forms a yoke about the neck, breast and shoulders and has two pendants hanging down in front and behind, and is ornamented with six crosses.
Various Antipopes challenged papal authority, especially during the Western Schism (1378–1417).
The Dean asks next, "By what name shall you be called?"
This political and temporal authority was demonstrated through the papal role in the Holy Roman Empire (especially prominent during periods of contention with the Emperors, such as during the Pontificates of Pope Gregory VII and Pope Alexander III).
However, since he is regarded as an anti-pope, he is not mentioned in the list above.
The pope assumes a place of honor as the rest of the cardinals wait in turn to offer their first "obedience" (''adoratio'') and to receive his blessing.
Starting with the Papal conclave, 2005, church bells are also rung as a signal that a new pope has been chosen.
In the early Christian era, Rome and a few other cities had claims on the leadership of worldwide Church.
The first record of the application of this title to a Bishop of Rome appears in a synod of 495 with reference to Pope Gelasius I.
#Pius III (22 September&nbsp;– 18 October 1503): reigned for 27 calendar days
The Bull ''Regnans in Excelsis'' in 1570 excommunicated Elizabeth I of England and declared that all her subjects were released from all allegiance to her.
The names "Holy See" and "Apostolic see" are ecclesiastical terminology for the ordinary jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome (including the Roman Curia); the pope's various honors, powers, and privileges within the Catholic Church and the international community derive from his Episcopate of Rome in lineal succession from the Apostle Saint Peter (see Apostolic succession).
In recent centuries, popes were gradually forced to give up temporal power, and papal authority is now once again almost exclusively restricted to matters of religion.
The current regulations regarding a papal interregnum—that is, a ''sede vacante'' ("vacant seat")—were promulgated by Pope John Paul II in his 1996 document ''Universi Dominici Gregis''.
#Damasus II (17 July&nbsp;– 9 August 1048): reigned for 24 calendar days
Since the beginning of the 7th century, the Caliphate had conquered much of the southern Mediterranean, and represented a threat to Christianity.
It seems that at first the terms "episcopos" and "presbyter" were used interchangeably.
Recent popes have not, however, worn the ''triregnum'', though it remains the symbol of the papacy and has not been abolished.
In the present time this cardinal has power over mission territories for Catholicism, essentially the Churches of Africa and Asia, but in the past his competence extended also to all lands where Protestants or Eastern Christianity was dominant.
Until the time of the Avignon Papacy, the residence of the pope was the Lateran Palace, donated by the Roman emperor Constantine the Great.
Once the ballots are counted and bound together, they are burned in a special stove erected in the Sistine Chapel, with the smoke escaping through a small chimney visible from Saint Peter's Square.
The pope's ecclesiastical jurisdiction (the Holy See) is distinct from his secular jurisdiction (Vatican City).
The pope is considered one of the world's most powerful people because of his diplomatic and cultural influence.
In 380, the Edict of Thessalonica declared Nicene Christianity to be the state religion of the empire, with the name "Catholic Christians" reserved for those who accepted that faith.
XVI", bulls of nomination of bishops.
In general, they are not signed by the pope, but Pope John Paul II introduced in the mid-1980s the custom by which the pope signs not only bulls of canonization but also, using his normal signature, such as "Benedictus PP.
During the "sede vacante" period, the College of Cardinals  is collectively responsible for the government of the Church and of the Vatican itself, under the direction of the Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church; however, canon law specifically forbids the cardinals from introducing any innovation in the government of the Church during the vacancy of the Holy See.
Many contemporary portraits of 15th and 16th-century predecessors of Pius V show them wearing a white cassock similar to his.
The Eastern Church continued to decline with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire, undercutting Constantinople's claim to equality with Rome.
Currently, in addition to the expansion of the Christian faith and doctrine, the popes are involved in ecumenism and interfaith dialog, charitable work, and the defense of human rights.
The earliest record of the use of this title was in regard to the by then deceased Patriarch of Alexandria, Pope Heraclas of Alexandria (232–248).
The title "Vicar of Peter" (''Vicarius Petri'') is used only of the pope, not of other bishops.
The 1983 Code of Canon Law states, "If it happens that the Roman Pontiff resigns his office, it is required for validity that the resignation is made freely and properly manifested but not that it is accepted by anyone."
He is also head of state of Vatican City, a sovereign city-state entirely enclaved within the Italian capital city of Rome.
Until 1978 the pope's election was followed in a few days by the Papal coronation, which started with a procession with great pomp and circumstance from the Sistine Chapel to St. Peter's Basilica, with the newly elected pope borne in the ''sedia gestatoria''.
This period includes the Saeculum obscurum, the Crescentii era, and the Tusculan Papacy.
The pope's escucheon does not appear on the flag.
In the 15th century, the Ottoman Empire captured Constantinople.
One of the most prominent aspects of the papal election process is the means by which the results of a ballot are announced to the world.
The earliest document that describes it as such is the ''Ordo XIII'', a book of ceremonies compiled in about 1274.
Most countries of the world maintain the same form of diplomatic relations with the Holy See that they entertain with other states.
In Eastern Christianity, where the title "Pope" is used also of the Bishop of Alexandria, the Bishop of Rome is often referred to as the "Pope of Rome", regardless of whether the speaker or writer is in communion with Rome or not.
Otherwise, each ballot is read aloud by the presiding Cardinal, who pierces the ballot with a needle and thread, stringing all the ballots together and tying the ends of the thread to ensure accuracy and honesty.
First-century Christian communities would have had a group of presbyter-bishops functioning as leaders of their local churches.
Great defenders of Trinitarian faith included the popes, especially Pope Liberius, who was exiled to Berea by Constantius II for his Trinitarian faith, Damasus I, and several other bishops.
However, this should be differentiated from the words used for the head of the Catholic Church (Bulgarian "папа" ''papa'', Russian "папа римский" ''papa rimskiy'').
Primacy is regarded as a consequence of the pope's position as bishop of the original capital city of the Roman Empire, a definition explicitly spelled out in the 28th canon of the Council of Chalcedon.
Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei'' ("Name, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God").
He is also commonly called the Supreme Pontiff or the Sovereign Pontiff ().
As such, between 1309 and 1378, the popes lived in Avignon, France (see Avignon Papacy), a period often called the Babylonian captivity in allusion to the Biblical narrative of Jews of the ancient Kingdom of Judah living as captives in Babylonia.
John mutilated the Imperial representatives in Rome and had himself reinstated as pope.
#Urban VII (15–27 September 1590): reigned for 13 calendar days, died before coronation.
From 1309 to 1377, the pope resided not in Rome but in Avignon.
The plate is then used to drop the ballot into the chalice, making it difficult for electors to insert multiple ballots.
Though antipope movements were significant at one time, they are now overwhelmingly minor fringe causes.
The Holy See's ''Annuario Pontificio'', in its list of popes and antipopes, attaches a footnote to its mention of Stephen II (III):
Even Catholics do not all agree whether certain historical figures were popes or antipopes.
The pope was originally chosen by those senior clergymen resident in and near Rome.
In Western Christianity these objections both contributed to and are products of the Protestant Reformation.
In Spanish and Italian, "''Beatísimo/Beatissimo Padre''" (Most Blessed Father) is often used in preference to "''Santísimo/Santissimo Padre''" (Most Holy Father).
In Christian use, ''pontifex'' appears in the Vulgate translation of the New Testament to indicate the High Priest of Israel (in the original Koine Greek, ἀρχιερεύς).
The Edict of Milan in 313 granted freedom to all religions in the Roman Empire, beginning the Peace of the Church.
Earlier still, in the 3rd century, Tertullian used "vicar of Christ" to refer to the Holy Spirit sent by Jesus.
From an ancient senatorial family, Gregory worked with the stern judgement and discipline typical of ancient Roman rule.
Rome had a large congregation early in the apostolic period whom Paul the Apostle addressed in his Epistle to the Romans, and according to tradition Paul was martyred there.
Some historians have argued that the notion that Peter was the first bishop of Rome and founded the episcopal see there can be traced back no earlier than the 3rd century.
Tertullian, when he had become a Montanist, used the title derisively of either the pope or the Bishop of Carthage.
A traditionalist Catholic belief that lacks reliable authority claims that a Papal Oath was sworn, at their coronation, by all popes from Pope Agatho to Pope Paul VI and that it was omitted with the abolition of the coronation ceremony.
This Council decreed that the cardinal electors must meet within ten days of the pope's death, and that they must remain in seclusion until a pope has been elected; this was prompted by the three-year ''sede vacante'' following the death of Pope Clement IV in 1268.
The last to be elected when not yet a bishop was Pope Gregory XVI in 1831, and the last to be elected when not even a priest was Pope Leo X in 1513, and the last to be elected when not a cardinal was Pope Urban VI in 1378.
In 1207, Innocent III placed England under interdict until King John made his kingdom a fiefdom to the Pope, complete with yearly tribute, saying, "we offer and freely yield...to our lord Pope Innocent III and his catholic successors, the whole kingdom of England and the whole kingdom of Ireland with all their rights and appurtenences for the remission of our sins".
#Benedict V (22 May&nbsp;– 23 June 964): reigned for 33 calendar days
This is blazoned: "two keys in saltire or and argent, interlacing in the rings or, beneath a tiara argent, crowned or").
The Bull ''Laudabiliter'' in 1155 authorized Henry II of England to invade Ireland.
The electors are now limited to those who have not reached 80 on the day before the death or resignation of a pope.
Another example is Cao Dai, a Vietnamese faith that duplicates the Catholic hierarchy, which is declared legitimate by religious authorities in Cao Dai due to the fact that, according to them, God created both Catholicism and Cao Dai.
Saint Boniface described Pope Gregory II as vicar of Peter in the oath of fealty that he took in 722.
Some new religious movements, especially those that have disassociated themselves from the Catholic Church yet retain a Catholic hierarchical framework, have used the designation "pope" for a movement's founder or current leader.
The difference is that the other bishops are vicars of Christ for their own local churches, the pope is vicar of Christ for the whole Church.
Moreover, Irenaeus was not the first to write of Peter's presence in the early Roman Church.
The current pope is Francis, who was elected on 13 March 2013, succeeding Benedict XVI.
The Senior Cardinal Deacon announces from a balcony over St. Peter's Square the following proclamation: ''Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum!
However, there are only a few other references of that time to recognition of the authoritative primacy of the Roman See outside of Rome.
Some popes used the term and others did not.
In the late 2nd century AD, there were more manifestations of Roman authority over other churches.
It was in relation to the latter that, in November 2008, the United States Court of Appeals in Cincinnati decided that a case over sexual abuse by Catholic priests could proceed, provided the plaintiffs could prove that the bishops accused of negligent supervision were acting as employees or agents of the Holy See and were following official Holy See policy.
Acclamation was the simplest procedure, consisting entirely of a voice vote.
Pope Pius V (reigned 1566–1572), is often credited with having originated the custom whereby the pope wears white, by continuing after his election to wear the white habit of the Dominican order.
Three cardinals are chosen by lot to collect the votes of absent cardinal electors (by reason of illness), three are chosen by lot to count the votes, and three are chosen by lot to review the count of the votes.
In AD 195, Pope Victor I, in what is seen as an exercise of Roman authority over other churches, excommunicated the Quartodecimans for observing Easter on the 14th of Nisan, the date of the Jewish Passover, a tradition handed down by John the Evangelist (see Easter controversy).
This was not done on the deaths of popes John Paul I and John Paul II.
The current Cardinal Vicar is Agostino Vallini, who was appointed to the office in June 2008.
On 11 October 2012, on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the opening of the Second Vatican Council 60 prominent theologians, (including Hans Küng), put out a Declaration, stating that the intention of Vatican II to balance authority in the Church has not been realised.
In 325, the First Council of Nicaea condemned Arianism, declaring trinitarianism dogmatic, and in its sixth canon recognized the special role of the sees of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch.
The Dean of the College of Cardinals then asks two solemn questions of the cardinal who has been elected.
Papal claims of superiority were a sticking point in reunification, which failed in any event.
This head-of-state immunity, recognized by the United States, must be distinguished from that envisaged under the United States' Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, which, while recognizing the basic immunity of foreign governments from being sued in American courts, lays down nine exceptions, including commercial activity and actions in the United States by agents or employees of the foreign governments.
The Bull, ''Inter gravissimas'', in 1582 established the Gregorian calendar.
Donning the appropriate vestments and reemerging into the Sistine Chapel, the new pope is given the "Fisherman's Ring" by the Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church, whom he first either reconfirms or reappoints.
From the early 6th century, it began to be confined in the West to the Bishop of Rome, a practice that was firmly in place by the 11th century, when Pope Gregory VII declared it reserved for the Bishop of Rome.
The title Patriarch of the West symbolized the pope's special relationship with, and jurisdiction over, the Latin Church—and the omission of the title neither symbolizes in any way a change in this relationship, nor distorts the relationship between the Holy See and the Eastern Churches, as solemnly proclaimed by the Second Vatican Council.
Papal bulls, interdict, and excommunication (or the threat thereof) have been used many times to increase papal power.
This was generally dismissed as "unrealistic and spurious".
Pope Pius VII was present at the coronation of Napoleon I in 1804 but did not actually perform the crowning.
From the 7th century it became common for European monarchies and nobility to found churches and perform investiture or deposition of clergy in their states and fiefdoms, their personal interests causing corruption among the clergy.
The ''Encyclopaedia Britannica'' comments that "the consensus of the great majority of scholars today is that the most obvious and traditional understanding should be construed, namely, that rock refers to the person of Peter".
Popes were variously imprisoned, starved, killed, and deposed by force.
Prior to the election of the Polish cardinal Karol Wojtyla as Pope John Paul II in 1978, the last non-Italian was Pope Adrian VI of the Netherlands, elected in 1522.
Urban, at the council of Clermont, called the First Crusade to assist the Byzantine Empire to regain the old Christian territories, especially Jerusalem.
The pope's official seat or cathedral is the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran, and his official residence is the Apostolic Palace.
Though unique for each pope, the arms have for several centuries been traditionally accompanied by two keys in saltire (i.e., crossed over one another so as to form an ''X'') behind the escutcheon (shield) (one silver key and one gold key, tied with a red cord), and above them a silver ''triregnum'' with three gold crowns and red ''infulae'' (lappets—two strips of fabric hanging from the back of the triregnum which fall over the neck and shoulders when worn).
The conflict between popes and secular autocratic rulers such as the Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV and Henry I of England, known as the Investiture Controversy, was only resolved in 1122, by the Concordat of Worms, in which Pope Callixtus II decreed that clerics were to be invested by clerical leaders, and temporal rulers by lay investiture.
The popes in ancient times helped in the spread of Christianity and the resolution of various doctrinal disputes.
Its use specifically for the pope appears in the 13th century in connection with the reforms of Pope Innocent III, as can be observed already in his 1199 letter to Leo I, King of Armenia.
For centuries, from 1378 on, those elected to the papacy were predominantly Italians.
The Cardinal Camerlengo retrieves the Ring of the Fisherman and cuts it in two in the presence of the Cardinals.
Conciliarism holds that the supreme authority of the church lies with a General Council, not with the pope.
The Catholic Church teaches that Jesus personally appointed Peter as leader of the Church and in its dogmatic constitution ''Lumen gentium'' makes a clear distinction between apostles and bishops, presenting the latter as the successors of the former, with the pope as successor of Peter in that he is head of the bishops as Peter was head of the apostles.
James the Just, known as "the brother of the Lord", served as head of the Jerusalem church, which is still honored as the "Mother Church" in Orthodox tradition.
If the Dean himself is elected pope, the Vice Dean performs this task.
The 21st century has seen departures from this tradition.
XVI" (Pope Benedict&nbsp;XVI), except in bulls of canonization and decrees of ecumenical councils, which a pope signs with the formula, "Ego N. Episcopus Ecclesiae catholicae", without the numeral, as in "Ego Benedictus Episcopus Ecclesiae catholicae" (I, Benedict, Bishop of the Catholic Church).
Other documents he signs in accordance with the tradition of using Latin only and including, in the abbreviated form "PP.
This document, accepted as genuine until the 15th century, states that Constantine the Great placed the entire Western Empire of Rome under papal rule.
accept the doctrine of Apostolic succession and, to varying extents, papal claims to a primacy of honour while generally rejecting that the pope is the successor to Peter in any unique sense not true of any other bishop.
International law treats the Holy See, essentially the central government of the Roman Catholic Church, as the juridical equal of a state.
After the Fall of the Western Roman Empire, barbarian tribes were converted to Arian Christianity or Catholicism; Clovis I, king of the Franks, was the first important barbarian ruler to convert to Catholicism rather than Arianism, allying himself with the papacy.
* ''Sedia gestatoria'', a mobile throne carried by twelve footmen (''palafrenieri'') in red uniforms, accompanied by two attendants bearing ''flabella'' (fans made of white ostrich feathers), and sometimes a large canopy, carried by eight attendants.
A nine-day period of mourning (''novendialis'') follows the interment.
The Petrine Doctrine is still controversial as an issue of doctrine that continues to divide the eastern and western churches and separate Protestants from Rome.
The pope may have utilized the forged Donation of Constantine to gain this land, which formed the core of the Papal States.
Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor had John accused in an ecclesiastical court, which deposed him and elected a layman as Pope Leo VIII.
Gradually, episcopacies were established in metropolitan areas.
Even countries without those diplomatic relations participate in international organizations of which the Holy See is a full member.
Previously, the pallium worn by the pope was identical to those he granted to the primates, but in 2005, Pope Benedict XVI began to use a distinct papal pallium that is larger than the primatial, and was adorned with red crosses instead of black.
It is as head of the state-equivalent worldwide religious jurisdiction of the Holy See (not of the territory of Vatican City) that the U.S. Justice Department ruled that the pope enjoys head-of-state immunity.
Though the pope is the diocesan Bishop of the Diocese of Rome, he delegates most of the day-to-day work of leading the diocese to the Cardinal Vicar, who assures direct episcopal oversight of the diocese's pastoral needs, not in his own name but in that of the pope.
From this term is derived the term sedevacantism, which designates a category of dissident Catholics who maintain that there is no canonically and legitimately elected pope, and that there is therefore a ''sede vacante''.
In the following list the number of calendar days includes partial days.
With the East–West Schism, the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church split definitively in 1054.
