Cesare then returned to Rome, where his father asked him to assist Goffredo in reducing the last Orsini strongholds; this for some reason he was unwilling to do, much to his father's annoyance; but he eventually marched out, captured Ceri and made peace with Giulio Orsini, who surrendered Bracciano.
He desecrated the Holy Church as none before.
When Rodrigo de Borgia was elected pope as Alexander VI following the death of Innocent VIII, it was the turn of his son Cesare Borgia to "inherit" the post as second archbishop of Valencia.
Cesare, after resigning his cardinalate, was sent on a mission to France at the end of the year, bearing a bull of divorce for the new French king Louis XII, in exchange for which he obtained the duchy of Valentinois (a duchy chosen because it was consistent with his already known nickname of Valentino), a promise of material assistance in his schemes to subjugate the feudal princelings of papal Romagna, and a marriage to a princess of Navarre.
(This and other related bulls are known collectively as the ''Bulls of Donation''.)
Following the death of Alexander VI, Julius II said on the day of his election: "I will not live in the same rooms as the Borgias lived.
However, he still very dearly loved Vannozza, in a way he considered 'spiritual', and his love for his children by Vannozza remained as strong as ever and proved, indeed, the determining factor of his whole career.
The bulls issued by Pope Alexander VI: ''Eximiae devotionis'' (3 May 1493), ''Inter Caetera'' (4 May 1493) and ''Dudum Siquidem'' (23 September 1493), granted rights to Spain with respect to the newly discovered lands in the Americas similar to those Pope Nicholas V had previously conferred with the bulls ''Romanus Pontifex'' and ''Dum Diversas''.
When Alexander VI heard the news, he lured Cardinal Orsini to the Vatican and cast him into a dungeon, where he died.
Alexander instituted a special rite for the closing of a holy door, as well.
In the Jubilee year 1500, Alexander ushered in the custom of opening a holy door on Christmas Eve and closing it on Christmas Day the following year.
Translation of the plaque on the side of the Archbishop's Palace of Valencia:
Alexander Lee argues that the crimes attributed to the Borgias were exaggerated by contemporaries because they were outsiders expanding their holdings at the expense of the Italians, that they were Spaniards when it was felt that Spain had too much control on the Italian peninsula, and that after the death of Alexander the family lost its influence and therefore any incentive for anyone to defend them.
He and his assistants, bearing candles, processed to the holy door, as the choir chanted .
He had annulled Lucrezia's marriage to Giovanni Sforza, who had responded to the suggestion that he was impotent with the unsubstantiated counter-claim that Alexander and Cesare indulged in incestuous relations with Lucrezia, in 1497.
His daughter Isabella was the great-great-grandmother of Pope Innocent X, who was therefore descended in a direct line from Alexander.
He met the allies at Fornovo, and after a drawn battle cut his way through them and was back in France by November.
The Borgias' apartments remained sealed until the 19th century.
This was followed by a similar appeal in 1994 by the Parliament of World Religions.
After the 1492 expulsion of the Jews from Spain, some 9,000 impoverished Iberian Jews arrived at the borders of the Papal States.
Planned reforms included new rules on the sale of Church property, the limiting of cardinals to one bishopric, and stricter moral codes for clergy.
For the Duke of Gandia and for Gioffre, also known as Goffredo, the Pope proposed to carve fiefs out of the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples.
File:WP_Ercole_II.jpg|Ercole II d'Este, Duke of Ferrara
Alexander, in the bull ''Inter Caetera'' on 4 May 1493, divided the title between Spain and Portugal along a demarcation line.
In 1435, Pope Eugene IV had issued an attack on slavery in his papal bull ''Sicut Dudum'', which included the excommunication of all those who engaged in the slave trade.
Cesare was preparing for another expedition in August 1503 when, after he and his father had dined with Cardinal Adriano Castellesi on 6 August, they were taken ill with fever a few days later.
Saturday, the 12th of August, 1503, the Pope fell ill in the morning.
His reign must be obliterated.
King's College now forms an integral element of the University of Aberdeen.
:pastor Alexander, maxima Roma, tuus.
This door lasted until 1618, when another door was installed in the new basilica.
'''Pope Alexander VI''', born '''Roderic Borgia''' ( (,  ); 1 January 1431&nbsp;– 18 August 1503), was Pope from 11 August 1492 until his death.
The war between France and Spain for the possession of Naples dragged on, and the Pope was forever intriguing, ready to ally himself with whichever power promised the most advantageous terms at any moment.
Alessandro Farnese (later Pope Paul III), the brother of one of the Pope's mistresses, Giulia Farnese, was also among the newly created cardinals.
In order to dominate the Sacred College of Cardinals more completely, Alexander, in a move that created much scandal, created 12 new cardinals.
From that time on, Alexander was able to build himself an effective power base in the Papal States.
In addition to the arts, Alexander VI also encouraged the development of education.
The Duke had many other enemies.
His family name is written Llançol in Catalan and Lanzol in Castillian (Spanish).
Alexander is reported to have been reduced to laughter when Savonarola's denunciations were related to him.
The interregnum witnessed again the ancient "tradition" of violence and rioting.
A danger now arose in the shape of a conspiracy by the deposed despots, the Orsini, and of some of Cesare's own ''condottieri''.
Thus, Pope Alexander formalized the rite and began a longstanding tradition that is still in practice.
His only success had been the capture of Ostia and the submission of the Francophile cardinals Colonna and Savelli.
However, his children were known to be of Llançol paternal lineage.
Then he ended the Mass at which were present five cardinals, Serra, Juan and Francesco Borgia, Casanova and Loris.
Nevertheless, he appointed Sebastian Maggi to investigate the friar, and he responded on 16 October 1495:
Alexander appealed to Ascanio Sforza and even to the Ottoman Sultan Bayazid II for help.
Alexander VI, allegedly a marrano according to papal rival Giuliano della Rovere, distinguished himself by his relatively benign treatment of Jews.
Other later popes, such as Pope Paul III in "Sublimus Dei" (1537), Pope Benedict XIV in ''Immensa Pastorium'' (1741), and Pope Gregory XVI in his letter ''In Supremo Apostolatus'' (1839), continued to condemn slavery.
24 March 1437), and his Aragonese wife and distant cousin Isabel de Borja y Cavanilles (died 19 October 1468).
Alexander agreed to send Cesare as legate to Naples with the French army; to deliver Cem Sultan, held as a hostage, to Charles VIII, and to give Charles Civitavecchia (16 January 1495).
Della Rovere was bankrolled to the cost of 200,000 gold ducats by King Charles VIII of France, with another 100,000 supplied by the Republic of Genoa.
Neapolitan resistance collapsed, and Alfonso II fled and abdicated in favour of his son Ferdinand II.
When at last the pope was suffering from a very severe sickness, he spontaneously requested, one after another, each of the last sacraments.
Having served in the Roman Curia under five popes – his uncle Calixtus III, Pius II, Paul II, Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII – Rodrigo Borgia acquired considerable administrative experience, influence and wealth.
The rest of the Orsini clan still held out, defeating the papal troops sent against them under Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino and Giovanni Borgia, Duke of Gandia, at Soriano (January 1497).
In this manner, he was able to take advantage of the defeat of the French in order to break the power of the Orsini.
Valencian See to the rank of
The Orsini, against whom the Duke had been involved in the recent campaign, were the principal suspects at the time.
A famous quote by him stated the following "Never have mercy for those who won't help themselves."
''Sampietrini'' (basilica workers) completed the seal, placing specially-minted coins and medals inside the wall.
Contemporary accounts suggest that Rodrigo was "handsome, with a very cheerful countenance and genial bearing.
Cesare Borgia, his son, while a youth of seventeen and a student at Pisa, was made Archbishop of Valencia, and Giovanni Borgia inherited the Spanish Dukedom of Gandia, the Borgias' ancestral home in Spain.
After a short stay, the body was removed from the crypts of St. Peter's and installed in a less well-known church, the Spanish national church of Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli.
Rodrigo Llançol was born on 1 January 1431, in the town of Xativa near Valencia, one of the component realms of the Crown of Aragon, in what is now Spain.
Cardinal Borja and the Catholic
Minnich (2010) asserts that this "slave trade" was permitted to facilitate conversions to Christianity.
The ambassador of Ferrara wrote to Duke Ercole that it was no wonder the Pope and the duke were sick because nearly everyone in Rome was ill because of bad air ("per la mala condictione de aere").
(When cardinals died, their wealth automatically reverted to the Church.)
Cesare, by an act of treachery, then seized the ringleaders at Senigallia and put Oliverotto da Fermo and Vitellozzo Vitelli to death (31 December 1502).
Charles VIII had himself crowned King of Naples on 12 May, but a few days later began his retreat northward.
Innocent VIII, at the request of
At the hour of vespers after Gamboa had given him Extreme Unction, he died.
Italy was shown to be very vulnerable to the predations of the powerful nation-states, France and Spain, that had forged themselves during the previous century.
In these circumstances Alexander, feeling more than ever that he could only rely on his own kin, turned his thoughts to further family aggrandizement.
But when the French invasion became a reality Pope Alexander VI became alarmed, recognised Alfonso II as king of Naples, and concluded an alliance with him in exchange for various fiefs for his sons (July 1494).
As De Maistre said in his work ''Du Pape'', "The latter are forgiven nothing, because everything is expected from them, wherefore the vices lightly passed over in a Louis XIV become most offensive and scandalous in an Alexander VI."
Alexander authorised him to pass through Rome, ostensibly on a crusade against the Ottoman Empire, without mentioning Naples.
He took a great interest in theatrics, and he even had the Menaechmi performed in his apartments.
The pope was 72 years old.
Alexander hoped that Louis XII's help would be more profitable to his house than that of Charles VIII had been.
He declared that henceforth the moral reform of the Church would be the sole object of his life.
When the Orsini offered to admit the French to their castles, Alexander had no choice but to come to terms with Charles.
As King Ferdinand I of Naples was threatening to come to the aid of the rightful duke Gian Galeazzo Sforza, the husband of his granddaughter Isabella, Alexander encouraged the French king in his plan for the conquest of Naples.
Mallett shows that Borgia was in the lead from the start and that the rumours of bribery began after the election with the distribution of benefices; Sforza and della Rovere were just as willing and able to bribe as anyone else.
The benefices and offices granted to Sforza, moreover, would be worth considerably more than four mule-loads of silver.
File:San Francisco de Borja.jpg|Francis Borgia, 4th Duke of Gandía
For this, Pope Alexander had a new opening created in the ''portico'' of St. Peter's and commissioned a marble door.
But Alexander, always ready to seize opportunities to aggrandize his family, then adopted a double policy.
After consulting with his Master of Ceremonies, Johann Burchard, Pope Alexander VI opened the first holy door in St. Peter's Basilica on Christmas Eve 1499, and papal representatives opened the doors in the other three patriarchal basilicas.
He similarly allowed the immigration of Jews expelled from Portugal in 1497 and from Provence in 1498.
His goods were confiscated and many other members of the clan in Rome were arrested, while Alexander's son Goffredo Borgia led an expedition into the Campagna and seized their castles.
He is one of the most controversial of the Renaissance popes, partly because he acknowledged fathering several children by his mistresses.
It must be crossed out of every document and memorial.
Some revisionists suggest that the confusion is attributed by attempts to connect Rodrigo as the father of Giovanni, Cesare and Lucrezia, who were surnamed ''Llançol i Borja''.
It is often alleged, sometimes by serious historians, that Alexander and his son poisoned Cardinal Adriano Castellesi, but this is unlikely.
Cesare, too ill to attend to the business himself, sent Don Micheletto, his chief ''bravo'', to seize the Pope's treasures before the death was publicly announced.
Alexander, overwhelmed with grief, shut himself up in Castel Sant'Angelo.
Enquiries suddenly ceased without explanation.
Charles VIII's belligerence in Italy had made it transparent that the 'politics of equilibrium' did nothing but render the country unable to defend itself against a powerful invading force.
In 1468, he was ordained to the priesthood and, in 1471, he was consecrated bishop and appointed Cardinal-Bishop of Albano.
On 14 June, the Duke of Gandia, lately created Duke of Benevento, disappeared; the next day, his corpse was found in the Tiber.
Raphael, Michelangelo and Pinturicchio all worked for him.
Alexander now feared that Charles might depose him for simony, and that the king would summon a council to nominate a new pope.
He first made a very careful confession of his sins, with a contrite heart, and was affected even to the shedding of tears, I am told; then he received in Communion the most Sacred Body and Extreme Unction was administered to him.
Borgia was elected on 11 August 1492, assuming the name of Alexander VI (due to confusion about the status of Pope Alexander V elected by the Council of Pisa).
Alternatively, it has been argued that Rodrigo's father was Jofré de Borja y Escrivà, making Rodrigo a Borja from his mother and father's side.
After his Communion he gave the Eucharist to the Pope who was sitting in bed.
Rodrigo of Borja the first
He also appealed to Spain for help, but Spain was eager to be on good terms with the papacy to obtain the title to the recently discovered New World.
In a ceremony similar to today's, Alexander was carried in the ''sedia gestatoria'' to St. Peter's.
Additionally, he was "so familiar with Holy Writ, that his speeches were fairly sparkling with well-chosen texts of the Sacred Books".
Opponents such as the powerful demagogic Florentine friar Girolamo Savonarola launched invectives against papal corruption and appealed for a general council to confront the papal abuses.
His name and memory must be forgotten.
On Friday, the 18th, between nine and ten o'clock he confessed to the Bishop Gamboa of Carignola, who then read Mass to him.
In 1993, the Indigenous Law Institute called on Pope John Paul II to revoke ''Inter Caetera'' and to make reparation for "this unreasonable historical grief".
The only contemporary accusations of poisoning were from some of the servants of the Borgias, extracted under torture by Alexander's bitter enemy and successor, Julius II.
The debased state of the curia was a major scandal.
A reaction against Charles VIII soon set in, for all the European powers were alarmed at his success.
File:Alexander VI guilia.jpg| Alexander VI kneeling in front of the Madonna, said to be a likeness of Giulia Farnese.
Other historians and Vatican scholars strongly disagree with these accusations and assert that Alexander never gave his approval to the practice of slavery.
He lavished vast sums on them and lauded them with every honor.
Monarchs, raised the
Alexander was able to win over the bishop of Saint-Malo, who had much influence over the king, with a cardinal's hat.
The League was ostensibly formed against the Turks, but in reality it was made to expel the French from Italy.
Image:Buch2-318.jpg|Giovanni Borgia, 2nd Duke of Gandia.
Cesare was suspected but not until much later and he was never named in the immediate aftermath, nor would there have been any particular reason for him to commit such a crime.
However, two of Alexander's successors, the also controversial pontiffs Sixtus V and Urban VIII, described him as one of the most outstanding popes since St. Peter.
Peace was made through Venetian mediation, the Orsini paying 50,000 ducats in exchange for their confiscated lands; the Duke of Urbino, whom they had captured, was left by the Pope to pay his own ransom.
He was a gifted speaker and great at conversation.
The children lived between their mother's home and the Papal Palace itself.
Among the new cardinals was his own son Cesare, then only 18 years old.
Rodrigo Borgia studied law at Bologna where he graduated, not simply as Doctor of Law, but as "the most eminent and judicious jurisprudent".
Both expeditions were badly conducted and failed, and on 8 September Charles VIII crossed the Alps and joined Ludovico il Moro at Milan.
Every effort was made to discover the assassin, and suspicion fell on various highly placed people.
:atque Animam vestris hanc prohibete locis.
He put together a group of his most pious cardinals in order to move the process along.
:and prohibit the Soul from entering your sites.
This policy brought Ferdinand I, King of Naples, into conflict with Alexander, who was also opposed by Cardinal della Rovere, whose candidature for the papacy had been backed by Ferdinand.
There is no evidence that the Borgias resorted to poisoning, judicial murder, or extortion to fund their schemes and the defense of the Papal States.
The Pope told them that he felt very bad.
Thus, the prominent Italian families looked down on the Borgia family, and they resented their power, which they sought for themselves.
After the hour of vespers, between six and seven o'clock a fever appeared and remained permanently.
But a promise of French help quickly forced the confederates to come to terms.
In 1495, he issued a papal bull at the request of William Elphinstone, Bishop of Aberdeen, and King James IV of Scotland, founding King's College, Aberdeen.
'''Epitaphium Alexandri Papae'''
:In Styga nam veniens pacem turbabit Averni,
At first the papal troops were defeated and things looked bleak for the house of Borgia.
:is lying here in the coffin for all people to rejoice,
In the wake of Columbus's landing in the New World, Pope Alexander was asked by the Spanish monarchy to confirm their ownership of these newly found lands.
This became the basis of the Treaty of Tordesillas which was ratified by Spain on 2 July 1494 and by Portugal on 5 September 1494.
Before the death of Alexander VI, Rome was filled with political instability.
On 31 March 1495 the Holy League was formed between the Pope, the emperor, Venice, Ludovico il Moro and Ferdinand of Spain.
Bohuslav Hasištejnský z Lobkovic, a Bohemian humanist poet (1461–1510) dedicated one of his Latin poems to Alexander:
File:José de Avelar Rebelo - Retrato da Rainha D.Luisa de Gusmão.jpg|Luisa de Guzmán, Queen consort of Portugal
:who did not stop at quarrels, struggles and slaughters,
On the 15th of August thirteen ounces of blood were drawn from him and the tertian ague supervened.
But the expulsion of the French from Milan and the return of Lodovico Sforza interrupted his conquests, and he returned to Rome early in 1500.
Thus the two great houses of Orsini and Colonna, who had long fought for predominance in Rome and often flouted the Pope's authority, were subjugated and the Borgias' power increased.
Alexander VI also, in 1501, approved the University of Valencia.
In spite of the remonstrances of Spain and of the Sforza, he allied himself with France in January 1499 and was joined by Venice.
Sixteen days before the death of Pope Innocent VIII, he proposed Valencia as a metropolitan see and became the first archbishop of Valencia.
The Venetian ambassador stated that the body was "the ugliest, most monstrous and horrible dead body that was ever seen, without any form or likeness of humanity".
He usurped the papal power by the devil's aid, and I forbid under the pain of excommunication anyone to speak or think of Borgia again.
Virginio Orsini, who had been captured by the Spanish, died a prisoner at Naples, and the Pope confiscated his property.
By autumn Louis XII was in Italy expelling Lodovico Sforza from Milan.
The atmosphere of Alexander's household is typified by the fact that his daughter Lucrezia apparently lived with Giulia at a point.
According to Raphael Volterrano: "It was a revolting scene to look at that deformed, blackened corpse, prodigiously swelled, and exhaling an infectious smell; his lips and nose were covered with brown drivel, his mouth was opened very widely, and his tongue, inflated by poison, fell out upon his chin; therefore no fanatic or devotee dared to kiss his feet or hands, as custom would have required."
Each pope during this period inevitably found himself surrounded by the servants and retainers of his predecessors who often owed their loyalty to the family of the pontiff who had appointed them.
Ferdinand allied himself with Florence, Milan and Venice.
He was gifted with the quality of being a smooth talker and of choice eloquence.
His parents were Jofré Llançol i Escrivà (died bef.
While the enterprising explorers of Spain and Portugal were quick to enslave the indigenous peoples they met in Africa and the New World, some popes spoke out against the practice.
Rodrigo Borgia was also an intelligent man with an appreciation for the arts and sciences and an immense amount of respect for the Church.
In Italy at the time, the Spanish were looked down upon.
Alexander VI now followed the general tendency of all the princes of the day to crush the great feudatories and establish a centralized despotism.
This is, at least partially, why both Pope Callixtus III and Pope Alexander VI gave powers to family members whom they could trust.
The Papal States were in turmoil, and the powerful Colonna faction seized Ostia in the name of France.
Among the fiefs destined for the duke of Gandia were Cerveteri and Anguillara, lately acquired by Virginio Orsini, head of that powerful house.
He offered to help Louis XII on condition that Sicily be given to Cesare, and then offered to help Spain in exchange for Siena, Pisa and Bologna.
:He would disrupt the peace of Styx and disturb Avernus,
No conclusive explanation was ever reached, and it may be that the crime was simply as a result of one of the Duke's sexual liaisons.
And if we do not flee, he will inevitably devour us all."
And, unable to arrange a union between Cesare and the daughter of King Frederick IV of Naples (who had succeeded Ferdinand II the previous year), he induced Frederick by threats to agree to a marriage between the Duke of Bisceglie, a natural son of Alfonso II, and Lucrezia.
The bishop of Gallipoli, Alexis Celadoni, spoke of the pontiff's contrition during his funeral oration to the electors of Alexander's successor, pope Pius III:
Johann Burchard, the conclave's master of ceremonies and a leading figure of the papal household under several popes, recorded in his diary that the 1492 conclave was a particularly expensive campaign.
All paintings made of the Borgias or for them must be covered over with black crepe.
File:JoffreBorgia.jpg|Gioffre Borgia (1482–1522) Prince of Squillace.
Therefore his Italianized Valencian surname, ''Borgia'', became a byword for libertinism and nepotism, which are traditionally considered as characterizing his pontificate.
Such a criticism, particularly by the very youthful Giovanni, is believed to be highly unlikely: "Precocious though he was, the cardinal would scarcely have made this observation when sixteen years of age."
A daughter, Laura, was born to his mistress, Giulia Farnese; paternity was officially attributed to Orsino Orsini (Farnese's husband).
After the election of his uncle as Pope Callixtus III, he was ordained deacon and created Cardinal-Deacon of ''San Nicola in Carcere'' at the age of twenty-five in 1456.
:Ye prelates of Erebus and Heaven, close your doors
He is an ancestor of virtually all royal houses of Europe, mainly the southern and western ones, for being the ancestor of ''Dona'' Luisa de Guzmán, wife of King John IV of Portugal, of the House of Braganza.
Burchard's ''Diary'' provides a few details of the pope's final illness and death:
Vannozza lived in the Palace of a late Cardinal, or in a large, palatial villa.
Cesare, who "lay in bed, his skin peeling and his face suffused to a violet colour" as a consequence of certain drastic measures to save him, eventually recovered; but the aged Pontiff apparently had little chance.
Morales Padron (1979) concludes that these bulls gave power to enslave the natives.
All the tombs of the Borgias must be opened and their bodies sent back to where they belong – to Spain."
