In contrast to his father, Joseph I was fond of de Melo, and with the Queen Mother's approval, he appointed Melo as Minister of Foreign Affairs.
After annexing the County of Portugal into one of the several counties that made up the Kingdom of Asturias, King Alfonso III of Asturias knighted Vimara Peres, in 868 AD, as the First Count of Portus Cale (Portugal).
Portugal has the largest aquarium in Europe, the Lisbon Oceanarium, and the Portuguese have several other notable organizations focused on science-related exhibits and divulgation, like the state agency ''Ciência Viva'', a programme of the Portuguese Ministry of Science and Technology to the promotion of a scientific and technological culture among the Portuguese population, the Science Museum of the University of Coimbra, the National Museum of Natural History at the University of Lisbon, and the Visionarium.
In addition, a number of EU citizens, mostly from the United Kingdom, other northern European or Nordic countries, have become permanent residents in the country (with the British community being mostly composed of retired pensioners and choosing to live in the Algarve and Madeira).
Only one third of adults rated their health as good or very good in Portugal (Kasmel et al., 2004).
The major seaports are located in Sines, Lisbon, Leixões, Setúbal, Aveiro, Figueira da Foz, and Faro.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal established the first global empire, becoming one of the world's major economic, political and military powers.
Rome installed a colonial regime.
In the year 500, the Visigothic Kingdom was installed in Iberia, centred on Toledo.
In 2015, 50.7% of births were to unmarried women.
Not having children, his brother, Luís I of Portugal ascended the throne and continued his modernization.
The legendary Eusébio is still a major symbol of Portuguese football history.
The new city centre of Lisbon was designed to resist subsequent earthquakes.
Though Pedro was his heir, and reigned briefly as Pedro IV, his status as a Brazilian monarch was seen as an impediment to holding the Portuguese throne by both nations.
These were subsistence societies that, although they did not establish prosperous settlements, did establish organized societies.
Neolithic Portugal experimented with domestication of herding animals, the raising of some cereal crops and fluvial or marine fishing.
In the period between January and May 2010, 70% of the national production of energy came from renewable sources.
In the second decade of the 21st century the Portuguese economy suffered its most severe recession since the 1970s resulting in the country having to be bailed out by the European Commission, European Central Bank and International Monetary Fund.
The Head of State of Portugal is the President of the Republic, elected to a five-year term by direct, universal suffrage.
This forced the Portuguese military to retreat from the land between the Portuguese colonies of Mozambique and Angola (most of present-day Zimbabwe and Zambia), which had been claimed by Portugal and included in its "Pink Map", which clashed with British aspirations to create a Cape to Cairo Railway.
Portugal is an important stopover for migratory birds, in places such as Cape St. Vincent or the Monchique mountains, where thousands of birds cross from Europe to Africa during the autumn or in the spring (return migration).
In 1373, Portugal made an alliance with England, which is the longest-standing alliance in the world.
A few small, semi-permanent, commercial coastal settlements (such as Tavira) were also founded in the Algarve region by Phoenicians-Carthaginians.
The two largest metropolitan areas have subway systems: Lisbon Metro and ''Metro Sul do Tejo'' in the Lisbon Metropolitan Area and Porto Metro in the Porto Metropolitan Area, each with more than  of lines.
In 1996 the country was a co-founder of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) headquartered in Lisbon.
File:Alto Douro.jpg|The cultivated hillsides of the Douro river valley of Northern Portugal.
Disaster fell upon Portugal in the morning of 1 November 1755, when Lisbon was struck by a violent earthquake with an estimated Richter scale magnitude of 9.
*The Ilhas Selvagens (Savage Islands).
The Portuguese Football Federation (FPF) &nbsp;– ''Federação Portuguesa de Futebol''&nbsp;– annually hosts the Algarve Cup, a prestigious women`s football tournament that has been celebrated in the Algarvian part of Portugal.
The most important demographic influence in the modern Portuguese seems to be the oldest one; current interpretation of Y-chromosome and mtDNA data suggests that the Portuguese have their origin in Paleolithic peoples that began arriving to the European continent around 45,000 years ago.
The Macaronesian islands (Azores and Madeira) have many endemic species (like birds, reptiles, bats, insects, snails and slugs) that evolved independently from other regions of Portugal.
The Portuguese consume a lot of dry cod (''bacalhau'' in Portuguese), for which there are hundreds of recipes.
Pedro's reign saw the consolidation of national independence, imperial expansion, and investment in domestic production.
Coins, some of which coined in Lusitanian land, as well as numerous pieces of ceramics were also found.
Following the Távora affair, the new Count of Oeiras knew no opposition.
He demarcated the region for production of Port to ensure the wine's quality, and this was the first attempt to control wine quality and production in Europe.
The early history of Portugal is shared with the rest of the Iberian Peninsula located in South Western Europe.
The Portuguese have a culture of good food, and throughout the country there are myriads of good restaurants and typical small ''tasquinhas''.
Portuguese sailors set out to reach Eastern Asia by sailing eastward from Europe, landing in such places as Taiwan, Japan, the island of Timor, and in the Moluccas.
According to the Ethnologue of Languages, Portuguese and Spanish have a lexical similarity of 89% - educated speakers of each language can communicate easily with one another.
Egas Moniz, a Portuguese physician who developed the cerebral angiography and leucotomy, received in 1949 the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine&nbsp;– he is the first Portuguese recipient of a Nobel Prize and the only in the sciences.
Portuguese primary school enrollments are close to 100 percent.
Portuguese processed fish products are exported through several companies, under a number of different brands and registered trademarks, such as Ramirez, the world’s oldest active canned fish producer.
Galicia is a consultative observer of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.
Companies listed on Euronext Lisbon stock exchange like EDP, Galp, Jerónimo Martins, Mota-Engil, Novabase, Semapa, Portucel Soporcel, Portugal Telecom and Sonae, are among the largest corporations of Portugal by number of employees, net income or international market share.
Traditional architecture is distinctive and include the Manueline, also known as Portuguese late Gothic, a sumptuous, composite Portuguese style of architectural ornamentation of the first decades of the 16th century.
Forestry has also played an important economic role among the rural communities and industry (namely paper industry that includes Portucel Soporcel Group, engineered wood that includes Sonae Indústria, and furniture that includes several manufacturing plants in and around Paços de Ferreira, the core of Portugal's major industrial operations of IKEA).
In 1500, Pedro Álvares Cabral discovered Brazil and claimed it for Portugal.
Historically, within the scope of the Portuguese Empire, the Portuguese founded the oldest engineering school of the Americas (the ''Real Academia de Artilharia, Fortificação e Desenho'' of Rio de Janeiro) in 1792, as well as the oldest medical college in Asia (the ''Escola Médico-Cirúrgica'' of Goa) in 1842.
Artists with international recognition include Dulce Pontes, Moonspell, Buraka Som Sistema, Blasted Mechanism and The Gift, with the two latter being nominees for a MTV Europe Music Award.
The Portuguese art of pastry has its origins in the many medieval Catholic monasteries spread widely across the country.
Mário Soares would be Prime Minister from 1976 to 1978 and again from 1983 to 1985.
The country produces a wide variety of crops and livestock products, including tomatoes, citrus, green vegetables, rice, corn, barley, olives, oilseeds, nuts, cherries, bilberry, table grapes, edible mushrooms, dairy products, poultry and beef.
The city was razed to the ground by the earthquake and the subsequent tsunami and ensuing fires.
The President is also the ''ex officio'' Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
In winter temperatures may drop below  in particular in Serra da Estrela, Serra do Gerês, Serra do Marão and Serra de Montesinho and the lowest temperature ever has been -17 C near Miranda do Douro.
They have won eight titles in the European UEFA club competitions, were present in many finals and have been regular contenders in the last stages almost every season.
It is now around 2 deaths per a 1000 newborns.
Today, the country is known by wine lovers and its wines have won several international prizes.
It is the westernmost country of mainland Europe.
The IMF, the European Commission (EC) and the European Central Bank (ECB) said in September 2012 that Portugal’s debt would peak at 124 percent of gross domestic product in 2014.
The governors of the taifas each proclaimed themselves Emir of their provinces and established diplomatic relations with the Christian kingdoms of the north.
War led to a deterioration of the relations with Portugal's oldest ally, England, and the loss of Hormuz, a strategic trading post located between Iran and Oman.
Other episodes during this period of the Portuguese presence in Africa include the 1890 British Ultimatum.
Portuguese military expenditure in 2009 was $5.2 billion, representing 2.1 percent of GDP.
Other influences include some 5th-century vestiges of Alan settlements, which were found in Alenquer (old Germanic ''Alankerk'', from Alan+kerk; meaning ''temple of the Alans''), Coimbra and Lisbon.
As a result of political division, Galician-Portuguese lost its unity when the County of Portugal separated from the Kingdom of Galicia (a dependent kingdom of Leon) to establish the Kingdom of Portugal.
Adventurer and poet Luís de Camões (c. 1524–1580) wrote the epic poem ''"Os Lusíadas"'' (The Lusiads), with Virgil's Aeneid as his main influence.
The Rooster of Barcelos is bought by many tourists as a souvenir.
In order to defend his daughter's rights to the throne, Pedro launched the Liberal Wars to reinstall his daughter and establish a constitutional monarchy in Portugal.
These reforms gained him enemies in the upper classes, especially among the high nobility, who despised him as a social upstart.
Presidential powers include the appointment of the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government (where the President takes into account the results of legislative elections); dismissing the Prime Minister; dissolving the Assembly of the Republic (to call early elections); vetoing legislation (which may be overridden by the Assembly); and declaring a state of war or siege.
Port and Madeira are particularly appreciated in a wide range of places around the world.
In 1640, John IV spearheaded an uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king.
File: Região de Leiria Leiria
These countries, plus Macau Special Administrative Region (People's Republic of China) where Portuguese is co-official with Cantonese, make up the Lusosphere, a term derived from the ancient Roman province of "Lusitania", which currently matches the Portuguese territory south of the Douro river.
File:Serra da Estrela 1.jpg|The Serra da Estrela, the highest mountain range on continental Portugal.
The President, who is elected to a five-year term, has an executive role: the current President is Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa.
King John IV's eldest son came to reign as Afonso VI, however his physical and mental disabilities left him overpowered by Luís de Vasconcelos e Sousa, 3rd Count of Castelo Melhor.
The main laws include the Constitution (1976, as amended), the Portuguese Civil Code (1966, as amended) and the Penal Code of Portugal (1982, as amended).
Joseph I made his loyal minister Count of Oeiras in 1759.
With the emergence and growth of several science parks throughout the world that helped create many thousands of scientific, technological and knowledge-based businesses, Portugal started to develop several science parks across the country.
It has the 18th highest Social Progress in the world, putting it ahead of other Western European countries like France, Spain and Italy.
Portuguese literature, one of the earliest Western literatures, developed through text as well as song.
There are several species of diverse mammalian fauna, including the fox, badger, iberian lynx, iberian wolf, wild goat (''Capra pyrenaica''), wild cat (''Felis silvestris''), hare, weasel, polecat, chameleon, mongoose, civet, brown bear (spotted near Rio Minho, close to Peneda-Gerês) and many others.
The Arabs were principally noblemen from Oman; and though few in numbers, they constituted the elite of the population.
Ten years later, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Goa in India, Muscat and Ormuz in the Persian Strait, and Malacca, now a state in Malaysia.
That year the west of the empire gained its independence under Abd-ar-Rahman I with the establishment of the Emirate of Córdoba.
To the west and south it is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean and to the east and north by Spain.
Before the solar/wind revolution, Portugal had generated electricity from hydropower plants on its rivers for decades.
Benfica, Sporting CP and FC Porto are the largest sports clubs by popularity and by number of trophies won, often known as "''os três grandes''" ("the big three").
The Távora family and the Duke of Aveiro were implicated and executed after a quick trial.
Companies locate in the Portuguese science parks to take advantage of a variety of services ranging from financial and legal advice through to marketing and technological support.
For the next 300 years and by the year 700, the entire Iberian Peninsula was ruled by the Visigoths.
The Pre-Celts, Celts, Phoenicians, Carthaginians and the Romans were followed by the invasions of the  Visigothic and the Suebi Germanic peoples.
Out of the summer season, Portugal has a large number of festivals, designed more to an urban audience, like Flowfest or Hip Hop Porto.
Despite the calamity and huge death toll, Lisbon suffered no epidemics and within less than one year was already being rebuilt.
While possession is legal, trafficking and possession of more than "10 days worth of personal use" are still punishable by jail time and fines.
On 5 July 2004, José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal, was nominated President of the European Commission, the most powerful office in the European Union.
They serve primarily as a self-defense force whose mission is to protect the territorial integrity of the country and provide humanitarian assistance and security at home and abroad.
However, the sector also includes larger scale intensive farming export-oriented agrobusinesses backed by companies (like Grupo RAR's Vitacress, Sovena, Lactogal, Vale da Rosa, Companhia das Lezírias and Valouro).
File:Monsaraz and the Alqueva Reservoir.jpg|Monsaraz and the Alqueva Reservoir on the background, on the Alentejo.
Other than football, many Portuguese sports clubs, including the "big three", compete in several other sports events with a varying level of success and popularity, these may include roller hockey, basketball, futsal, handball, and volleyball.
Influences from African Traditional Religion and Chinese Traditional Religion are also felt among many people, particularly in fields related with Traditional Chinese Medicine and African Witch Doctors.
By the end of 2006, 66% of the country's electrical production was from coal and fuel power plants, while 29% were derived from hydroelectric dams, and 6% by wind energy.
The Army (21,000 personnel) comprises three brigades and other small units.
He then aimed to regroup the Iberian Peninsula's Christian armies and use the Cantabrian mountains as a springboard from which to regain their lands.
The country has small Protestant, Latter-day Saint, Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, Eastern Orthodox Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Baha'i, Buddhist, Jewish and Spiritist communities.
In 2006, the world's largest solar power plant at that date, the Moura Photovoltaic Power Station, began operating near Moura, in the south, while the world's first commercial wave power farm, the Aguçadoura Wave Farm, opened in the Norte region (2008).
Portugal is a member of several pan-European scientific organizations.
In 1961, São João Baptista de Ajudá's annexation by the Republic of Dahomey was the start of a process that led to the final dissolution of the centuries-old Portuguese Empire.
After Afonso's death, Pedro came to the throne as King Pedro II.
The Lusitanians and other native tribes, under the leadership of Viriathus, wrested control of all of western Iberia.
Geologically, these islands were formed by volcanic and seismic events.
Afonso then turned his arms against the Moors in the south.
Although a few other tracts were created (around 1960 and 1970), it was only after the beginning of the 1980s that large-scale motorway construction was implemented.
However, every higher education institution offers also a number of additional vacant places through other extraordinary admission processes for sportsmen, mature applicants (over 23 years old), international students, foreign students from the Lusosphere, degree owners from other institutions, students from other institutions (academic transfer), former students (readmission), and course change, which are subject to specific standards and regulations set by each institution or course department.
Due to the human population decrease and rural exodus, Pyrenean oak and other local native trees are colonizing many abandoned areas.
The Ministry of Health is responsible for developing health policy as well as managing the SNS.
The Portuguese national rugby sevens team has played in the World Rugby Sevens Series.
In Gerês both mature deciduous and coniferous forests can be found, an extremely rare worldwide mature Mediterranean forest remain in some parts of the Arrábida mountain and a subtropical laurissilva forest, dating back to the Tertiary period, covers its largest continuous area in the world in the Madeira main island.
The Taifa period ended with the conquest of the Almoravids who came from Morocco in 1086 winning a decisive victory at the Battle of Sagrajas, followed a century later in 1147, after the second period of Taifa, by the Almohads, also from Marrakesh.
In addition to the three branches of the armed forces, there is the National Republican Guard, a security force subject to military law and organization (gendarmerie) comprising 25,000 personnel.
Portugal has considerable resources of wind and river power, the two most cost-effective renewable sources.
In Portugal, Lisbon tram services have been supplied by the ''Companhia de Carris de Ferro de Lisboa'' (Carris), for over a century.
Portuguese wines have enjoyed international recognition since the times of the Romans, who associated Portugal with their god Bacchus.
A national railway system that extends throughout the country and into Spain, is supported and administered by Comboios de Portugal.
File:Lagoa_das_Sete_Cidades3.jpg|Sete Cidades volcanic lagoons, on the island of São Miguel.
Modern Portugal has given the world renowned architects like Eduardo Souto de Moura, Álvaro Siza Vieira (both Pritzker Prize winners) and Gonçalo Byrne.
In addition, about 25% of the population is covered by the health subsystems, 10% by private insurance schemes and another 7% by mutual funds.
The region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by Neanderthals and then by Homo sapiens, who roamed the border-less region of the northern Iberian peninsula.
After the turmoil of the 1974 revolution and the PREC period, Portugal tried to adapt to a changing modern global economy, a process that continues in 2013.
Two other popular fish recipes are grilled sardines and caldeirada, a potato-based stew that can be made from several types of fish.
The Savage Islands, which are part of the regional territory of Madeira and a nature reserve are unique in being classified as a desert climate (''BWh'') with an annual average rainfall of approximately .
There are many endemic insect species, most only found in certain parts of Portugal, while other species are more widespread like the stag beetle (''Lucanus cervus'') and the cicada.
The country has also achieved notable performances in sports like fencing, judo, kitesurf, rowing, sailing, surfing, shooting, triathlon and windsurf, owning several European and world titles.
After the end of the Portuguese Empire in 1975, the Portuguese Armed Forces have participated in peacekeeping missions in East Timor, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq (Nasiriyah) and Lebanon.
Also in the early 1960s, independence movements in the Portuguese overseas provinces of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea in Africa, resulted in the Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974).
The reigns of Dinis I, Afonso IV, and Pedro I for the most part saw peace with the Christian kingdoms of Iberia.
Military conscription was abolished in 2004.
Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by military monastic orders, pushed southward to drive out the Moors.
The region became known as ''Portucale'', ''Portugale'', and simultaneously ''Portugália'' — the County of Portugal.
Among his best-known works is ''Canção Popular a Russa e o Fígaro''.
Continental Portugal's  territory is serviced by four international airports located near the principal cities of Lisbon, Porto, Faro and Beja.
Despite criticism from other European nations, who stated Portugal's drug consumption would tremendously increase, overall drug use has declined along with the number of HIV infection cases, which had dropped 50 percent by 2009.
The Roman leaders decided to change their strategy.
Particularly popular and distinguished is José Saramago, recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Literature.
The Portuguese legal system is part of the civil law legal system, also called the continental family legal system.
At the end of the 9th century, the region of Portugal, between the rivers Minho and Douro, was freed or reconquered from the Moors by Vimara Peres on the orders of King Alfonso III of Asturias.
Each government is required to define the broad outline of its policies in a programme, and present it to the Assembly for a mandatory period of debate.
Noted Portuguese film actors include Joaquim de Almeida, Daniela Ruah, Maria de Medeiros, Diogo Infante, Soraia Chaves, Ribeirinho, Lúcia Moniz, and Diogo Morgado.
Portugal has left a profound cultural and architectural influence across the globe and a legacy of over 250 million Portuguese speakers today.
An infantry brigade (mainly equipped with Pandur II APC), a mechanized brigade (mainly equipped with Leopard 2 A6 tanks and M113 APC) and a Rapid Reaction Brigade (consisting of paratroopers, commandos and rangers).
Throughout the 15th century, Portuguese explorers sailed the coast of Africa, establishing trading posts for several common types of tradable commodities at the time, ranging from gold to slaves, as they looked for a route to India and its spices, which were coveted in Europe.
The PSD and CDS-PP form the opposition to the government alongside a single seat held by the PAN.
The President is advised on issues of importance by the Council of State, which is composed of six senior civilian officers, any former Presidents elected under the 1976 Constitution, five-members chosen by the Assembly, and five selected by the president.
The government decided to build a new airport outside Lisbon, in Alcochete, to replace Lisbon Portela Airport, though this plan has been stalled due to the austerity.
However, the King of Portugal remained in Brazil until the Liberal Revolution of 1820, which started in Porto, demanded his return to Lisbon in 1821.
In 711 the Iberian Peninsula was invaded by the Moors and for the following centuries Portugal would be part of Muslim Al Andalus.
The former Kingdom of the Suebi then became the sixth province of the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania.
The Treaty of Tordesillas, intended to resolve the dispute that had been created following the return of Christopher Columbus, which was made by Pope Alexander VI, the mediator between Portugal and Spain.
By the early 1970s Portugal's fast economic growth with increasing consumption and purchase of new automobiles set the priority for improvements in transportation.
In the South of the country snowfalls are rare but still occur in the highest elevations.
One of the first cities Vimara Peres founded at this time is Vimaranes, known today as Guimarães - the "birthplace of the Portuguese nation" or the "cradle city" (Cidade Berço in Portuguese).
According to the 2011 Census, 81.0% of the Portuguese population are Roman Catholic.
Rail transport of passengers and goods is derived using the  of railway lines currently in service, of which  are electrified and about  allow train speeds greater than .
Marine fish species are more common, and include thousands of species, such as the sardine (''Sardina pilchardus''), tuna and Atlantic mackerel.
From the 1940s to the 1960s, Portugal was a founding member of NATO, OECD and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Similarly, contemporary composers such as Nuno Malo and Miguel d'Oliveira have achieved some international success writing original music for film and television.
The retreat from the overseas territories and the acceptance of its independence terms by Portuguese head representatives for overseas negotiations, which would create independent states in 1975, prompted a mass exodus of Portuguese citizens from Portugal's African territories (mostly from Portuguese Angola and Mozambique).
Shortly after, independence was granted to almost all its overseas territories, marking the end of the longest-lived European colonial empire.
At this time Spain was a geographic territory.
Genetic studies show Portuguese populations not to be significantly different from other European populations.
Since the Carnation Revolution of 1974, which culminated in the end of one of Portugal's most notable phases of economic expansion (that started in the 1960s), a significant change has occurred in the nation's annual economic growth.
Snowfalls occur regularly in the winter in the interior North and Centre of the country in districts such as Vila Real, Bragança, Viseu and Guarda.
The armed forces have three branches: Navy, Army and Air Force.
This period lasted until 711, when King Roderic (Rodrigo) was killed while opposing a Moorish invasion from the south.
The Portuguese national rugby union team qualified for the 2007 Rugby World Cup and became the first all amateur team to qualify for the World Cup since the dawn of the professional era.
In the autumn of 1807, Napoleon moved French troops through Spain to invade Portugal.
Major State-owned companies include Águas de Portugal (water), Caixa Geral de Depósitos (banking), Comboios de Portugal (railways), Companhia das Lezírias (agriculture) and RTP (media).
In 1972, Brisa, the highway concessionaire, was founded to handle the management of many of the regions motorways.
In 2005, Portugal held the MTV Europe Music Awards, in Pavilhão Atlântico, Lisbon.
Rome sent numerous legions and its best generals to Lusitania to quell the rebellion, but to no avail—the Lusitanians kept conquering territory.
At this time Portugal covered about half of its present area.
Beginning in 711, the land that is now Portugal became part of the vast Umayyad Caliphate's empire of Damascus, which stretched from the Indus river in the Indian sub-continent (now Pakistan) up to the South of France, until its collapse in 750.
Boar, Iberian red deer, roe deer, and the Iberian wild goat, are reported to have expanded greatly during recent decades.
Pelagius' plan was to use the Cantabrian mountains as a place of refuge and protection from the invading Moors.
They bribed Viriathus's allies to kill him.
Although Portugal did not lose its formal independence, it was governed by the same monarch who governed the Spanish Empire, briefly forming a union of kingdoms.
In the following years Portugal's economy progressed considerably as a result of EEC/EU structural and cohesion funds and Portuguese companies' easier access to foreign markets.
At times the Kingdom of Galicia existed independently for short periods, but usually formed an important part of the Kingdom of Leon.
After the financial crisis of 2007–08, it was known in 2008–2009 that two Portuguese banks (Banco Português de Negócios (BPN) and Banco Privado Português (BPP)) had been accumulating losses for years due to bad investments, embezzlement and accounting fraud.
Again in the 1990s, after joining the European Economic Community, the country built many new motorways.
Thus he returned to Portugal but left his son Pedro in charge of Brazil.
After the bailout was announced, the Portuguese government headed by Pedro Passos Coelho managed to implement measures with the intention of improving the state's financial situation, including tax hikes, a freeze of civil service-related lower-wages and cuts of higher-wages by 14.3%, on top of the government's spending cuts.
The Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General of the Republic, constitutes the independent body of public prosecutors.
In 1498, Vasco da Gama reached India and brought economic prosperity to Portugal and its population of 1.7&nbsp;million residents, helping to start the Portuguese Renaissance.
There are still many ruins of castros (hill forts) all over modern Portugal and remains of Castro culture.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, the language spread worldwide as Portugal established a colonial and commercial empire between 1415 and 1999.
The site also has a museum that displays objects found by archaeologists during their excavations.
