''Portsmouth Point'' is an overture for orchestra by the English composer William Walton in 1925.
Construction of both ships took place in the Firth of Forth at Rosyth Dockyard and BAE Systems Surface Ships in Glasgow, Babcock Babcock at Rosyth, and at HMNB Portsmouth.
Despite public health improvements, 514 people died in a smallpox epidemic in 1872.
The Danes were massacred by the survivors the following year and rebuilding began although it was subject to attack until 1066.
Portsmouth's secondary schools were to undergo a major redevelopment, with three being totally demolished and rebuilt and the remainder receiving major renovation work.
In 1336 a French fleet under the command of David II of Scotland scourged the English Channel, ransacked the Isle of Wight and threatened the town.
Fenton was then hanged and his body was chained to a gibbet in Southsea Common, as a warning to others.
In April 1811 the Portsea Island Company constructed the first piped water supply to upper and middle class houses.
Other districts in Portsmouth include North End and Fratton.
The overture was used for the BBC Proms Concert in 2007.
This service was criticised when the ferry ''Fortuny'' was detained in Portsmouth by the Maritime and Coastguard Agency for numerous safety breaches.
The city has several mainline railway stations which connect to London Waterloo amongst other lines in South East England, while Portsmouth International Port is a commercial cruise ship and ferry port for international destinations.
Portsmouth's long association with the Royal Navy meant that it represents one of the most diverse cities in terms of the peoples of the British Isles.
both compete in Wessex League Division One, with United Services being formed in 1962, and Baffins Milton Rovers being founded in 2011.
It was announced by the government prior to the Scottish Independence Referendum that military shipbuilding would end in Portsmouth, with all UK surface warship shipbuilding focusing instead at the two older BAE facilities in Glasgow.
In 1818 John Pounds began teaching working class children in the country's first ragged school.
Clarence Pier was officially opened in 1861 by the Prince and Princess of Wales, and was named after the once military governor of Portsmouth, Lord Fitz Clarence.
Richard granted the town the arms of Isaac Komnenos of Cyprus, whom he had defeated during the Third Crusade in 1191, reflecting a significant involvement of local soldiers, sailors and vessels in he holy war.
In addition, Countryliner runs a Saturday service to Midhurst in West Sussex, and Xelabus operate a Sunday open-top seafront summer service around the city .
The west of the city is mainly council estates such as Buckland, Landport and Portsea.
Royal Navy Rugby Union play in the annual Army Navy Match at Twickenham.
In Jane Austen's novel ''Mansfield Park'', Portsmouth is the hometown of the main character Fanny Price, and is the setting of most of the closing chapters of the novel.
They were successful, although Wulfherd was killed.
There is an ongoing debate on the development of a new public transport structure, with monorails and light rail both being considered.
In 1416, a number of French ships blockaded Portsmouth, which housed ships that were set to invade Normandy.
The port is the second busiest in the United Kingdom after Dover, handling around three million passengers a year.
The town was plundered and burnt, however its inhabitants fought back and defeated them, which led the French to retreat and raid towns in the West Country instead.
When the first local commercial radio stations were licensed in the 1970s by the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA), Radio Victory was the radio service for Portsmouth.
On 2 April 1982, Argentine forces invaded two British territories in the South Atlantic: the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.
Henry VII rebuilt the fortifications with stone, assisted Robert Brygandine and Sir Reginald Bray in the construction of the world's first dry dock, and raised the Square Tower in 1494.
The flagship of the task force, HMS ''Hermes'', returned to Portsmouth carrying the survivors of HMS ''Sheffield'' on 21 July 1982, and was decommissioned shortly after.
Before 1791 Roman Catholic chapels in towns with borough status were prohibited.
In 787, it was assaulted and conquered by Danish pirates, while during the reign of Æthelwulf, King of Wessex in 838, a Danish fleet landed between Portsmouth and Southampton and the surrounding area was plundered.
Hovertravel and Stagecoach run the Hoverbus from the city centre to Southsea Hovercraft Terminal and The Hard Interchange, near the seafront.
The city is predominantly white in terms of ethnicity, with 91.8% of the population belonging to this ethnic group.
The city forms part of the South Hampshire built-up area, which also covers Southampton and the towns of Havant, Waterlooville, Eastleigh, Fareham and Gosport.
In 1563, Portsmouth suffered from an outbreak of a plague, resulting in about 300 deaths out of the town's population of 2000.
The development of the former Brickwoods Brewery site included the construction of a 22-storey tower known as the Admiralty Quarter Tower, the tallest in a complex of mostly low-rise residential buildings.
Several local colleges also have the power to award Higher National Diplomas, including Highbury College, which specialises in vocational education; and Portsmouth College, which offers various academic courses in the city.
After its closure, housing, industrial sites, retail areas and a school were built on the site.
Portsmouth Airport, an airport with grass runway, was in operation from 1932 to 1973.
22 million people have visited her since.
The city is home to some famous ships, including HMS ''Warrior'', the Tudor carrack ''Mary Rose'' and Horatio Nelson's flagship, HMS ''Victory'' (the world's oldest naval ship still in commission).
Two years later, on 30 May 1775, Captain James Cook arrived on board HMS ''Endeavour'' after circumnavigating the world.
A light rail link to Gosport was authorised in 2002 with completion expected in 2005, but it is unlikely to go ahead following the refusal of funding by the Department for Transport in November 2005.
Heathrow and Gatwick are both  and  away, respectively.
The museum was awarded a £14 million grant from the National Lottery Fund, and is set to relocate to the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard in 2019.
The city formerly had its own airport, Portsmouth Airport, until its closure in 1973.
The shock occurred at 11am, giving a "rumbling sound", followed by a violent rusting of trees.
In 1982, the city housed the entirety of the attacking forces in the Falklands War.
''HMS Vernon'' closed on 1 April 1996 and was redeveloped by Portsmouth City Council as Gunwharf Quays, a mixed residential and retail destination with outlet stores, restaurants, pubs and cafés.
Most notably Charles Dickens – known for such works as ''Oliver Twist'', ''A Tale of Two Cities'' and ''The Pickwick Papers'', was born in Portsmouth.
Between 1667 and 1685 the town's fortifications were rebuilt; new walls were constructed with bastions and two moats were dug, making Portsmouth one of the most heavily fortified towns in Europe.
The court martial opened on 12 September 1792 on board the HMS ''Duke in Portsmouth Harbour – out of the remaining ten men, three were sentenced to death.
The city's first chapel, dedicated to Thomas Becket, was built in 1185.
In 1759, General James Wolfe sailed from the harbour to Canada on an ill-fated expedition to capture Quebec.
In 1242 Henry III summoned troops to invade Guienne, and in 1295 Edward I sent supplies for his army in France.
Some historians believe that the ''Mary Rose'' turned too quickly and submerged her open gun ports, whereas others argue that it sunk due to its poor design.
A new student accommodation tower, nicknamed 'The Blade' has started construction on the site of the old Victoria swimming baths, on the edge of Victoria Park.
The waterfront and Portsmouth Harbour are dominated by the Spinnaker Tower, one of the United Kingdom's tallest structures at .
King John reaffirmed the rights and privileges awarded by Richard I and established the permanent naval base.
Developers still occasionally find unexploded bombs in the area, such as on the site of the destroyed Hippodrome theatre in 1984.
Portsmouth was affected by the British Empire's decline in the latter half of the 20th century.
They land fresh fish and shellfish daily, most of which is sold at the quayside fish market.
The rest of Portsea Island is composed of layers of London Clay and sand (part of the Bagshot Formation), formed principally during the late and early Eocene Epoch.
After the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in 1914, large receptions were held inside the church.
These were built to replace Victorian terraces destroyed by bombing in the Second World War.
The work was inspired by Thomas Rowlandson's etching depicting Portsmouth Point, otherwise known as "Spice Island" in Old Portsmouth.
Portsmouth will help build and be the home port of the two new ''Queen Elizabeth''-class aircraft carriers; ''HMS Queen Elizabeth'' and ''HMS Prince of Wales'', the largest ships ever built by the Royal Navy.
Olivia Manning's childhood was also spent in the city.
The application was made on the grounds that it was the "first naval port of the kingdom".
The Tudor era Southsea Castle has a small museum, and much of the seafront defences leading up to the Round Tower are open to the public.
During the Second World War, the city, particularly the port, was bombed extensively by the Luftwaffe in the Portsmouth Blitz.
The city is divided into two parliamentary constituencies, Portsmouth South and Portsmouth North, represented in the House of Commons by, respectively, Flick Drummond and Penny Mordaunt, both Conservative Members of Parliament.
Gatwick is directly linked by Southern train services to London Victoria station, while Heathrow is linked by coach to Woking, which is on both rail lines to London Waterloo, or by London Underground.
Both Admiral Lord Nelson School and Miltoncross Academy were built in the late 1990s to meet the demand of a growing school age population.
Before being taken over by ARK Schools and becoming a Charter Academy, St Luke's Church of England secondary school was, in terms of GCSE achievement, one of the worst schools in the country.
Many of the city's former defences are now museums, or host events.
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Portsmouth was founded in 1882 by Pope Leo XIII.
The city has been home to a number of noted authors.
Smaller places of worship in the city include St Jude's Church in Southsea, St Mary's Church in Portsea, St Ann's Chapel in the naval base, and the Portsmouth and Southsea Synagogue, which is among the oldest synagogues in Britain.
Recognising the town's growing importance, he ordered a wooden Round Tower to be built at the mouth of the harbour, which was completed in 1426.
Between 1865 and 1870 the council built sewers after more than 800 people died in a cholera epidemic.
Charter Academy operates its intake policy as a standard comprehensive taking from its catchment area rather than selecting on religious background.
The lowest temperature recorded is .
The leader of the council is the Conservative Donna Jones.
In late 2004, the Tricorn Centre, dubbed "the ugliest building in the UK", was demolished after years of debate over the expense of demolition, and controversy as to whether it was worth preserving as an example of 1960s brutalist architecture.
Portsmouth is on Portsea Island, making it the United Kingdom's only island city, although parts of it have expanded onto the mainland in recent years.
In response Æthelwulf sent Wulfherd, and the governor of Dorsetshire to confront the Danes at Portsmouth where most of their ships were docked.
As it is located on the coast in South East England, the city receives more sunshine per annum than most of the UK.
Portsmouth Continental Ferry Port has links to Caen, Cherbourg-Octeville, St Malo and Le Havre in France, Santander and Bilbao in Spain, and the Channel Islands.
When Richard returned from captivity in Austria in May 1194 he summoned a fleet of 100 ships and an army to the port.
A working-class suburb was constructed in the 1870s when around 1820 houses were built on land owned by a Mr Somers.
It was England's first line of defence during the French invasion in 1545.
The largest party within the council is the Liberal Democrats with 19 councillors (including the Lord Mayor).
The naval base at HMNB Portsmouth remains the largest dockyard for the Royal Navy and is home to two-thirds of the entire surface fleet.
A collection of fantastical short stories, ''Portsmouth Fairy Tales for Grown Ups'' was published in 2014.
In March 2007, AT Ferries withdrew the Bilbao service at short notice, citing the need to deploy the ''Fortuny'' elsewhere.
In literature, Portsmouth is the chief location for Jonathan Meades' 1993 novel ''Pompey'', in which it is inhabited largely by incestuous and necrophiliac criminals.
Nevil Shute moved to Portsmouth in 1934 when he relocated his aircraft company to the city; his former home stands in the Eastney end of the island of Portsea.
The population of the city had dropped from approximately 200,000 to 177,142 by the end of the 1960s.
After the restoration of Monarchy, Charles II married Catherine of Braganza in the Royal Garrison Church.
Southsea features in ''The History of Mr Polly'' by H. G. Wells under the fictional name of ''Port Burdock'', which he describes as "one of the three townships that are grouped around the Port Burdock naval dockyards".
Across the harbour, parliamentarians in Gosport joined in the assault, with their guns damaging St Thomas's Church.
The city is home to some famous ships: in the dry dock of Portsmouth Historic Dockyard lies Horatio Nelson's flagship, HMS ''Victory'', the world's oldest naval ship still in commission.
The city is also home to four hockey clubs: City of Portsmouth Hockey Club, who are based at the University's Langstone Campus; Portsmouth & Southsea Hockey Club and Portsmouth Sharks Hockey Club, who are both based at the Admiral Lord Nelson School; and United Services Portsmouth Hockey Club, who are based on Burnaby Road.
HMS ''Victory''s active career ended in 1812, when she was moored in Portsmouth Harbour and used as a depot ship.
In 1986, due to transmission area changes by the IBA, it was replaced by a new company and service called Ocean Sound, later renamed as Ocean FM.
Many of the city's houses were damaged and areas of Landport and Old Portsmouth destroyed, with the future site of Gunwharf Quays being razed to the ground.
In 1900, Portsmouth Dockyard employed 8000 men – a figure which more than doubled to 23,000 people during the First World War.
The Romans built Portus Adurni, a fort, at nearby Portchester in the late-third century.
Other tourist attractions include the birthplace of Charles Dickens at Mile End Terrace, the Blue Reef Aquarium which houses an "underwater safari" of aquatic life in Britain, and Cumberland House Natural History Museum, which features a variety of wildlife featured in the area.
The murder took place in the Greyhound public house on High Street which is now private and called Buckingham House, it bears a commemorative plaque.
There is also a South West Trains stopping service to Southampton Central and a service by Great Western Railway to Cardiff Central via Southampton, Salisbury, Bath and Bristol.
May light perpetual shine upon them".
Throughout the war, around 1200 ships were refitted in the dockyard, making it one of the most strategic ports in the empire at the time.
Since the 1990s the population of the city has been gradually increasing.
More contemporary Portsmouth literary figures include social critic, journalist and author Christopher Hitchens, who was born in the city.
The invasion stalled and returned from France in October 1231.
At the time of its opening, the pier was labelled as "one of the largest amusement parks on the south coast".
Today, the nearest airport is Southampton Airport, situated in the Borough of Eastleigh, which lies  away.
Between July 1940 and May 1944, the city was hit by 67 air raids which destroyed 6625 houses and severely damaged 6549 of them.
The average maximum temperature in July is , with the average minimum being .
That year, on 21 December, the Challenger expedition was launched from Portsmouth, which made a  circumnavigation of the globe for scientific research.
Except for the celestial objects in the arms, the motto was that of the Star of India referring to the troopships bound for British India that left from the port.
He died within sight of the town returning from Cádiz.
The £600 million mixed use development, designed by architects Herzog & de Meuron, would also include 1500 harbourside apartments as well as shops and offices.
Under the Commonwealth of England, Robert Blake, the father of the Royal Navy, used the harbour as his base during the First Anglo-Dutch War in 1652 and the Anglo Spanish War of 1654.
In 1001, the Danes returned and pillaged Portsmouth and surrounding locations, threatening the English with extinction.
Ferry services from the port are operated by Brittany Ferries, Condor Ferries and LD Lines.
Being located on the south coast of England, Portsmouth has a mild oceanic climate, receiving more sunshine than most of the British Isles.
The sheltered Portsmouth Harbour lies to the west of Portsea Island and the large tidal bay of Langstone Harbour is to the east.
The establishment was run by three officers; a ''viz'' (storekeeper), a clerk, and a foreman.
Portsmouth was not mentioned in the Domesday Survey of 1086 but ''Bocheland'' (Buckland), ''Copenore'' (Copnor) and ''Frodentone'' (Fratton) were.
On the west face, the description reads: "This memorial was erected by the people of Portsmouth in proud and loving memory of those who in the glorious morning of their days for England's sake lost all but England's praise.
The first permanent houses were built away from the city centre to new developments such as Paulsgrove and Leigh Park, with construction of council estates in Paulsgrove being completed in 1953.
Although ''Oberste Heeresleitung'' (German Supreme Army Command) stated that the town was "lavishly bombarded with good results", there were no reports of any bombs being dropped in the area.
The city's post-1992 university, the University of Portsmouth, has 20,000 students on campus as of 2016.
The southern waterfront of the city is dominated by a series of fortifications including the Round Tower, the Square Tower and Southsea Castle.
Notable crime novels featured in Portsmouth and the surrounding area include Graham Hurley's D.I.
Only the stone-built church and hospital survived.
James Callaghan, who was British prime minister from 1976 to 1979, was born and raised in Portsmouth.
After centuries of decay, it became an ammunition store in 1540.
As of August 2009, internal demolition has started on the building that currently occupies the site.
The city's history can be traced to Roman times.
From 1 April 1974 it formed the second tier of local government below Hampshire County Council, however Portsmouth, along with Southampton, became administratively independent of Hampshire with the creation of the unitary authority on 1 April 1997.
Another source asserted that the bombs were mistakenly dropped into the harbour rather than the dockyard.
The other parties represented in council are the UK Independence Party (UKIP) and Labour, with five and four Councillors respectively.
The Guildhall is a symbol of Portsmouth, serving principally as a cultural venue.
The city council attempted to create new work; an industrial estate was built in Fratton in 1948, and others were built at Paulsgrove and Farlington in the 1950s and 1960s, respectively.
Five years later, Charles' unpopular military adviser, George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham, was stabbed to death in an Old Portsmouth pub by war veteran John Felton.
It uses locations around Portsmouth for the stories, and includes writing by crime novelists William Sutton, Diana Bretherick, and author Lynne E Blackwood.
Instead, Henry gathered a fleet at Southampton and invaded the Norman coast in August of that year.
Since becoming an academy in 2009, the schools have significantly improved; 69% of students achieved five GCSEs at grades A* – C including English and mathematics.
The paper was established in 1873 and was previously known as the ''Portsmouth Evening News''.
suna Bieda 7 Mægla mid .ii.
Today, the common is a popular recreation ground, and also a venue for a number of annual events, which includes carnivals, Christmas markets and Victorian festivals.
The earliest detailed references are found in the-13th century Southwick Cartularies.
Edward II ordered all ports on the south coast to assemble their largest vessels at Portsmouth to carry soldiers and horses to the Duchy of Aquitaine in 1324 to strengthen defences.
The common also has a large collection of mature elm trees, believed to be the oldest and largest surviving in Hampshire, which have escaped Dutch elm disease owing to their isolation.
This arrangement came to an end in 2000 when Hampshire moved all their home matches to their newly built Rose Bowl cricket ground in West End.
In November 2014, a new TV station, named That's Solent, was launched as part of a UK wide roll out of local Freeview channels in southern central England.
The present day common lies parallel to the shore from Clarence Pier to Southsea Castle.
The supercarriers were first ordered by then Defence Secretary Des Browne on 25 July 2007.
Portsmouth Harbour has passenger ferry links to Gosport and the Isle of Wight from the Portsmouth International Port, with a car ferry service to the Isle of Wight operated by Wightlink also being nearby.
Portsdown Hill dominates the skyline in the north of the city, giving a panoramic view over the island.
This equates to 5,100 people living in every square kilometre, which is eleven times more than the regional average of 440 people per square kilometre and more than London, which has 4,900 people per square kilometre.
It supplied water to approximately 4500 of the 14,000 houses, generating £5000 a year.
For every three years between 1979 and 1988, Portsmouth served as the host city for a major international string quartet competition.
The city gets around 645 millimetres of rain a year, with a minimum of  of rain reported on 103 days a year.
To the south are the waters of the Solent which connects Portsmouth Harbour and the Isle of Wight.
John summoned his earls, barons, and military advisers to the town to plan an invasion of Normandy.
South Parade Pier was built in 1878 and is among the 55 remaining private piers in the United Kingdom.
Northern areas of the city include Stamshaw, Hilsea and Copnor, Cosham, Drayton, Farlington and Port Solent.
Cryptozoologist Jonathan Downes was born and lived in Portsmouth for a time.
It was restored in 1970, 1982 and 2001.
Since the early 2000s the estate has been entirely under the jurisdiction of Havant Borough Council, but Portsmouth City Council remains the landlord of these properties, making it the biggest landowner in Havant Borough.
Ten years later, in 1348, the town was struck by the Black Death, causing the death of Portsmouth's rector, Walter de Corf, amongst many others.
In 1650, the first ship to be built for more than 100 years, the ''Portsmouth'', was launched.
Portsmouth was granted its first charter in 1194.
After the war the  estate of Leigh Park was built to solve the chronic housing shortage during the post-war reconstruction.
Winter novels and C. J. Sansom's Tudor crime novel ''Heartstone'', with the latter including references to the famous warship ''Mary Rose'' and descriptions of Tudor life in the town.
Approximately 185,000 to 230,000 people use the Cascades Shopping Centre each week.
The  tower is visible from  on a clear day and its viewing platforms provide views across the Solent towards the Isle of Wight, and north towards the harbour and Southsea Castle.
Southsea is a seaside resort and residential area which lies at the southern end of Portsea Island.
From the city's 800th birthday in 1994, Victory FM broadcast for three 28-day periods over an 18-month period.
Her Majesty's Yacht ''Britannia'' left the city to oversee the transfer of Hong Kong in 1997.
The faults were quickly corrected by Acciona and the service was cleared to begin carrying passengers on 23 May 2006.
Development at Gunwharf Quays continued until 2007 with the completion of the  tall No.
On 1 October 1916, Portsmouth was bombed by a Zeppelin airship.
Portsmouth is the most densely populated city in the United Kingdom and is the only city whose population density exceeds that of London.
The £600 million project for a new stadium was rejected by the city council due to the financial crisis of 2008,
A new 25-storey tower named 'Number One Portsmouth', was made public at the end of October 2008, which has been proposed at a height of , and will stand opposite Portsmouth & Southsea Station.
In 1623, Charles I (then Prince of Wales) returned to Portsmouth from his travels in France and Spain.
The rugby teams, United Services Portsmouth RFC and Royal Navy Rugby Union, both play their home matches at the United Services Recreation Ground in the city.
During his reign, Henry VII made Portsmouth a Royal Dock, and was England's only dockyard to be considered "national" at the time.
By 1817, Gunwharf purportedly housed the largest naval arsenal in the world, employing 5000 men at the time.
Ocean Retail Park, a large retail park on the north-eastern side of Portsea Island, was built on land previously occupied by a Metal Box factory in September 1985.
By the early-19th century, Portsmouth was the most heavily fortified city in the world, and was considered "the world's greatest naval port" during the height of the British Empire throughout ''Pax Britannica''.
Concerned, Edward III instructed all maritime towns to build vessels and raise troops to rendezvous at Portsmouth.
