For the year 2013 the rate reached 407.
Another important facility, the new Beetham Waste Water Treatment Plant, began to treat domestic waste to international standards in 2004.
Woodford Square itself is a green oasis in the heart of the city, with a late-Victorian fountain and bandstand, trees, benches, and lawns.
Laqtel which would have offered Trinidad and Tobago's first CDMA (3G) network had its license revoked by the TATT in 2008.
Some of the Squares have not retained nor do they give the appearance of having had the lengths of metal placed on its exterior points as lines of demarcation.
In the high, misty valleys and mountains that surround the northern outskirts of the city, temperature inversion is quite frequent and the mountains provide a cooling relief from the sweltering heat below.
Belmont has 9.035 inhabitants.
"1962: Marine Square becomes Independence Square."
Satellite, Wifi, EDGE, GPRS, DSL and Cable broadband services in excess of 6 Mbit/s are available throughout the city.
Further major reclamation efforts took place in the 1840s, the 1870s, and in 1906.
Port of Spain school leavers, as citizens of Trinidad and Tobago, do not pay tuition to study at local & regional public and private tertiary institutions except for graduate studies where they pay a heavily subsidised fee.
According to Geoffrey MacLean, in the Trinidad Express Newspaper in December 2014, "the fort, which replaced a mound of mud and wood that served as the only defence of Port of Spain, was, when completed in 1787, located offshore and linked to the mainland by a wooden bridge."
In 2005 there was an unprecedented series of small bombings in Port of Spain which caused injuries to bystanders.
Port of Spain became a "city" in 1914; the ordinance was passed on May 29 and was proclaimed by the Governor on June 25, 1914.
This is the closest waterfall and is invigorating and refreshing.
This church is located on the Belmont Circular Road and is approximately one hundred and fourteen (114) years old.
Victoria Square is located on Duke St. West, Park St, and has been categorised as a Park located in Woodbrook  according to WOW City.
Where Independence Square is bisected by Frederick Street there is a roundabout with a statue of Captain A.A. Cipriani, the early 20th-century populist politician and mayor of the city.
Newtown is one of the areas which had at least one primary school for boys and one for girls, which is the Newtown Boys and Newtown Girls.
It was the birthplace and early home of many important Carnival designers and bandleaders.
The major ones are:
A ferry service links Port of Spain with Scarborough, Tobago and a water taxi service, restarted in December 2008 (Trinidad's west coast towns were once served by steamship), links it with San Fernando.
In 1797, Trinidad was invaded by a British force under General Sir Ralph Abercromby.
South of the square, Frederick Street widens and becomes Broadway, which terminates at the waterfront and the Port of Spain lighthouse, no longer used as a navigational aid but considered a major landmark.
Education is free and compulsory up to secondary school.
The NWRHA administers and manages the Port of Spain General Hospital, St Ann’s Psychiatric Hospital, St. James Medical Complex and 16 health centres that serve a catchment area of 500,000 persons.
Frederick Street, which runs north through the city to the Queen's Park Savannah, is Port of Spain's major avenue, connecting the two downtown squares with the uptown park, and very approximately dividing downtown into retail (east) and office (west) districts.
The 3278 hectare protected Caroni Swamp has long formed a physical barrier to the city's expansion to the south, forcing urban growth relentlessly eastward at the expense of a traffic relieving ring road.
"Woodford Square was formerly known as Brunswick Square.".
The Northern Range runs from the Chaguaramas Peninsula in the west to Toco in the east and consists mainly of steeply dipping metasedimentary rocks and lush rainforest containing a wide variety of plants and animal species.
The last Spanish Governor of Trinidad, Don José Maria Chacón, devoted much of his time to developing the new capital.
The iconic Nicholas Tower, as well as other skyscrapers, are well known throughout the region.
It includes the Wendy Fitzwilliam Children's Ward and the Mt.
Brunswick is a German name, and so it is believed that this open space was named after the German soldiers who used it."
In the 1980s "this area was the site of the statue of Captain Arthur Andrew Cipriani (1875–1945), one of Trinidad and Tobago's celebrated political leaders and sportsmen......The area was then renamed the Brian Lara Promenade in honor of Trinidad and Tobago's most celebrated cricketer and record breaking batsman, Brian Charles Lara (1974–).The Promenade was completed in three phases and finally opened in August 1995".
From this location the Parade of Bands is broadcast live to the nation on Carnival Monday and Tuesday; it is also the venue for the Calypso Monarch and Carnival King and Queen Competitions and the finals of the Panorama steelpan competition.
However, theft and violent crimes remain prevalent to this date, while crime and the perception of crime continues to hamper the economic prospects of the city.
It includes the towns of Barataria, San Juan, St. Joseph, Curepe, St. Augustine, Tunapuna, Tacarigua, Arouca, and Five Rivers, once distinct communities and now districts within a continuous urban area.
Hope Women's Hospital.
It is also an important financial services centre for the Caribbean and is home to two of the largest banks in the region.
Maraval is home to the exclusive Trinidad Country Club and right next door to the popular Long Circular Mall.
It is located on the Gulf of Paria, on the northwest coast of the island of Trinidad and is part of a larger conurbation stretching from Chaguaramas in the west to Arima in the east with an estimated population of 600,000.
In secondary schools, 7,567 were male and 8,074 were female.
One of Trinidad's poshest shopping centres, The Falls at West-Mall, lies at the centre of these developments.
In the 1880s a fountain was erected in the middle of the square."
Port of Spain's diverse population reflects two centuries of immigration and this shows in the architecture of its buildings.
For many years, the  Government Printery Service was located at the intersection of Victoria Avenue and Tragarete Road until it was demolished between 2013 and 2015.
One of the more recent renovations in Belmont which was done with a view to preserving the historic character of the  building is Myler House.
Much of the city's water supply comes from the Caroni Arena Dam located in the Arena Forest Reserve near Brazil Village.
According to "Let me tell you about My Island site, "the first President of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago was born on Myler Street".
Trinidad's economy is based on natural gas and oil.
From 1958 to 1962, Port of Spain was the temporary capital of the short-lived West Indies Federation, though there were plans to build a new federal capital at Chaguaramas, on land occupied by the US military base established during World War II.
Bauxite from Guyana is trans-shipped via facilities at Chaguaramas, about  west of the city.
Realising that the St. Ann's River, prone to flooding, was impeding the expansion of the town, Chacón had its course diverted in 1787 so that it ran to the east of the city, along the foot of the Laventille Hills.
However, because of its location on Duke St. West which starts on Wrightson Road and ends on Charlotte St, it is included here.
West of here is Newtown, laid out in the 1840s, bounded by Tragarete Road (south), the Queen's Park Savannah (north), Cipriani Boulevard (east), and Maraval Road (west).
Cascade, a mainly suburban area with treed lot type housing is located to the south-eastern area of St. Ann's.
Church with access from Maraval Road.
The Northern Range is the range of tall, biodiverse hills across the northern portion of Trinidad and is considered an extension of the Andes mountains of South America, although that is geologically incorrect.
The upgrading of the Churchill-Roosevelt highway to a grade separated expressway and the extension of water ferry services from Port of Spain to the major urban hubs along the west coast are particularly notable.
At first it was used as a vast cattle pasture in what was then the town's suburbs, but by the middle of the 19th century it had become established as a park.
Prominent Port of Spain citizens include Derek Walcott (Nobel Prize Literature 1992) and former West Indies cricketer Brian Lara.
Continued pressure for expansion of commercial development in Woodbrook and uptown POS (Port of Spain proper) has led to a rapid rate of decline in the city's population over the past 4 decades.
Port of Spain's award winning restaurants provide a wide range of local and international cuisines, accompanied by the traditional fast food chains.
These are  Anglican and Catholic schools and churches.
Oddly, this part of Port of Spain—between Oxford Street and the Queen's Park Savannah—has no name in common usage, though a century ago it was known as Tranquillity.
At Woodbrook's western end, at the edge of Invaders Bay, is the Hasely Crawford Stadium, the national venue for football and track and field events.
The city hosted the 2009 Pan American Junior Athletics Championship and the finals of the 2001 Fifa Under 17 World Cup.
Cruise ships also dock at the port  which has:
A few small parks are sprinkled through the neighbourhood; Adam Smith Square and Siegert Square are the two largest.
Five (5) RHAs deliver public health care services to the population of Trinidad and Tobago.
Lady Chancellor Road, which ascends the hills overlooking the Savannah, is one of Port of Spain's most exclusive residential areas and is the current home of former West Indies cricketer and record breaking batsman, Brian Lara.
Leroy Clarke is one of the well known artists of Trinidad and Tobago.
Its "circle" encloses Flagstaff Hill, a small rise with the US ambassador's residence at its summit, which lends its name to an area of apartment buildings at its southern foot.
Duncie Park is located 200 metres west of St Clair.
On weekends several  young families bring their toddlers and young children to the Square to run, play and get in some exercise and bonding time prior to the start of the next week.
Water and sewerage are under the purview of the Water and Sewerage Authority of Trinidad and Tobago (WaSA).
The architecturally soothing arches and curves of the Port of Spain National Academy for the Performing Arts (see picture and caption) dominate the south boundary of the Savannah between the green trimmed landmarks of Memorial Park (in remembrance of fallen soldiers during World Wars I and II) and the gingerbread styled, limestone built, colourful splendour of the Knowsley Ministry of Foreign Affairs Building.
Wrightson Road, linking downtown Port of Spain to its western suburbs, was constructed at the same time.
Trinidad and Tobago is considered one of the wealthiest nations in the Caribbean and some of this wealth is on display in Port of Spain.
In July 1990, an extremist Muslim group held the prime minister and members of parliament hostage for 5 days while rioting and looting shook Port of Spain.
Port of Spain General Hospital is on upper Charlotte Street, as is the Memorial Park, while nearby on Frederick Street is the National Museum and Art Gallery.
Port of Spain's last major municipal expansion occurred in 1938, when the St. James district north of Woodbrook and west of St. Clair was incorporated into the city limits.
The Caribs were transient, travelling to the mainland (now Venezuela) and up the Orinoco River.
(During the rainy season the river still had a tendency to overflow its banks, flooding parts of the city; over the decades its channel would be widened and paved.
It has successfully de-monopolised the industry, granting several new mobile licenses in 2005 for two private companies, Digicel and Laqtel to offer wireless service in competition with TSTT.
Lord Harris Square which is located between Pembroke, New and Abercromby Sts.
Port of Spain was now able to continue spreading northwards and westwards, encroaching on the surrounding sugar-cane plantations.
Marine Square, while not a designated green space serves as a meeting place for many visitors coming into Port of Spain.
He compelled the island's Cabildo (governing council) to move to Port of Spain, and he limited its powers to the municipality.
The council is presided over by the mayor, who is effectively the chief custodian of the city.
Caricom was established in Chaguaramas, west of Port of Spain.
City Gate serves as a transportation hub for public buses and private mini-buses (locally known as maxi-taxis).
"Kew Place has a length of 0.12 kilometres"   and is large enough to hold a statue of Gandhi.
The French naval commander Comte D'Estrées visited in 1680, and reported that there was no Port of Spain.
They were fleeing from the harsh religious and political persecution of the Turks who had conquered their lands.
It is one of the country's most popular tourist attractions with visitor facilities and regular guided boat tours.
There are also private secondary schools and Government run schools located in close proximity to Maraval Road and Tragarete Road, such as Wood Brook Secondary School  and St. Cecelia's Private Secondary School.
But in 1690, Spanish governor Don Sebastien de Roteta reported in writing to the King of Spain:
The last two districts fall outside the municipal boundary, but are sometimes considered extensions of the city.
These gates are positioned on the corners so as to allow the main paths of the Square to form an X.
To the east along the east-west corridor, also falling outside city limits, lie the large towns of San Juan, Tunapuna and Arima.
Although taxi drivers who ply the Belmont route speak of the number of cemeteries which are located in the area, the website "Burial Grounds, Cemeteries & Cremation sites in Trinidad" lists one cemetery with an address which is located in Belmont, under the heading of Port of Spain.
Port of Spain's official population is relatively small, and reflects the narrow city boundaries including the central business district and a number of economically depressed and a few upscale adjoining suburbs.
The private development scheme at Damien street Woodbrook recently provided 350 luxury-apartments, but those are unaffordable to most, even though it was originally intended for the general population.
In 1999/2000 there were 40 Government/Assisted schools located in the Port of Spain Administrative Area.
There are 12 councillors and 4 aldermen.
Among them were oil pioneer Randolph Rust, lawyer and social activist Emmanuel Mzumbo Lazare and Dr. Enrique Prada, who was elected chairman by the council and became the first mayor of the City of Port of Spain.
Port of Spain is the second largest capital city in the English-speaking Caribbean and is one of the largest cities in the Caribbean.
However, the oil and gas majors and some service companies have located their headquarters in the city to be in close proximity to government services, infrastructure and the high quality of life many citizens of Port of Spain enjoy.
The city features French colonial 'ginger bread' style houses, buildings with New Orleans reminiscent wrought-iron railings and wooden fretwork set beside modern high-rise towers and strip malls with a mish-mash of gothic-style cathedrals, mosques and Hindu temples testifying to the diversity of cultures.
By 1786, the town had a population of about 3,000.
The Caroni Arena Dam supplies the Caroni Water Treatment Plant located opposite the Piarco International Airport Southern Terminal.
Other buildings which are either historic due to the age of the existing building or the principle on which the property was established to be used are as follows:
A chapel which is open to the public is attached to the property.
Port of Spain is a shopping and business centre for much of the country.
This Museum is in close proximity to the Old Cabildo Building, called the Law Museum as of August 2012 by the Guardian TT when it was reopened, the Ministry of Legal Affairs, and the Colonial Life Insurance Co Ltd building, known as CLICO,  and opposite to CLICO is the  RED HOUSE.
St. Ann's is notable for being the location of the Prime Minister's official residence and diplomatic centre.
Long Circular Road, which curves north from Western Main Road then east to meet Maraval Road, forms part of the city boundary.
The Port of Port of Spain is the country's major port for containerized shipping followed by the Port of Point Lisas.
Immediately north and northwest of Port of Spain lie the suburbs of Cascade, St. Ann's, Maraval and Diego Martin.
Thus on obtaining a miracle or assistance through the assistance or intercession of St. Anthony, one would offer a donation to the nearest chapel with a statue of St. Anthony.
The damage was a significant setback to the city's commercial district at a time of severe economic hardship, yet businesses returned.
Adam Smith Square is surrounded by residences which have been restored and modified, many of which now function as business places.
The chief executive officer and his staff are public servants functioning under the regulations of the Statutory Authorities Service Commissions Ordinance.
There are Wifi hotspots at all major hotels and for free in coffee shops, malls and at the airport.
The fort was a mud-walled enclosure with a shack inside, a flagpole, two or three cannon, and few Spanish soldiers.
For the year 2012, the rate reached 354 murders per 100,000 persons, but with a State of Emergency being imposed by government for approximately three months.
Recently completed was the Richmond street Government Campus Plaza and the International Waterfront Centre Towers including the Hyatt Regency Hotel, with Towers C and D standing as the tallest buildings in Trinidad and Tobago and seventh and eighth tallest in the entire Caribbean region.
The University of Trinidad and Tobago has several campuses and institutes in the greater Port of Spain area including the research based Natural Gas Institute of the Americas and the Chaguaramas Centre for Maritime Studies.
Reports of kidnappings for ransom which were on the rise a few years ago have declined dramatically since 2006.
The Port of Spain General Hospital is one of the major trauma centres in the nation and in the Southern Caribbean.
Port of Spain and its immediate environs have a higher crime rate than any other part of Trinidad.
Singer, songwriter and actress Nicki Minaj was born in St. James and lived there until emigrating to the United States.
MovieTowne's Fiesta Plaza, a tribute to Bourbon Street New Orleans, on the city's foreshore, features many new restaurants, open air dining and a bandstand with live entertainment.
Homicides countrywide rose from fewer than 50 in the 1980s, to 97 in 1998, then to 360 in 2006 (30 murders per 100,000 persons).
This cemetery serves as a melting pot of the people of Trinidad and Tobago as described in the following extract from The Caribbean History Archives by Gerard Besson of Paria Publishing Company Limited, "There are rows of graves with Chinese inscriptions, as well as small mansions for the French aristocratic dead.
No heavy industrial sites are located in Port of Spain, but a major oil refinery and many petrochemical and iron and steel plants exist or are planned for sites south of it and closer to Trinidad's second city of San Fernando.
The section of the square immediately behind the cathedral is called Columbus Square.
Port of Spain's largest open space—and the world's largest traffic roundabout—is the Queen's Park Savannah, known colloquially simply as "the Savannah".
Apart from a ring of trees round its perimeter, the Savannah was never really landscaped, except for the small area in its northwest corner called the Hollows, a former reservoir now drained and planted with flowering shrubs.
It has well over 160 species of birds, including the national bird, the scarlet ibis.
Until the early 1990s, horse racing was held frequently at the Savannah race track, and it also contains several cricket, football and rugby pitches.
It has famously been the site of many political rallies over the decades; former Prime Minister Eric Williams gave many public lectures here, dubbing it "the University of Woodford Square", and near the eastern gate is a spot which has become Port of Spain's Speakers' Corner.
By 1757, the old capital, San José de Oruña (modern Saint Joseph), about  inland, had fallen into disrepair, and Governor Don Pedro de la Moneda transferred his seat to Port of Spain, which thus became Trinidad's de facto capital.
As you head west beyond Carenage settlement is sparse, however the peninsula known as Chaguaramas, which was once a large US Army Base, has become a mecca for hundreds of international cruisers and a world major yacht storage and repair hub.
From the small cluster of buildings at the foot of the Laventille Hills, eleven streets were laid out west to the area bounded by the St. Ann's River, thus establishing the grid pattern which has survived in downtown Port of Spain to the present day.
The western edge of the Savannah, along Maraval Road, is the location of the Magnificent Seven, a group of late Victorian and Edwardian buildings built in an eccentric and flamboyant variety of styles.
The St. Dominic's Home is located in the St. Dominic's Compound and has been in existence for approximately one hundred and forty five (145) years.
Port of Spain continued to grow in size and importance during the 19th and early 20th centuries, peaking in size in the 1960s at about 100,000 people.
To ease the current traffic woes that result in two- to three-hour commutes during rush hours, a number of projects are in various stages of implementation.
Electricity generation is handled by Powergen, a privately owned electricity producer, while electrical distribution is handled by the Trinidad and Tobago Electricity Commission (T&TEC) a state owned enterprise.
Kew Place is one of the smallest "squares" in Port of Spain.
For visitors entering Port of Spain from the airport, this neighbourhood dominates the city as it spreads over the surrounding hills.
The Port also operates the ferry service between Trinidad & Tobago, as agents of the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.
The mayor is elected from the membership of the council.
Unlike Chaguanas and San Fernando, Port of Spain has a cool climate due to elevation and the surrounding Northern Range mountains.
Belmont is famous for having one of the few churches in the island which is dedicated to St. Francis of Assisi.
Port of Spain was among the host cities of the 2007 Cricket World Cup.
They ceased in October 2005 but the perpetrator has not been charged.
The policies and directives of the council are executed by the administrative arm of the corporation, which is headed by the chief executive officer and has under his charge a number of senior officers and a workforce of about 3,000 daily-paid and 300 monthly-paid employees.
*L'Hospice – This Home for the Aged is located in close proximity to Charlotte and Park Streets.
Some of the more famous squares are as follows:
Within recent years, local banks headquartered here have helped it become a financial centre for the Caribbean and Central America region.
Two blocks south of Woodford Square is Independence Square (formerly Marine Square), which runs along the breadth of downtown Port of Spain from Wrightson Road to the west to the Roman Catholic Cathedral Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in the east.
Some of the tallest skyscrapers in the Caribbean  are located in Port of Spain.
Port of Spain has a large agricultural market, known as the "central market" where food produced in the surrounding hinterland is traded.
A number of government offices are located in the immediate vicinity, and the blocks north and west of the Red House are home to many lawyers' chambers.
The city has a municipal population of 37,074 (2011 census), a metropolitan population of 128,026 (1990 unofficial estimate) and a transient daily population of 250,000.
Western Main Road, the area's major thoroughfare, has long been the city's main nightlife district, sometimes nicknamed "the city that never sleeps".
The corridor is the built-up area of north Trinidad stretching from the capital, Port of Spain,  east to Arima.
Robinson International Airport), formerly, Crown Point International Airport serves Tobago.
Although the address of the cemetery is listed as St. Margaret's Lane, the church and cemetery are also accessed from the Belmont Circular Road, Belmont as the property is situated on a corner.
Federation Park, a residential neighbourhood in western Port of Spain intended to house employees of the federal government, is a memorial to that time.
Fixed-line telephone service and broadband was also once a monopoly controlled by Telecommunications Services of Trinidad and Tobago (TSTT).
Housing in Port of Spain ranges from luxurious waterfront apartments to board houses lacking indoor plumbing and motor vehicular access.
These are the recently well restored Queen's Royal College; the residences of the Anglican bishop and the Roman Catholic archbishop; Whitehall, once a private residence, then the office of the prime minister from 1963 to 2010 ; Mille Fleurs, once a private residence, is undergoing full restoration as a public museum and headquarters for the National Heritage Trust and was sold to the Government in 1979; Roomor, an ornate black-and-white château-like building that remains a private residence; and Stollmeyer's Castle, a turreted house supposedly modelled on Balmoral Castle.
Some of the city lies on land reclaimed from the Gulf of Paria, the calm sheltered bay separating Trinidad from Venezuela, while other parts climb into the hills above the city.
The Trinidad and Tobago Police Service Museum which is located at the Old Police Headquarters on St. Vincent Street.
Port of Spain lies at the western end and the city climbs into the hills and valleys which are settled and largely deforested.
On its northern side are City Hall and the Hall of Justice, seat of the Supreme Court; on its western side is the Red House, seat of Parliament; the Anglican Holy Trinity Cathedral is on its south side, and on the block south-west of the square is the National Library.
(For Trinidadians born and bred in Port of Spain or its northern and north-western suburbs, "past the lighthouse"—east of the lighthouse on the Beetham Highway—means outside the city proper.)
While the cemetery is not considered to be within the "Tranquility area",  due to its proximity to this area, it is located on the opposite side of  Tragarete Road which is included in the Tranquility area, it is mentioned in this section of the piece.
The image in the attached link, is that of Myler House.
The new pedestrian area in the middle of the square was named the Brian Lara Promenade in honour of Trinidad and Tobago's star cricket batsman.
To address the problem, East Port of Spain Development Company was formed in 2005 with a mandate to develop and redevelop a zone in east Port-of-Spain to improve the economic, social and physical environment of those areas.
broadband and mobile competition has resulted in lower rates and wider availability of services for consumers.
Port of Spain is also home to the biggest and most successful stock exchange in the Caribbean, the Trinidad and Tobago Stock Exchange (TTSE).
High-income proceeds from the international sale of natural gas has aided the country in the Port of Spain International Waterfront project constructed on former Port Authority Land.
Brunswick Square was used as a parade ground for soldiers.
Just northwest of St. Clair are two upscale residential neighbourhoods, Ellerslie Park and Federation Park.
In some of the Squares, there are street lights to illuminate the interior of the square at nighttime.
"When the British came in 1797 the name was changed to Marine Square....
Woodford Square is sometimes referred to as "University of Woodford Sq because of its occasional use by soapbox speakers and gospel preachers, this is the symbolic center of downtown.
Immediately north of the Savannah—also the northern limit of the city of Port of Spain—are the Royal Botanic Gardens, the Emperor Valley Zoo, President's House (recently abandoned after one end fell down), the official residence of the prime minister, and Queen's Hall, the city's major performing arts venue.
Until the opening of Living Water Community, several years ago, the L'Hospice and Holy Rosary Church were the two closest Catholic places of worship for persons visiting their loved ones in the Royal Jail or the General Hospital to obtain some respite.
The National Museum and Art Gallery of Trinidad and Tobago is the country’s most important museum.
The Community Association held a series of events in August 2011 to celebrate its 100th Year Anniversary.
Port of Spain hosts major sporting venues including the Queen's Park Oval, Hasely Crawford Stadium, the Jean Pierre Complex and various sporting fields on the Queen's Park Savannah.
Known for success in academics and Music Festival competitions, these schools are located on either side of the St. Patrick's R.C.
