Heightened startle responses and a smaller hippocampal volume have been identified as biomarkers for the risk of developing PTSD.
Women most frequently report instances of rape, sexual molestation, physical attack, being threatened with a weapon and childhood physical abuse.
Drawbacks include the risk of developing a benzodiazepine dependence, tolerance (i.e., short-term benefits wearing off with time), and withdrawal syndrome; additionally, individuals with PTSD (even those without a history of alcohol or drug misuse) are at an increased risk of abusing benzodiazepines.
Symptoms may include disturbing thoughts, feelings, or dreams related to the events, mental or physical distress to trauma-related cues, attempts to avoid trauma-related cues, alterations in how a person thinks and feels, and increased arousal.
88% of men and 79% of women with lifetime PTSD have at least one comorbid psychiatric disorder.
For twin pairs exposed to combat in Vietnam, having a monozygotic (identical) twin with PTSD was associated with an increased risk of the co-twin's having PTSD compared to twins that were dizygotic (non-identical twins).
Physical activity can influence people's psychological wellbeing and physical health.
The cannabinoid nabilone is sometimes used off-label for nightmares in PTSD.
They recommend a discussion with a doctor before starting an exercise program.
However, exposure by way of being asked to think about the experience rather than talk about it has been highlighted as one of the more important distinguishing elements of EMDR.
Since the introduction of DSM-IV, the number of possible events that might be used to diagnose PTSD has increased; one study suggests that the increase is around 50%.
Preliminary results suggest MDMA-assisted psychotherapy might be effective for individuals who have not responded favorably to other treatments.
"screen for the psychiatric disorders commonly encountered and treated by primary care providers".
But the most revealing fact, theater veterans injured or wounded in combat had nearly four times the risk of developing PTSD compared to those not injured/wounded according to two key studies—the August 2014 ''National Vietnam Veterans Longitudinal Study'' (NVVLS).
Systematic reviews have found that combination therapy (psychological and pharmacotherapy) is no more effective than psychological therapy alone.
These benefits are less than those seen with therapy.
It was also found those with PTSD were more likely to die of chronic conditions such as cancer, nervous system disorders, and musculoskeletal problems.
This suggests that enhancing IGF2 signalling and adult neurogenesis might be suitable to treat diseases linked to excessive fear memory such as PTSD.
Together, these findings suggest abnormality in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis.
Of the intermediate screens (Breslau, M3, PC-PTSD, and SPAN), their performances were "comparable."
Trauma-exposed individuals often receive treatment called ''psychological debriefing'' in an effort to prevent PTSD.
In the May 2013 DSM-5, PTSD was classified as a trauma- and stress-related disorder.
As of 2013, rates of PTSD have been estimated at up to 20% for veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan.
Sexual assault in the military is a leading cause for female soldiers developing PTSD; a female soldier who is sexually assaulted while serving in the military is nine times more likely to develop PTSD than a female soldier who is not assaulted.
Four out of five reported recent symptoms when interviewed 20–25 years after Vietnam.
An individual that has been exposed to domestic violence is predisposed to the development of PTSD.
During the World Wars study increased and it was known under various terms including "shell shock" and "combat neurosis".
According to one theory this suppression may be the cause of the flashbacks that can affect people with PTSD.
Panic and generalized anxiety disorders and PTSD share 60% of the same genetic variance.
The term "posttraumatic stress disorder" came into use in the 1970s in large part due to the diagnoses of US military veterans of the Vietnam War.
Some of these terms date back to the 19th century, which is indicative of the universal nature of the condition.
The racial similarity between Hispanic and Vietnamese soldiers, and the discrimination Hispanic soldiers faced from their own military, made it difficult for Hispanic soldiers to dehumanize their enemy.
Low cortisol levels may predispose individuals to PTSD: Following war trauma, Swedish soldiers serving in Bosnia and Herzegovina with low pre-service salivary cortisol levels had a higher risk of reacting with PTSD symptoms, following war trauma, than soldiers with normal pre-service levels.
The United States Department of Veterans Affairs estimates that 830,000 Vietnam War veterans suffered symptoms of PTSD.
Gross stress reaction is defined as a "normal personality utilizing established patterns of reaction to deal with overwhelming fear" as a response to "conditions of great stress".
Some organizations have endorsed the need for exposure.
This may occur one-on-one or in a group.
Recent research on contextually based third-generation behavior therapies suggests that they may produce results comparable to some of the better validated therapies.
Those serving more than 12 months in a combat zone were 14.3 percentage points more likely to be diagnosed with PTSD than those having served less than one year.
Adults who were in foster care as children have a higher rate of PTSD.
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR) developed the Battlemind program to assist service members avoid or ameliorate PTSD and related problems.
Causes of the symptoms of PTSD are the experiencing or witnessing of a stressor event involving death, serious injury or such threat to the self or others in a situation in which the individual felt intense fear, horror, or powerlessness.
Given the strong cortisol suppression to dexamethasone in PTSD, HPA axis abnormalities are likely predicated on strong negative feedback inhibition of cortisol, itself likely due to an increased sensitivity of glucocorticoid receptors.
Risk-targeted interventions are those that attempt to mitigate specific formative information or events.
Early in 1978, the term was used in a working group finding presented to the Committee of Reactive Disorders.
The key to this fact is that the vast majority (6,250 or 83.3%) of the women who served in the war zone were nurses who dealt almost daily with death.
Modest benefits have been seen from early access to cognitive behavioral therapy.
Dictionaries also differ with regard to the preferred spelling of the disorder with the ''Collins English Dictionary - Complete and Unabridged'' using the hyphenated spelling, and the ''American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fifth Edition'' and the ''Random House Kernerman Webster's College Dictionary'' giving the non-hyphenated spelling.
She had noticed that, when she was thinking about disturbing memories herself, her eyes were moving rapidly.
As of 2013 13% of veterans returning from Iraq were unemployed.
'''Posttraumatic stress disorder''' ('''PTSD''') is a mental disorder that can develop after a person is exposed to a traumatic event, such as sexual assault, warfare, traffic collisions, or other threats on a person's life.
The symptom pattern for acute stress disorder must occur and be resolved within four weeks of the trauma.
PTSD is believed to be caused by the experience of a wide range of traumatic events and, in particular if the trauma is extreme, can occur in persons with no predisposing conditions.
It is unclear if using medications and therapy together has greater benefit.
Play is thought to help children link their inner thoughts with their outer world, connecting real experiences with abstract thought.
The 1952 edition of the DSM-I includes a diagnosis of "gross stress reaction", which has similarities to the modern definition and understanding of PTSD.
It consists of interviews that are meant to allow individuals to directly confront the event and share their feelings with the counselor and to help structure their memories of the event.
If any of the symptom pattern is present before the stressor, another diagnosis is required, such as brief psychotic disorder or major depressive disorder.
Additionally, benzodiazepines may reduce the effectiveness of psychotherapeutic interventions, and there is some evidence that benzodiazepines may actually contribute to the development and chronification of PTSD.
Repetitive play can also be one of the ways a child relives traumatic events, and that can be a symptom of traumatization in a child or young person.
PTSD can be particularly difficult to diagnose, because numerous factors can lead to over-reporting (e.g., disability) and under-reporting (e.g., avoidance) symptoms, dysfunction and distress.
Other medications do not have enough evidence to support their use and in the case of benzodiazepines may worsen outcomes.
Major depressive disorder, 48% of men and 49% of women, and lifetime alcohol abuse or dependence, 51.9% of men and 27.9% of women, are the most common comorbid disorders.
It was officially recognized by the American Psychiatric Association in 1980 in the third edition of the ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders'' (DSM-III).
Some evidence supports the use of hydrocortisone for prevention in adults, however there is limited or no evidence supporting propranolol, escitalopram, temazepam, or gabapentin.
In response, the United States Marine Corps has instituted programs to assist them in re-adjusting to civilian life, especially in their relationships with spouses and loved ones, to help them communicate better and understand what the other has gone through.
The study concludes with recommendations for future research.
Further animal and clinical research into the amygdala and fear conditioning may suggest additional treatments for the condition.
A revised form of the ''Impact of Events'' scale (IES-R) gives a total score ranging from 0 to 88.
Other approaches, in particular involving social supports, may also be important.
Critical incident stress management has been suggested as a means of preventing PTSD, but subsequent studies suggest the likelihood of its producing negative outcomes.
Obsessive compulsive disorder may be diagnosed for intrusive thoughts that are recurring but not related to a specific traumatic event.
The condition was added to the DSM-III, which was being developed in the 1980s, as posttraumatic stress disorder.
Among American troops in Vietnam a greater portion of women experienced high levels of war-zone stress compared to theater men—39.9 percent versus 23.5 percent.
The basolateral nucleus (BLA) of the amygdala is responsible for the comparison and development of associations between unconditioned and conditioned responses to stimuli, which results in the fear conditioning present in PTSD.
A meta-analytic comparison of EMDR and cognitive behavioral therapy found both protocols indistinguishable in terms of effectiveness in treating PTSD; however, "the contribution of the eye movement component in EMDR to treatment outcome" is unclear.
People who experience interpersonal trauma (for example rape or child abuse) are more likely to develop PTSD, as compared to people who experience non-assault based trauma such as accidents and natural disasters.
This is consistent with an interpretation of PTSD as a syndrome of deficient extinction ability.
Posttraumatic stress reactions have not been studied as well in children and adolescents as adults.
In CBT, individuals learn to identify thoughts that make them feel afraid or upset and replace them with less distressing thoughts.
Hispanic veterans who reported experiencing racial discrimination during their service displayed more symptoms of PTSD than Hispanic veterans who did not.
Experiencing bullying as a child or an adult has been correlated with the development of PTSD.
Serotonin also contributes to the stabilization of glucocorticoid production.
However, being exposed to a traumatic experience does not automatically indicate that an individual will develop PTSD.
In this treatment, patients participate in an extended psychotherapy session during the acute activity of the drug, and then spend the night at the treatment facility.
Drug-induced psychotic disorders can be considered if substance abuse is involved.
The therapist initiates voluntary rapid eye movements while the person focuses on memories, feelings or thoughts about a particular trauma.
The researchers from the Grady Trauma Project highlight the tendency people have to focus on the combat side of PTSD: "less public awareness has focused on civilian PTSD, which results from trauma exposure that is not combat related... " and "much of the research on civilian PTSD has focused on the sequelae of a single, disastrous event, such as the Oklahoma City bombing, September 11th attacks, and Hurricane Katrina".
This theory proposes that eye movement can be used to facilitate emotional processing of memories, changing the person's memory to attend to more adaptive information.
The etiology of this relationship is not certain other than lingering stress from combat such as nightmares, intrusive memories, and hyper-vigilance are aggravating factors contributing to psychological and physiological illnesses.
Approximately 30% of the variance in PTSD is caused from genetics alone.
During traumatic experiences the high levels of stress hormones secreted suppress hypothalamic activity that may be a major factor toward the development of PTSD.
A number of different types of therapy may be useful.
Persons employed in occupations that expose them to violence (such as soldiers) or disasters (such as emergency service workers) are also at risk.
The most frequently reported traumatic events by men are rape, combat, and childhood neglect or physical abuse.
While many medications do not have enough evidence to support their use, three (fluoxetine, paroxetine, and venlafaxine) have been shown to have a small benefit over placebo.
EMDR reduced PTSD symptoms enough in the short term that one in two adults no longer met the criteria for PTSD, but the number of people involved in these trials was small.
Other studies indicate that people that suffer from PTSD have chronically low levels of serotonin, which contributes to the commonly associated behavioral symptoms such as anxiety, ruminations, irritability, aggression, suicidality, and impulsivity.
Individuals diagnosed with PTSD respond more strongly to a dexamethasone suppression test than individuals diagnosed with clinical depression.
A 2016 study strengthened theory that a smaller hippocampus increases the risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, and a larger hippocampus increases the likelihood efficacious treatment.
It can target modeling normal behaviors, instruction on a task, or giving information on the event.
MDMA was used for psychedelic therapy for a variety of indications before its criminalization in the US in 1985.
Prevention may be possible when therapy is targeted at those with early symptoms but is not effective when carried out among all people following trauma.
Of these multidimensional screens, "the M-3 performed better than the GAD-7 at identifying probable cases of PTSD."
those manifest decades after the stressful experience, should be classified under F62.0.
Thus, these four medications are considered to be first-line medications for PTSD.
While it is common to have symptoms after any traumatic event, these must persist to a sufficient degree (i.e., causing dysfunction in life or clinical levels of distress) for longer than one month after the trauma to be classified as PTSD (clinically significant dysfunction or distress for less than one month after the trauma may be acute stress disorder).
Increased levels of dopamine can cause psychosis, agitation, and restlessness.
Overactivation of norepinephrine receptors in the prefrontal cortex can be connected to the flashbacks and nightmares frequently experienced by those with PTSD.
The Royal British Legion and the more recently established Help for Heroes are two of Britain's more high-profile veterans' organisations which have actively advocated for veterans over the years.
In a 2007 study Vietnam War combat veterans with PTSD showed a 20% reduction in the volume of their hippocampus compared with veterans having suffered no such symptoms.
Exposure therapy is a type of cognitive behavioral therapy that involves assisting trauma survivors to re-experience distressing trauma-related memories and reminders in order to facilitate habituation and successful emotional processing of the trauma memory.
Authors of a meta-analysis published in 2013 stated, "We found that people treated with eye movement therapy had greater improvement in their symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder than people given therapy without eye movements….Secondly we found that that in laboratory studies the evidence concludes that thinking of upsetting memories and simultaneously doing a task that facilitates eye movements reduces the vividness and distress associated with the upsetting memories."
The BLA activates the central nucleus (CeA) of the amygdala, which elaborates the fear response, (including behavioral response to threat and elevated startle response).
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is a form of psychotherapy developed and studied by Francine Shapiro.
PTSD symptoms may result when a traumatic event causes an over-reactive adrenaline response, which creates deep neurological patterns in the brain.
This finding was not replicated in chronic PTSD patients traumatized at an air show plane crash in 1988 (Ramstein, Germany).
The M3 uses a "two-staged screening approach" that also assesses for depression, bipolar, and anxiety disorders.
Men are more likely to experience a traumatic event, but women are more likely to experience the kind of high-impact traumatic event that can lead to PTSD, such as interpersonal violence and sexual assault.
CBT has been proven to be an effective treatment for PTSD and is currently considered the standard of care for PTSD by the United States Department of Defense.
The HPA axis that coordinates the hormonal response to stress, which activates the LC-noradrenergic system, is implicated in the over-consolidation of memories that occurs in the aftermath of trauma.
Antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor type are the first-line medications for PTSD and result in benefit in about half of people.
Tricyclic antidepressants are equally effective but are less well tolerated.
With many medications, residual PTSD symptoms following treatment is the rule rather than the exception.
The correlations between combat and PTSD are undeniable; according to Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau and Annette Becker, "One-tenth of mobilized American men were hospitalized for mental disturbances between 1942 and 1945, and, after thirty-five days of uninterrupted combat, 98% of them manifested psychiatric disturbances in varying degrees."
Life-Time prevalence of PTSD was 30.9% for males and 26.9% for females.
A 2011 study from Georgia State University and San Diego State University found that rates of PTSD diagnosis increased significantly when troops were stationed in combat zones, had tours of longer than a year, experienced combat, or were injured.
It is more common in women than men.
In comparison with other animal studies, examination of neuroendocrine and neuroimmune responses in plasma revealed a trend toward increase in corticosterone in PTSD and combination groups.
Clinical research is also investigating using D-cycloserine, hydrocortisone, and propranolol as adjuncts to more conventional exposure therapy.
A soldier's assailant may be her colleague or superior officer, making it difficult for her to both report the crime and to avoid interacting with her assailant again.
The US Department of Veterans Affairs has been actively training mental health treatment staff in prolonged exposure therapy and Cognitive Processing Therapy in an effort to better treat US veterans with PTSD.
'', post-traumatic stress disorder.
There is evidence that those with a genetically smaller hippocampus are more likely to develop PTSD following a traumatic event.
While benzodiazepines can alleviate acute anxiety, there is no consistent evidence that they can stop the development of PTSD and may actually increase the risk of developing PTSD 2-5 times.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) seeks to change the way a trauma victim feels and acts by changing the patterns of thinking or behavior, or both, responsible for negative emotions.
If it lasts longer, and the symptom pattern fits that characteristic of PTSD, the diagnosis may be changed.
Furthermore, the availability of school-based therapy is particularly important for children with PTSD.
Those with PTSD are at a higher risk of suicide.
Many of these therapy methods have a significant element of exposure and have demonstrated success in treating the primary problems of PTSD and co-occurring depressive symptoms.
A current, NIMH-funded trial in New York City is now (and into 2013) comparing interpersonal psychotherapy, prolonged exposure therapy, and relaxation therapy.
These results suggest that suppression of intrusive thoughts may be important in the development and maintenance of PTSD.
In 2002, Shapiro and Maxfield published a theory of why this might work, called adaptive information processing.
Quasi-experimental studies have demonstrated a relationship between intrusive thoughts and intentional control responses such that suppression increases the frequency of unwanted intrusive thoughts.
Experiencing an enemy firefight was associated a 18.3 percentage point increase in the probability of PTSD, while being wounded or injured in combat was associated a 23.9 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a PTSD diagnosis.
Benzodiazepines are not recommended for the treatment of PTSD due to a lack of evidence of benefit and risk of worsening PTSD symptoms.
In the typical case, the individual with PTSD persistently avoids trauma-related thoughts and emotions, and discussion of the traumatic event, and may even have amnesia of the event.
The brief screens (SIPS, ADD, and PDI-4A) were least useful due to poor discrimination.
For those who already have PTSD, benzodiazepines may worsen and prolong the course of illness, by worsening psychotherapy outcomes, and causing or exacerbating aggression, depression (including suicidality), and substance use.
Psychological debriefing was in the past, however, the most often used preventive measure, partly because of the relative ease with which this treatment can be given to individuals directly following an event.
The 2014 National Comorbidity Survey reports that "the traumas most commonly associated with PTSD are combat exposure and witnessing among men and rape and sexual molestation among women."
An open trial of interpersonal psychotherapy reported high rates of remission from PTSD symptoms without using exposure.
The American Psychiatric Association has a more general practice guideline for the assessment and management of acute stress disorder and PTSD.
A score of 24 or more confers a clinical concern for PTSD, and a score of 33 is suggested to represent the best cutoff for a probable diagnosis
Nevertheless, some use benzodiazepines with caution for short-term anxiety and insomnia.
In the DSM-IV, the spelling "posttraumatic stress disorder" is used, while in the ICD-10, the spelling is "post-traumatic stress disorder".
In the UK, there are various charities and service organisations dedicated to aiding veterans in readjusting to civilian life.
This effect of childhood trauma, which is not well-understood, may be a marker for both traumatic experiences and attachment problems.
Intrusive memories and conditioned fear responses are thought to be a result of the response to associated triggers.
The goal is to understand how certain thoughts about events cause PTSD-related stress.
In a similar vein, psychiatrist Jonathan Shay has proposed that Lady Percy's soliloquy in the William Shakespeare play ''Henry IV, Part 1'' (act 2, scene 3, lines 40–62), written around 1597, represents an unusually accurate description of the symptom constellation of PTSD.
Evidence provides support for a small or modest improvement with sertraline, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and venlafaxine.
Descending inhibitory inputs from the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) regulate the transmission from the BLA to the CeA, which is hypothesized to play a role in the extinction of conditioned fear responses.
The ''National Vietnam Veterans' Readjustment Study'' (NVVRS) found 15.2% of male and 8.5% of female Vietnam veterans to suffer from current PTSD at the time of the study.
Children are less likely than adults to develop PTSD after trauma, especially if they are under ten years of age.
There is considerable controversy within the medical community regarding the neurobiology of PTSD.
During high stress, the hippocampus, which is associated with placing memories in the correct context of space and time and memory recall, is suppressed.
Several meta-analyses; however, find that psychological debriefing is unhelpful and is potentially harmful.
A review "...did not find any evidence to support the use of an intervention offered to everyone", and that "...multiple session interventions may result in worse outcome than no intervention for some individuals."
The rate of PTSD may be lower in children than adults, but in the absence of therapy, symptoms may continue for decades.
Dopamine levels in a person with PTSD can help contribute to the symptoms associated.
There is a small amount of evidence that EMDR may improve re-experiencing symptoms in children and adolescents, but EMDR has not been shown to improve other PTSD symptoms, anxiety, or depression.
This is true for both single-session debriefing and multiple session interventions.
The majority of reports indicate people with PTSD have elevated levels of corticotropin-releasing hormone, lower basal cortisol levels, and enhanced negative feedback suppression of the HPA axis by dexamethasone.
Higher rates may occur in regions of armed conflict.
In the laboratory, the researchers exposed mice to a repeated session of unpredictable stressor (i.e.
Children with PTSD are far more likely to pursue treatment at school (because of its proximity and ease) than at a free clinic.
A diagnosis of PTSD requires that the person has been exposed to an extreme stressor such as one that is life-threatening.
Most exposure therapy programs include both imaginal confrontation with the traumatic memories and real-life exposure to trauma reminders; this therapy modality is well supported by clinical evidence.
There have been multiple small controlled trials of four to eight weeks of EMDR in adults  as well as children and adolescents.
Additionally, one study found that soldiers whose leukocytes had greater numbers of glucocorticoid receptors were more prone to developing PTSD after experiencing trauma.
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry has a practice guideline for the assessment and treatment of PTSD in children and adolescents.
In fact, much of the available published research regarding PTSD is based on studies done on veterans of the war in Vietnam.
Various scales to measure the severity and frequency of PTSD symptoms exist.
Persons considered at risk include, for example, combat military personnel, victims of natural disasters, concentration camp survivors, and victims of violent crime.
There is a strong association between the development of PTSD in mothers that experienced domestic violence during the perinatal period of their pregnancy.
The most used screen, the PCL (or PTSD Checklist), was the longest one (17 items) and had the most variability in cut points across various clinical populations.
Research has also found that PTSD shares many genetic influences common to other psychiatric disorders.
Although it is commonly used, there have not been enough studies comparing outcomes in groups of children receiving and not receiving play therapy, so the effects of play therapy are not yet understood.
Glucocorticoids may be useful for short-term therapy to protect against neurodegeneration caused by the extended stress response that characterizes PTSD, but long-term use may actually promote neurodegeneration.
While the 5 multidimensional screens—those that screened for multiple psychiatric conditions—performed less well than the PTSD-only screens, "this might be preferable, as 'false positives' on multidimensional screens may reflect psychiatric symptomatology requiring further evaluation."
There is evidence that susceptibility to PTSD is hereditary.
There were no studies comparing EMDR to other psychological treatments or to medication.
Brain catecholamine levels are high, and corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) concentrations are high.
Until the Tailhook scandal drew attention to the problem, the role that sexual assault in the military plays in female veterans developing PTSD went largely unstudied.
When she brought her eye movements under control while thinking, the thoughts were less distressing.
Symptoms of trauma-related mental disorders have been documented since at least the time of the ancient Greeks.
There was some evidence that EMDR might prevent depression.
Low levels of dopamine can contribute to anhedonia, apathy, impaired attention, and motor deficits.
Some authors believe that the use of benzodiazepines is contraindicated for acute stress, as this group of drugs promotes dissociation and ulterior revivals.
