The result is a moist ball about the size of a baseball.
The potato cyst nematode is a microscopic worm that thrives on the roots, thus causing the potato plants to wilt.
There are about 5,000 potato varieties worldwide.
It remains an essential crop in Europe (especially eastern and central Europe), where per capita production is still the highest in the world, but the most rapid expansion over the past few decades has occurred in southern and eastern Asia.
Over 99% of the presently cultivated potatoes worldwide descended from varieties that originated in the lowlands of south-central Chile, which have displaced formerly popular varieties from the Andes.
Cross-breeding has been done repeatedly to transfer resistances to certain pests and diseases from the gene pool of wild species to the gene pool of cultivated potato species.
It subsequently transferred over to a variety of digging tools.
Varieties contain different levels of glycoalkaloids.
The word has an unknown origin and was originally (c. 1440) used as a term for a short knife or dagger, probably related to Dutch ''spyd'' or the Latin "spad-" a word root meaning "sword"; cf.
Potatoes are usually cured after harvest to improve skin-set.
The only requirement involves cooking to swell the starch granules.
Others found in potatoes are 4-O-caffeoylquinic acid (crypto-chlorogenic acid), 5-O-caffeoylquinic (neo-chlorogenic acid), 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic and 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acids.
Potato density assessment can be performed by floating them in brines.
Exposure to light, physical damage, and age increase glycoalkaloid content within the tuber.
The name potato originally referred to a type of sweet potato although the two plants are not closely related; in many of the chronicles detailing agriculture and plants, no distinction is made between the two.
Thus, the United Nations officially declared 2008 as the ''International Year of the Potato'', to raise its profile in developing nations, calling the crop a "hidden treasure".
Home gardeners often plant a piece of potato with two or three eyes in a hill of mounded soil.
An alternative method used by home gardeners and smaller-scale growers involves covering the growing area with organic mulches such as straw or with plastic sheets.
Chuño is a freeze-dried potato product traditionally made by Quechua and Aymara communities of Peru and Bolivia,  and is known in various countries of South America, including Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, and Chile.
For short-term storage before cooking, temperatures of about  are preferred.
In the UK, most seed potatoes originate in Scotland in areas where westerly winds prevent aphid attack and thus prevent spread of potato virus pathogens.
According to an Environmental Working Group analysis of USDA and FDA pesticide residue tests performed from 2000 through 2008, 84% of the 2,216 tested potato samples contained detectable traces of at least one pesticide.
It remains an essential crop in Europe (especially eastern and central Europe), where per capita production is still the highest in the world, but the most rapid expansion over the past few decades has occurred in southern and eastern Asia.
New tubers may arise at the soil surface.
In Western Europe, especially in Belgium, sliced potatoes are fried to create ''frieten'', the original French fried potatoes.
Commercial storage of potatoes involves several phases: drying of surface moisture; a wound healing phase at 85% to 95% relative humidity and temperatures below ; a staged cooling phase; a holding phase; and a reconditioning phase, during which the tubers are slowly warmed.
In the United States, potatoes have become one of the most widely consumed crops and thus have a variety of preparation methods and condiments.
They are a type of dumpling made from riced potatoes (see Potato ricer) and usually stuffed with minced meat, although sometimes dry cottage cheese (curd) or mushrooms are used instead.
A dish called masala dosa from South India is very notable all over India.
There is a big gap among various countries between high and low yields, even with the same variety of potato.
In western Norway, komle is popular.
Even cold weather makes potatoes more susceptible to bruising and possibly later rotting, which can quickly ruin a large stored crop.
A medium-size  potato with the skin provides 27&nbsp;mg of vitamin C (45% of the Daily Value (DV)), 620&nbsp;mg of potassium (18% of DV), 0.2&nbsp;mg vitamin B6 (10% of DV) and trace amounts of thiamin, riboflavin, folate, niacin, magnesium, phosphorus, iron, and zinc.
In the Andes, where the species is indigenous, there are some other closely related cultivated potato species.
Potatoes are occasionally referred to as "Irish potatoes" or "white potatoes" in the United States, to distinguish them from sweet potatoes.
Commercial growers plant potatoes as a row crop using seed tubers, young plants or microtubers and may mound the entire row.
A mutation in the varieties' P locus causes production of the antioxidant anthocyanin.
Since then breeders developing new varieties test for this, and sometimes have to discard an otherwise promising cultivar.
Potatoes are often broadly classified as high on the glycemic index (GI) and so are often excluded from the diets of individuals trying to follow a low-GI diet.
Some of the more notable dishes include boiled potato as a base for several dishes or with ají-based sauces like in Papa a la Huancaína or ocopa, diced potato for its use in soups like in cau cau, or in Carapulca with dried potato (papa seca).
Eliminating all root-weeds is desirable in potato cultivation.
In the north of Italy, in particular, in the Friuli region of the northeast, potatoes serve to make a type of pasta called gnocchi.
Like most other pre-20th century acronymic origins, this is false.
Tuber bulking occurs during the fourth phase, when the plant begins investing the majority of its resources in its newly formed tubers.
A traditional Canary Islands dish is Canarian wrinkly potatoes or ''papas arrugadas''.
Wound-healing prevents infection and water-loss from the tubers during storage.
These are then mixed with regionally varying ingredients.
Wild potato species can be found throughout the Americas from the United States to southern Chile.
Genetic research has produced several genetically modified varieties.
It is crucial that the storage area is dark, well ventilated and for long-term storage maintained at temperatures near .
The International Potato Center, based in Lima, Peru, holds an ISO-accredited collection of potato germplasm.
In France, the most notable potato dish is the ''Hachis Parmentier'', named after Antoine-Augustin Parmentier, a French pharmacist, nutritionist, and agronomist who, in the late 18th century, was instrumental in the acceptance of the potato as an edible crop in the country.
Further inspection and separation occurs when the potatoes are unloaded from the field vehicles and put into storage.
The '''blue''' or '''purple potato''' originated in South America.
The initials of the main words in this title gave rise to spud."
The potato was originally believed to have been domesticated independently in multiple locations, but later genetic testing of the wide variety of cultivars and wild species proved a single origin for potatoes in the area of present-day southern Peru and extreme northwestern Bolivia (from a species in the ''Solanum brevicaule'' complex), where they were domesticated approximately 7,000–10,000 years ago.
Curing allows the skin to fully set and any wounds to heal.
Tracing its origins to Quebec in the 1950s, it has become a widespread and popular dish throughout Canada.
At harvest time, gardeners usually dig up potatoes with a long-handled, three-prong "grape" (or graip), i.e., a spading fork, or a potato hook, which is similar to the graip but with tines at a 90° angle to the handle.
Skin-set is the process by which the skin of the potato becomes resistant to skinning damage.
Correct potato husbandry can be an arduous task in some circumstances.
A small but significant portion of this starch is resistant to digestion by enzymes in the stomach and small intestine, and so reaches the large intestine essentially intact.
A regional dish of Central New York, salt potatoes are bite-size new potatoes boiled in water saturated with salt then served with melted butter.
Potatoes are mostly cross-pollinated by insects such as bumblebees, which carry pollen from other potato plants, though a substantial amount of self-fertilizing occurs as well.
The potato contains vitamins and minerals, as well as an assortment of phytochemicals, such as carotenoids and natural phenols.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reports that the world production of potatoes in 2013 was about 368 million tonnes.
In the UK, potatoes form part of the traditional staple fish and chips.
McDonald's, Burger King, Frito-Lay, and Procter & Gamble announced they would not use genetically modified potatoes, and Monsanto published its intent to discontinue the line in March 2001.
Different designs use different systems at this point.
This is transported up an apron chain consisting of steel links several feet wide, which separates some of the dirt.
To be disease free, the areas where seed potatoes are grown are selected with care.
The chain deposits into an area where further separation occurs.
Colcannon is a traditional Irish food made with mashed potato, shredded kale or cabbage, and onion; champ is a similar dish.
However, the local importance of potato is extremely variable and rapidly changing.
They cited its potential derived from its status as a cheap and plentiful crop that grows in a wide variety of climates and locales.
The 16th-century English herbalist John Gerard used the terms "bastard potatoes" and "Virginia potatoes" for this species, and referred to sweet potatoes as "common potatoes".
After flowering, potato plants produce small green fruits that resemble green cherry tomatoes, each containing about 300 seeds.
The Tattie scone is a popular Scottish dish containing potatoes.
The Moche culture from Northern Peru made ceramics from earth, water, and fire.
A variant eaten and sold in Lancashire, especially Liverpool, is made with cooked and mashed potatoes.
They bear white, pink, red, blue, or purple flowers with yellow stamens.
It is believed to have originated from the German ''Klöße'', prepared by early German settlers who lived among the Acadians.
Unlike many foods, potatoes can also be easily cooked in a microwave oven and still retain nearly all of their nutritional value, provided they are covered in ventilated plastic wrap to prevent moisture from escaping; this method produces a meal very similar to a steamed potato, while retaining the appearance of a conventionally baked potato.
Another relative native to this region, ''Solanum bulbocastanum'', has been used to genetically engineer the potato to resist potato blight.
Glycoalkaloids may cause headaches, diarrhea, cramps, and in severe cases coma and death; however, poisoning from potatoes occurs very rarely.
Potatoes yield abundantly with little effort, and adapt readily to diverse climates as long as the climate is cool and moist enough for the plants to gather sufficient water from the soil to form the starchy tubers.
The origin of the word "spud" has erroneously been attributed to a 19th-century activist group dedicated to keeping the potato out of Britain, calling itself The Society for the Prevention of an Unwholesome Diet (S.P.U.D.).
However, it is used in northern China where rice is not easily grown, with a popular dish being 青椒土豆丝 (qīng jiāo tǔ dòu sī), made with green pepper, vinegar and thin slices of potato.
Tubers form in response to decreasing day length, although this tendency has been minimized in commercial varieties.
However, the local importance of the potato is variable and changing rapidly.
In Chile's Chiloé Archipelago, potatoes are the main ingredient of many dishes, including milcaos, chapaleles, curanto and chochoca.
Plants propagated from tubers are clones of the parent, whereas those propagated from seed produce a range of different varieties.
Vada pav is a popular vegetarian fast food dish in Mumbai and other regions in the Maharashtra in India.
The Andean potato is adapted to the short-day conditions prevalent in the mountainous equatorial and tropical regions where it originated; the Chilean potato, however, native to the Chiloé Archipelago, is adapted to the long-day conditions prevalent in the higher latitude region of southern Chile.
The Spanish Royal Academy says the Spanish word is a compound of the Taíno ''batata''  and the Quechua ''papa'' (potato).
The '''potato''' is a starchy, tuberous crop from the perennial nightshade '''''Solanum tuberosum'''''.
They belong to eight or nine species, depending on the taxonomic school.
In fact, the GI of potatoes can vary considerably depending on type (such as red, russet, white, or King Edward), origin (where it was grown), preparation methods (i.e., cooking method, whether it is eaten hot or cold, whether it is mashed or cubed or consumed whole, etc.
A traditional Acadian dish from New Brunswick is known as ''poutine râpée''.
When stored in homes, the shelf life is usually only a few weeks.
There is one pentaploid cultivated species (with 60 chromosomes): ''S.&nbsp;curtilobum''.
Genetically modified varieties have met public resistance in the United States and in the European Union.
Boiled whole and served un-peeled with dill, these "new potatoes" are traditionally consumed with Baltic herring.
''Bryndzové halušky'' is the Slovakian national dish, made of a batter of flour and finely grated potatoes that is boiled to form dumplings.
The English word ''potato'' comes from Spanish ''patata'' (the name used in Spain).
There are two major subspecies of ''Solanum tuberosum'': ''andigena'', or Andean; and  ''tuberosum'', or Chilean.
New potatoes are often cooked with mint and served with a little melted butter.
Trimming or peeling green areas are inadequate to remove copresent toxins, and such potatoes are no longer suitable as animal food.
In Ecuador, the potato, as well as being a staple with most dishes, is featured in the hearty ''locro de papas'', a thick soup of potato, squash, and cheese.
This phase is often (but not always) associated with flowering.
The major species grown worldwide is ''Solanum tuberosum'' (a tetraploid with 48 chromosomes), and modern varieties of this species are the most widely cultivated.
It is also occasionally seen in Korean and Thai cuisines.
In the UK, potatoes are not considered by the NHS as counting towards the recommended daily five portions of fruit and vegetables.
Chlorogenic acid constitutes up to 90% of the potato tuber natural phenols.
Potatoes are represented anthropomorphically as well as naturally.
The U.S. National Toxicology Program suggests that the average American consume at most 12.5&nbsp;mg/day of solanine from potatoes (the toxic dose is actually several times this, depending on body weight).
On the other hand, temperatures below  convert potatoes' starch into sugar, which alters their taste and cooking qualities and leads to higher acrylamide levels in the cooked product, especially in deep-fried dishesthe discovery of acrylamides in starchy foods in 2002 has led to many international health concerns as they are believed to be possible carcinogens and their occurrence in cooked foods is currently under study as a possible influence in potential health problems.
2 are rated as lower in quality due to their appearance (e.g.
Potatoes were introduced outside the Andes region approximately four centuries ago, and have since become an integral part of much of the world's food supply.
In Northern India, alu dum and alu paratha are a favorite part of the diet; the first is a spicy curry of boiled potato, the second is a type of stuffed chapati.
These locations are selected for their cold hard winters that kill pests and long sunshine hours in the summer for optimum growth.
Three successive plowings, with associated harrowing and rolling, are desirable before planting.
Commercial growers usually address this problem by piling additional soil around the base of the plant as it grows ("hilling", or in British English "earthing up").
Three thousand of them are found in the Andes alone, mainly in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, and Colombia.
Waxy potato varieties produce two main kinds of potato starch, amylose and amylopectin, the latter of which is most industrially useful.
Seed potato crops are 'rogued' in some countries to eliminate diseased plants or those of a different variety from the seed crop.
There are two triploid species (with 36 chromosomes): ''S.&nbsp;chaucha'' and ''S.&nbsp;juzepczukii''.
In sprouted and cooked form, the relative nutritional and anti-nutritional contents of each of these grains may be different from the values reported in this table.
At more formal dinners, a common practice includes taking small red potatoes, slicing them, and roasting them in an iron skillet.
The Aloo gosht, Potato and meat curry, is one of the popular dishes in South Asia, especially in Pakistan.
The final phase is maturation: The plant canopy dies back, the tuber skins harden, and their sugars convert to starches.
The average quantity of all pesticide traces found in the 2,216 samples was 1.602 ppm.
A total of 36 unique pesticides were detected on potatoes over the 2,216 samples, though no individual sample contained more than 6 unique pesticide traces, and the average was 1.29 detectable unique pesticide traces per sample.
The '''purple''' or '''blue''' '''potato''' tends to have a more nutty flavor than its relatives of other colors.
The potato was slow to be adopted by distrustful European farmers, but soon enough it became an important food staple and field crop that played a major role in the European 19th century population boom.
In a summary of several studies, the glycoalkaloid content was highest in flowers and sprouts and lowest in the tuber flesh (in order from highest to lowest content, generally: flowers, sprouts, leaves, skin, roots, berries, peel skin plus outer cortex of tuber flesh, stems, and tuber flesh).
High-density potatoes are desirable in the production of dehydrated mashed potatoes, potato crisps and french fries.
Commercial harvesting is typically done with large potato harvesters, which scoop up the plant and surrounding earth.
It is a thin pancake of rice and pulse paste rolled over spicy smashed potato and eaten with sambhar and chutney.
Among American Jews, the practice of eating latkes (fried potato pancakes) is common during the festival of Hanukkah.
Commercial planting of 'Amflora' was expected in the Czech Republic and Germany in the spring of 2010, and Sweden and the Netherlands in subsequent years.
As of 2007, China led the world in potato production, and nearly a third of the world's potatoes were harvested in China and India.
Since exposure to light leads to greening of the skins and the development of solanine, growers are interested in covering such tubers.
Following the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire, the Spanish introduced the potato to Europe in the second half of the 16th century.
Good ground preparation, harrowing, plowing, and rolling are always needed, along with a little grace from the weather and a good source of water.
In the third phase stolons develop from lower leaf axils on the stem and grow downwards into the ground and on these stolons new tubers develop as swellings of the stolon.
In 2010, the European Commission cleared the way for 'Amflora' to be grown in the European Union for industrial purposes only—not for food.
Nonetheless, genetic testing of the wide variety of cultivars and wild species affirms that all potato subspecies derive from a single origin in the area of present-day southern Peru and extreme northwestern Bolivia (from a species in the ''Solanum brevicaule'' complex).
pulling out the young tubers by hand while leaving the plant in place.
Van Gogh's 1885 painting ''The Potato Eaters'' portrays a family eating potatoes.
It is commonly eaten with salt and pepper or brown sugar.
Potatoes are boiled between 10 and 25 minutes, depending on size and type, to become soft.
While a normal potato has 12–20&nbsp;mg/kg of glycoalkaloid content, a green tuber contains 250–280&nbsp;mg/kg, and green skin 1500–2200&nbsp;mg/kg.
Cooking and then cooling potatoes significantly increases resistant starch.
In India, the most popular potato dishes are ''aloo ki sabzi'', batata vada, and samosa, which is spicy mashed potato mixed with a small amount of vegetable stuffed in conical dough, and deep fried.
Since its eggs can survive in the soil for several years, crop rotation is recommended.
Tuber formation halts when soil temperatures reach ; hence potatoes are considered a cool-season crop.
However, when these commercial varieties turn green, they can still approach concentrations of solanine of 1000&nbsp;mg/kg (1000 ppmw).
China and India accounted for over a third of world's production in 2010, and had yields of 14.7 and 19.9 tonnes per hectare respectively.
Potato farms in the United States were the most productive in 2010, with a nationwide average of 44.3 tonnes per hectare.
Some Englishmen who did not fancy potatoes formed a Society for the Prevention of Unwholesome Diet.
These compounds, which protect the plant from its predators, are, in general, concentrated in its leaves, stems, sprouts, and fruits.
Potato plants are herbaceous perennials that grow about  high, depending on variety, with the leaves dying back after flowering, fruiting and tuber formation.
''Poutine'', by contrast, is a hearty serving of French fries, fresh cheese curds and hot gravy.
Potato tubers may be susceptible to skinning at harvest and suffer skinning damage during harvest and handling operations.
Boxty pancakes are eaten throughout Ireland, although associated especially with the north, and in Irish diaspora communities; they are traditionally made with grated potatoes, soaked to loosen the starch and mixed with flour, buttermilk and baking powder.
Improvements in one or more of these yield determinants, and a closure of the yield gap, can be a major boost to food supply and farmer incomes in the developing world.
The result is then usually run past workers who continue to sort out plant material, stones, and rotten potatoes before the potatoes are continuously delivered to a wagon or truck.
The most complex designs use vine choppers and shakers, along with a blower system to separate the potatoes from the plant.
It has purple skin and flesh, which becomes blue once cooked.
Bauernfrühstück  (literally ''Farmer's breakfast'') is a warm German dish made from fried potatoes, eggs, ham and vegetables.
In South Asia, Potato is very popular traditional staple.
Just over two thirds of the global production is eaten directly by humans with the rest being fed to animals or used to produce starch.
Similarly, cooked and mashed potatoes or potato flour can be used in the Knödel or dumpling eaten with or added to meat dishes all over central and Eastern Europe, but especially in Bavaria and Luxembourg.
While this was a very low value of pesticide residue, it was the highest amongst the 50 vegetables analyzed.
Nevertheless, under EU rules, individual countries have the right to decide whether they will allow this potato to be grown on their territory.
Most modern potatoes grown in North America arrived through European settlement and not independently from the South American sources; however, at least one wild potato species, ''Solanum fendleri'', is found as far north as Texas and is used in breeding for resistance to a nematode species that attacks cultivated potatoes.
Storage facilities need to be carefully designed to keep the potatoes alive and slow the natural process of decomposition, which involves the breakdown of starch.
Potatoes are sensitive to heavy frosts, which damage them in the ground.
In 1845, a plant disease known as late blight, caused by the fungus-like oomycete ''Phytophthora infestans'', spread rapidly through the poorer communities of western Ireland, resulting in the crop failures that led to the Great Irish Famine.
Potatoes do not keep very well in storage and are vulnerable to molds that feed on the stored tubers and quickly turn them rotten, however: crops such as grain can be stored for several years with a low risk of rot.
The concentration of glycoalkaloid in wild potatoes suffices to produce toxic effects in humans.
Most potato dishes are served hot, but some are first cooked, then served cold, notably potato salad and potato chips/crisps.
The amount of resistant starch in potatoes depends much on preparation methods.
During the first phase, sprouts emerge from the seed potatoes and root growth begins.
In Tamil Nadu this tuber acquired a name based on its appearance 'urulai-k-kizhangu' (உருளைக் கிழங்கு) meaning cylindrical tuber.
), and with what it is consumed (i.e., the addition of various high-fat or high-protein toppings).
The word spud traces back to the 16th century.
Insects that commonly transmit potato diseases or damage the plants include the Colorado potato beetle, the potato tuber moth, the green peach aphid (''Myzus persicae''), the potato aphid, beet leafhoppers, thrips, and mites.
Other favorite dishes are alu tikki and pakoda items.
The predominant form of this carbohydrate is starch.
The potato is best known for its carbohydrate content (approximately 26&nbsp;grams in a medium potato).
In Germany, Northern and Eastern Europe, especially in Scandinavian countries, Poland, Russia, Belarus and Ukraine, newly harvested, early ripening varieties are considered a special delicacy.
New varieties grown from seed can be propagated vegetatively by planting tubers, pieces of tubers cut to include at least one or two eyes, or cuttings, a practice used in greenhouses for the production of healthy seed tubers.
United Kingdom was a close second.
In East Asia, particularly Southeast Asia, rice is by far the predominant starch crop, with potatoes a secondary crop, especially in China and Japan.
In 2008, several international organizations highlighted the potato's role in world food production, in the face of developing economic problems.
Aloo posto (a curry with potatoes and poppy seeds) is immensely popular in East India, especially Bengal.
French-fried potatoes are a typical ingredient in Peruvian stir-fries, including the classic dish lomo saltado.
In the winter, roadside sellers in northern China will also sell roasted potatoes.
