Potassium can be detected by taste because it triggers three of the five types of taste sensations, according to concentration.
The resulting sodium and magnesium waste is either stored underground or piled up in slag heaps.
Most agricultural fertilizers contain potassium chloride, while potassium sulfate is used for chloride-sensitive crops or crops needing higher sulfur content.
Potassium chromate () is used in inks, dyes, stains (bright yellowish-red color); in explosives and fireworks; in the tanning of leather, in fly paper and safety matches, but all these uses are due to the properties of chromate ion containment rather than potassium ions.
Potassium hydroxide reacts readily with carbon dioxide to produce potassium carbonate, and is used to remove traces of the gas from air.
'''Kalium''' was taken from the word ''alkali'', which in turn came from '''' ''al-qalyah'' "plant ashes."
Lower purity metal is considerably cheaper.
Potassium carbonate ( or potash) is used in the manufacture of glass, soap, color TV tubes, fluorescent lamps, textile dyes and pigments.
Potassium ions are necessary for the function of all living cells.
The similar-sounding English term alkali is from this same root, whereas the word for potassium in Modern Standard Arabic is بوتاسيوم ''būtāsyūm''.
One example is potassium superoxide, , an orange solid that acts as a portable source of oxygen and a carbon dioxide absorber.
The potassium ion is colorless in water and is very difficult to precipitate; possible precipitation methods include reactions with sodium tetraphenylborate, hexachloroplatinic acid, and sodium cobaltinitrite.
The 2004 guidelines of the Institute of Medicine specify a Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) of 4,700&nbsp;mg of potassium (100&nbsp;mEq); most Americans consume only half that amount per day.
While potash has been used since ancient times, it was not understood for most of its history to be a fundamentally different substance from sodium mineral salts.
Deficiency symptoms include muscle weakness, paralytic ileus, ECG abnormalities, decreased reflex response; and in severe cases, respiratory paralysis, alkalosis, and cardiac arrhythmia.
Potassium bromide (KBr) was formerly used as a sedative and in photography.
The most recently discovered potassium ion channel is KirBac3.1, which makes a total of five potassium ion channels (KcsA, KirBac1.1, KirBac3.1, KvAP, and MthK) with a determined structure.
Finely grated potassium ignites in air at room temperature.
The deposits are located in the Elk Point Group produced in the Middle Devonian.
The conventional K-Ar dating method depends on the assumption that the rocks contained no argon at the time of formation and that all the subsequent radiogenic argon () was quantitatively retained.
There are 24 known isotopes of potassium, three of which occur naturally:  (93.3%),  (0.0117%), and  (6.7%).
An alloy of sodium and potassium, NaK is a liquid used as a heat-transfer medium and a desiccant for producing dry and air-free solvents.
The potassium cation is a nutrient necessary for human life and health.
The production of sodium potassium alloys is accomplished by changing the reaction time and the amount of sodium used in the reaction.
Sylvite (KCl), carnallite , kainite  and langbeinite  are the minerals found in large evaporite deposits worldwide.
In 2005, about 93% of world potassium production was consumed by the fertilizer industry.
This ion pump uses ATP to pump three sodium ions out of the cell and two potassium ions into the cell, creating an electrochemical gradient and electromotive force across the cell membrane.
is also formed in s-process nucleosynthesis and the neon burning process.
In the kidneys, about 180&nbsp;liters of plasma is filtered through the glomeruli and into the renal tubules per day.
Potassium ions are present in a wide variety of proteins and enzymes.
It also reacts explosively with sulfuric acid.
The potassium moves passively through pores in the cell membrane.
Once oxidized, it is very stable and difficult to reduce back to the metal.
The movement of potassium and sodium through the cell membrane is mediated by the Na+/K+-ATPase pump.
Naturally occurring  has a half-life of 1.250×109 years.
In a flame test, potassium and its compounds emit a lilac color with a peak emission wavelength of 766.5 nanometers.
Adequate potassium intake is achieved by eating a variety of foods.
The more severe the impairment, the more severe is the restriction necessary to avoid hyperkalemia.
The last two species, especially the superoxide, are rare and are formed only in reaction with very electropositive metals; these species contain oxygen-oxygen bonds.
Its applications include gold mining, electroplating, and electroforming of these metals; it is also used in organic synthesis to make nitriles.
All elements in Group 1 have a single valence electron in the outer electron shell, which is easily removed to create an ion with a positive charge – a cation, which combines with anions to form salts.
The Griesheimer process employing the reaction of potassium fluoride with calcium carbide was also used to produce potassium.
Potassium is present in all fruits, vegetables, meat and fish.
The market is volatile because long-term storage of the metal is difficult.
Some of the few poorly soluble potassium salts include potassium tetraphenylborate, potassium hexachloroplatinate, and potassium cobaltinitrite.
Minerals are dated by measurement of the concentration of potassium and the amount of radiogenic  that has accumulated.
Nitrogen, argon, sodium chloride (table salt), sodium carbonate (soda ash), and silicon dioxide (sand) are effective if they are dry.
The pores require calcium to open although it is thought that the calcium works in reverse by blocking at least one of the pores.
Supplements of potassium are most widely used in conjunction with diuretics that block reabsorption of sodium and water upstream from the distal tubule (thiazides and loop diuretics), because this promotes increased distal tubular potassium secretion, with resultant increased potassium excretion.
The only common oxidation state for potassium is +1.
This process requires so little energy that potassium is readily oxidized by atmospheric oxygen.
At the end of the processing, potassium is secreted one more time if the serum levels are too high.
They are located in the Zechstein and were deposited in the Middle to Late Permian.
Potassium is an extremely active metal that reacts violently with oxygen and water in air.
The principal source of potassium – potash – is mined in Canada, Russia, Belarus, Germany, Israel, United States, Jordan, and other places around the world.
The body has about as much potassium as sulfur and chlorine, and only calcium and phosphorus are more abundant.
Pores have only one gate, and there only one kind of ion can stream through, at 10 million to 100 million ions per second.
Georg Ernst Stahl obtained experimental evidence that led him to suggest the fundamental difference of sodium and potassium salts in 1702, and Henri Louis Duhamel du Monceau was able to prove this difference in 1736.
: 4&nbsp; + 2&nbsp; → 2&nbsp; + 3&nbsp;
Because its density is 0.89 g/cm3, burning potassium floats in water that exposes it to atmospheric oxygen.
Potassium is the eighth or ninth most common element by mass (0.2%) in the human body, so that a 60&nbsp;kg adult contains a total of about 120&nbsp;g of potassium.
When ions move through pumps there is a gate in the pumps on either side of the cell membrane and only one gate can be open at once.
Potassium salts such as carnallite, langbeinite, polyhalite, and sylvite form extensive deposits in ancient lake bottoms and seabeds, making extraction of potassium salts in these environments commercially viable.
Because it can reduce the salts to the metal, potassium is often used as the reductant in the preparation of finely divided metals from their salts by the Rieke method.
The exact chemical composition of potassium and sodium compounds, and the status as chemical element of potassium and sodium, was not known then, and thus Antoine Lavoisier did not include the alkali in his list of chemical elements in 1789.
For this reason, non-prescription potassium pills are limited by law in the US to a maximum of 99&nbsp;mg of potassium.
Depending on the concentration, the ammonia solutions are blue to yellow, and their electrical conductivity is similar to that of liquid metals.
Metallic potassium is used in several types of magnetometers.
Neutral potassium atoms have 19 electrons, one more than the extremely stable configuration of the noble gas argon.
The first mined deposits were located near Staßfurt, Germany, but the deposits span from Great Britain over Germany into Poland.
Potassium metal is a powerful reducing agent that is easily oxidized to the monopositive cation, .
Potassium bromate () is a strong oxidizer (E924), used to improve dough strength and rise height.
After prolonged storage in air dangerous shock-sensitive peroxides can form on the metal and under the lid of the container, and can detonate upon opening.
daytime for humans, nighttime for rodents) independent of the presence, amount, or absence of potassium ingestion.
Hypokalemia, a deficiency of potassium in the plasma, can be fatal if severe.
Potassium is the major cation (positive ion) inside animal cells 150&nbsp;mmol/L, (4.8&nbsp;g), while sodium is the major cation of extracellular fluid 150&nbsp;mmol/L, (3.345&nbsp;g).
For a long time the only significant applications for potash were the production of glass, bleach, soap and gunpowder as potassium nitrate.
The deposits often show layers starting with the least soluble at the bottom and the most soluble on top.
Potassium and sodium cations influence fluid distribution between intracellular and extracellular compartments by osmotic forces.
The decay of  to  is the basis of a common method for dating rocks.
Three species are formed during the reaction: potassium oxide, potassium peroxide, and potassium superoxide formed of three different oxygen-based ions: oxide (), peroxide (), and superoxide ().
Potassium in nature occurs only in ionic salts.
It is the 17th most abundant element by weight in the earth, and 20th most abundant element in the solar system.
In 1797, the German chemist  Martin Klaproth discovered "potash" in the minerals leucite and lepidolite, and realized that "potash" was not a product of plant growth but was actually a new element, which he proposed to call ''kali''.
It was first isolated from potash, the ashes of plants, from which its name derives.
Later in the same year, Davy reported extraction of the metal sodium from a mineral derivative (caustic soda, NaOH, or lye) rather than a plant salt, by a similar technique, demonstrating that the elements, and thus the salts, are different.
In general, potassium compounds have excellent water solubility, owing to the high hydration energy of the  ion.
Although the electrolysis process was developed and used in industrial scale in the 1920s, the thermal method by reacting sodium with potassium chloride in a chemical equilibrium reaction became the dominant method in the 1950s.
The English name for the element ''potassium'' comes from the word "potash", and refers to the method of producing potassium: placing in a ''pot'' the ''ash'' of burnt wood or tree leaves, adding water, heating, and evaporating the solution.
Hydrogen reacts again with atmospheric oxygen, producing water, which reacts with the remaining potassium.
Potassium compounds are typically highly ionic and thus most of them are soluble in water.
In a pure solution, potassium slowly reacts with ammonia to form , but this reaction is accelerated by minute amounts of transition metal salts.
*The predictive or circadian system increases renal secretion of potassium during mealtime hours (e.g.
Epidemiological studies indicate that diets high in potassium can reduce the risk of hypertension and possibly stroke (by a mechanism independent of blood pressure).
Naturally occurring potassium is composed of three isotopes, of which  is radioactive.
The water of the Dead Sea is used by Israel and Jordan as a source of potash, while the concentration in normal oceans is too low for commercial production at current prices.
Potassium is formed in supernovas by nucleosynthesis from lighter atoms.
This is probably initiated by gut cell potassium receptors that detect ingested potassium and trigger vagal afferent signals to the pituitary gland.
This compound is a very strong alkali, and 1.21&nbsp;kg of it can dissolve in as little as a liter of water.
Potassium soaps from animal fats and vegetable oils were especially prized because they tend to be more water-soluble and of softer texture, and are therefore known as soft soaps.
Sodium is reabsorbed to maintain extracellular volume, osmotic pressure, and serum sodium concentration within narrow limits; potassium is reabsorbed to maintain serum potassium concentration within narrow limits.
This filtering involves about 600&nbsp;g of sodium and 33&nbsp;g of potassium.
Potassium must be conserved also, but, because the amount of potassium in the blood plasma is very small and the pool of potassium in the cells is about thirty times as large, the situation is not so critical for potassium.
Potassium is also available in tablets or capsules, which are formulated to allow potassium to leach slowly out of a matrix, since very high concentrations of potassium ion that occur adjacent to a solid tablet can injure the gastric or intestinal mucosa.
In 1809, the German physicist and chemist Ludwig Wilhelm Gilbert proposed the names ''Kalium'' for Humphry Davy's "potassium" and ''Natronium'' for Davy's "sodium".
Because of the sensitivity of potassium to water and air, reactions with other elements are possible only in an inert atmosphere such as argon gas using air-free techniques.
Since potassium is moved passively in counter flow to sodium in response to an apparent (but not actual) Donnan equilibrium, the urine can never sink below the concentration of potassium in serum except sometimes by actively excreting water at the end of the processing.
*The ion transport system moves potassium across the cell membrane using two mechanisms.
Wood-ash from fir trees was initially used as a potassium salt source for fertilizer, but, with the discovery in 1868 of mineral deposits containing potassium chloride near Staßfurt, Germany, the production of potassium-containing fertilizers began at an industrial scale.
This reaction requires only traces of water; because of this, potassium and the liquid sodium-potassium — NaK — are potent desiccants that can be used to dry solvents prior to distillation.
If potassium is still withheld, the concentration continues to fall until a severe deficiency causes eventual death.
The mineral industry refers to potassium chloride either as potash, muriate of potash, or simply MOP.
It is a soft solid with a low melting point, and can be easily cut with a knife.
The body responds to the influx of dietary potassium, which raises serum potassium levels, with a shift of potassium from outside to inside cells and an increase in potassium excretion by the kidney.
The main species in water solution are the aquated complexes  where n = 6 and 7.
Since only 1–10&nbsp;g of sodium and 1–4&nbsp;g of potassium are likely to be replaced by diet, renal filtering must efficiently reabsorb the remainder from the plasma.
Potassium chloride may be dissolved in water, but the salty/bitter taste make liquid supplements unpalatable.
The most-used method is fractional precipitation using the solubility differences of the salts at different temperatures.
The resulting explosion often starts a fire difficult to extinguish.
Potassium is excreted twice and reabsorbed three times before the urine reaches the collecting tubules.
It is widely used in respiration systems in mines, submarines and spacecraft as it takes less volume than the gaseous oxygen.
Both peroxides and superoxides may react explosively with metallic potassium.
Traces of  are found in all potassium, and it is the most common radioisotope in the human body.
It must be stored in a dry inert gas atmosphere or anhydrous mineral oil to prevent the formation of a surface layer of potassium superoxide, a pressure-sensitive explosive that detonates when scratched.
In 1814, the Swedish chemist  Berzelius advocated the name ''kalium'' for potassium, with the chemical symbol ''K''.
It is found dissolved in sea water (which is 0.04% potassium by weight), and is part of many minerals.
As a result, approximately 100 ions are forced through per second.
Agricultural fertilizers consume 95% of global potassium chemical production, and about 90% of this potassium is supplied as KCl.
The bulk metal ignites in air if heated.
The other is passive and allows potassium to leak out of the cell.
Most of the mined potassium mineral ends up as potassium chloride after processing.
During combustion, potassium forms peroxides and superoxides.
Deposits of niter (potassium nitrate) are formed by decomposition of organic material in contact with atmosphere, mostly in caves; because of the good water solubility of niter the formation of larger deposits requires special environmental conditions.
Potassium makes up about 2.6% of the weight of the earth's crust and is the seventh most abundant element in the crust.
It decays to stable  by electron capture or positron emission (11.2%) or to stable  by beta decay (88.8%).
They are used as a fertilizer in agriculture, horticulture, and hydroponic culture in the form of chloride (KCl), sulfate (), or nitrate ().
The potassium content of most plants range from 0.5% to 2% of the harvested weight of crops, conventionally expressed as amount of .
Potassium nitrate () or saltpeter is obtained from natural sources such as guano and evaporites or manufactured via the Haber process; it is the oxidant in gunpowder (black powder) and an important agricultural fertilizer.
They have a similar ionization energy, which allows for each atom to give up its sole outer electron.
Typical doses range from 10&nbsp;mmol (400&nbsp;mg), to 20&nbsp;mmol (800&nbsp;mg).
The reaction of potassium with water is dangerous because of its violent exothermic character and the production of hydrogen gas.
Other potash deposits were discovered, and by the 1960s Canada became the dominant producer.
It is also used to bleach textiles and straw, and in the tanning of leathers.
Dried apricots have the highest concentration of potassium by weight of any food.
Reagent-grade potassium metal costs about $10.00/pound ($22/kg) in 2010 when purchased by the tonne.
*The reactive feed-forward system refers to an incompletely understood system that induces renal potassium secretion in response to potassium ingestion prior to any rise in the plasma potassium.
It is mediated by a circadian oscillator in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain (central clock), which causes the kidney (peripheral clock) to secrete potassium in this rhythmic circadian fashion.
Since the kidneys are the site of potassium excretion, individuals with impaired kidney function are at risk for hyperkalemia if  dietary potassium and supplements are not restricted.
Potassium ''metal'' was first isolated in 1807 in England by Sir Humphry Davy, who derived it from caustic potash (KOH, potassium hydroxide) by electrolysis of molten KOH with the newly discovered voltaic pile.
It can also be used in reactive distillation.
A variety of prescription and over-the counter supplements are available.
Apart from dating, potassium isotopes have been used as tracers in studies of weathering and for nutrient cycling studies because potassium is a macronutrient required for life.
That they are different elements that combine with the same anions to make similar salts was suspected in 1702, and was proven in 1807 using electrolysis.
Potassium oxidizes faster than most metals and forms oxides with oxygen-oxygen bonds, as do all alkali metals except lithium.
Potassium permanganate () is an oxidizing, bleaching and purification substance and is used for production of saccharin.
Potassium chlorate () is added to matches and explosives.
*The reactive negative-feedback system refers to the system that induces renal secretion of potassium in response to a rise in the plasma potassium (potassium ingestion, shift out of cells, or intravenous infusion.)
occurs in natural potassium (and thus in some commercial salt substitutes) in sufficient quantity that large bags of those substitutes can be used as a radioactive source for classroom demonstrations.
Collectively, the first three are sometimes termed the "external potassium homeostasis system"; and the first two, the "reactive potassium homeostasis system".
It readily dissolves in liquid ammonia, up to 480 g per 1000 g of ammonia at 0&nbsp;°C.
Only a very few fertilizers contain potassium nitrate.
Elemental potassium does not occur in nature because of its high reactivity.
Potassium sodium tartrate (, Rochelle salt) is the main constituent of baking powder; it is also used in the silvering of mirrors.
The minerals best suited for dating include biotite, muscovite, metamorphic hornblende, and volcanic feldspar; whole rock samples from volcanic flows and shallow instrusives can also be dated if they are unaltered.
For example, the preparation of magnesium by this method employs potassium as the reductant:
Heavy crop production rapidly depletes the soil of potassium, and this depletion is prevented and remedied with agricultural fertilizers containing potassium, accounting for 95% of global potassium chemical production.
Carbonyl groups inside the pore on the amino acids mimic the water hydration that takes place in water solution by the nature of the electrostatic charges on four carbonyl groups inside the pore.
Because potassium reacts with water vapor in the air, it is usually stored under anhydrous mineral oil or kerosene.
All five are from prokaryotic species.
Because of this and its low first ionization energy of 418.8 kJ/mol, the potassium atom is much more likely to lose the last electron and acquire a positive charge than to gain one and acquire a negative charge (though negatively charged alkalide  ions are not impossible).
'''Potassium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''K''' (derived from Neo-Latin, ''kalium'') and atomic number&nbsp;19.
The discovery by Justus Liebig in 1840 that potassium is a necessary element for plants and that most types of soil lack potassium caused a steep rise in demand for potassium salts.
Potassium chloride and bicarbonate are used by those seeking to control hypertension.
In contrast, the second ionization energy is very high (3052 kJ/mol), because removal of two electrons breaks the stable noble gas electronic configuration (the configuration of the inert argon).
The potassium concentration in seawater is 0.39&nbsp;g/L (0.039 wt/v%), about one-quarter the concentration of sodium.
Potassium content in the plasma is tightly controlled by four basic mechanisms, which have various names and classifications.
This reaction is exothermic and releases enough heat to ignite the resulting hydrogen in the presence of oxygen, possibly explosively splashing onlookers with potassium hydroxide, which is a strong alkali that destroys living tissue and causes skin burns.
With oxygen it forms potassium peroxide, and with water potassium forms potassium hydroxide.
Foods with high potassium concentrations include yam, parsley, dried apricots, milk, chocolate, all nuts (especially almonds and pistachios), potatoes, bamboo shoots, bananas, avocados, coconut water, soybeans, and bran.
Neither elemental potassium nor potassium salts (as separate entities from other salts) were known in Roman times, and the Latin name of the element, ''kalium'', is not Classical Latin but rather neo-Latin.
Another example is potassium cobaltinitrite, , which is used as artist's pigment under the name of Aureolin or Cobalt Yellow.
The four are 1) a reactive negative-feedback system, 2) a reactive feed-forward system, 3) a predictive or circadian system, and 4) an internal  or cell membrane transport system.
Potassium is the second least dense metal after lithium.
These peroxides may react violently with organic compounds such as oils.
The activity of natural potassium is 31 Bq/g.
Potassium was the first metal that was isolated by electrolysis.
Potassium does not react with most hydrocarbons such as mineral oil or kerosene.
Potassium bisulfite () is used as a food preservative, for example in wine and beer-making (but not in meats).
Potassium homeostasis denotes the maintenance of the total body potassium content, plasma potassium level, and the ratio of the intracellular to extracellular potassium concentrations within narrow limits, in the face of pulsatile intake (meals), obligatory renal excretion, and shifts between intracellular and extracellular compartments.
Although the production of potassium and sodium metal should have shown that both are elements, it took some time before this view was universally accepted.
With no potassium intake, it is excreted at about 200&nbsp;mg per day until, in about a week, potassium in the serum declines to a mildly deficient level of 3.0–3.5&nbsp;mmol/L.
:Na + KCl → NaCl + K &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; (Thermal method)
Diets low in potassium can lead to hypertension and hypokalemia.
Potassium reacts violently with halogens and detonates in the presence of bromine.
Many common fire extinguishing agents, including water, either are ineffective or make a potassium fire worse.
The largest deposits ever found lie  below the surface of the Canadian province of Saskatchewan.
Granite for example contains 5% potassium, which is well above the average in the Earth's crust.
:  +  2 K  →  Mg  +  2 KCl
:2 KF +  → 2 K +  + 2 C &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Griesheimer process)
Orthoclase (potassium feldspar) is a common rock-forming mineral.
