Consequently, the number of private banknotes dwindled in England and Wales but proliferated in Scotland and Ireland.
Denominations were initially written on the notes at the time of issue.
With the extension of sterling to Ireland in 1825, the Bank of Ireland began issuing sterling notes, later followed by other Irish banks.
Banknotes issued by other jurisdictions are not regulated by the Bank of England; local governments use Bank of England notes as backing for local issuance by allowing them to be exchanged 1:1 at face value.
The move prompted several other currencies to be devalued against the dollar.
Following the succession of the Scottish King James VI to the English throne, a new gold coinage was introduced, including the ''spur ryal'' (15/-), the ''unite'' (20/-) and the ''rose ryal'' (30/-).
Initially the pound rocketed, moving above US$2.40, as interest rates rose in response to the monetarist policy of targeting money supply.
The Conservative Party was elected to office in 1979, on a programme of fiscal austerity.
The currency sign for the pound sign is '''£''', which is usually written with a single cross-bar (as on sterling bank notes), though a version with a double cross-bar ('''₤''') is also sometimes seen.
In 1920, the silver standard, maintained at .925 since 1552, was reduced to .500.
The abbreviations "ster."
A number of nations that do not use sterling also have currencies called the ''pound''.
The same amount was denoted by 32s 6d, 32/6, £1 12s 6d, £1/12/6.
Another argument that the Hanseatic League was the origin for both the origin of its definition and manufacture, and in its name is that the German name for the Baltic is "Ost See", or "East Sea", and from this the Baltic merchants were called "Osterlings", or "Easterlings".
The coins have the same sizes, shapes and weights as those with the old designs, which will continue to circulate.
Gold coins included the half-crown, crown, angel, half-sovereign and sovereign.
As another established source notes, the compound expression was then derived: However, the perceived narrow window of the issuance of this coin, and the fact that coin designs changed frequently in the period in question, led Philip Grierson to reject this in favour of a more complex theory.
In 1848, the 2/- ''florin'' was introduced, followed by the short-lived double florin in 1887.
The original English colonies on mainland North America were not party to the sterling area because the above-mentioned silver shortage in England coincided with these colonies' formative years.
or alternatively a farthing as the pound was already equivalent to 960 farthings which could be easily rounded up to one thousand farthings in the new system.
At the time of the penny's introduction, it weighed 22.5 troy grains of fine silver (32 tower grains; about 1.5 g), indicating that the Mercian pound weighed 5,400 troy grains (the Mercian pound became the basis of the tower pound, which weighed 5,400 troy grains, equivalent to 7,680 tower grains, about 350g).
These currencies do not have ISO 4217 codes so "GBP" is usually used to represent all of them; informal codes are used where the difference is important.
Silver coins were replaced by those in cupro-nickel in 1947 and by the 1960s the silver coins were rarely seen.
However, the subject was always politically controversial, and the UK negotiated an opt-out on this issue.
For example, the gold sovereign was legal tender in Canada despite the use of the Canadian dollar.
By 5 November 2009, some £175 billion had been injected using quantitative easing and the effectiveness of the process remained less successful in the long term.
Those who had argued for a lower GBP/DM exchange rate were vindicated as the cheaper pound encouraged exports and contributed to the economic prosperity of the 1990s.
: ''£'' or ''L'') in 1489.
the pound weight of Standard silver was to contain thirty shillings in Tale, or 1-1/2 pound Sterling, therefore the pound Sterling reduced to 2/3 of a pound weight, or 8 oz.
The penny swiftly spread throughout the other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms and became the standard coin of what was to become England.
In 1552, a new silver coinage was introduced, struck in sterling silver.
However, silver remained the legal basis for sterling until 1816.
It is subdivided into 100 ''pence'' (singular: ''penny'', abbreviated: ''p'').
'Black Wednesday' saw interest rates jump from 10% to 15% in an unsuccessful attempt to stop the pound from falling below the ERM limits.
Both began to issue paper money.
In some parts, it was used alongside local currencies.
As the central bank of the United Kingdom which has been delegated authority by the government, the Bank of England sets the monetary policy for the British pound by controlling the amount of money in circulation.
and land for their Kontor, the Steelyard of London, which by the 1340s was also called "Easterlings Hall", or Esterlingeshalle.
The pound Sterling was adjusted in weight several more times thereafter.
The pound sterling is the world's oldest currency still in use and which has been in continuous use since its inception.
Irish independence reduced the number of Irish banks issuing sterling notes to five operating in Northern Ireland.
By the 1950s, coins of Kings George III, George IV and William IV had disappeared from circulation, but coins (at least the penny) bearing the head of any British king or queen from Queen Victoria onwards could be found in circulation.
Copper halfpenny coins followed in the reign of Charles I.
This caused the pound to appreciate against other major currencies and, with the US dollar depreciating at the same time, the pound hit a 15-year high against the US dollar on 18 April 2007, reaching US$2 the day before, for the first time since 1992.
The Bank is now responsible for setting its base rate of interest so as to keep inflation in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) very close to 2%.
Fixed in weight at  to the troy pound from 1670, this coin's value varied considerably until 1717, when it was fixed at 21 shillings (21/-, 1.05 pounds).
£20 Bank of England notes were reintroduced in 1970, followed by £50 in 1981.
As a member of the European Union, the United Kingdom could have adopted the euro as its currency.
The highest denomination issued by the Irish banks was £100.
Silversmiths had always regarded coinage as a source of raw material, already government verified for fineness.
Elizabeth's reign also saw the introduction of the horse-drawn screw press to produce the first "milled" coins.
are sometimes used.
The symbol for the penny is "p"; hence an amount such as 50p (£0.50) properly pronounced "fifty pence" is more colloquially, quite often, pronounced "fifty pee" /fɪfti: pi:/.
or, more commonly, "5/–".
Until 1800, these circulated at a rate of 4/9 for 8 reales.
on the words "Bank of England"); watermarks; embedded metallic thread; holograms; and fluorescent ink visible only under UV lamps.
James Callaghan came to office in 1976.
However, the country was forced to withdraw from the system on "Black Wednesday" (16 September 1992) as Britain's economic performance made the exchange rate unsustainable.
In 1816, the gold standard was adopted officially, with the silver standard reduced to 66 shillings (66/-, £3 6s), rendering silver coins a "token" issue (i.e., not containing their value in precious metal).
and spoken as "three and six" (except for "1/1," "2/1" etc., which were spoken as "one and a penny," "two and a penny," etc.).
A common slang term for the pound sterling or pound is ''quid'', which is singular and plural, except in the common phrase "Quids in!"
Giants and titans are used only within the banking system.
The British Crown dependencies of Guernsey and Jersey produce their own local issues of sterling: the "Guernsey pound" and the "Jersey pound".
The Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition government (2010-2015) ruled out joining the euro for that parliamentary term.
However, the Irish pound continued to exist and was not replaced by sterling until January 1826.
There is apparent convergence of opinion regarding the origin of the term "pound sterling", toward its derivation from the name of a small Norman silver coin, and away from its association with Easterlings (Germanic traders) or other etymologies.
In 1969, the 10/- note was replaced by the 50p coin as part of the preparation for decimalisation.
At present, the oldest circulating coins in the UK are the 1p and 2p copper coins introduced in 1971.
British merchants sent silver abroad in payments whilst goods for export were paid for with gold.
This was abandoned on 21 September 1931, during the Great Depression, and sterling suffered an initial devaluation of some 25%.
It was expected that the process would occur over a period of three months with results only likely in the long term.
The pound appreciated in early 2009 reaching a peak against the euro in mid-July of €1.17.
The pound sterling is the world's oldest currency still in use.
As in the Carolingian system, 240 pennies weighed 1 pound (corresponding to Charlemagne's ''libra''), with the shilling corresponding to Charlemagne's ''solidus'' and equal to 12d.
(Bank of England 10/- and £1 notes were legal tender, as were Scottish banknotes, during World War II under the Currency (Defence) Act 1939, repealed on 1 January 1946.)
Technically, every other EU nation must eventually sign up.
In the summer of 1966, with the value of the pound falling in the currency markets, exchange controls were tightened by the Wilson government.
In 1260, Henry III granted them a charter of protection.
In November 1976 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced the conditions for a loan, including deep cuts in public expenditure.
Financial markets were beginning to believe the pound was overvalued, and in April that year ''The Wall Street Journal'' advised the sale of sterling investments in the face of high taxes, in a story that ended with "goodbye, Great Britain.
The first base metal coins were also introduced: tin and copper farthings.
During the English Civil War, a number of siege coinages were produced, often in unusual denominations.
Following the introduction of the £1 coin in 1983, Bank of England £1 notes were withdrawn in 1988.
A giant is a one million pound note, and a titan is a one hundred million pound bank note, of which there are about 40.
The pound did not join the Second European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II) after the euro was created.
J.B. Smith, MP for Sterling Burghs, raised the issue of full decimalisation again in Parliament in 1853, resulting in the Chancellor of the Exchequer, William Gladstone, announcing soon afterwards that 'The great question of a decimal coinage was now under serious consideration.'
From 1727, the Royal Bank of Scotland also issued notes.
This debasement was halted in 1552, and a new silver coinage was introduced, including coins for 1d, 2d, 3d, 4d and 6d, 1/-, 2/6 and 5/-.
Tower.By an act of 13 Henry IV.
The symbol for the penny was "''d''.
Fearful of mass forgery by the Nazis (see Operation Bernhard), all notes for £10 and above ceased production, leaving the bank to issue only 10/-, £1 and £5 notes.
The result was a coin copper in appearance, but relatively pale in colour.
Various coin denominations had, and in some cases continue to have, special names—such as crown, farthing, sovereign and guinea.
The ''guinea'' was introduced in 1663, soon followed by the , 2 and 5 guinea coins.
The reign of Henry VII saw the introduction of two important coins: the shilling (abbr.
As a consequence, silver flowed out of the country and gold flowed in, leading to a situation where Great Britain was effectively on a gold standard.
£100 (produced from 2015)
The idea of replacing the pound with the euro was always controversial with the British public, partly because of the pound's identity as a symbol of British sovereignty and because it would, according to many critics, have led to suboptimal interest rates, harming the British economy.
The ISO 4217 currency code is '''GBP'''.
The new designs were issued gradually into circulation, starting in summer 2008.
Bank of England notes are generally accepted in the Falklands and Gibraltar, but for example Scottish and Northern Irish notes are not.
It was customary to specify some prices (for example professional fees and auction prices for works of art) in guineas (one guinea was 21 shillings) although guinea coins were no longer in use.
During the American war of independence and Napoleonic wars, Bank of England notes were legal tender and their value floated relative to gold.
He was immediately told the economy was facing huge problems, according to documents released in 2006 by the National Archives.
Both banks issued some notes denominated in guineas as well as pounds.
1344 also saw the establishment of a gold coinage with the introduction (after the failed gold florin) of the ''noble'' worth six shillings and eight pence (6/8) (i.e.
Inflation concerns in the UK led the Bank of England to raise interest rates in late 2006 and 2007.
The pound sterling was equal to 4.85 United States dollars, 5.25 Canadian dollars, 12.10 Dutch guilders, 26.28 French francs (or equivalent currencies in the Latin Monetary Union), 20.43 German Marks or 24.02 Austro-Hungarian Krones.
(Only the year before, it had been $4.86.)
Due to the widespread export of silver in the 18th century, the production of silver coins gradually came to a halt, with the half crown and crown not issued after the 1750s, the 6d and 1/- stopping production in the 1780s.
These included Australia, Barbados, British West Africa, Cyprus, Fiji, the Irish Free State, Jamaica, New Zealand, South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.
In 1826, banks at least  from London were given permission to issue their own paper money.
However, in 1279, the ''groat'', worth 4d, was introduced, with the half groat following in 1344.
The American Nellie Bly carried Bank of England notes on her 1889-1890 trip around the world in 72 days.
Aggravating this outflow was the fact that silver was the only commodity accepted by China for exporting goods during this period.
: ''s''; known as the ''testoon'') in 1487 and the pound (known as the ''sovereign'', abbr.
Before decimalisation, a handful of change might have contained coins 100 or more years old, bearing any of five monarchs' heads.
", from the French ''denier'', from the Latin ''denarius'' (the solidus and denarius were Roman coins).
The exchange rate fell to DM2.20.
The "leave" result of the 2016 UK referendum on EU membership caused a major decline in the pound against other world currencies as the future of international trade relationships and domestic political leadership became unclear.
Callaghan was told there were three possible outcomes: a disastrous free fall in sterling, an internationally unacceptable siege economy, or a deal with key allies to prop up the pound while painful economic reforms were put in place.
3 nobles to the pound), together with the half and quarter noble.
During the reigns of Henry VIII and Edward VI, the silver coinage was drastically debased, although the pound was redefined to the troy pound of  in 1526.
Under continuing economic pressure, and despite months of denials that it would do so, on 19 September 1949 the government devalued the pound by 30.5% to $2.80.
Sterling is also the third most-held reserve currency in global reserves (about 4%).
In an attempt to resume stability, a variation on the gold standard was reintroduced in 1925, under which the currency was fixed to gold at its pre-war peg, although people were only able to exchange their currency for gold bullion, rather than for coins.
A mixed sum of shillings and pence, such as 3 shillings and 6 pence, was written as "3/6" or "3''s''.
In the 27th year of Edward III, the pound Sterling was now but 4/5 of the pound weight, or 9 oz, 12 dwts.
The silver coinage consisted of denominations of 1d, 2d, 3d, 4d and 6d, 1/-, 2/6 and 5/-.
As a result of equitable trade (and rather less equitable piracy), the Spanish milled dollar became the most common coin within the English colonies.
The Bank of England was founded in 1694, followed by the Bank of Scotland a year later.
£5 (post-1990 crown)
By the 19th century the pound sterling was widely accepted outside Britain.
Struck in 22‑carat gold, it contained  of gold and replaced the guinea as the standard British gold coin without changing the gold standard.
The Bank of England introduced £5 polymer banknotes in September 2016.
From mid-2003 to mid-2007, the pound/euro rate remained range-bound (within ± 5%) of €1.45.
The conversion rate had long been thirteen Irish pounds to twelve pounds sterling.
In 1544, a silver coinage was issued containing just one third silver and two thirds copper—equating to .333 silver, or 33.3% pure.
For this reason, former Prime Minister Edward Heath referred to Lawson as a "one club golfer").
The term may have come via Italian immigrants from "scudo", the name for a number of coins used in Italy until the 19th century; or from Latin 'quid' via the common phrase ''quid pro quo,'' literally, "what for what," or, figuratively, "An equal exchange or substitution".
The pound and the euro fluctuate in value against one another, although there may be correlation between movements in their respective exchange rates with other currencies such as the US dollar.
In 1663, a new gold coinage was introduced based on the 22 carat fine guinea.
Forex brokers are sometimes referred to as "cable dealers".
Commemorative £5 and 25p (crown) coins, rarely seen in circulation, are legal tender, as are the bullion coins issued by the Mint.
the Australian pound).
Prior to decimalisation, the pound was divided into 20 shillings and each shilling into 12 pence, making 240 pence to the pound.
The full, official name, pound sterling, (plural: ''pounds sterling'') is used mainly in formal contexts and also when it is necessary to distinguish the United Kingdom currency from other currencies with the same name.
Formal parliamentary proposals to decimalise sterling were first made in 1824 when Sir John Wrottesley, MP for Staffordshire, asked in the British House of Commons whether consideration had been given to decimalise the currency.
Merchants in England generally do not accept Jersey, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Gibraltar, and Falkland notes, but Isle of Man notes are generally accepted in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The Bank of England produces notes named "giant" and "titan".
Otherwise the term ''pound'' is normally used.
In 1988, Margaret Thatcher's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, decided that the pound should "shadow" the West German Deutsche Mark, with the unintended result of a rapid rise in inflation as the economy boomed due to inappropriately low interest rates.
It copied the ''denarius'' of the new currency system of Charlemagne's Frankish Empire.
During the time of Henry III, the pound Sterling equaled the pound weight Tower.
Accordingly, and for the first time, the Governor had to write publicly to the government explaining why inflation was more than one percentage point higher than its target.
The pound sterling is also referred to as "cable" amongst forex traders.
This was the first time in the United Kingdom's history that this measure had been used, although the Bank's Governor Mervyn King suggested it was not an experiment.
At various times, the pound sterling was commodity money or bank notes backed by silver or gold, but it is currently fiat money, backed only by the economy in the areas where it is accepted.
Sterling silver is harder than the 0.999 (99.9%) fine silver that was traditionally used and so sterling silver coins did not wear down as rapidly as fine silver coins.
Towards  the end of the Second World War, various attempts to decimalise the pound sterling in the United Kingdom were made, until in 1966 the British government decided to include in the Queen's Speech a plan to convert the pound into a decimal currency.
Britain owed £850 million (£ as of 2015), mostly to the United States, with interest costing the country some 40% of all government spending.
The last English private banknotes were issued in 1921.
This included Hong Kong from 1863 to 1866; Cyprus from 1955 until 1960 (and continued on the island as the division of the Cypriot pound until 1983); and the Palestine Mandate from 1926 until 1948.
The word "new" was omitted from coins minted after 1981.
See Coins of the pound sterling and List of British coins and banknotes for details.
Three printing techniques are involved:  offset litho, intaglio and letterpress; and incorporate a total of 85 specialized inks.
Unlike banknotes which have separate issuers in Scotland and Northern Ireland, all UK coins are issued by the Royal Mint, which is an independent enterprise (wholly owned by the Treasury) which also mints coins for other countries.
In 1961, 1964 and 1966, the pound came under renewed pressure since the exchange rate against the dollar was considered too high.
However, they are maintained at a fixed exchange rate by their respective governments, and Bank of England notes have been made legal tender on the islands, forming a sort of one-way de facto currency union.
Occasionally, the abbreviation "UKP" is used but this is non-standard because the ISO 3166 country code for United Kingdom is GB (see Terminology of the British Isles).
However, in 1158, a new coinage was introduced by King Henry II (known as the ''Tealby penny'') which was struck from 0.925 (92.5%) silver.
In 1855, the notes were converted to being entirely printed, with denominations of £5, £10, £20, £50, £100, £200, £300, £500 and £1000 issued.
In April 2008, an extensive redesign of the coinage was unveiled.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many other countries adopted the gold standard.
Following German re-unification in 1990, the reverse held true, as high borrowing costs to fund Eastern reconstruction, a need exacerbated by the political choice to make the Ostmark equivalent to the Deutsche Mark (DM), meant rates in other countries shadowing the DM, especially the UK, were far too high relative to domestic circumstances, leading to a housing decline and recession.
The Bank of Scotland began issuing notes in 1695.
The gold standard was suspended at the outbreak of the war in 1914, with Bank of England and Treasury notes becoming legal tender.
Sterling circulated in much of the British Empire.
However, the penny's weight was reduced to , meaning that 1 troy pound of sterling silver produced 60 shillings of coins.
Denmark and the UK have opt-outs from entry to the euro.
However, after the end of the war the country was indebted.
The early pennies were struck from fine silver (as pure as was available).
Product then made solely from melted coins would be found wanting when the silversmith took his wares to the Assay Office, thus discouraging the melting of coins.
Until decimalisation, amounts were stated in pounds, shillings, and pence, with various widely understood notations.
After 1800, a rate of 5/- for 8 reales was used.
HM Treasury has reserve powers to give orders to the committee "if they are required in the public interest and by extreme economic circumstances" but such orders must be endorsed by Parliament within 28 days.
The inflation rate per annum rose in following years, reaching 5.2% (based on Consumer Price Index) in September 2011, then decreased to around 2.5% in the following year.
Bank of England, Scottish, Northern Irish, Channel Islands, Isle of Man, Gibraltar, and Falkland banknotes may be offered anywhere in the United Kingdom, although there is no obligation to accept them as a means of payment, and acceptance varies.
Currently, the UK's annual government deficit, as a percentage of the GDP, is above the defined threshold.
It at first appreciated a little, rising to almost $2.65 in March 1972, from $2.42 when it had been fixed.
As a result of this, on 15 February 1971, the UK decimalised the pound sterling, replacing the shilling and penny with a single subdivision, the new penny.
Parties can alternatively settle a debt by other means with mutual consent.
From 1745, the notes were printed in denominations between £20 and £1000, with any odd shillings added by hand.
The silver penny (plural: ''pence''; abbreviation: ''d'') was the principal and often the only coin in circulation from the 8th century until the 13th century.
These circulated until 1928 when they were replaced by Bank of England notes.
The pound and many other currencies continued to appreciate against the dollar; sterling hit a 26-year high of US$2.1161 on 7 November 2007 as the dollar fell worldwide.
, £1 was worth US$1.32, €1.19, ¥140, CHF 1.30, A$1.73, C$1.71 or INR 88.59.
In December 2008, the results of a BBC poll of 1000 people suggested that 71% would vote no to the euro, 23% would vote yes to joining the European single currency, while 6% said they were unsure.
The Bank of England is the central bank for the pound sterling, issuing its own coins and banknotes, and regulating issuance of banknotes by private banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
the South African pound), whilst others deviated from parity after the end of the gold standard (e.g.
