According to Chen and Ravallion, about 1.76 billion people in developing world lived ''above'' $1.25 per day and 1.9 billion people lived ''below'' $1.25 per day in 1981.
It is speculated that, flush with money, orphanages are increasing and push for children to join even though demographic data show that even the poorest extended families usually take in children whose parents have died.
Mobile banking utilizes the wide availability of mobile phones to address the problem of the heavy regulation and costly maintenance of saving accounts.
The main poverty line used in the OECD and the European Union is based on "economic distance", a level of income set at 60% of the median household income.
Net worth minus home equity is the same except it does not include home ownership in asset calculations.
In Rajan's view the main cause of increasing gap between the high income and low income earners, was lack of equal access to high class education for the latter.
Some scholars argue that the World Bank method sets the bar too high, others argue it is low.
As it was indicated above the reduction of poverty results from religion, but also can result from solidarity.
Poverty is often understood to be an essential element of renunciation in religions such as Buddhism (only for monks, not for lay persons) and Jainism, whilst in Roman Catholicism it is one of the evangelical counsels.
In one survey, 67% of children from disadvantaged inner cities said they had witnessed a serious assault, and 33% reported witnessing a homicide.
Microsavings are designs to make savings products available for the poor, who make small deposits.
This  leaves the ideal of ''eradicating poverty through profits'' or with a ''good business sense—not a sense of do-gooding'' rather questionable.
The collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in large declines in GDP per capita, of about 30 to 35% between 1990 and the trough year of 1998 (when it was at its minimum).
Poor people spend a greater portion of their budgets on food than wealthy people.
However, researchers have gathered evidence that suggest that values are not as deeply ingrained and that changing economic opportunities explain most of the movement into and out of poverty, as opposed to shifts in values.
Additionally, migration from poorer countries resulted in $328 billion sent from richer to poorer countries in 2010, more than double the $120 billion in official aid flows from OECD members.
Funds from aid and natural resources are often sent by government individuals for money laundering to overseas banks which insist on bank secrecy, instead of spending on the poor.
Those living in poverty suffer lower life expectancy.
For children with low resources, the risk factors are similar to others such as juvenile delinquency rates, higher levels of teenage pregnancy, and the economic dependency upon their low-income parent or parents.
José Antonio Ocampo, professor at Columbia University and former finance minister of Colombia, and Magdalena Sepúlveda Carmona, former UN Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights, argue that global tax reform is integral to human development and fighting poverty, as corporate tax avoidance has disproportionately impacted those mired in poverty, noting that "the human impact is devastatingly real.
Australia is one of the world's wealthier nations.
Various poverty reduction strategies are broadly categorized here based on whether they make more of the basic human needs available or whether they increase the disposable income needed to purchase those needs.
The proportion of the developing world's population living in extreme economic poverty fell from 28 percent in 1990 to 21 percent in 2001.
Europe and Central Asia
Developing countries' debt service to banks and governments from richer countries can constrain government spending on the poor.
The effects of poverty may also be causes as listed above, thus creating a "poverty cycle" operating across multiple levels, individual, local, national and global.
Mass production of goods in places such as rapidly industrializing China has made what were once considered luxuries, such as vehicles and computers, inexpensive and thus accessible to many who were otherwise too poor to afford them.
Enrichment through personalized, increasingly complex activities".
Intangible assets are simply the access to credit, social capital, cultural capital, political capital, and human capital.
Intensive farming often leads to a vicious cycle of exhaustion of soil fertility and decline of agricultural yields.
This is often a process that begins in primary school for some less fortunate children.
The world's population increased over the next 25 years.
Of more importance is the modernization of agriculture, such as fertilizers, to provide enough yield to feed the population.
It is a multifaceted concept, which includes social, economic, and political elements.
Improving road and transportation infrastructure helps solve this major bottleneck.
In 1979, British sociologist, Peter Townsend published his famous definition, "individuals ... can be said to be in poverty when they lack the resources to obtain the types of diet, participate in the activities and have the living conditions and amenities which are customary, or are at least widely encouraged or approved, in the societies to which they belong (page 31).".
Each nation has its own threshold for absolute poverty line; in the United States, for example, the absolute poverty line was US$15.15 per day in 2010 (US$22,000 per year for a family of four), while in India it was US$1.0 per day and in China the absolute poverty line was US$0.55 per day, each on PPP basis in 2010.
Marc Gunther states that "The bottom-of-the-pyramid (BOP) market leader, arguably, is Unilever ... Its signature BOP product is Pureit, a countertop water-purification system sold in India, Africa and Latin America.
* Precarious livelihoods
Income grants are argued to be vastly more efficient in extending basic needs to the poor than subsidizing supplies whose effectiveness in poverty alleviation is diluted by the non-poor who enjoy the same subsidized prices.
In the early 1990s some of the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia experienced a sharp drop in income.
The report presented the likely impacts of present day, 2&nbsp;°C and 4&nbsp;°C warming on agricultural production, water resources, coastal ecosystems and cities across Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and South East Asia.
Mobility statistics supply additional information about the fraction who leave the poverty level.
After the industrial revolution, mass production in factories made production goods increasingly less expensive and more accessible.
Similar trends can be observed for literacy, access to clean water and electricity and basic consumer items.
But in the view of Friedman ''the social responsibility of business is to increase its profits'' only, thus, it needs to be examined whether business in BoP markets is capable of achieving the dual objective of ''making a profit while serving the poorest of consumers and contributing to development''?
It means insecurity, powerlessness and exclusion of individuals, households and communities.
Safe, predictable, stable environments.
The definition varies from place to place and time to time.
This results in a lack of incentive to maintain delivery systems, leading to losses from leaks annually that are enough for 200 million people.
According to Rangan "For business, the bulk of emerging markets worldwide is at the bottom of the pyramid so it makes good business sense—not a sense of do-gooding—to go after it.
Life expectancy has greatly increased in the developing world since World War II and is starting to close the gap to the developed world.
Nevertheless, given the current economic model, built on GDP, it would take 100 years to bring the world's poorest up to the previous poverty line of $1.25 a day.
Distressed securities funds, also known as ''vulture funds'', buy up the debt of poor nations cheaply and then sue countries for the full value of the debt plus interest which can be ten or 100 times what they paid.
A basic income (or negative income tax) is a system of social security, that periodically provides each citizen, rich or poor, with a sum of money that is sufficient to live on.
Rather, it is determined by the purchasing power parity rate, which would look at how much local currency is needed to buy the same things that a dollar could buy in the United States.
The Great Smoky Mountains Study was a ten-year study that was unexpectedly able to demonstrate this.
In Africa, it costs more to move fertilizer from an African seaport 60 miles inland than to ship it from the United States to Africa because of sparse, low-quality roads, leading to fertilizer costs two to six times the world average.
In the United Kingdom, the second Cameron ministry came under attack for their redefinition of poverty; poverty is no longer classified by a family's income, but as to whether a family is in work or not.
Responding to basic needs can be restricted by constraints on government's ability to deliver services, such as corruption, tax avoidance, debt and loan conditionalities and by the brain drain of health care and educational professionals.
Illicit capital flight from the developing world is estimated at ten times the size of aid it receives and twice the debt service it pays, with one estimate that most of Africa would be developed if the taxes owed were paid.
Poverty reduction is a major goal and issue for many international organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank.
This also leads to a lack of incentive to invest in expanding the network, resulting in much of the poor population being unconnected to the network.
).Wealth is measured in three forms: net worth, net worth minus home equity, and liquid assets.
"No objective definition of poverty exists...
The share of the world's population living in absolute poverty fell from 43% in 1981 to 14% in 2011.
Relative poverty views poverty as socially defined and dependent on social context, hence relative poverty is a measure of income inequality.
Poverty can also be reduced as an improved economic policy is developed by the governing authorities to facilitate a more equitable distribution of the nation's wealth.
In Africa, if current trends of soil degradation continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to United Nations University's Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.
These different poverty lines make data comparison between each nation's official reports qualitatively difficult.
For example, a court in Jersey ordered Congo to pay an American speculator $100 million in 2010.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, as primary holders of developing countries' debt, attach structural adjustment conditionalities in return for loans which are generally geared toward loan repayment with austerity measures such as the elimination of state subsidies and the privatization of state services.
* Weak community organizations
"Once economic development has progressed beyond a certain minimum level, the rub of the poverty problem – from the point of view of both the poor individual and of the societies in which they live – is not so much the effects of poverty in any absolute form but the effects of the contrast, daily perceived, between the lives of the poor and the lives of those around them.
Instruction in the US educational system, as well as in most other countries, tends to be geared towards those students who come from more advantaged backgrounds.
Greater access to markets brings more income to the poor.
The loss of basic needs providers emigrating from impoverished countries has a damaging effect.
Wilson calculated that Earth would lose half its higher life forms by 2100 if the current rate of human disruption continued.
Asset poverty is an economic and social condition that is more persistent and prevalent than income poverty.
This self-invited poverty (or giving up pleasures) is different from the one caused by economic imbalance.
In Sub-Saharan Africa extreme poverty went up from 41 percent in 1981 to 46 percent in 2001, which combined with growing population increased the number of people living in extreme poverty from 231 million to 318 million.
Latin America and the Caribbean
It's saving lives, but it's not making money for shareholders."
Most of this improvement has occurred in East and South Asia.
Cash transfers can be done between phones and issued back in cash with a small commission, making remittances safer.
Poverty may be defined as either absolute or relative.
Tangible assets most closely resemble liquid assets in that they include stocks, bonds, property, natural resources, and hard assets not in the form of real estate.
It means not having enough to feed and clothe a family, not having a school or clinic to go to, not having the land on which to grow one’s food or a job to earn one’s living, not having access to credit.
With cars and other appliances, the wealthiest 20% of Egypt uses about 93% of the country's fuel subsidies.
Strategies of increasing income to make basic needs more affordable typically include welfare, economic freedoms and providing financial services.
Studies have shown that poverty changes the personalities of children who live in it.
It reduced it to 0.5–0.6% in the 1950s and to .06% today while spending less each year on maternal health because it learned what worked and what did not.
World Bank data shows that the percentage of the population living in households with consumption or income per person below the poverty line has decreased in each region of the world since 1990:
There are several definitions of poverty depending on the context of the situation it is placed in, and the views of the person giving the definition.
The group stated that the $240 billion added to the fortunes of the world's richest billionaires in 2012 was enough to end extreme poverty four times over.
Some strategies such as building roads can both bring access to various basic needs, such as fertilizer or healthcare from urban areas, as well as increase incomes, by bringing better access to urban markets.
In a nine-year period ending in 2005 for the U.S., 50% of the poorest quintile transitioned to a higher quintile.
One third of deaths – some 18 million people a year or 50,000 per day – are due to poverty-related causes.
In practice, payments determined by complex iris scanning are used by war-torn Congo and Afghanistan, while India is phasing out its fuel subsidies in favor of direct transfers.
United Nations: Fundamentally, poverty is the inability of having choices and opportunities, a violation of human dignity.
Almost 90% of maternal deaths during childbirth occur in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, compared to less than 1% in the developed world.
Those labeled as poor in 1995 would have had "a higher standard of living than many labeled not poor" in 1965.
Experts and child advocates maintain that orphanages are expensive and often harm children's development by separating them from their families and that it would be more effective and cheaper to aid close relatives who want to take in the orphans.
Equally western society have become more complex with ethnic diversity, multi-culturalism and life-style choices raising the possibility that a single concept of poverty as conceived in the past might no longer apply (Ferragina et al.
Usually, this would translate to less local currency than the exchange rate in poorer countries as the United States is a relatively more expensive country.
Zambia began offering services, such as free health care even while overwhelming the health care infrastructure, because of savings that resulted from a 2005 round of debt relief.
In 1964 in a joint committee economic President's report in the United States, Republicans endorsed the concept of relative poverty.
Every year nearly 11 million children living in poverty die before their fifth birthday.
Better education for both men and women, and more control of their lives, reduces population growth due to family planning.
Oxfam has called for an international movement to end extreme wealth concentration as a significant step towards ameliorating global poverty.
Poverty often drastically affects children's success in school.
Given that there are no universal principles by which to determine the minimum threshold of participation equating to full membership of society, Townsend argued that the appropriate measure would necessarily be relative to any particular cultural context.
Child mortality has decreased in every developing region of the world.
In 2005, after extensive studies of cost of living across the world, The World Bank raised the measure for global poverty line to reflect the observed higher cost of living.
In 2011, India got $52 billion from its diaspora, more than it took in foreign direct investment.
Relative poverty measures are used as official poverty rates by the European Union, UNICEF, and the OEDC.
World Bank: Poverty is pronounced deprivation in well-being, and comprises many dimensions.
In October 2015, they reset it to $1.90 a day.
Among some individuals, poverty is considered a necessary or desirable condition, which must be embraced to reach certain spiritual, moral, or intellectual states.
Absolute poverty, extreme poverty, or abject poverty is "a condition characterized by severe deprivation of basic human needs, including food, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, health, shelter, education and information.
The proportion of the world's population living in countries where per-capita food supplies are less than 2,200 calories (9,200 kilojoules) per day decreased from 56% in the mid-1960s to below 10% by the 1990s.
A Global Witness report asked for more action from Western banks as they have proved capable of stanching the flow of funds linked to terrorism.
In Australia the OECD poverty would equate to a "disposable income of less than $358 per week for a single adult (higher for larger households to take account of their greater costs).
Solutions include corporate "country-by-country reporting" where corporations disclose activities in each country and thereby prohibit the use of tax havens where no effective economic activity occurs.
According to an Australian scientist Professor Frank Fenner, humans will not be able to survive the population explosion and “unbridled consumption,” and will become extinct, perhaps within a century, along with many other species.
Such costly barriers favor big firms at the expense of small enterprises, where most jobs are created.
He suggested that in each society there should be an empirically determinable ‘breakpoint’ within the income distribution below which participation of individuals collapses, providing a scientific basis for fixing a poverty line and determining the extent of poverty (Ferragina et al.
Fortification with micronutrients was ranked the most cost effective aid strategy by the Copenhagen Consensus.
Absolute poverty or '''destitution''' refers to the lack of means necessary to meet basic needs such as food, clothing and shelter.
In addition, the fact that women are more likely to be caregivers, regardless of income level, to either the generations before or after them, exacerbates the burdens of their poverty.
According to experts, many women become victims of trafficking, the most common form of which is prostitution, as a means of survival and economic desperation.
Peter Townsend transformed the conception of poverty, viewing it not simply as lack of income but as the configuration of the economic conditions that prevent people from being full members of the society (Townsend, 1979 ; Ferragina et al.
Families and society who submit low levels of investment in the education and development of less fortunate children end up with less favorable results for the children who see a life of parental employment reduction and low wages.
Infectious diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis can perpetuate poverty by diverting health and economic resources from investment and productivity; malaria decreases GDP growth by up to 1.3% in some developing nations and AIDS decreases African growth by 0.3–1.5% annually.
Estimates show that growth in the agricultural productivity of small farmers is, on average, at least twice as effective in benefiting the poorest half of a country’s population as growth generated in nonagricultural sectors.
The initial industrial revolution led to high economic growth and eliminated mass absolute poverty in what is now considered the developed world.
It has been argued by some academics that the neoliberal policies promoted by global financial institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank are actually exacerbating both inequality and poverty.
Research has found that there is a high risk of educational underachievement for children who are from low-income housing circumstances.
Net worth consists of all the aspects mentioned above.
This usually involves a network of agents of mostly shopkeepers, instead of bank branches, would take deposits in cash and translate these onto a virtual account on customers' phones.
Most of the children living in institutions around the world have a surviving parent or close relative, and they most commonly entered orphanages because of poverty.
East Asia and Pacific
This idea has received theoretical support from scholars and extensive testimony from people experiencing poverty across the globe (Walker 2014 ).
It means susceptibility to violence, and it often implies living in marginal or fragile environments, without access to clean water or sanitation.
Oxfam argues that the "concentration of resources in the hands of the top 1% depresses economic activity and makes life harder for everyone else - particularly those at the bottom of the economic ladder."
The absolute poverty measure trends noted above are supported by human development indicators, which have also been improving.
He considered that the moderation implied in the former favors solidarity, and is a necessary condition so as to fight effectively to eradicate the abuse of the latter.
A 'dollar a day', in nations that do not use the U.S. dollar as currency, does not translate to living a day on the equivalent amount of local currency as determined by the exchange rate.
The social aspects of poverty may include lack of access to information, education, health care, social capital or political power.
Participation and consumption have become ever more crucial mechanisms through which people establish and communicate their identity and position in society, increasing the premium attached to resources needed to participate (Giddens 1991 ).
Infectious diseases continue to blight the lives of the poor across the world.
Researchers have developed a name for areas like this: an urban war zone is a poor, crime-laden district in which deteriorated, violent, even war-like conditions and underfunded, largely ineffective schools promote inferior academic performance, including irregular attendance and disruptive or non-compliant classroom behavior.
Because of poverty, "Students from low-income families are 2.4 times more likely to drop out than middle-income kids, and over 10 times more likely than high-income peers to drop out"
Usually, relative poverty is measured as the percentage of the population with income less than some fixed proportion of median income.
Considerable resources are diverted on costly court cases.
Even with new products, such as better seeds, or greater volumes of them, such as industrial production, the poor still require access to these products.
Harvard biologist E.O.
Approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded.
Such social exclusion can be minimized through strengthened connections with the mainstream, such as through the provision of relational care to those who are experiencing poverty.
It was $62.70 a week, which was the disposable income required to support the basic needs of a family of two adults and two dependent children at the time.
Poor children have a great deal less healthcare and this ultimately results in many absences from the academic year.
It has been reported that only 1% of the world population  controls 50% of the wealth today, and the other 99% is having access to the remaining 50% only, and the gap has sharply increased in the recent past.
An African Union report estimates that about 30% of sub-Saharan Africa's GDP has been moved to tax havens.
A guaranteed minimum income ensures that every citizen will be able to purchase a desired level of basic needs.
Lipton defined ultra-poverty as receiving less than 80 percent of minimum caloric intake whilst spending more than 80% of income on food.
Nations do not necessarily need wealth to gain health.
* Limited capabilities
Poverty reduces the ability of people to participate in society, effectively denying them full citizenship (as suggested by T.H.
Those who live in poverty have also been shown to have a far greater likelihood of having or incurring a disability within their lifetime.
A report published in 2013 by the World Bank, with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network, found that climate change was likely to hinder future attempts to reduce poverty.
Those living in poverty suffer disproportionately from hunger or even starvation and disease.
Initial fears that the program would encourage families to stay at home rather than work to collect benefits have proven to be unfounded.
For example, one study finds that in a sixteen-year period (1975 to 1991 in the U.S.) only 5% of those in the lower fifth of the income level were still at that level, while 95% transitioned to a higher income category.
Thus, payment schemes such as lend-to-own programs are promoted and up to 14% of Kenyan households use solar as their primary energy source.
Those in poverty place overwhelming importance on having a safe place to save money, much more so than receiving loans.
Analysis of social aspects of poverty links conditions of scarcity to aspects of the distribution of resources and power in a society and recognizes that poverty may be a function of the diminished "capability" of people to live the kinds of lives they value.
The impacts of a temperature rise of 2&nbsp;°C included: regular food shortages in Sub-Saharan Africa; shifting rain patterns in South Asia leaving some parts under water and others without enough water for power generation, irrigation or drinking; degradation and loss of reefs in South East Asia, resulting in reduced fish stocks; and coastal communities and cities more vulnerable to increasingly violent storms.
As a result of heavy consumption subsidies, the price of water decreases to the extent that only 30%, on average, of the supplying costs in developing countries is covered.
A pair of studies of the influence of poverty on the ability to reason about complicated issues requiring an immediate solution found that poverty directly impedes cognitive function.
Deterioration of living conditions can often compel children to abandon school to contribute to the family income, putting them at risk of  being exploited.
One is the conditions of which they attend school.
* Physical limitations
According to the World Bank, between 1990 and 2015, the percentage of the world's population living in extreme poverty fell from 37.1% to 9.6%, falling below 10% for the first time.
), net value of farm and business assets, stocks, checking and savings accounts, and other savings (money in savings bonds, life insurance policy cash values, etc.
Microfranchising models such as door to door distributors who earn commission-based income or Coca-Cola's successful distribution system are used to disseminate basic needs to remote areas for below market prices.
The study showed that among these children, instances of behavioral and emotional disorders decreased, and conscientiousness and agreeableness increased.
A child's "home activities, preferences, mannerisms" must align with the world and in the cases that they do not do these, students are at a disadvantage in the school and, most importantly, the classroom.
The World Bank warned that 100 million people were at risk of sinking deeper into poverty.
Water utility subsidies tend to subsidize water consumption by those connected to the supply grid, which is typically skewed towards the richer and urban segment of the population and those outside informal housing.
During the study, about one-quarter of the families saw a dramatic and unexpected increase in income.
Relative poverty measure is used by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Canadian poverty researchers.
The economist Max Roser estimates that the number of people in poverty is therefore roughly the same as 200 years ago.
Erik Simanis has reported that the model has a fatal flaw.
In 1968, Paul Samuelson, John Kenneth Galbraith and another 1,200 economists signed a document calling for the US Congress to introduce a system of income guarantees.
According to Erik "Despite achieving healthy penetration rates of 5% to 10% in four test markets, for instance, Procter & Gamble couldn’t generate a competitive return on its Pur water-purification powder after launching the product on a large scale in 2001...DuPont ran into similar problems with a venture piloted from 2006 to 2008 in Andhra Pradesh, India, by its subsidiary Solae, a global manufacturer of soy protein ... Because the high costs of doing business among the very poor demand a high contribution per transaction, companies must embrace the reality that high margins and price points aren’t just a top-of-the-pyramid phenomenon; they’re also a necessity for ensuring sustainable businesses at the bottom of the pyramid."
Poverty levels are snapshot pictures in time that omits the transitional dynamics between levels.
This was revised in 1993, and through 2005, absolute poverty was $1.08 a day for all countries on a purchasing power parity basis, after adjusting for inflation to the 1993 U.S. dollar.
Relative poverty is the "most useful measure for ascertaining poverty rates in wealthy developed nations."
Relative poverty takes into consideration individual social and economic status compared to the rest of society.
The World Bank's "Voices of the Poor," based on research with over 20,000 poor people in 23 countries, identifies a range of factors which poor people identify as part of poverty.
