The Czech ''práh'' might thus be understood to refer to rapids or fords in the river, the edge of which could have acted as a means of fording the river&nbsp;– thus providing a "threshold" to the castle.
* Pivovary Staropramen (Praha 5)
Prague is approximately at the same latitude as Frankfurt, Germany; Paris, France; and Vancouver, Canada.
It ranked just above Paris and well above the Czech Republic as a whole, which achieved 80 percent of the EU average.
The city offers approximately 73,000 beds in accommodation facilities, most of which were built after 1990, including almost 51,000 beds in hotels and boarding houses.
*USA & Russia Summit 2010 (signing of the New START treaty)
The city had a mint and was a centre of trade for German and Italian bankers and merchants.
The city has many buildings by renowned architects, including Adolf Loos (Villa Müller), Frank O. Gehry (Dancing House) and Jean Nouvel (Golden Angel).
In 1689, a great fire devastated Prague, but this spurred a renovation and a rebuilding of the city.
The number of (legally registered) foreign residents in Prague has been increasing in spite of the country's economic downturn.
Hollywood films set in Prague include ''Mission Impossible'', ''xXx'', ''Blade II'', Alien vs.
In the late 1990s Prague again became an important cultural centre of Europe and was notably influenced by globalisation.
The longest city tunnel in Europe with a length of  and five interchanges has been completed to relieve congestion in the north-western part of Prague.
Prague is classified as an "Alpha-" global city according to GaWC studies, comparable to Vienna, Seoul and Washington, D.C. Prague ranked sixth in the Tripadvisor world list of best destinations in 2016.
In the last century BC, the Celts were slowly driven away by Germanic tribes (Marcomanni, Quadi, Lombards and possibly the Suebi), leading some to place the seat of the Marcomanni king Maroboduus on the site of present-day Prague.
They also took the Codex Gigas and the Codex Argenteus.
Additionally, Kłodzko is traditionally referred to as "Little Prague" ().
In operation there are currently two kinds of units: "81-71M" which is modernized variant of the Soviet 81-71 (completely modernized between 1995 and 2003) and new "Metro M1" trains (since 2000), manufactured by consortium consisting of Siemens, ČKD Praha and ADtranz.
Legend says that Libuše came out on a rocky cliff high above the Vltava and prophesied: "I see a great city whose glory will touch the stars."
On 31 October 1967 students  demonstrated at Strahov.
The region city of Prague is an important centre of research.
*Czech Presidency of the Council of the European Union 2009
Around the area where present-day Prague stands, the 2nd century map of Ptolemaios mentioned a Germanic city called ''Casurgis''.
In June 2009, as the result of financial pressures due to the global recession, Prague's officials also chose to cancel the city's planned bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics.
Prague was chosen as its capital and Prague Castle as the seat of president Tomáš Masaryk.
701 people were killed, more than 1,000 people were injured and some of buildings, factories and historical landmarks  (Emmaus Monastery, Faust House, Vinohrady Synagogue) were destroyed.
*Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Taxi services make pick-ups on the streets or operate from regulated taxi stands.
Full completion is expected by 2020.
Charles IV died in 1378.
The song ''Cristales de Bohemia'' (''Bohemian Crystal'') by Joaquin Sabina, is dedicated to Prague.
In the following century, the Czech tribes built several fortified settlements in the area, most notably in Levý Hradec, Butovice and in the Šárka valley.
Companies with highest turnover in the region in 2014:
An extensive modern public transportation system connects the city.
It is the seat of 39 out of 54 institutes of the Czech Academy of Sciences, including the largest ones, the Institute of Physics, the Institute of Microbiology and the Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry.
Other major cultural institutions are the Rudolfinum which is home to the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra and the Municipal House which is home to the Prague Symphony Orchestra.
The driest season is usually winter while late spring and summer can bring quite heavy rain, especially in form of thundershowers.
The social order, however, became more turbulent due to the rising power of the craftsmen's guilds (themselves often torn by internal fights), and the increasing number of poor people.
*President of the Czech Republic
This ring road will connect all major motorways and speedways that meet each other in Prague region and provide faster transit without a necessity to drive through the city.
Prague launched a bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics, but failed to make the candidate city shortlist.
In 1784, under Joseph II, the four municipalities of Malá Strana, Nové Město, Staré Město, and Hradčany were merged into a single entity.
At that time, the castle was surrounded by forests, covering the nine hills of the future city&nbsp;– the Old Town on the opposite side of the river, as well as the Lesser Town beneath the existing castle, appeared only later.
Most recently, the southern part of this road (with a length of more than ) was opened on 22 September 2010.
The Prague tram system now operates various types of trams: still popular classic Tatra T3, newer Tatra KT8D5, T6A5, Škoda 14 T (designed by Porsche), newest modern Škoda 15 T and nostalgic tram number 91.
The album of this song, ''Vinagre y rosas'' (''Vinegar and Roses'') was produced in the cities of Prague, Madrid and Rota.
She is said to have ordered the city ''"to be built where a man hews a threshold of his house"''.
Summers usually bring plenty of sunshine and the average high temperature of .
Industry is present in sectors such as pharmaceuticals, printing, food processing, manufacture of transport equipment, computer technology and electrical engineering.
Prague is present in numerous artistic works of authors from around the world.
(Inflation in Prague was 0.5% in December, compared with 0.1% nationally.)
It is the 15th largest city in the European Union.
* Klášterní pivovar Strahov (Praha 1)
Hitler ordered bloody reprisals.
In the following two centuries, Prague strengthened its role as a merchant city.
It hosts music festivals including the Prague Spring International Music Festival, the Prague Autumn International Music Festival, the Prague International Organ Festival and the Prague International Jazz Festival.
The city suffered subsequently during the war under Saxon (1631) and Battle of Prague (1648).
Prague Castle is dominated by the cathedral, which was founded in 1344, but completed in the 20th century.
This bridge was destroyed by a flood in 1342.
Some popular sights include:
The winters are relatively cold with average temperatures at about freezing point, and with very little sunshine.
At metro stations is also striving to architectural appearance.
This spurred the new secretary of the Communist Party, Alexander Dubček, to proclaim a new deal in his city's and country's life, starting the short-lived season of the "socialism with a human face".
He ordered the building of the New Town (Nové Město) adjacent to the Old Town and laid out the design himself.
Prague is home to a number of famous cultural attractions, many of which survived the violence and destruction of 20th-century Europe.
In 1993, after the split of Czechoslovakia, Prague became the capital city of the new Czech Republic.
The Prague Metro system served 589.2 million passengers in 2012, making it the fifth busiest metro system in Europe.
During the reign of his son, King Wenceslaus IV (1378–1419), a period of intense turmoil ensued.
For civilian purposes it should be launched in 2016.
Prague began a steady decline which reduced the population from the 60,000 it had had in the years before the war to 20,000.
The majority (about 50,000 people) of the German population of Prague either fled or were expelled by the Beneš decrees in the aftermath of the war.
In 1989, after the riot police beat back a peaceful student demonstration, the Velvet Revolution crowded the streets of Prague, and the Czechoslovak capital benefited greatly from the new mood.
With the growth of low-cost airlines in Europe, Prague has become a popular weekend city destination allowing tourists to visit its many museums and cultural sites as well as try its famous Czech beers and hearty cuisine.
On 5 May 1945, two days before Germany capitulated, an uprising against Germany occurred.
The public transport infrastructure (PID, ''Pražská integrovaná doprava'') consists of a heavily-used integrated transport system of Prague Metro (lines A, B, and C – its length is  with 61 stations in total), Prague tram system, Prague buses, funiculars, and six ferries.
* Pivovar Pražský most u Valšů (Praha 1)
Its main objective is "to identify the key issues facing civilization and to explore ways to prevent the escalation of conflicts that have religion, culture or ethnicity as their primary components", and also intends to promote democracy in non-democratic countries and to support civil society.
The year of full completion is unknown due to incompetent, constantly changing, leadership of Czech Road and Motorway Directorate, lack of administrative preparations, and insufficient funding of road constructions.
The city was also the setting for the film ''Dungeons and Dragons'' in 2000.
In the second half of the 17th century Prague's population began to grow again.
Prague is the fifth most visited European city after London, Paris, Istanbul and Rome.
The annual conference Forum 2000, which was founded by former Czech President Václav Havel, Japanese philanthropist Yōhei Sasakawa, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Elie Wiesel in 1996, is held in Prague.
Precipitation in Prague (and most of the Bohemian lowland) is rather low (just over  per year) since it is located in the rain shadow of the Sudetes and other mountain ranges.
The city is the site of the European headquarters of many international companies.
From 1939, when the country was occupied by Nazi Germany, and during the Second World War, most Jews were deported and killed by the Germans.
Prague has one of the highest rates of public transport usage in the world, with 1.2 billion passenger journeys per year.
*Czech Television and other major broadcasters
On 9 July 1357 at 5:31&nbsp;am, Charles IV personally laid the first foundation stone for the Charles Bridge.
This represented an annual increase of 3.4% which was nevertheless lower than national increase of 3.9% both in nominal and real terms.
Other Czech films shot in Prague include ''Empties'', ''EuroTrip'', Amadeus and ''The Fifth Horseman is Fear''.
At this time Prague was a true European capital with highly developed industry.
The region was settled as early as the Paleolithic age.
Nearly the entire Jewish population of Prague (3,000 people) perished.
Many of these were rich merchants and nobles who enriched the city with a host of palaces, churches and gardens full of art and music, creating a Baroque style renowned throughout the world.
Some well-known multinational companies have established research and development facilities in Prague, among them Siemens, Honeywell and Sun Microsystems.
* První novoměstský restaurační pivovar (Praha 1)
At the festival, more than 70 brands of Czech beer can be tasted.
Recently, the ''Regional Organiser of Prague Integrated Transport (ROPID)'' has franchised operation of ferries on the Vltava river, which are also a part of the public transport system with common fares.
In 1347, he founded Charles University, which remains the oldest university in Central Europe.
At the site of the ford in the Vltava river, King Vladislaus I had the first bridge built in 1170, the Judith Bridge (Juditin most), named in honour of his wife Judith of Thuringia.
One of these banners was captured by Swedish troops in Battle of Prague (1648), when they captured the western bank of the Vltava river and were repulsed from the eastern bank, they placed it in the Royal Military Museum in Stockholm; although this flag still exists, it is in very poor condition.
Prague was an important seat for trading where merchants from all of Europe settled, including many Jews, as recalled in 965 by the Hispano-Jewish merchant and traveller Ibrahim ibn Ya'qub.
Prague was a city in the territory of military and political control of the Soviet Union (see Iron Curtain).
Prague is also called the ''"City of a Hundred Spires"'', based on a count by 19th century mathematician Bernard Bolzano, today's count is estimated by Prague Information Service at 500.
The city of Prague lies between oceanic climate and humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dfb'').
The city boasts more than ten major museums, along with numerous theatres, galleries, cinemas, and other historical exhibits.
During Easter 1389, members of the Prague clergy announced that Jews had desecrated the host (Eucharistic wafer) and the clergy encouraged mobs to pillage, ransack and burn the Jewish quarter.
*Czech National Bank
Nicknames for Prague have also included: the Golden City, the Mother of Cities and the Heart of Europe.
Prague is home to many breweries including:
Services account for around 80 percent of employment.
'''Outer Ring Road (The Prague Ring "D0"):'''
The city was named as a top-tier nexus city for innovation across multiple sectors of the global innovation economy, placing 29th globally out of 289 cities, ahead of Brussels and Helsinki for innovation in 2010 in 2thinknow annual analysts Innovation Cities Index.
The Metro has three major lines extending throughout the city: A (green), B (yellow) and C (red).
Other airports in Prague include the city's original airport in the north-eastern district of Kbely, which is serviced by the Czech Air Force, also internationally.
Following this in 1621 was an execution of 27 Czech leaders (involved in the uprising) in Old Town Square and the exiling of many others.
*EU & USA Summit 2009
Prague is situated on the Vltava river, at 50°05"N and 14°27"E. in the centre of the Bohemian Basin.
However next month after the Battle of Kolín, Frederick II.
Many Indian films have also been filmed in the city including ''Yuvraaj'', ''Drona'' and ''Rockstar''.
It contains one of the world's most pristine and varied collections of architecture, from Romanesque, to Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, Neo-Renaissance, Neo-Gothic, Art Nouveau, Cubist, Neo-Classical and ultra-modern.
Another airport in the proximity is Aero Vodochody aircraft factory to the north, used for testing purposes, as well as for aeroclub aviation.
Recent major events held in Prague:
For most of its history, Prague had been a multi-ethnic city with important Czech, German and (mostly native German-speaking) Jewish populations.
There are 800,000 employees in Prague, including 120,000 commuters.
On the site she ordered to build a castle and a town called Praha.
All services have a common ticketing system, and are run by the Prague Public Transport Company (Dopravní podnik hl.
The music video "Silver and Cold" by AFI, an American rock band, was also filmed in Prague.
Peasant rebels, led by the general Jan Žižka, along with Hussite troops from Prague, defeated Emperor Sigismund, in the Battle of Vítkov Hill in 1420.
*Galileo global navigation project
File:Prague Zoo main entrance.JPG|Prague Zoo, selected as the fourth best zoo in the world by TripAdvisor
A first suburb, Karlín, was created in 1817, and twenty years later the population exceeded 100,000.
Nights can be quite cool even in summer, though.
Gross expenditure on research and development accounted for €901.3&nbsp;million (41.5% of country's total).
The city is traditionally one of the cultural centres of Europe, hosting many cultural events.
During the thousand years of its existence, the city grew from a settlement stretching from Prague Castle in the north to the fort of Vyšehrad in the south, becoming the capital of a modern European state, the Czech Republic, a member state of the European Union.
The city also hosts the Prague Writers' Festival, the Prague Folklore Days, Prague Advent Choral Meeting the ''Summer Shakespeare Festival'', the Prague Fringe Festival, the World Roma Festival, as well as the hundreds of Vernissages and fashion shows.
* Vyukový a výzkumný pivovar&nbsp;– Suchdolský Jeník (Praha 6)
The Prague tram rolling stock consists of over 900 individual cars, of those around 400 are the modernized T3 class, which are typically operated coupled together in pairs.
The airport also houses the Prague Aviation Museum.
During the Hussite Wars when the City of Prague was attacked by "Crusader" and mercenary forces, the city militia fought bravely under the Prague Banner.
The newly released cyber-fiction game by Eidos Montreal, ''Deus Ex: Mankind Divided'' is mostly centered around the city of Prague during 2029.
Although now in Poland, the city was the capital of the Bohemian kraj of the County of Kladsko.
It is the hub of the flag carrier, Czech Airlines, as well as of the low-cost airlines SmartWings and Wizz Air operating throughout Europe.
* Pivovarský dům (Praha 2)
A new interchange station for the bus in the direction of the airport is now the station Nádraží Veleslavín.
Situated in the north-west of the country on the Vltava River, the city is home to about 1.26&nbsp;million people, while its larger urban zone is estimated to have a population of nearly 2&nbsp;million.
Near the swallow-tails is a crescent shaped golden sun with rays protruding.
Also, the romantic music video "Never Tear Us Apart" by INXS, "Diamonds from Sierra Leone" by Kanye West was shot in the city, and features shots of the Charles Bridge and the Astronomical Clock, among other famous landmarks.
'''Prague''' (; , , ) is the capital and largest city of the Czech Republic.
There are also a few periods of mild temperatures in winter.
Under Roman Emperor Otto II the area became a bishopric in 973.
Twelve universities, and a number of colleges and schools are located in the city, including:
The fervent Catholicism of its members was to bring them into conflict in Bohemia, and then in Prague, where Protestant ideas were gaining popularity.
Jan Hus, a theologian and rector at the Charles University, preached in Prague.
After the Battle of Prague in 1757 Prussian bombardment destroyed more than one quarter of the city and heavily damaged St. Vitus Cathedral.
Prague ranked the 5th best-performing European NUTS two-level region at 172 percent of the EU-27 average.
From 1995 highrise buildings began to be built in Prague in large quantities.
RWE Supply & Trading CZ
The entire City Ring is estimated to be finished after 2020.
The Prague metro is generally considered very safe.
Also, it is home to a wide range of public and private schools, including Charles University in Prague, the oldest university in Central Europe.
The earliest evidence indicates that a gonfalon with a municipal charge painted on it was used for Old Town as early as 1419.
Prague contained an important slave market.
Prague's main international railway station is Hlavní nádraží, rail services are also available from other main stations: Masarykovo nádraží, Holešovice and Smíchov, in addition to suburban stations.
Many historic structures in Prague, however, escaped the destruction of the war and the damage was small compared to the total destruction of many other cities in that time.
The Prague State Opera (Státní opera) performs at the Smetana Theatre.
The city has a temperate climate, with warm summers and chilly winters.
The Náměstí Míru metro station is the deepest station and is equipped with the longest escalator in European Union.
It was the stretch between stations Kačerov and Florenc on the current line C. The first part of Line A was opened in 1978 (Dejvická – Náměstí Míru), the first part of line B in 1985 (Anděl – Florenc).
The railway system links Prague with major European cities (which can be reached without transfers), including Berlin (Germany); Munich (Germany); Vienna (Austria); Warsaw (Poland); Budapest (Hungary); Košice (Slovakia); Zürich (Switzerland); Split (Croatia) and Moscow (Russia).
Prague's economy accounts for 25% of the Czech Republic's GDP making it the highest performing regional economy of the country.
The system carries more than 356 million passengers annually, the third highest tram patronage in the world after St Petersburg and Budapest.
Since 1990, the city's economic structure has shifted from industrial to service-oriented.
The economic rise continued through the 18th century, and the city in 1771 had 80,000 inhabitants.
The construction of what came to be known as the Prague Castle began near the end of the 9th century, with a fortified settlement already existing on the site in the year 800.
In 1402, he began giving sermons in the Bethlehem Chapel.
*IAU General Assembly 2006 (Definition of planet)
Prague suffered considerably less damage during World War II than some other major cities in the region, allowing most of its historic architecture to stay true to form.
* Ministries and other national offices (Industrial Property Office, Czech Statistical Office, National Security Authority etc.)
The English spelling of the city's name is borrowed from French.
The biggest Stalin Monument was unveiled on Letná hill in 1955 and destroyed in 1962.
Prague was elevated to an archbishopric in 1344, the year the cathedral was begun.
It was the ''"Prague Spring"'', which aimed at the renovation of institutions in a democratic way.
The first masonry under Prague Castle dates from the year 885 at the latest.
* Pivovar U Bulovky (Praha 8)
In 1713–14, a major outbreak of plague hit Prague one last time, killing 12,000 to 13,000 people.
World War I ended with the defeat of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the creation of Czechoslovakia.
Ferdinand II of Habsburg was deposed, and his place as King of Bohemia taken by Frederick V, Elector Palatine; however his army was crushed in the Battle of White Mountain (1620) not far from the city.
Although Melbourne, Australia has the longest total tram system length in the world, Prague's tram network is one of the largest in the world by other measures.
In 1526, the Bohemian estates elected Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg.
Since 1992, the extensive historic centre of Prague has been included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.
He began construction of the Gothic Saint Vitus Cathedral, within the largest of the Prague Castle courtyards, on the site of the Romanesque rotunda there.
Prague is also a windy city with common sustained western winds and an average wind speed of 16 kph (10&nbsp;mph) that often help break temperature inversions and clear the air in cold months.
* Pivovar U Fleků (Praha 1)
Hus' death, coupled with Czech proto-nationalism and proto-Protestantism, had spurred the Hussite Wars.
Snow cover can be common between mid-November to late March although snow accumulations of more than 20&nbsp;cm (8&nbsp;in) are infrequent.
*International Monetary Fund and World Bank Summit 2000
Prague also hosts the Czech Beer Festival (Český pivní festival), which is the biggest beer festival in the Czech Republic, held for 17 days every year in May.
In the Eurostat research, Prague ranked fifth among Europe's 271 regions in terms of gross domestic product per inhabitant, achieving 172 percent of the EU average.
