Term pregnancy is 37 to 41 weeks, with early term being 37 and 38 weeks, full term 39 and 40 weeks, and late term 41 weeks.
Caused by impaired venous return, straining associated with constipation, or increased intra-abdominal pressure in later pregnancy.
When a pregnancy exceeds 42 weeks, the risk of complications for both the woman and the fetus increases significantly.
This is from factors including underdeveloped lungs of newborns, infection due to underdeveloped immune system, feeding problems due to underdeveloped brain, and jaundice from underdeveloped liver.
Around 50% of women of childbearing age in developed countries like the United Kingdom are overweight or obese before pregnancy.
*Haemorrhoids (piles).
In most cultures, pregnant women have a special status in society and receive particularly gentle care.
A multiple pregnancy involves more than one offspring, such as with twins.
In the United States and Canada, most wheat products (flour, noodles) are fortified with folic acid.
Studies show that skin-to-skin contact between a mother and her newborn immediately after birth is beneficial for both the mother and baby.
During the time immediately after birth, both the mother and the baby are hormonally cued to bond, the mother through the release of oxytocin, a hormone also released during breastfeeding.
Studies of routine daily iron supplementation for all pregnant women in developed countries found improvement in blood iron levels, without a clear clinical benefit.
Maternity leave typically provides paid leave from work during roughly the last trimester of pregnancy and for some time after birth.
The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2013 was estimated to be highest in Niger (7.03 children/woman) and lowest in Singapore (0.79 children/woman).
*Pelvic girdle pain
During pregnancy, the woman undergoes many physiological changes, which are entirely normal, including cardiovascular, hematologic, metabolic, renal, and respiratory changes.
Common causes include maternal bleeding, complications of abortion, high blood pressure of pregnancy, maternal sepsis, and obstructed labor.
Head engagement, where the fetal head descends into cephalic presentation, relieves pressure on the upper abdomen with renewed ease in breathing.
The most effective intervention for weight gain in underweight women is not clear.
The amount of healthy weight gain during a pregnancy varies.
* Pigmentation of linea alba – Linea nigra, (darkening of the skin in a midline of the abdomen, caused by hyperpigmentation resulting from hormonal changes, usually appearing around the middle of pregnancy).
Around the middle of the second trimester, movement of the fetus may be felt.
Women are also counseled to eat seafood in moderation and to eliminate seafood known to be high in mercury because of the risk of birth defects.
The basic outlines of the organ, body, and nervous systems are established.
Most women feel more energized in this period, and begin to put on weight as the symptoms of morning sickness subside and eventually fade away.
A review done by the World Health Organization found that skin-to-skin contact between mothers and babies after birth reduces crying, improves mother–infant interaction, and helps mothers to breastfeed successfully.
A quantitative blood test can determine approximately the date the embryo was conceived because HCG doubles every 36 to 48 hours.
In context of this overall decrease in desire, some studies indicate a second-trimester increase, preceding a decrease during the third trimester.
Fetal movement can become strong and be disruptive to the woman.
Caused by compression of the inferior vena cava (IVC) and pelvic veins by the uterus leads to increased hydrostatic pressure in lower extremities.
Accurate dating of pregnancy is important, because it is used in calculating the results of various prenatal tests, (for example, in the triple test).
Globally, an estimated 270,000 women die from pregnancy-related complications each year.
A woman can be labeled as high risk for different reasons including previous complications in pregnancy, complications in the current pregnancy, current medical diseases, or social issues.
Babies born between 39 and 41 weeks gestation have better outcomes than babies born either before or after this range.
However, an important condition with serious health implications that is more common than expected is denial of pregnancy by the pregnant woman.
The placenta connects the developing embryo to the uterine wall to allow nutrient uptake, waste elimination, and gas exchange via the mother's blood supply.
Nutrition during pregnancy is important to ensure healthy growth of the fetus.
Women benefit from education to encourage a balanced energy and protein intake during pregnancy.
There are multiple definitions of the beginning of a pregnancy.
The first trimester carries the highest risk of miscarriage (natural death of embryo or fetus).
About 213 million pregnancies occurred in 2012 of which 190 million were in the developing world and 23 million were in the developed world.
Image:10 weeks pregnant.png|Fetus at 8 weeks after fertilization.
Each trimester is defined as 14 weeks, for a total duration of 42 weeks, although the average duration of pregnancy is 40 weeks.
It usually lasts around 40&nbsp;weeks from the last menstrual period (LMP) and ends in childbirth.
Developing infants cannot produce DHA efficiently, and must receive this vital nutrient from the woman through the placenta during pregnancy and in breast milk after birth.
It sometimes incorporates weight as well as gestational age.
Pregnancy alters the vaginal flora with a reduction in microscopic species/genus diversity.
Babies born before 37 weeks are preterm and are at higher risk of health problems such as cerebral palsy.
In the United States and United Kingdom, 40% of pregnancies are unplanned, and between a quarter and half of those unplanned pregnancies were unwanted pregnancies.
The first trimester is from week one through 12 and includes conception.
Overall, pregnancy is accompanied by numerous customs that are often subject to ethnological research, often rooted in traditional medicine or religion.
Other algorithms take into account other variables, such as whether this is the first or subsequent child, the mother's race, age, length of menstrual cycle, and menstrual regularity.
In 2014, the American state of Kentucky passed a law which allows prosecutors to charge a woman with criminal assault if she uses illegal drugs during her pregnancy and her fetus or newborn is considered harmed as a result.
For example, nausea can be a discomfort (morning sickness), but if, in combination with significant vomiting, it causes water-electrolyte imbalance it is a complication (hyperemesis gravidarum).
The following are some examples of pregnancy complications:
Unpasteurized dairy and deli meats may contain ''Listeria,'' which can cause neonatal meningitis, stillbirth and miscarriage.
Sometimes if a woman's water breaks or she has contractions before 39 weeks, birth is unavoidable.
Cell division begins approximately 24 to 36 hours after the male and female cells unite.
While childbirth is widely experienced as painful, some women do report painless labours, while others find that concentrating on the birth helps to quicken labour and lessen the sensations.
File:Octave TASSAERT The Waif -L'abandonnée.jpg|Octave Tassaert, ''The Waif'' aka ''L'abandonnée'' 1852, Musée Fabre, Montpellier
Image:Month 5.svg|Relative size in 5th month (simplified illustration)
This is about a week to ten days after fertilization.
Retrieved 2007-08-28.
* Darkening of the nipples and areolas due to an increase in hormones.
Common causes include maternal bleeding (44,000), complications of abortion (44,000), high blood pressure of pregnancy (29,000), maternal sepsis (24,000), and obstructed labor (19,000).
Levels of progesterone and oestrogens rise continually throughout pregnancy, suppressing the hypothalamic axis and therefore also the menstrual cycle.
However, the relationship between caffeine, birthweight, and preterm birth is unclear.
In addition, pregnancy may result in pregnancy complication such as deep vein thrombosis or worsening of an intercurrent disease in pregnancy.
This is about 133 pregnancies per 1,000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.
The number of pregnancies in women ages 15 to 44 is 133 per 1,000 women.
In Western, Northern, and Southern Europe, first-time mothers are on average 26 to 29 years old, up from 23 to 25 years at the start of the 1970s.
Diet modification is the most effective way to reduce weight gain and associated risks in pregnancy.
Pregnancy is an important topic in sociology of the family.
A diet that has foods with a low glycemic index may help prevent the onset of gestational diabetes.
It is important for the woman to consume adequate amounts of DHA during pregnancy and while nursing to support her well-being and the health of her infant.
Swollen veins at or inside the anal area.
The main reason for this success is increased immune tolerance during pregnancy.
Half of unplanned pregnancies are aborted.
Pregnancy is typically divided into three trimesters.
The beginning of pregnancy may be detected either based on symptoms by the pregnant woman herself, or by using a medical test(s).
Legality of socially indicated abortions varies widely both internationally and through time.
In the U.S., drugs were classified into categories A,B,C,D and X based on the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) rating system to provide therapeutic guidance based on potential benefits and fetal risks.
*Regurgitation, heartburn, and nausea.
Cell division continues at a rapid rate and the cells then develop into what is known as a blastocyst.
The decision to perform an induction must be made after weighing the risks and benefits, but is safer after 39 weeks.
Daily iron supplementation reduces the risk of maternal anemia.
A number of early medical signs are associated with pregnancy.
Minute ventilation increases by 40% in the first trimester.
Also during this time, there is development of structures important to the support of the embryo, including the placenta and umbilical cord.
Several micronutrients are important for the health of the developing fetus, especially in areas of the world where insufficient nutrition is common.
About 10% to 15% of recognized pregnancies end in miscarriage.
The proportion of cases persisting until delivery is about 1 in 2500 refusing to acknowledge that they are pregnant (''denial of pregnancy)'').
There are increased energy requirements and specific micronutrient requirements.
During pregnancy, insufficient or excessive weight gain can compromise the health of the mother and fetus.
Obstetric ultrasonography can detect some congenital diseases at an early stage, estimate the due date, and  detect  multiple pregnancies.
Similarly, the term ''parity'' (abbreviated as "para") is used for the number of times a female carries a pregnancy past 20 weeks of gestation.
Fertilization is the event where the egg cell fuses with the male gamete, spermatozoon.
Fertilization usually occurs about two weeks before the ''next'' expected menstrual period.
In many traditional societies, pregnancy must be preceded by marriage, on pain of ostracism of mother and (illegitimate) child.
Many symptoms and discomforts of pregnancy like nausea and tender breasts appear in the first trimester.
Most pregnant women experience a number of symptoms, which can signify pregnancy.
In ''in vitro'' fertilisation, gestational age is calculated by days from oocyte retrieval + 14 days (the 14 days before the known time of conception).
In 2013 complications of pregnancy resulted in 293,000 deaths down from 377,000 deaths in 1990.
* the presence of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in the blood and urine
Events after 42 weeks are considered postterm.
This is in contrast to pregnancy complications.
*Braxton Hicks contractions.
*Thromboembolic disorders.
* Chadwick's sign (darkening of the cervix, vagina, and vulva)
Occasional, irregular, and often painless contractions that occur several times per day.
Pregnancy is typically broken into three periods, or trimesters, each of about three months.
Each year, ill health as a result of pregnancy is experienced (sometimes permanently) by more than 20 million women around the world.
DHA omega-3 is a major structural fatty acid in the brain and retina, and is naturally found in breast milk.
''Preterm'' and ''postterm'' are defined above, whereas ''premature'' and ''postmature'' have historical meaning and relate more to the infant's size and state of development rather than to the stage of pregnancy.
Zinc supplementation has been associated with a decrease in preterm birth, but it is unclear whether it is causative.
Common complaint in advancing pregnancy.
Final weight gain takes place, which is the most weight gain throughout the pregnancy.
The fetus continues to grow in both weight and length, although the majority of the physical growth occurs in the last weeks of pregnancy.
This choice was a result of inability to discern the point in time when the actual conception happened.
Electrical brain activity is first detected between the fifth and sixth week of gestation.
Cat feces and undercooked meats may contain the parasite Toxoplasma gondii and can cause toxoplasmosis.
In this model, during the time between conception and implantation, the future fetus exists, but the woman is not considered pregnant.
Pregnant women are counseled to consume caffeine in moderation, because large amounts of caffeine are associated with miscarriage.
A woman who has never been pregnant is referred to as a ''nulligravida.''
It also severely reduces bladder capacity, and increases pressure on the pelvic floor and the rectum.
In most countries of Western Europe, abortions during the first trimester were a criminal offense a few decades ago but have since been legalized, sometimes subject to mandatory consultations.
Although the fetus begins to move during the first trimester, it is not until the second trimester that movement, often referred to as "quickening", can be felt.
Pregnant women are also more prone to ''Salmonella'' infections, can be in eggs and poultry, which should be thoroughly cooked.
Folate is abundant in green leafy vegetables, legumes, and citrus.
*Urinary tract infection
Sometimes a symptom that is considered a discomfort can be considered a complication when it is more severe.
Fertilization (conception) is sometimes used as the initiation of pregnancy, with the derived age being termed fertilization age.
The fusion of male and female gametes usually occurs following the act of sexual intercourse.
The second trimester is from week 13 through 28.
This typically happens in the fourth month, more specifically in the 20th to 21st week, or by the 19th week if the woman has been pregnant before.
Pregnancy most commonly lasts for 40 weeks according to this LNMP-based method, assuming that the woman has a predictable menstrual cycle length of close to 28 days and conceives on the 14th day of that cycle.
* Hegar's sign (softening of the uterus isthmus)
The most common system used among healthcare professionals is Naegele's rule, which was developed in the early 19th century.
They do, however, list several circumstances when a woman should contact her health care provider before continuing with an exercise program: vaginal bleeding, dyspnea before exertion, dizziness, headache, chest pain, muscle weakness, preterm labor, decreased fetal movement, amniotic fluid leakage, and calf pain or swelling (to rule out thrombophlebitis).
Excessive weight gain can make losing weight after the pregnancy difficult.
Sex organs begin to appear during the third month of gestation.
Therefore, in an otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy, obstetricians usually prefer to induce labour at some stage between 41 and 42 weeks.
This is typically accurate within seven days.
Anything (including drugs) that can cause permanent deformities in the fetus are labeled as teratogens.
Whereas micronutrient supplementation for the mother has been found to reduce the risk of low birth weight, several studies reported variable effects on mortality in the newborn in developing countries.
In order to have a standard reference point, the normal pregnancy duration is assumed by medical professionals to be 280 days (or 40 weeks) of gestational age.
Adequate periconceptional (time before and right after conception) folic acid (also called folate or Vitamin B9) intake has been shown to decrease the risk of fetal neural tube defects, such as spina bifida.
Weight gain is related to the weight of the baby, the placenta, extra circulatory fluid, larger tissues, and fat and protein stores.
One such law is the federal Unborn Victims of Violence Act.
Careful washing of fruits and raw vegetables may remove these pathogens, as may thoroughly cooking leftovers, meat, or processed meat.
This condition is known as pseudocyesis or false pregnancy.
Women are counseled to avoid certain foods, because of the possibility of contamination with bacteria or parasites that can cause illness.
*Increased urinary frequency.
Recent medical literature prefers the terminology ''preterm'' and ''postterm'' to ''premature'' and ''postmature.''
Many countries have various legal regulations in place to protect pregnant women and their children.
The womb will grow to the size of a lemon by eight weeks.
Immune tolerance is the concept that the body is able to not mount an immune system response against certain triggers.
This means that fewer than 5 percent of births occur on the day of being 40 weeks of gestational age; 50 percent of births are within a week of this duration, and about 80 percent are within 2 weeks.
Image:Month 9.svg|Relative size in 9th month (simplified illustration)
Being or becoming overweight in pregnancy increases the risk of complications for mother and fetus, including cesarean section, gestational hypertension, pre-eclampsia, macrosomia and shoulder dystocia.
It has rate at 20 weeks gestation of approximately 1 in 475 pregnant women.
Most women can continue to engage in sexual activity throughout pregnancy.
A common complaint referred by the gravida, caused by increased intravascular volume, elevated GFR (glomerular filtration rate), and compression of the bladder by the expanding uterus.
Image:6 weeks pregnant.png|Embryo at 4 weeks after fertilization.
Notable extreme cases include Norway (8 months with full pay) and the United States (no paid leave at all except in some states).
To minimize exposure to environmental toxins, the ''American College of Nurse-Midwives'' recommends: checking whether the home has lead paint, washing all fresh fruits and vegetables thoroughly and buying organic produce, and avoiding cleaning products labeled "toxic" or any product with a warning on the label.
In the United States, laws make some actions that result in miscarriage or stillbirth crimes.
(Image from gestational age of 20 weeks).
Among unintended pregnancies in the United States, 60% of the women used birth control to some extent during the month pregnancy occurred.
The uterus, the muscular organ that holds the developing fetus, can expand up to 20 times its normal size during pregnancy.
They recommend that neonates be allowed to bond with the mother during their first two hours after birth, the period that they tend to be more alert than in the following hours of early life.
An abortion is the termination of an embryo or fetus, either naturally or via medical methods.
It is also during the third trimester that maternal activity and sleep positions may affect fetal development due to restricted blood flow.
Women who have never carried a pregnancy achieving more than 20 weeks of gestation age are referred to as ''nulliparous.''
One scientific term for the state of pregnancy is ''gravidity'' (adjective ''"gravid"''), Latin for "heavy" and a pregnant female is sometimes referred to as a ''gravida''.
The woman's navel will sometimes become convex, "popping" out, due to the expanding abdomen.
Planned birth before 39 weeks by Caesarean section or labor induction, although "at term", results in an increased risk of complications.
After 41 weeks, it is known as post term.
The mean pregnancy length has been estimated to be 283.4 days of gestational age as timed from the first day of the last menstrual period and 280.6 days when retrospectively estimated by obstetric ultrasound measurement of the fetal biparietal diameter (BPD) in the second trimester.
The woman's abdomen will transform in shape as it drops due to the fetus turning in a downward position ready for birth.
Vitamin E supplementation has not been shown to improve birth outcomes.
Half of unplanned pregnancies are aborted.
Prenatal care improves pregnancy outcomes.
Air pollution has been associated with low birth weight infants.
Nutrition during pregnancy is different from the non-pregnant state.
Synapses begin forming at 17 weeks, and begin to multiply quickly at week 28 until 3 to 4 months after birth.
Conception is when the sperm fertilizes the egg.
Delivery before 39 weeks by labor induction or caesarean section is not recommended unless required for other medical reasons.
Women who are high risk have better outcomes if they are seen regularly and frequently by a medical professional than women who are low risk.
Prenatal medical care is the medical and nursing care recommended for women during pregnancy, time intervals and exact goals of each visit differ by country.
On the other hand, drugs like thalidomide with proven fetal risks that outweigh all benefits are classified as Category X.
The aim of good prenatal care is prevention, early identification, and treatment of any medical complications.
*Postpartum depression
Conversely, some non-pregnant women have a very strong belief that they are pregnant along with some of the physical changes.
In developed areas, such as Western Europe and the United States, certain nutrients such as Vitamin D and calcium, required for bone development, may require supplementation.
Ultrasound is used to measure the nuchal fold in order to screen for Downs syndrome.
A third point in time is also considered by some people to be the true beginning of a pregnancy:  This is time of implantation, when the future fetus attaches to the lining of the uterus.
Whenever possible, waiting for labor to begin on its own in this time period is best for the health of the mother and baby.
At the same time, they are subject to expectations that may exert great psychological pressure, such as having to produce a son and heir.
There is also an increased susceptibility and severity of certain infections in pregnancy.
