The Church of Scotland abolished the Synod in 1993.
Some Presbyterian churches will also have ornate statues of Christ or Graven Scenes from the Last Supper located behind the Chancel.
In 1719 a major split, the Salter's Hall controversy, occurred; with the majority siding with nontrinitarian views.
Beginning from Cross River state, the nearby coastal states, Rivers state, Lagos state to Ebonyi and Abia States.
The church is strong in the rural villages.
By the 18th century many English Presbyterian congregations had become Unitarian in doctrine.
Often the churches there have one main congregation and a number of Prayer Houses develop.
In South Korea there are 100 different Presbyterian denominations.
In the 21st century, a new General Assembly of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church of Korea (president Seung-moo Ha) in 2012 declared itself an authentic historical succession of Scottish Presbyterian John Knox.
The Presbyterian Church of Nigeria, western Africa is also healthy and strong in mostly the southern states of this nation, strong density in the south-eastern states of this country.
However, with the Glorious Revolution of 1688 the Church of Scotland was finally unequivocally recognised as a Presbyterian institution by the monarch due to Scottish Presbyterian support for the aforementioned revolution and the Acts of Union 1707 between Scotland and England guaranteed the Church of Scotland's form of government.
In the late 1800s, Presbyterian missionaries established a presence in what is now northern New Mexico.
The presbytery sends representatives to a broader regional or national assembly, generally known as the General Assembly, although an intermediate level of a ''synod'' sometimes exists.
The image of Christ is more of faint image and more modern design.
The origins of the Presbyterian churches are in Calvinism.
Most of the Korean Presbyterian denominations share the same name in Korean, 대한예수교장로회 (literally means the Presbyterian Church of Korea or PCK), tracing its roots to the United Presbyterian Assembly before its long history of disputes and schisms.
Presbyterian denominations that trace their heritage to the British Isles usually organise their church services inspired by the principles in the Directory of Public Worship, developed by the Westminster Assembly in the 1640s.
In England, Presbyterianism was established in secret in 1592.
All major seminaries associated with each denomination claim heritage from the Pyung Yang Theological Seminary, therefore, not only Presbyterian University and Theological Seminary and Chongsin University which are related to PCK but also Hanshin University of PROK all celebrated the 100th class in 2007, 100 years from the first graduates of Pyung Yang Theological Seminary.
The Korean Presbyterian Church started through the mission of the Presbyterian Church (USA) and the Australian Presbyterian theological tradition is central to the United States.
You may also find decorative and ornate stained glass windows depicting scenes from the bible.
This provided an alternative to the Catholicism, which was brought to the area by the Spanish Conquistadors and had remained unchanged.
Congregational churches present in the country are also part of the Calvinistic tradition in Latin America.
A number of small Presbyterian denominations have arisen since the 1950s through migration or schism.
The nation's largest Presbyterian denomination, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) – PC (USA) – can trace their heritage back to the original PCUSA, as can the Presbyterian Church in America (PCA), the Orthodox Presbyterian Church (OPC), the Bible Presbyterian Church (BPC), the Cumberland Presbyterian Church (CPC), the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in America  the Evangelical Presbyterian Church (EPC) and the Evangelical Covenant Order of Presbyterians (ECO).
Following the 'Disruption' in 1843 many of those linked to the Church of Scotland eventually joined what became the Presbyterian Church of England in 1876.
The Presbyterian Church in Vanuatu is the largest denomination in the country, with approximately one-third of the population of Vanuatu members of the church.
These are sometimes known as "presbyters" to the full congregation.
Cumberland Presbyterian Church Yao Dao Secondary School is a Presbyterian school in Yuen Long, New Territories.
There are probably more than four million members of Presbyterian churches in all of Latin America.
The territory within about a  radius of Charlotte, North Carolina, is historically the greatest concentration of Presbyterianism in the Southern United States, while an almost identical geographic area around Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, contains probably the largest number of Presbyterians in the entire nation.
In time, the Scots Confession would be supplanted by the Westminster Confession of Faith, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, which were formulated by the Westminster Assembly between 1643 and 1649.
After a period of religious convulsion and political conflict culminating in a victory for the Protestant party at the Siege of Leith the authority of the Church of Rome was abolished in favour of Reformation by the legislation of the Scottish Reformation Parliament in 1560.
Presbyterianism is the largest Protestant denomination in Northern Ireland and the second largest on the island of Ireland (after the Anglican Church of Ireland), and was brought by Scottish plantation settlers to Ulster who had been strongly encouraged to emigrate by James VI of Scotland, later James I of England.
The Independent Presbyterian Church in Brasil was founded in 1903 by pastor Pereira, has 500 congregations and 75 000 members.
In South Korea there are 15 million Protestants and about 9 million are Presbyterians.
The Restored Reformed Church works with RPCM.
Some Presbyterian church buildings are often decorated with a cross that has a circle around the center, or Celtic cross.
A number of partnerships exist between presbyteries in Africa and the PC(USA), including specific connections with Lesotho, Malawi, South Africa, Ghana and Zambia.
This congregation / presbytery / synod / general assembly schema is based on the historical structure of the larger Presbyterian churches, such as the Church of Scotland or the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.);  some bodies, such as the Presbyterian Church in America and the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, skip one of the steps between congregation and General Assembly, and usually the step skipped is the Synod.
The Presbyterian Church in Canada developed the confessional document ''Living Faith'' (1984) and retains it as a subordinate standard of the denomination.
Some estimates have placed that loss at nearly half in the last forty years.
Local congregations of churches which use presbyterian polity are governed by sessions made up of representatives of the congregation (elders); a conciliar approach which is found at other levels of decision-making (presbytery, synod and general assembly).
GSM, the missionary body of the "Hapdong" General Assembly of Presbyterian Churches of Korea, is the single largest Presbyterian missionary organization in Korea.
It is generally considered that the point of such learning is to enable one to put one's faith into practice; some Presbyterians generally exhibit their faith in action as well as words, by generosity, hospitality, as well as proclaiming the gospel of Christ.
Presbyterians place great importance upon education and lifelong learning.
By using the "empty" cross, or cross of the resurrection, Presbyterians emphasize the resurrection and that Christ is not continually dying, but died once and is alive for all eternity.
There are some Presbyterian people, but no organised Presbyterian churches in Penama and Torba, both of which are traditionally Anglican.
The Presbyterian denominations in Scotland hold to the theology of John Calvin and his immediate successors, although there are a range of theological views within contemporary Presbyterianism.
Usually a Presbyterian church will not have statues of saints, nor the ornate altar more typical of a Roman Catholic church.
A congregation issues a call for the pastor's service, but this call must be ratified by the local presbytery.
However, there are still stalwart Presbyterians and Presbyterian churches in the area.
They broke off from the Church of England in 1811, ordaining their own ministers.
As such, the church is a member of the World Communion of Reformed Churches.
Presbyterian churches are also present in Peru, Bolivia, Cuba, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Colombia, Chile, Paraguay, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Argentina and others, but with few members.
Presbyterian churches derive their name from the presbyterian form of church government, which is governed by representative assemblies of elders.
The Fundamentalist Presbyterian church in Brazil was influenced by Karl McIntire and the Bible Presbyterian church USA and has around 1 800 members.
The PC (USA), beginning with its predecessor bodies, has, in common with other so-called "mainline" Protestant denominations, experienced a significant decline in members in recent years.
Prior to Mizoram, the Welsh Presbyterians (missionaries) started venturing into the north-east of India through the Khasi Hills (presently located within the state of Meghalaya in India) and established Presbyterian churches all over the Khasi Hills from the 1840s onwards.
The last major schism had to do with the issue of whether the PCK should join the WCC.
Other Presbyterian bodies in the United States include the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America (RPCNA), the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church (ARP), the Reformed Presbyterian Church in the United States (RPCUS),  the Reformed Presbyterian Church General Assembly, the Reformed Presbyterian Church – Hanover Presbytery,  the Covenant Presbyterian Church, the Presbyterian Reformed Church, the Westminster Presbyterian Church in the United States, the Korean American Presbyterian Church, and the Free Presbyterian Church of North America.
His colleague George Leslie Mackay, of the Canadian Presbyterian Mission, was active in Danshui and north Taiwan from 1872 to 1901; he founded the island's first university and hospital, and created a written script for Taiwanese Minnan.
However this is based on a more subtle point: In confessional churches, theology is not solely an individual matter.
The Presbyterian Church of East Africa, based in Kenya, is particularly strong, with 500 clergy and 4 million members.
However, there is not one fixed  "Presbyterian" worship style.
There may be a rail between the communion table and the "Chancel" behind it, which may contain a more decorative altar-type table, choir loft, or choir stalls, lectern and clergy area.
In the mainly Christian Indian state of Mizoram, the Presbyterian denomination is the largest denomination; it was brought to the region with missionaries from Wales in 1894.
Some of the values and ideals espoused in Scottish presbyterian denominations can be reflected in this reference in a book from Norman Drummond, chaplain to the Queen in Scotland.
Some Presbyterian traditions adopt only the Westminster Confession of Faith as the doctrinal standard to which teaching elders are required to subscribe, in contrast to the Larger and Shorter catechisms, which are approved for use in instruction.
They also make use of the appropriate seasonal liturgical colors, etc.
The Presbyterian church traces its ancestry back primarily to England and Scotland.
Presbyterians in the United States came largely from Scotch-Irish immigrants communities and also from New England Yankee communities that had originally been Congregational but changed because of an agreed-upon Plan of Union of 1801 for frontier areas.
In addition there are many Korean-American Presbyterians in the United States, either with their own church sites or sharing space in pre-existing churches as is the case in Australia, New Zealand and even Muslim countries such as Saudi Arabia with Korean immigration.
Presbyterian church government was ensured in Scotland by the Acts of Union in 1707 which created the Kingdom of Great Britain.
Cartwright's controversial lectures at Cambridge University condemning the episcopal hierarchy of the Elizabethan Church led to his deprivation of his post by Archbishop John Whitgift and his emigration abroad.
This not only emphasized the resurrection, but also acknowledges historical aspects of Presbyterianism.
These other documents include ancient creedal statements (the Nicene Creed, the Apostles' Creed), 16th-century Reformed confessions (the Scots Confession, the Heidelberg Catechism, the Second Helvetic Confession), and 20th century documents (The Theological Declaration of Barmen, Confession of 1967 and A Brief Statement of Faith).
The decor in some instances was austere so as not to detract from worship.
Although there are set services for the "Lord's Day", one can find a service to be evangelical and even revivalist in tone (especially in some conservative denominations), or strongly liturgical, approximating the practices of Lutheranism or Anglicanism (especially where Scottish tradition is esteemed), or semi-formal, allowing for a balance of hymns, preaching, and congregational participation (favored by probably most American Presbyterians).
Along with Episcopalians, Presbyterians tend to be considerably wealthier and better educated (having graduate and post-graduate degrees per capita) than most other religious groups in United States, and are disproportionately represented in the upper reaches of American business, law and politics.
Some later rejoined only to separate again.
The obvious one is that confessional churches express their faith in the form of "confessions of faith," which have some level of authoritative status.
Many of its members left the largely liberal PCANZ because they were seeking a more Biblical church.
In addition also there are a number of Presbyterian Churches in north Africa, the most known is the Nile Synod in Egypt and a recently founded synod for Sudan.
In December 1560, the ''First Book of Discipline'' was published, outlining important doctrinal issues but also establishing regulations for church government, including the creation of ten ecclesiastical districts with appointed superintendents which later became known as presbyteries.
The Conservative Presbyterian Church was founded in 1940 and has eight presbyteries.
Many Presbyterian denominations have found ways of working together with other Reformed denominations and Christians of other traditions, especially in the World Communion of Reformed Churches.
Former ROC president Lee Teng-hui (in office 1988–2000) is a Presbyterian.
What resulted was an armed insurrection, with many Scots signing the ''Solemn League and Covenant''.
Hence there is a strong presence of Presbyterians in Shillong (the present capital of Meghalaya)  and the areas adjoining it.
It maintains close links with the Church of Scotland in Scotland itself, as well as with the Reformed Church of France.
Within Scotland the term kirk is usually used to refer to a local Presbyterian church.
The Province of Sanma is mainly Presbyterian with a strong Roman Catholic minority in the Francophone areas of the province.
In the late 19th century a gradual shift began to occur.
In some cases, the converts left towns and villages to establish their own neighboring villages.
No stained glass, no elaborate furnishings, and no images were to be found in the meeting-house.
In the twentieth century, some Presbyterians played an important role in the ecumenical movement, including the World Council of Churches.
Between 1645 and 1648, a series of ordinances of the Long Parliament established Presbyterianism as the polity of the Church of England.
There are also Korean Christians resident in Hong Kong who are Presbyterians.
The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (PCT) is by far the largest Protestant denomination in Taiwan, with some 238,372 members as of 2009 (including a majority of the island's aborigines).
Vanuatu is the only country in the South Pacific with a significant Presbyterian heritage and membership.
Presbyterian architecture generally makes significant use of symbolism.
The pulpit, often raised so as only to be accessible by a staircase, was the centerpiece of the building.
The approval of women elders given in the 1960s has been rescinded in all states except New South Wales, which has the largest membership.
Over subsequent centuries, many Presbyterian churches modified these prescriptions by introducing hymnody, instrumental accompaniment, and ceremonial vestments into worship.
The arrival of the United States to the area prompted the Catholic church to modernize and make efforts at winning the converts back, many of which did return.
Most Reformed churches which trace their history back to Scotland are either presbyterian or congregationalist in government.
In Brazil, the Presbyterian Church of Brazil (''Igreja Presbiteriana do Brasil'') totals approximately 1,011,300 members; other Presbyterian churches (Independents, United, Conservatives, Renovated, etc.)
Other Presbyterians, however, such as the Reformed Presbyterians, would practice a cappella exclusive psalmody, as well as eschew the celebration of holy days.
The Reformed Presbyterian Church in Malawi has 150 congregations and 17 000–20 000 members.
Presbyterians participated in the mergers that resulted in the Church of North India and the Church of South India.Sohra
Presbyterianism was especially influenced by the French theologian John Calvin, who is credited with the development of Reformed theology, and the work of John Knox, a Scotsman who studied with Calvin in Geneva, Switzerland and brought his teachings back to Scotland.
These are composed of teaching elders and ruling elders from each of the constituent congregations.
In 1733, a group of ministers seceded from the Church of Scotland to form the Associate Presbytery, another group seceded in 1761 to form the Relief Church and the Disruption of 1843 led to the formation of the Free Church of Scotland.
The Covenanters would serve as the government of Scotland for nearly a decade, and would also send military support to the Parliamentarians during the English Civil War.
Also the Southminster Presbyterian Church, located near Pittsburgh, has partnerships with churches in Malawi and Kenya.
A sizable minority of Canadian Presbyterians, primarily in southern Ontario but also throughout the entire nation, withdrew, and reconstituted themselves as a non-concurring continuing Presbyterian body.
The missionary expedition of Mary Slessor and Hope Waddel and their group in the mid 18th century in this coastal regions of the ten British colony has brought about the beginning and the flourishing of this church in these areas.
In Canada, the largest Presbyterian denomination – and indeed the largest Protestant denomination – was the Presbyterian Church in Canada, formed in 1875 with the merger of four regional groups.
Presbyterians believed that meeting-houses (now called churches) are buildings to support the worship of God.
A number of new Presbyterian Churches were founded by Scottish immigrants to England in the 19th century and later.
Among the congregations the PCofE brought to the URC were Tunley (Lancashire), Aston Tirrold (Oxfordshire) and John Knox Presbyterian Church, Stepney, London (now part of Stepney Meeting House URC) – these are among the sole survivors today of the English Presbyterian churches of the 17th century.
In Wales, Presbyterianism is represented by the Presbyterian Church of Wales, which was originally composed largely of Calvinistic Methodists who accepted Calvinist theology rather than the Arminianism of the Wesleyan Methodists.
The church was founded in the 12th century, and centuries later, after the Protestant Reformation, it adhered to Calvinist theology and became the Italian branch of the Presbyterian churches.
The Welsh missionaries built their first church in Sohra (aka Cherrapunji) in 1846.
Until the late 19th century, very few Presbyterians ever referred to their buildings as "churches."
The United Presbyterian Church in Brazil has around 4 000 members.
Following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, Charles II, despite the initial support that he received from the Covenanters, reinstated an episcopal form of government on the church.
The roots of Presbyterianism lie in the European Reformation of the 16th century; the example of John Calvin's Geneva being particularly influential.
The Cumberland Presbyterian Church also have a church on the island of Cheung Chau.
The manner of subscription, or the degree to which the official standards establish the actual doctrine of the church, turns out to be a practical matter.
And in 1953 the second schism happened when the theological orientation of the Chosun Seminary (later Hanshin University) founded in 1947 could not be tolerated in the PCK and another minor group (The Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea, Kijang, 기장) was separated.
This group may variously be known as a "Deacon Board", "Board of Deacons" "Diaconate", or "Deacons' Court".
This directory documented Reformed worship practices and theology adopted and developed over the preceding century by British Puritans, initially guided by John Calvin and John Knox.
King James VI and I moved the Church of Scotland towards an episcopal form of government, and in 1637, James' successor, Charles I and William Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury, attempted to force the Church of Scotland to use the Book of Common Prayer.
A great number of Reformed churches are organized this way, but the word ''Presbyterian'', when capitalised, is often applied uniquely to churches that trace their roots to the Scottish and English Presbyterians, and several English political groups that formed during the English Civil War.
In 1925, the United Church of Canada was formed by the majority of Presbyterians combining with the Methodist Church, Canada, and the Congregational Union of Canada.
However, legislation by the United Kingdom parliament allowing patronage led to splits in the Church.
education, health ministries as well as worship and spiritual development are important.
William Robertson Smith).
Part of the Presbyterian Church in Malawi and Zambia is known as CCAP, Church of Central Africa-Presbyterian.
In fact, most Presbyterians found in England can trace a Scottish connection, and the Presbyterian denomination was also taken to North America mostly by Scots and Scots-Irish immigrants.
The theology of the church is now generally conservative and Reformed.
Some of the splits have been due to doctrinal controversy, while some have been caused by disagreement concerning the degree to which those ordained to church office should be required to agree with the Westminster Confession of Faith, which historically serves as an important confessional document – second only to the Bible, yet directing particularities in the standardization and translation of the Bible – in Presbyterian churches.
St. Giles Cathedral ( Church Of Scotland- The Mother Church of Presbyterians) does have a Crucifix next to one of the Pulpits that hangs alongside.
Informally, and sadly now rather morosely, the term 'The Kirk' refers to the
The permission for the ordination of women given in 1974 was rescinded in 1991 without affecting the two or three existing woman ministers.
The PCV (Presbyterian Church of Vanuatu) is headed by a moderator with offices in Port Vila.
Above the sessions exist presbyteries, which have area responsibilities.
The Presbyterian Church in Belize has 14 churches and church plants and there is a Reformed Seminary founded in 2004.
There are also ethnic Korean Presbyterian churches in the country.
Presbyterians distinguish themselves from other denominations by doctrine, institutional organization (or "church order") and worship; often using a "Book of Order" to regulate common practice and order.
This has two implications.
Presbyterian government is by councils (known as ''courts'') of elders.
The PCV is particularly strong in the provinces of Tafea, Shefa, and Malampa.
Early Presbyterians were careful to distinguish between the "church," which referred the ''members'', and the "meeting house," which was the building in which the church met.
Many Presbyterian denominations, especially in North America, have adopted all of the Westminster Standards as their standard of doctrine which is subordinate to the Bible.
Early Presbyterian meeting-houses were extremely plain.
This formulation represents many years of struggle over the extent to which the confession reflects the Word of God and the struggle of conscience of those who came to believe it did not fully do so (e.g.
In a Presbyterian (Reformed Church) there may be an altar cross, either on the communion table or on a table in the chancel.
It is confessional in format, yet like the Westminster Confession, draws attention back to original Bible text.
The PCV runs many primary schools and Onesua secondary school.
In 1977, two thirds of the Presbyterian Church of Australia, along with most of the Congregational Union of Australia and all the Methodist Church of Australasia, combined to form the Uniting Church in Australia.
Presbyterian Churches are the biggest and by far the most influential Protestant denominations in South Korea, with close to 20,000 churches affiliated with the two largest Presbyterian denominations in the country.
There is a Church of Scotland (Presbyterian) in central Paris The Scots Kirk, Paris which is English-speaking, and is attended by many nationalities.
Among the paleo-orthodox and emerging church movements in Protestant and evangelical churches, in which some Presbyterians are involved, clergy are moving away from the traditional black Geneva gown to such vestments as the alb and chasuble, but also cassock and surplice (typically a full length Old English style surplice which resembles the Celtic alb, an ungirdled liturgical tunic of the old Gallican Rite), which some, particularly those identifying with the Liturgical Renewal Movement, hold to be more ancient and representative of a more ecumenical past.
The third who did not unite had various reasons for so acting, often cultural attachment but often conservative theological or social views.
The altar is called the communion table and the altar area is called the Chancel by Presbyterians.
African Presbyterian churches often incorporate diaconal ministries, including social services, emergency relief, and the operation of mission hospitals.
There is also a congregation in the heart of London's financial district called  London City Presbyterian Church  that is also affiliated with Free Church of Scotland.
Some, that is Crown Court (Covent Garden, London), St Andrew's (Stepney, London) and Swallow Street (London), did not join the English denomination, which is why there are Church of Scotland congregations in England such as those at Crown Court, and St Columba's, Pont Street (Knightsbridge) in London.
Presbyterian governance is practised by Presbyterian denominations and also by many other Reformed churches.
Presbyterianism is represented in Ireland by the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, the Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland, the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church.
In time, the presbytery would be joined by two more to form a synod (1717) and would eventually evolve into the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America in 1789.
They were originally known as the Calvinist Methodist connexion and in the 1920s it became alternatively known as the Presbyterian Church of Wales.
Thomas Cartwright is thought to be the first Presbyterian in England.
Teaching elders (pastors) have responsibility for teaching, worship, and performing sacraments.
Ruling elders are usually laymen (and laywomen in some denominations) who are elected by the congregation and ordained to serve with the teaching elders, assuming responsibility for nurture and leadership of the congregation.
But after independence, the 'Presbyterian Church in Korea (KoRyuPa)' advocated a Dutch Reformed position.
The Reformed Churches in Brazil were recently founded by the Canadian Reformed Churches with the Reformed Church in the Netherlands (liberated).
The Westminster Confession is "The principal subordinate standard of the Church of Scotland" but "with due regard to liberty of opinion in points which do not enter into the substance of the Faith" (V).
One of the few churches permitted to operate in Taiwan through the era of Japanese rule (1895–1945), the PCT experienced rapid growth during the era of Guomindang-imposed martial law (1949–1987), in part due to its support for democracy, human rights, and Taiwan independence.
It was enacted as law by the Scottish Parliament, and became one of the foundational documents of Presbyterian church legislation elsewhere.
It was a mission of the Free Presbyterian church of Scotland.
They regained use of the original name in 1939.
in this nation have around 350,000 members.
Prosperous congregations built imposing churches, such as Fourth Presbyterian in Chicago, Madison Avenue Presbyterian and Fifth Avenue Presbyterian in New York City, Shadyside Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh, PA, East Liberty Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh, PA, First Presbyterian in Dallas, House of Hope Presbyterian Church in Saint Paul, Minnesota Independent Presbyterian Church (Birmingham, Alabama) plus many others.
Many branches of Presbyterianism are remnants of previous splits from larger groups.
The area experienced a "mini" reformation, in that many converts were made to Presbyterianism, prompting persecution.
In 1972, the Presbyterian Church of England (PCofE) united with the Congregational Church in England and Wales to form the United Reformed Church (URC).
John Knox (1505–1572), a Scot who had spent time studying under Calvin in Geneva, returned to Scotland and urged his countrymen to reform the Church in line with Calvinist doctrines.
The PCV was taken to Vanuatu by missionaries from Scotland.
The URC also has a presence in Scotland, mostly of former Congregationalist Churches.
Two former Presbyterian congregations, St Columba's, Cambridge (founded in 1879), and St Columba's, Oxford (founded as a chaplaincy by the PCofE and the Church of Scotland in 1908 and as a congregation of the PCofE in 1929), continue as congregations of the URC and university chaplaincies of the Church of Scotland.
That is, the decisions rendered in ordination and in the courts of the church largely determine what the church means, representing the whole, by its adherence to the doctrinal standard.
Often, especially in larger congregations, the elders delegate the practicalities of buildings, finance, and temporal ministry to the needy in the congregation to a distinct group of officers (sometimes called deacons, which are ordained in some denominations).
The Renewed Presbyterian Church in Brazil was influenced by the charismatic movement and has about 131 000 members as of 2011.
Presbyterianism arrived in Latin America in the 19th century.
Instead, one will find a "communion table," usually on the same level as the congregation.
The re-establishment of the monarchy in 1660 brought the return of Episcopal church government in England (and in Scotland for a short time); but the Presbyterian church in England continued in Non-Conformity, outside of the established church.
