**** Superfamily Lorisoidea
Orangutans use a similar form of locomotion called quadramanous climbing, in which they use their arms and legs to carry their heavy bodies through the trees.
Such values are among the highest recorded for any terrestrial mammal, and a relatively extreme example of ultrasonic communication.
Old World monkeys have eight premolars, compared with 12 in New World monkeys.
Among the primates wiped out were ''Archaeoindris'' (a lemur larger than a silverback gorilla) and the families Palaeopropithecidae and Archaeolemuridae.
Predators of primates have diverse hunting strategies and as such, primates have evolved several different antipredator adaptations including crypsis, alarm calls and mobbing.
For example, leaf eaters such as howler monkeys, black-and-white colobuses and sportive lemurs have extended digestive tracts which enable them to absorb nutrients from leaves that can be difficult to digest.
Simians include monkeys, apes and hominins.
Suborder Haplorhini, the simple-nosed or "dry-nosed" primates, is composed of two sister clades.
** '''Suborder Haplorhini''': tarsiers, monkeys and apes
They will break off a tree branch that is about 30&nbsp;cm long, snap off the twigs, fray one end and then use the stick to dig in tree holes for termites.
***** Family Lepilemuridae: sportive lemurs (26 species)
Most primates include fruit in their diets to obtain easily digested carbohydrates and lipids for energy.
In 2008, the aye-aye family was confirmed to be most closely related to the other Malagasy lemurs, likely having descended from the same ancestral population that colonized the island.
***** Family Lorisidae: lorisids (14 species)
There is ''fission'' when the main group splits up to forage during the day, then ''fusion'' when the group returns at night to sleep as a group.
Primates have forward-facing eyes on the front of the skull; binocular vision allows accurate distance perception, useful for the brachiating ancestors of all great apes.
Locomotion techniques used include leaping from tree to tree, walking on two or four limbs, knuckle-walking, and swinging between branches of trees (brachiation).
Primates with a large body size (over 5&nbsp;kg) are at increased extinction risk due to their greater profitability to poachers compared to smaller primates.
Primates exploit a variety of food sources.
Accounting for 25% to 40% of the fruit-eating animals (by weight) within tropical rainforests, primates play an important ecological role by dispersing seeds of many tree species.
Marmosets, which are gum eaters, have strong incisor teeth, enabling them to open tree bark to get to the gum, and claws rather than nails, enabling them to cling to trees while feeding.
Woolly monkeys also brachiate at times.
Primates, especially females, have longer lifespans than other similarly sized mammals, this may be partially due to their slower metabolisms.
***** Superfamily Hominoidea
NHPs are kept in zoos around the globe.
The chimpanzee had been using the grass as a tool to “fish” or "dip" for termites.
The primary evolutionary trend of primates has been the elaboration of the brain, in particular the neocortex (a part of the cerebral cortex), which is involved with sensory perception, generation of motor commands, spatial reasoning, conscious thought and, in humans, language.
However, there is a great deal of variation in each group (e.g., among New World monkeys, both spider and capuchin monkeys have scored highly by some measures), as well as in the results of different studies.
Intergeneric hybridizations, hybrids of different genera, have also been found in the wild.
Howler monkeys are one of the most specialized leaf-eaters of the New World monkeys; fruits are not a major part of their diets, and the type of leaves they prefer to consume (young, nutritive, and digestible) are detectable only by a red-green signal.
The red-tailed monkey associates with several species, including the western red colobus, blue monkey, Wolf's mona monkey, mantled guereza, black crested mangabey and Allen's swamp monkey.
Given estimated current and wind speeds, this would have provided enough time to make the voyage between the continents.
Capuchin monkeys can be trained to assist quadriplegic humans; their intelligence, memory, and manual dexterity make them ideal helpers.
With their technology and increased intelligence, modern humans are nearly free of threats from predators and are themselves apex predators.
Primates in the suborder Strepsirrhini (non-tarsier prosimians) are able to synthesize vitamin C, like most other mammals, while primates of the suborder Haplorrhini (tarsiers, monkeys and apes) have lost this ability, and require the vitamin in their diet.
In the first edition of the same book (1735), he had used the name Anthropomorpha for ''Homo'', ''Simia'' and ''Bradypus'' (sloths).
****** Family Hominidae: great apes, including humans (7 species)
Miss Waldron's red colobus was recently declared extinct when no trace of the subspecies could be found from 1993 to 1999.
The primate collar bone is retained as prominent element of the pectoral girdle; this allows the shoulder joint broad mobility.
Prosimians are distinguished by their immobilized upper lips, the moist tip of their noses and forward-facing lower front teeth.
There was a single case in which a chimpanzee successfully extracted a bush baby with the tool.
How these two groups relate to extant primates is unclear.
Within a social group there is a balance between cooperation and competition.
Richard Wrangham stated that social systems of non-human primates are best classified by the amount of movement by females occurring between groups.
***** Family Indriidae: woolly lemurs and allies (19 species)
*** Infraorder Tarsiiformes
**** Parvorder Catarrhini
Primates usually have dimorphism in body mass and canine tooth size along with pelage and skin color.
The main cause of forest loss is clearing for agriculture, although commercial logging, subsistence harvesting of timber, mining, and dam construction also contribute to tropical forest destruction.
Some species are partially terrestrial, such as baboons and patas monkeys, and a few species are fully terrestrial, such as geladas and humans.
Older classification schemes wrap Lepilemuridae into Lemuridae and Galagidae into Lorisidae, yielding a four-one family distribution instead of five-two as presented here.
Close interactions between humans and non-human primates (NHPs) can create pathways for the transmission of zoonotic diseases.
Research suggests that a small  primate could have survived 13 days on a raft of vegetation.
Ontogenetic scaling, where relative extension of a common growth trajectory occurs, may give some insight into the relationship between sexual dimorphism and growth patterns.
Depending on the species, adults may live in solitude, in mated pairs, or in groups of up to hundreds of members.
These include many bushbabies, all indriids (i.e., sifakas, avahis and indris), sportive lemurs, and all tarsiers.
Technically, Old World monkeys are distinguished from New World monkeys by the structure of the nose, and from apes by the arrangement of their teeth.
Common threats to primate species include deforestation, forest fragmentation, monkey drives (resulting from primate crop raiding), and primate hunting for use in medicines, as pets, and for food.
Large-scale tropical forest clearing is widely regarded as the process that most threatens primates.
During the Eocene, most of the northern continents were dominated by two groups, the adapiforms and the omomyids.
Chacma baboons use stones as weapons; stoning by these baboons is done from the rocky walls of the canyon where they sleep and retreat to when they are threatened.
Many species of NHP are kept as pets by humans, the Allied Effort to Save Other Primates (AESOP) estimates that around 15,000 NHPs live as exotic pets in the United States.
***** Family Atelidae: howler, spider, woolly spider and woolly monkeys (29 species)
Primate crop raiding gives locals a negative impression of primates, hindering conservation efforts.
This is due to their large body size, ease of transport and profitability per animal.
Other relatives of the infant, such as siblings and aunts, may participate in its care as well.
Data for some African cities show that half of all protein consumed in urban areas comes from the bushmeat trade.
***** Family Pitheciidae: titis, sakis and uakaris (43 species)
In June 2008, Spain became the first country in the world to recognize the rights of some NHPs, when its parliament's cross-party environmental committee urged the country to comply with GAP's recommendations, which are that chimpanzees, bonobos, orangutans, and gorillas are not be used for animal experiments.
In Thailand and Myanmar, crab-eating macaques use stone tools to open nuts, oysters and other bivalves, and various types of sea snails.
Primates are characterized by large brains relative to other mammals, as well as an increased reliance on stereoscopic vision at the expense of smell, the dominant sensory system in most mammals.
Sumatran orangutans have been observed making and using tools.
The gelada has a similar social structure in which many smaller groups come together to form temporary herds of up to 600 monkeys.
Primates show an evolutionary trend towards a reduced snout.
While other mammals rely heavily on their sense of smell, the arboreal life of primates has led to a tactile, visually dominant sensory system, a reduction in the olfactory region of the brain and increasingly complex social behavior.
***** Family Lemuridae: ring-tailed lemur and allies (21 species)
Comparative studies show a trend towards higher intelligence going from prosimians to New World monkeys to Old World monkeys, and significantly higher average cognitive abilities in the great apes.
Many species are sexually dimorphic; differences include body mass, canine tooth size, and coloration.
Predation may have shaped group size in primates as species exposed to higher predation pressures appear to live in larger groups.
These social systems are affected by three main ecological factors: distribution of resources, group size, and predation.
**** Family Tarsiidae: tarsiers (11 species)
Predators of primates include various species of carnivorans, birds of prey, reptiles and other primates.
Another possibility is to expand the use of one of the traditional names.
In Asia, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam prohibit eating primate meat; however, primates are still hunted for food.
These features are more developed in monkeys and apes and noticeably less so in lorises and lemurs.
There are 21 critically endangered primates, 7 of which have remained on the IUCN's "The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates" list since the year 2000: the silky sifaka, Delacour's langur, the white-headed langur, the gray-shanked douc, the Tonkin snub-nosed monkey, the Cross River gorilla and the Sumatran orangutan.
The rhesus macaque, a model organism, was protected after excessive trapping threatened its numbers in the 1960s; the program was so effective that they are now viewed as a pest throughout their range.
All groups with scientific names are monophyletic (that is, they are clades), and the sequence of scientific classification reflects the evolutionary history of the related lineages.
The expanding Chinese middle class has increased demand for NHPs as exotic pets in recent years.
Primates arose from ancestors that lived in the trees of tropical forests; many primate characteristics represent adaptations to life in this challenging three-dimensional environment.
Populations therefore recover more slowly after being depleted by poaching or the pet trade.
This may have more to do with foraging benefits to the squirrel monkeys than anti-predation benefits.
Primates also use vocalizations, gestures, and facial expressions to convey psychological state.
Tool manufacture is much rarer than simple tool use and probably represents higher cognitive functioning.
However, they require other foods, such as leaves or insects, for amino acids, vitamins and minerals.
An analysis of breeding records of captive primate colonies representing numerous different species indicates that the infant mortality of inbred young is generally higher than that of non-inbred young.
Prosimian tarsiers in the family Tarsiidae (monotypic in its own infraorder Tarsiiformes), represent the most basal division, originating about 58 mya.
For Philippine tarsiers, ultrasonic vocalizations might represent a private channel of communication that subverts detection by predators, prey and competitors, enhances energetic efficiency, or improves detection against low-frequency background noise.
Several species of primates are known to associate in the wild.
Orangutans in Borneo scoop catfish out of small ponds.
Research in primate cognition explores problem solving, memory, social interaction, a theory of mind, and numerical, spatial, and abstract concepts.
This is considered the first evidence of systematic use of weapons in a species other than humans.
***** Superfamily Cercopithecoidea
Primate habitats span a range of altitudes: the black snub-nosed monkey has been found living in the Hengduan Mountains at altitudes of 4,700&nbsp;meters (15,400&nbsp;ft), the mountain gorilla can be found at 4,200 meters (13,200&nbsp;ft) crossing the Virunga Mountains, and the gelada has been found at elevations of up to  in the Ethiopian Highlands.
Molecular and fossil studies generally show that modern humans originated in Africa 100,000–200,000 years ago.
The dimorphism can be attributed to and affected by different factors, including mating system, size, habitat and diet.
Other primates follow a strategy of "riding", i,e.
Some species have additional specializations.
****** Family Cercopithecidae: Old World monkeys (138 species)
Primates have advanced cognitive abilities: some make tools and use them to acquire food and for social displays; some have sophisticated hunting strategies requiring cooperation, influence and rank; they are status conscious, manipulative and capable of deception; they can recognise kin and conspecifics; and they can learn to use symbols and understand aspects of human language including some relational syntax and concepts of number and numerical sequence.
Prosimians have characteristics more like those of the earliest primates, and include the lemurs of Madagascar, lorisoids, and tarsiers.
The seven strepsirrhine families are the five related lemur families and the two remaining families that include the lorisids and the galagos.
***** Family Callitrichidae: marmosets and tamarins (42 species)
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists more than a third of primates as critically endangered or vulnerable.
Fish, reptiles and birds are therefore trichromatic or tetrachromatic, while all mammals, with the exception of some primates and marsupials, are dichromats or monochromats (totally color blind).
Thumbs allow some species to use tools.
Some primates, such as the rhesus macaque and gray langurs, can exploit human-modified environments and even live in cities.
The primate skull has a large, domed cranium, which is particularly prominent in anthropoids.
A few hunters have found and killed individuals since then, but the subspecies' prospects remain bleak.
Captive gorillas have made a variety of tools.
This effect of inbreeding on infant mortality is probably largely a result of increased expression of deleterious recessive alleles (see Inbreeding depression).
For example, an alternative classification of the living Strepsirrhini divides them into two infraorders, Lemuriformes and Lorisiformes.
Due to continental drift, the Atlantic Ocean was not nearly as wide at the time as it is today.
Some are also terrestrial quadrupeds, while some are leapers.
Order Primates is part of the clade Euarchontoglires, which is nested within the clade Eutheria of Class Mammalia.
Some scientists consider Dermoptera to be a suborder of Primates and use the suborder Euprimates for the "true" primates.
This increases the amount of forest vulnerable to edge effects such as farmland encroachment, lower levels of humidity and a change in plant life.
There are some examples of non-human primates that live outside of the tropics; the mountain-dwelling Japanese macaque lives in the north of Honshū where there is snow-cover eight months of the year; the Barbary macaque lives in the Atlas Mountains of Algeria and Morocco.
The mean endocranial volume is 1,201 cubic centimeters in humans, 469&nbsp;cm3 in gorillas, 400&nbsp;cm3 in chimpanzees and 397&nbsp;cm3 in orangutans.
Catarrhines are routinely trichromatic due to a gene duplication of the red-green opsin gene at the base of their lineage, 30 to 40 million years ago.
European groups such as the European Coalition to End Animal Experiments are seeking a ban on all NHP use in experiments as part of the European Union's review of animal testing legislation.
Field work exploring the dietary preferences of howler monkeys suggests that routine trichromaticism was selected by environment.
A third clade, which included the eosimiids, developed in Asia, but became extinct millions of years ago.
The pet trade and traditional medicine also increase demand for illegal hunting.
Governments of many nations have strict care requirements of NHPs kept in captivity.
The number of primate species within tropical areas has been shown to be positively correlated to the amount of rainfall and the amount of rain forest area.
Consider the superfamily Hominoidea: In terms of the common names on the right, this group consists of apes and humans and there is no single common name for all the members of the group.
Order Primates was established by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, in the tenth edition of his book ''Systema Naturae'', for the genera ''Homo'' (humans), ''Simia'' (other apes and monkeys), ''Lemur'' (prosimians) and ''Vespertilio'' (bats).
The transfer of females or males from their native group is likely an adaptation for avoiding inbreeding.
With the exception of humans, who inhabit every continent except for Antarctica, most primates live in tropical or subtropical regions of the Americas, Africa and Asia.
They serve as service animals for disabled humans.
For example, the grey-cheeked mangabey has thick enamel on its teeth, enabling it to open hard fruits and seeds that other monkeys cannot.
Primates have a longer juvenile period between weaning and sexual maturity than other mammals of similar size.
Gibbons, muriquis and spider monkeys all brachiate extensively, with gibbons sometimes doing so in remarkably acrobatic fashion.
Males, therefore, can only be dichromatic, while females can be either dichromatic or trichromatic.
Primate species move by brachiation, bipedalism, leaping, arboreal and terrestrial quadrupedalism, climbing, knuckle-walking or by a combination of these methods.
Prosimii included all of the prosimians: Strepsirrhini plus the tarsiers.
A list of the families of the living primates is given below, together with one possible classification into ranks between order and family.
However, Madagascar split from Africa 160 mya and from India 90 mya.
Some smaller traditional religions allow the consumption of primate meat.
Although most species are generally shy of water, a few are good swimmers and are comfortable in swamps and watery areas, including the proboscis monkey, De Brazza's monkey and Allen's swamp monkey, which has developed small webbing between its fingers.
It has been said that many characteristics of modern primates, including humans, derive from an early ancestor's practice of taking most of its food from the tropical canopy.
In some instances, bonobos have been shown to consume lower-order primates.
Three-color vision has developed in some primates.
Some primates (including some great apes and baboons) are primarily terrestrial rather than arboreal, but all species possess adaptations for climbing trees.
Primates evolved from arboreal animals, and many species live most of their lives in trees.
She found that the termites bit onto the grass with their jaws.
Chimpanzees and gorillas knuckle walk, and can move bipedally for short distances.
After he left, Goodall approached the mound and repeated the behaviour because she was unsure what the chimpanzee was doing.
The infraorder Simiiformes (simian primates, consisting of monkeys and apes) emerged about 40&nbsp;mya, possibly also in Asia; if so, they dispersed across the Tethys Sea from Asia to Africa soon afterwards.
The suborder Strepsirrhini, the "wet-nosed" primates, is generally thought to have split off from the primitive primate line about 63&nbsp;mya, although earlier dates are also supported.
***** Family Aotidae: night or owl monkeys (douroucoulis) (11 species)
Although numerous species, such as australopithecines and early hominids, have exhibited fully bipedal locomotion, humans are the only extant species with this trait.
As in the case of lemurs, the origin of New World monkeys is unclear.
***** Family Cheirogaleidae: dwarf lemurs and mouse-lemurs (34 species)
The bonobo is an omnivorous frugivore – the majority of its diet is fruit, but it supplements this with leaves, meat from small vertebrates, such as anomalures, flying squirrels and duikers, and invertebrates.
Gibbons essentially use this system, although "monogamy" in this context does not necessarily mean absolute sexual fidelity.
Another adult female used a detached trunk from a small shrub as a stabilizer during food gathering, and another used a log as a bridge.
This often leads to weaning conflict with infants who attempt to continue breastfeeding.
These include the Diana monkey, Campbell's mona monkey, lesser spot-nosed monkey, western red colobus, king colobus and sooty mangabey, which coordinate anti-predator alarm calls.
Molecular studies of concatenated nuclear sequences have yielded a widely varying estimated date of divergence between platyrrhines and catarrhines, ranging from 33 to 70 mya, while studies based on mitochondrial sequences produce a narrower range of 35 to 43 mya.
The earliest known haplorhine skeleton, that of 55 MA old tarsier-like ''Archicebus'', was found in central China, supporting an already suspected Asian origin for the group.
Recent studies involve comparing DNA to examine both the variation in the expression of the dimorphism among primates and the fundamental causes of sexual dimorphism.
Lemurs, lorises, tarsiers, and New World monkeys rely on olfactory signals for many aspects of social and reproductive behavior.
Several species have separate alarm calls for different predators such as air-borne or ground-dwelling predators.
Stones are lifted with one hand and dropped over the side whereupon they tumble down the side of the cliff or fall directly to the canyon floor.
In South America, squirrel monkeys associate with capuchin monkeys.
In contrast with Clark's methodology, modern classifications typically identify (or name) only those groupings that are monophyletic; that is, such a named group includes ''all'' the descendants of the group's common ancestor.
The legal status of NHPs, on the other hand, is the subject of much debate, with organizations such as the Great Ape Project (GAP) campaigning to award at least some of them legal rights.
These three orders make up the clade Euarchonta.
The latter was closely related to tarsiers, monkeys, and apes.
Aggression is also used in establishing dominance hierarchies.
carrying individuals on the body while feeding.
*** Infraorder Simiiformes (or Anthropoidea)
Primate hybrids usually arise in captivity, but there have also been examples in the wild.
Cooperative behaviors include social grooming (removing skin parasites and cleaning wounds), food sharing, and collective defense against predators or of a territory.
In Central and South America forest fragmentation and hunting are the two main problems for primates.
According to genetic studies, the lemurs of Madagascar diverged from the lorisoids approximately 75 mya.
The evolution of color vision in primates is unique among most eutherian mammals.
The Old World species are divided into apes and monkeys depending on the number of cusps on their molars; apes have five, Old World monkeys have four, although humans may have four or five.
In 1839, Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville, following Linnaeus and imitating his nomenclature, established the orders Secundates (including the suborders Chiroptera, Insectivora and Carnivora), Tertiates (or Glires) and Quaternates (including Gravigrada, Pachydermata and Ruminantia), but these new taxa were not accepted.
Specifically, individual females must be heterozygous for two alleles of the opsin gene (red and green) located on the same locus of the X chromosome.
The offspring leaves the parents' territory during adolescence.
* "monkeys" comprise two monophyletic groups, New World monkeys and Old World monkeys, but is paraphyletic because it excludes hominoids, superfamily Hominoidea, also descendants of the common ancestor Simiiformes.
The cladogram below shows one possible classification sequence of the living primates, with groups that use common (traditional) names are shown on the right.
The chimpanzees then jabbed their spears into hollows in tree trunks where bush babies slept.
Primates are among the most social of animals, forming pairs or family groups, uni-male harems, and multi-male/multi-female groups.
Most primate mothers cease ovulation while breastfeeding an infant; once the infant is weaned the mother can reproduce again.
According to our current understanding of the evolutionary history of the primates, several of these groups are paraphyletic: a paraphyletic group is one which does ''not'' include all the descendants of the group's common ancestor.
