The policy remained in place even after Malkiel stepped down at the end of the 2010–2011 school year.
According to the ''New York Times'', "the day got its name from an apocryphal quote attributed to Paul Newman: '24 beers in a case, 24 hours in a day.
Buried in the ground at the center of the lawn south of Nassau Hall is the "Big Cannon," which was left in Princeton by British troops as they fled following the Battle of Princeton.
Each year, nearly 300 teams participate in intramural sports at Princeton.
The museum has collections of old master prints and drawings and a comprehensive collection of over 27,000 original photographs.
The residential colleges also sponsor trips to New York for undergraduates to see ballets, operas, Broadway shows, sports events, and other activities.
The free concerts take place in one of the larger arches on campus.
Published in 2008, Princeton's Sustainability Plan highlights three priority areas for the University's Office of Sustainability: reduction of greenhouse gas emissions; conservation of resources; and research, education, and civic engagement.
Wilson served as an early experiment in the establishment of the residential college system.
During this time, Princeton won 13 Ivy League titles and made 11 NCAA tournament appearances.
*''Dean's Date'' – The Tuesday at the end of each semester when all written work is due.
It remained in Princeton until the War of 1812, when it was taken to New Brunswick.
Out-of-class exercises fall under the jurisdiction of the Faculty-Student Committee on Discipline.
Most upperclassmen eat their meals at one of the eleven eating clubs.
Recently, upperclassmen have been given the option of remaining in their college for all four years.
For over 800 years, however, the collegiate system had already existed in Britain at Cambridge and Oxford Universities.
About 90 faculty members at Princeton University are affiliated with it.
Although the school's admissions policy is need blind, Princeton, based on the proportion of students who receive Pell Grants, was ranked as a school with little economic diversity among all national universities ranked by ''U.S.
Princeton's football team has a long and storied history.
A group of 20th-century sculptures scattered throughout the campus forms the Putnam Collection of Sculpture.
The campus expanded steadily around Nassau Hall during the early and middle 19th century.
Princeton's colors are orange and black.
Several leagues with differing levels of competitiveness are available.
A second "Little Cannon" is buried in the lawn in front of nearby Whig Hall.
The university has ties with the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton Theological Seminary, and the Westminster Choir College of Rider University.
The main campus sits on about  in Princeton.
The James Forrestal Campus is split between nearby Plainsboro and South Brunswick.
Additionally, it is among the largest "open stack" libraries in existence.
That year, Wilson College was established to cap a series of alternatives to the eating clubs.
American novelist Jodi Picoult graduated in 1987.
In the "America's Top Colleges" rankings by ''Forbes'' in 2016, Princeton University was ranked third among all national colleges and universities, after holding the number one position for a number of years.
Princeton was ranked first in the most recent 2016 ''U.S.
The Princeton Inn, originally constructed in 1924, played regular host to important symposia and gatherings of renowned scholars from both the university and the nearby Institute for Advanced Study for many years.
Royals such as Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad, Prince Moulay Hicham of Morocco, Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud, and Queen Noor of Jordan also have attended Princeton.
The event centers on cane wrestling, where a freshman and a sophomore will grapple for control of a cane.
For safety reasons, the administration banned the Olympics in 2000 to the chagrin of students.
Following the untimely deaths of Princeton's first five presidents, John Witherspoon became president in 1768 and remained in that office until his death in 1794.
The campuses are situated about one hour from both New York City and Philadelphia.
Princeton has also graduated many prominent members of the U.S. Congress and the U.S.
Wilson and Butler, located south of the center of the campus, were built in the 1960s.
In an effort to expand access, these libraries also subscribe to thousands of electronic resources.
Nobel laureate Angus Deaton for his analysis of consumption, poverty, and welfare.
The precursor of the present college system in America was originally proposed by university president Woodrow Wilson in the early 20th century.
Its athletic conference is the Ivy League.
*''Gilding the Lily'' – Promotion ceremony at the 25th reunion of a class.
Bob Dylan wrote "Day of The Locusts" (for his 1970 album ''New Morning'') about his experience of receiving an honorary doctorate from the University.
Before the Langlotz tune was written, the song was sung to ''Auld Lang Syne'''s melody, which also fits.
According to tradition, anyone who exits campus through the FitzRandolph Gates before his or her own graduation date will not graduate.
Numbering over 92,000 objects, the collections range from ancient to contemporary art and concentrate geographically on the Mediterranean regions, Western Europe, China, the United States, and Latin America.
It approves the operating and capital budgets, supervises the investment of the University's endowment and oversees campus real estate and long-range physical planning.
University housing is guaranteed to all undergraduates for all four years.
A compromise between the presidents of Princeton and Rutgers ended the war and forced the return of the Little Cannon to Princeton.
Princeton supports organized athletics at three levels: varsity intercollegiate, club intercollegiate, and intramural.
The front entrance is flanked by two bronze tigers, a gift of the Princeton Class of 1879.
Malkiel's argument was that an A was beginning to lose its meaning as a larger percentage of the student body received them.
Today, the Triangle Club performs its annual freshmen revue, fall show, and Reunions performances in McCarter.
Notable former faculty members include John Witherspoon, Walter Kaufmann, Ben Bernanke, Paul Krugman, Joseph Henry, Toni Morrison, John P. Lewis, and alumnus Woodrow Wilson, who served as president of the University 1902–1910.
Jonathan Belcher replied: "What a hell of a name that would be!"
McCarter is also recognized as one of the leading regional theaters in the United States.
*''Lawnparties'' – Parties that feature live bands that are held simultaneously by all of the eating clubs at the start of classes and at the conclusion of the academic year.
Most are held in Blair Arch or Class of 1879 Arch.
The eating clubs, located on Prospect Avenue, are co-ed organizations for upperclassmen.
In 1933, Albert Einstein became a lifetime member of the Institute for Advanced Study with an office on the Princeton campus.
In February 2011, following decisions by the University of Virginia and Harvard University to reinstate their early admissions programs, Princeton announced it would institute an early action program, starting with applicants for the Class of 2016.
They are Lakeside Apartments, Lawrence Apartments, and Stanworth Apartments.
Eating clubs, which are not officially affiliated with the university, serve as dining halls and communal spaces for their members and also host social events throughout the academic year.
The Princeton University Chapel is located on the north side of campus, near Nassau Street.
Two colleges, Wilson College and Forbes College (formerly Princeton Inn College), date to the 1970s; three others, Rockefeller, Mathey, and Butler Colleges, were created in 1983 following the Committee on Undergraduate Residential Life (CURL) report, which suggested the institution of residential colleges as a solution to an allegedly fragmented campus social life.
Its dining halls have set a goal to purchase 75% sustainable food products by 2015.
Construction finished in 2007, and Whitman College was inaugurated as Princeton's sixth residential college that same year.
Scholars from PEI have often been quoted in publications such as the ''New York Times'' and the ''Wall Street Journal''.
By a score of 6–4, Rutgers won the game, which was played by rules similar to modern rugby.
The actual dormitories are comparable, but only residential colleges have dining halls.
It was removed to the campus under cover of night by Princeton students in 1838 and buried in its current location in 1840.
Additionally, the clubs serve as evening and weekend social venues for members and guests.
It can also refer to Nassau Hall, the building that was built in 1756 and named after William III of the House of Orange-Nassau.
It offers professional degrees through the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, the School of Engineering and Applied Science, the School of Architecture and the Bendheim Center for Finance.
It served briefly as the capitol of the United States when the Continental Congress convened there in the summer of 1783.
This day signals the end of reading period and the beginning of final examinations.
The protruding cannons are occasionally painted scarlet by Rutgers students who continue the traditional dispute.
In 1919 the School of Architecture was established.
The University published its first Sustainability Progress Report in November 2009.
Several prominent architects have contributed some more recent additions, including Frank Gehry (Lewis Library), I. M. Pei (Spelman Halls), Demetri Porphyrios (Whitman College, a Collegiate Gothic project), Robert Venturi (Frist Campus Center, among several others), and Rafael Viñoly (Carl Icahn Laboratory).
*''The Clapper'' or ''Clapper Theft'' – The act of climbing to the top of Nassau Hall to steal the bell clapper, which rings to signal the start of classes on the first day of the school year.
The ORL houses the office of the Dean of Religious Life, Alison Boden, and a number of university chaplains, including the country's first Hindu chaplain, Vineet Chander; and one of the country's first Muslim chaplains, Sohaib Sultan.
Freshmen and sophomores must live in residential colleges, while juniors and seniors typically live in designated upperclassman dormitories.
The next bonfire happened on November 24, 2013, and was broadcast live over the Internet.
News & World Report'' and Princeton Review both cite Princeton as the university that has the fewest of graduates with debt even though 60% of incoming students are on some type of financial aid.
Wilson's model was much closer to Yale's present system, which features four-year colleges.
Under Wilson, Princeton introduced the preceptorial system in 1905, a then-unique concept in the US that augmented the standard lecture method of teaching with a more personal form in which small groups of students, or precepts, could interact with a single instructor, or preceptor, in their field of interest.
Students graduate with either the Bachelor of Arts (A.B.)
The graduate school offers advanced degrees spanning the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering.
Princeton hosts two Model United Nations conferences, PMUNC in the fall for high school students and PICSim in the spring for college students.
Two U.S. Presidents, 12 U.S. Supreme Court Justices (three of whom currently serve on the court), and numerous living billionaires and foreign heads of state are all counted among Princeton's alumni.
Undergraduate social life revolves around the residential colleges and a number of coeducational eating clubs, which students may choose to join in the spring of their sophomore year.
Cabinet, including eight Secretaries of State, three Secretaries of Defense, and two of the past four Chairs of the Federal Reserve.
On October 2, 1913, the Princeton University Graduate College was dedicated.
*''Class Jackets'' (''Beer Jackets'') – Each graduating class designs a Class Jacket that features its class year.
James McCosh took office as the college's president in 1868 and lifted the institution out of a low period that had been brought about by the American Civil War.
Carnegie hoped the opportunity to take up rowing would inspire Princeton students to forsake football, which he considered "not gentlemanly."
The policy deflates grades only relative to their previous levels; indeed, as of 2009, or five years after the policy was instituted, the average graduating GPA saw a marginal decrease, from 3.46 to 3.39.
While Pell figures are widely used as a gauge of the number of low-income undergraduates on a given campus, the rankings article cautions "the proportion of students on Pell Grants isn't a perfect measure of an institution's efforts to achieve economic diversity," but goes on to say that "still, many experts say that Pell figures are the best available gauge of how many low-income undergrads there are on a given campus."
The student organization "Greening Princeton" seeks to encourage the University administration to adopt environmentally friendly policies on campus.
The administration had barely finished these plans in April 1969 when the admissions office began mailing out its acceptance letters.
In ''Princeton Review'''s rankings of "softer" aspects of students' college experience, Princeton University was ranked first in "Students Happy with Financial Aid" and third in "Happiest Students", behind Clemson and Brown.
The Committee investigates reported violations and holds a hearing if it is warranted.
A collection of historical photographs of the building of the lake is housed at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library on Princeton's campus.
Today, Princeton University and Princeton Theological Seminary maintain separate institutions with ties that include services such as cross-registration and mutual library access.
In 2003, Princeton broke ground for a sixth college named Whitman College after its principal sponsor, Meg Whitman, who graduated from Princeton in 1977.
In the 2015–16 ''Times Higher Education'' assessment of the world's greatest universities, Princeton was ranked 6th.
Recently Princeton tied the record for the fewest points in a Division I game since the institution of the three-point line in 1986–87, when the Tigers scored 21 points in a loss against Monmouth University on Dec 14, 2005.
Under the Honor Code, faculty do not proctor examinations; instead, the students proctor one another and must report any suspected violation to an Honor Committee made up of undergraduates.
Measured on  the exterior, the Chapel is  long,  wide at its transepts, and  high.
The design evokes an English church of the Middle Ages.
Alumnae of the University (or "Tiger Lilies") enjoy the courting of male classmates, amid song and much drink (see Newman's Day).
*''Princeton Locomotive'' – Chant traditionally used by Princetonians to acknowledge a particular year or class.
For safety reasons, the clapper has been removed permanently.
Princeton was ranked the 360th top college in the United States by Payscale and CollegeNet's Social Mobility Index college rankings.
When built, it was the largest college building in North America.
Notable faculty members include Joyce Carol Oates, Cornel West, Robert Keohane, Peter Singer, Jhumpa Lahiri, Michael Mullen, Robert P. George, and Andrew Wiles.
Princeton has one graduate residential college, known simply as the Graduate College, located beyond Forbes College at the outskirts of campus.
Princeton University has an IBM BlueGeneL supercomputer, called ''Orangena'', which was ranked as the 89th fastest computer in the world in 2005 (LINPACK performance of 4713 compared to 12250 for other U.S. universities and 280600 for the top-ranked supercomputer, belonging to the U.S. Department of Energy).
As a result of a 1979 lawsuit by Sally Frank, Princeton's eating clubs were required to go coeducational in 1991, after Tiger Inn's appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court was denied.
Princeton was ranked 7th among 300 Best World Universities in 2011 compiled by Human Resources & Labor Review (HRLR) on Measurements of World's Top 300 Universities Graduates' Performance .
Its five-year coeducation plan provided $7.8 million for the development of new facilities that would eventually house and educate 650 women students at Princeton by 1974.
Nonetheless, any undergraduate may purchase a meal plan and eat in a residential college dining hall.
This cannon, which may also have been captured in the Battle of Princeton, was stolen by students of Rutgers University in 1875.
Today Princeton is a member of the Football Championship Subdivision of NCAA Division I.
Such a significant endowment is sustained through the continued donations of its alumni and is maintained by investment advisers.
Carril's final victory at Princeton came when the Tigers beat UCLA, the defending national champion, in the opening round of the 1996 NCAA tournament, in what is considered one of the greatest upsets in the history of the tournament.
This occurred in 2012, ending a five-year drought.
Widely disliked for their edgy modernist design, including "waffle ceilings", the dormitories on the Butler Quad were demolished in 2007.
The University also owns some property in West Windsor Township.
It underwent a two-year, US$10 million restoration campaign between 2000 and 2002.
They were considered regular students for their year on campus, but were not candidates for a Princeton degree.
Selden Edwards and Will Stanton graduated with English degrees.
It was built between 1924 and 1928, at a cost of US$2.3 million, approximately US$ million in  dollars.
The trustees also exercise prior review and approval concerning changes in major policies, such as those in instructional programs and admission, as well as tuition and fees and the hiring of faculty members.
The Tony-award-winning McCarter Theatre was built by the Princeton Triangle Club, a student performance group, using club profits and a gift from Princeton University alumnus Thomas McCarter.
Carril introduced the Princeton offense, an offensive strategy that has since been adopted by a number of college and professional basketball teams.
The plan was first attempted at Yale, but the administration was initially uninterested; an exasperated alum, Edward Harkness, finally paid to have the college system implemented at Harvard in the 1920s, leading to the oft-quoted aphorism that the college system is a Princeton idea that was executed at Harvard with funding from Yale.
In February 2007, Princeton became the 12th major library system to join Google's ambitious project to scan the world's great literary works and make them searchable over the Web.
This helped start an incorrect impression that it was part of the university, one that has never been completely eradicated.
It is commonly heard at Opening Exercises in the fall as alumni and current students welcome the freshman class, as well as the P-rade in the spring at Princeton Reunions.
The far-flung location of the GC was the spoil of a squabble between Woodrow Wilson and then-Graduate School Dean Andrew Fleming West.
During the summer of 1783, the Continental Congress met in Nassau Hall, making Princeton the country's capital for four months.
Its home in Princeton was Nassau Hall, named for the royal House of Orange-Nassau of William III of England.
In addition to Firestone library, specialized libraries exist for architecture, art and archaeology, East Asian studies, engineering, music, public and international affairs, public policy and University archives, and the sciences.
Butler is now reopened as a four-year residential college, housing both under- and upperclassmen.
The new dormitories were constructed in the Collegiate Gothic architectural style and were designed by architect Demetri Porphyrios.
Princeton has the largest endowment per student in the United States.
The university has graduated many notable alumni.
In the 2016/17 ''QS World University Rankings'' it was ranked 11th overall in the world.
Princeton's six residential colleges host a variety of social events and activities, guest speakers, and trips.
In 1987, the university changed the gendered lyrics of "Old Nassau" to reflect the school's co-educational student body.
*''Reunions'' – Massive annual gathering of alumni held the weekend before graduation.
The McCosh presidency (1868–88) saw the construction of a number of buildings in the High Victorian Gothic and Romanesque Revival styles; many of them are now gone, leaving the remaining few to appear out of place.
Commencement is held on the front lawn of Nassau Hall in good weather.
According to the athletics program's mission statement, Princeton aims for its students who participate in athletics to be "'student athletes' in the fullest sense of the phrase."
Newman had spoken out against the tradition, however.
In 2011, the main campus was named by Travel+Leisure as one of the most beautiful in the United States.
In 1966, Nassau Hall was added to the National Register of Historic Places.
The Princeton University Library system houses over eleven million holdings including seven million bound volumes.
Started in the early 1970s, the Nude Olympics went co-educational in 1979 and gained much notoriety with the American press.
Founded in 1746 in Elizabeth as the  '''College of New Jersey''', Princeton was the fourth chartered institution of higher education in the Thirteen Colonies and thus one of the nine colonial colleges established before the American Revolution.
This commemorates a time in the 1870s when sophomores, angry with the freshmen who strutted around with fancy canes, stole all of the canes from the freshmen, hitting them with their own canes in the process.
Following it are three chants of the class that is being acknowledged.
Murray-Dodge Hall houses the Office of Religious Life (ORL), the Murray Dodge Theater, the Murray-Dodge Café, the Muslim Prayer Room and the Interfaith Prayer Room.
The University has adopted a green purchasing policy and recycling program that focuses on paper products, construction materials, lightbulbs, furniture, and electronics.
The attached New Graduate College departs in its design from Collegiate Gothic; it is reminiscent of the former dormitories of Butler College, the newest of the five pre-Whitman residential colleges.
candidates follow a parallel track with an emphasis on a rigorous science and math curriculum, a computer science requirement, and at least two semesters of independent research including an optional senior thesis.
McCosh Hall is named in his honor.
The cornerstone of the building was laid on September 17, 1754.
During his two decades of service, he overhauled the curriculum, oversaw an expansion of inquiry into the sciences, and supervised the addition of a number of buildings in the High Victorian Gothic style to the campus.
In 1887, the university actually maintained and staffed a sister college, Evelyn College for Women, in the town of Princeton on Evelyn and Nassau streets.
Albert Einstein, though on the faculty at the Institute for Advanced Study rather than at Princeton, came to be associated with the university through frequent lectures and visits on the campus.
Its collections include the autographed manuscript of F. Scott Fitzgerald's ''The Great Gatsby'' and George F. Kennan's Long Telegram.
Rockefeller and Mathey are located in the northwest corner of the campus; Princeton brochures often feature their Collegiate Gothic architecture.
The Shea Rowing Center on the lake's shore continues to serve as the headquarters for Princeton rowing.
In 1879, the first thesis for a Doctor of Philosophy Ph.D. was submitted by James F. Williamson, Class of 1877.
The bell was then recast and melted again in the fire of 1855.
The extensive iconography, in stained glass, stonework, and wood carvings, has the common theme of connecting religion and scholarship.
*''Bicker'' – Selection process for new members that is employed by selective eating clubs.
Ranked in 2010 as the third largest endowment in the United States, the university has the greatest per-student endowment in the world (over US$2 million for undergraduates).
Like most of Princeton's Gothic buildings, they predate the residential college system and were fashioned into colleges from individual dormitories.
In 1754, trustees of the College of New Jersey suggested that, in recognition of Governor's interest, Princeton should be named as Belcher College.
More than 98 percent of students live on campus in dormitories.
In 2001, expanding on earlier reforms, Princeton became the first university to eliminate loans for all students who qualify for financial aid.
As of the end of the 2010 season, Princeton had won 26 national football championships, more than any other school.
or the Bachelor of Science in Engineering (B.S.E.
News'' rankings, as well as #1 in the 2015 and 2016 rankings for "best undergraduate teaching."
Similarly, the men's lacrosse program enjoyed a period of dominance 1992–2001, during which time it won six national championships.
Fierce debates raged before the present residential college system emerged.
Princeton has no medical school, law school, or business school.
Wilson preferred a central location for the College; West wanted the graduate students as far as possible from the campus.
The largest varsity sport is rowing, with almost 150 athletes.
Princeton played against Rutgers University in the first intercollegiate football game in the U.S. on Nov 6, 1869.
The committee concluded that the observed lower grades since 2003 were the result of discussions and increased awareness during and since the implementation of the deflation policy, and not the deflation targets themselves, so recommended removing the numerical targets while charging individual departments with developing consistent standards for grading.
The artwork is almost invariably dominated by the school colors and tiger motifs.
Carnegie financed the lake's construction in 1906 at the behest of a friend who was a Princeton alumnus.
