The victory was the crowning point of Eugene's military career and had confirmed him as the leading European general.
However, the Prince's fame was secured with his decisive victory against the Ottomans at the Battle of Zenta in 1697, earning him Europe-wide fame.
Several ships have been named in Eugene's honour: ''Prinz Eugen'', an Austrian World War I battleship; the HMS Prince Eugene, British Royal Navy World War I monitor; Italian light cruiser  and the German cruiser ''Prinz Eugen'' (later USS ''Prinz Eugen''), a World War II heavy cruiser.
For the next two years, Eugene continued to perform with distinction on campaign and establish himself as a dedicated, professional soldier; by the end of 1685, still only 22 years old, he was made a Major-General.
Confident and self-assured, the Prince of Savoy (ably assisted by Commercy and Guido Starhemberg) set about restoring order and discipline.
The Duchess of Orléans, who had known Eugene from those days, would later write to her aunt, Princess Sophia of Hanover, describing Eugene's antics with lackeys and pages.
It is inscribed on one side, 'To the wise counsellor of three Emperors', and on the other, 'To the glorious conqueror of Austria's enemies'.
By 1696, the deal was done, and Amadeus transferred his troops and his loyalty to the enemy.
In his early boyhood in Paris "he belonged to a small, effeminate set that included such unabashed perverts as the young abbé de Choisy who was invariably dressed as a girl" wrote the English historian Nicholas Henderson.
Although opinions differ as to his character, there is no dispute over his great achievements: he helped to save the Habsburg Empire from French conquest; he broke the westward thrust of the Ottomans, liberating central Europe after a century and a half of Turkish occupation; and he was one of the great patrons of the arts whose building legacy can still be seen in Vienna today.
Once again, Eugene's courage earned him recognition from his superiors, who granted him the honour of personally conveying the news of victory to the Emperor in Vienna.
Eugene returned to Italy in April 1705, but his attempts to move west towards Turin were thwarted by Vendôme's skilful manoeuvres.
His ability to snatch victory at the moment of defeat had shown the Prince at his best.
As head of the war council Eugene was now part of the Emperor's inner circle, and the first president since Montecuccoli to remain an active commander.
These ties, together with his ascetic manner and appearance (a positive advantage to him at the sombre court of Leopold I), ensured the refugee from the hated French king a warm welcome at Passau, and a position in Imperial service.
"I have warned you that you are dealing with an enterprising young prince," wrote Louis XIV to his commander, "he does not tie himself down to the rules of war."
Eugene was a disciplinarian – when ordinary soldiers disobeyed orders he was prepared to shoot them himself – but he rejected blind brutality, writing "you should only be harsh when, as often happens, kindness proves useless".
Leopold I's assurances of money and men had proved illusory, but desperate appeals from Amadeus and criticism from Vienna goaded the Prince into action, resulting in the Imperialists' bloody defeat at the Battle of Cassano on 16 August.
The Upper Belvedere, completed between 1720 and 1722, is a more substantial building; with sparkling white stucco walls and copper roof it became a wonder of Europe.
Eugene's holding operation, and his pressure for action leading up to the battle, proved crucial for the Allied success.
With the signing of the Treaty of Ryswick in September/October 1697, the desultory war in the west was finally brought to an inconclusive end, and Leopold I could once again devote all his martial energies into defeating the Ottoman Turks in the east.
For his services, Eugene was promoted to Lieutenant-General in November 1687.
In August 1726 Russia acceded to the Austro-Spanish alliance, and in October Frederick William of Prussia followed suit by defecting from the Allies with the signing of a mutual defensive treaty with the Emperor.
"The request was modest, not so the petitioner," he remarked.
Throughout the late 1720s, Eugene's influence and skilful diplomacy managed to secure the Emperor powerful allies in his dynastic struggles with the Bourbon powers, but physically and mentally fragile in his later years, Eugene enjoyed less success as commander-in-chief of the army during his final conflict, the War of the Polish Succession.
Certainly Eugene's appearance was not impressive — "He was never good-looking …" wrote the Duchess of Orléans, "It is true that his eyes are not ugly, but his nose ruins his face; he has two large teeth which are visible at all times."
Eugene commanded the right wing of the Allied army, holding the Elector of Bavaria's and Marshal Marsin's superior forces, while Marlborough broke through the Marshal Tallard's center, inflicting over 30,000 casualties.
During the last 20 years of his life Eugene was particularly close to Countess Eleonora Batthyány, daughter of Count Theodor von Strattman.
Villars, with superior numbers, was able to keep Eugene guessing as to his true intent.
Eugene moved to Austria and transferred his loyalty to the Habsburg Monarchy.
This loyalty was immediately put to the test.
Both Allied commanders were full of praise for each other's performance.
Marlborough now favoured a bold advance along the coast to bypass the major French fortresses, followed by a march on Paris.
"The important thing," wrote Maurice de Saxe in his ''Reveries'', "is to see the opportunity and to know how to use it.
Nevertheless, the Spanish attacks had strained Charles VI's government, causing tension between the Emperor and his Spanish Council on the one hand, and the conference, headed by Eugene, on the other.
Eugene was in no doubt where his new allegiance lay – "I will devote all my strength, all my courage, and if need be, my last drop of blood, to the service of your Imperial Majesty."
After resisting calls for caution and forgoing a council of war, the Prince decided to attack immediately on the morning of 5 August with approximately 70,000 men.
In the years following the Peace of Rastatt Eugene became acquainted with a large number of scholarly men.
Believing that a resurgent France now posed the greatest danger to their security British ministers, headed by Robert Walpole, moved to reform the Anglo-Austrian alliance, leading to the signing of the Second Treaty of Vienna on 16 March 1731.
The Grand Vizier, Suluieman Pasha, was executed and Sultan Mehmed IV, deposed.
By September, the Imperial forces under the Duke of Lorraine, together with a powerful Polish army under King John III Sobieski, were poised to strike the Sultan's army.
Prince Eugene was born in the Hôtel de Soissons in Paris on 18 October 1663.
The resulting Battle of Luzzara on 15 August proved inconclusive.
He was equally adept as an organizer, strategist, and tactician, believing in the primacy of battle and his ability to seize the opportune moment to launch a successful attack.
It was only from pressure exerted by the French army advancing into the Basque provinces of northern Spain in April 1719, and the British Navy's attacks on the Spanish fleet and shipping, that compelled Philip V and Elisabeth to dismiss Alberoni and join the Quadruple Alliance on 25 January 1720.
But as so often throughout his career the Prince faced war on two fronts – the enemy in the field and the government in Vienna.
Land in Hungary, given him by the Emperor, yielded a good income, enabling the Prince to cultivate his newly acquired tastes in art and architecture (see below); but for all his new-found wealth and property, he was, nevertheless, without personal ties or family commitments.
But on joining his army, he found it in a state of 'indescribable misery'.
In March 1684, Leopold I formed the Holy League with Poland and Venice to counter the Ottoman threat.
From 1726 Eugene gradually began to regain his political influence.
In August 1709 Eugene's chief political opponent and critic in Vienna, Prince Salm, retired as court chamberlain.
The French were driven out of almost all the Spanish Netherlands.
Further success followed in 1687, where, commanding a cavalry brigade, Eugene made an important contribution to the victory at the Battle of Mohács on 12 August.
There were two candidates for his successor: first, Stanisław Leszczyński, the father-in-law of Louis XV; second, the Elector of Saxony's son, Augustus, supported by Russia, Austria, and Prussia.
Eugene had gained a victory as signal as his colleague had at Ramillies – "It is impossible for me to express the joy it has given me;" wrote Marlborough, "for I not only esteem but I really love the prince.
Villeroi's capture caused a sensation in Europe, and had a galvanising effect on English public opinion.
Although the Imperials lost almost 5,000 dead or wounded, the Turks, who retreated in disorder to Belgrade, seem to have lost double that amount, including the Grand Vizier himself who had entered the mêlée and subsequently died of his wounds.
His mother, Olympia Mancini, was one of Cardinal Mazarin's nieces whom he had brought to Paris from Rome in 1647 to further his, and, to a lesser extent, their ambitions.
Yet there had been no final, decisive breakthrough, and this was to be the last year that Eugene and Marlborough would work together.
Representatives from a newly formed Anglo-French alliance – who were desirous of European peace for their own dynastic securities and trade opportunities – called on both parties to recognise each other's sovereignty.
The Allied commanders met for the first time at the small village of Mundelsheim on 10 June, and immediately formed a close rapport – the two men becoming, in the words of Thomas Lediard, 'Twin constellations in glory'.
Marlborough acquiesced and resolved upon the siege of Vauban's great fortress, Lille.
In February 1683, to the surprise of his family, Eugene declared his intention of joining the army.
But the Austrian monarchy faced severe peril on several fronts in 1703: by June the Duke of Villars had reinforced the Elector of Bavaria on the Danube thus posing a direct threat to Vienna, while Vendôme remained at the head of a large army in northern Italy opposing Guido Starhemberg's weak Imperial force.
After playing cards at Countess Batthyány's on the evening of 20 April he returned to his bed at the Stadtpalais.
This fluidity was key to his battlefield successes in Italy and in his wars against the Turks.
Countess Batthyány expressed in a letter dated 23 December 1720, that at the ''Kreuzkapelle'' a solemn requiem would be held annually.
Prince Eugene possessed this quality which is the greatest in the art of war and which is the test of the most elevated genius."
This glorious action must bring France so low, that if our friends could but be persuaded to carry on the war with vigour one year longer, we cannot fail, with the blessing of God, to have such a peace as will give us quiet for all our days."
But fearful of unprotected supply-lines, the Dutch and Eugene favoured a more cautious approach.
The Emperor also intended Maria Theresa to marry Francis Stephen of Lorraine which would present an unacceptable threat on France's border.
Following the long period of peace after the Austro-Turkish War, the idea of creating a separate field army or providing garrison troops with effective training for them to be turned into such an army quickly was never considered by Eugene.
His closest relative, therefore, was Louis Thomas's unmarried daughter, Princess Maria Anna Victoria of Savoy, whom Eugene had never met and, as he had heard nothing but bad of her, made no effort to do so.
In response Britain, France, and Prussia joined together in the Alliance of Hanover to counter the danger to Europe of an Austro-Spanish hegemony.
After displeasing the Emperor over his initial opposition to the formation of the Ostend Company, de Prié also lost the support of the native nobility from within his own council of state in Brussels, particularly from the Marquis de Mérode-Westerloo.
When his servants arrived to wake him the next morning, 21 April 1736, they found Prince Eugene dead after choking from phlegm in his throat, presumably after suffering from pneumonia.
Denied a military career in France, Eugene decided to seek service abroad.
Yet the coup was less successful than hoped: Cremona remained in French hands, and the Duke of Vendôme, whose talents far exceeded Villeroi's, became the theatre's new commander.
With the death of the infirm and childless Charles II of Spain on 1 November 1700, the succession of the Spanish throne and subsequent control over her empire once again embroiled Europe in war – the War of the Spanish Succession.
Born in Paris, Eugene grew up around the French court of King Louis XIV.
The artwork was bought by Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia.
A comment made by Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg in 1709, who had served under Eugene, could be read that the prince enjoyed "la petite débauche et la pine au-delà de tout," or that he derived his sexual gratification from the virile member of others.
Eugene's other friends such as the papal nuncio, Passionei, made up for the family he still lacked.
Yet the contrast to his co-commander of the Spanish Succession war were stark.
On the morning of 16 August 40,000 Imperial troops marched through the fog, caught the Turks unawares, and routed Halil Pasha's army; a week later Belgrade surrendered, effectively bringing an end to the war.
Substantial French reinforcements finally brought an end to the venture, and on 22 August 1707 the Imperial army began its retirement.
Eugene was reluctant to carry on the war, and wrote to the Emperor in June that a bad peace would be better than being 'ruined equally by friend and foe'.
Eugene and Wratislaw were now the undisputed leaders of the Austrian government: all major departments of state were in their hands or those of their political allies.
The Turkish cavalry had already crossed the river so Eugene decided to attack immediately, arranging his men in a half-moon formation.
By the end of the year Franco-Spanish forces had seized Lorraine and Milan; by early 1734 Spanish troops had taken Sicily.
Hoping to influence public opinion in England and force the French into making substantial concessions, Eugene prepared for a major campaign.
Eugene's library, prints and drawings were purchased by the Emperor in 1737 and have since passed into Austrian national collections.
His victory at Zenta had turned him into a European hero, and with victory came reward.
In order to gain Spanish support France backed the succession of Elisabeth Farnese's sons to further Italian lands.
Starved of supplies, money and men, Eugene was forced into unconventional means against the vastly superior enemy.
Eugene and Eleonora were constant companions, meeting for dinner, receptions and card games almost every day till his death.
Eugene's rewards for his victories, his share of booty, his revenues from his abbeys in Savoy, and a steady income from his Imperial offices and governorships, enabled him to contribute to the landscape of Baroque architecture.
The single-storey Lower Belvedere, with its exotic gardens and zoo, was completed in 1716.
The 1720s saw rapidly changing alliances between the European powers and almost constant diplomatic confrontation, largely over unsolved issues regarding the Quadruple Alliance.
Although the Ottomans lacked western organisation and training, the Savoyard prince had revealed his tactical skill, his capacity for bold decision, and his ability to inspire his men to excel in battle against a dangerous foe.
Nevertheless, it is clear that Baden was impressed with Eugene's qualities – "This young man will, with time, occupy the place of those whom the world regards as great leaders of armies."
Eugene first employed Hildebrandt to finish the Stadtpalais before commissioning him to  prepare plans for a palace (Savoy Castle) on his Danubian island at Ráckeve.
Despite the failed campaign in 1713 the  Prince was able to declare that, "in spite of the military superiority of our enemies and the defection of our Allies, the conditions of peace will be more advantageous and more glorious than those we would have obtained at Utrecht."
It was not an unnatural decision: his cousin, Louis of Baden, was already a leading general in the Imperial army, as was a more distant cousin, Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria.
For the loss of some 2,000 dead and wounded, Eugene had inflicted approximately 25,000 casualties on his enemy – including the Grand Vizier, Elmas Mehmed Pasha – annihilating the Turkish army.
"Prince Eugene and I," wrote the Duke, "shall never differ about our share of the laurels."
This professional and personal bond ensured mutual support on the battlefield, enabling many successes during the Spanish Succession war.
For the next three years there was the continual threat of war between the Hanover Treaty powers and the Austro-Spanish bloc.
Marshal Villars, recently joined by Boufflers, moved his army south-west of the town and began to fortify his position.
In this position of influence Eugene took the lead in pressing Charles VI towards peace.
With  Leopold I's interests now focused on Spain and the imminent death of Charles II, the Emperor terminated the conflict with the Sultan, and signed the Treaty of Karlowitz on 26 January 1699.
Lacking boats and bridging materials, and with desertion and sickness rife within his army, the outnumbered Imperial commander was helpless.
The building, completed in 1729, was far less elaborate than his other projects but it was strong enough to serve as a fortress in case of need.
When news of his death reached Paris, Eugene decided to travel to Austria in the hope of taking over his brother's command.
However, on 21 May 1712 – when the Tories felt they had secured favourable terms with their unilateral talks with the French – the Duke of Ormonde (Marlborough's successor) received the so-called 'restraining orders', forbidding him to take part in any military action.
The Duke of Orléans, under the direction of Marsin, replaced Vendôme, but indecision and disorder in the French camp led to their undoing.
By early 1704 Marlborough had resolved to march south and rescue the situation in southern Germany and on the Danube, personally requesting the presence of Eugene on campaign so as to have "a supporter of his zeal and experience".
It was largely through Eugene's diplomacy that in January 1732 the Imperial diet also guaranteed the Pragmatic Sanction which, together with the Treaties with Britain, Russia, and Prussia, marked the culmination of  the Prince's diplomacy.
But Amadeus, doubtful of victory and now more fearful of Habsburg influence in Italy than he was of French, had begun secret dealings with Louis XIV aimed at extricating himself from the war.
Eugene's main reason for desiring peace in the west was the growing danger posed by the Turks in the east.
To historian Christopher Duffy it was this awareness of the 'grand strategy' that was Eugene's legacy to Frederick.
From the age of ten, Eugene had been brought up for a career in the church; a personal choice of the King, basing the decision on the young Prince's poor physique and bearing.
At Eugene's death his possessions and estates, except those in Hungary which the crown reclaimed, went to his niece, Princess Maria Anna Victoria, who at once decided to sell everything.
The Battle of Zenta proved to be the decisive victory in the long war against the Turks.
Eugene also befriended the French writer Jean-Baptiste Rousseau who, by 1716, was receiving financial support from Eugene.
Nevertheless, in the Low Countries, particularly after the battle of Oudenarde in 1708, Eugene, like his cousin Louis of Baden, tended to play safe and become bogged down in a conservative strategy of sieges and defending supply lines.
In June Eugene set out to relieve Philippsburg, yet his former drive and energy was now gone.
By early August 1716 the Ottoman Turks, some 200,000 men under the sultan's son-in-law, the Grand Vizier Damat Ali Pasha, were marching from Belgrade towards Eugene's position west of the fortress of Petrovaradin on the north bank of the Danube.
However, another attempt at a negotiated settlement at Geertruidenberg in April 1710 failed, largely because the English Whigs still felt strong enough to refuse concessions, while Louis XIV saw little reason to accept what he had refused the previous year.
In one summer the whole forward Allied position laboriously built up over the years to act as the springboard into France had been precipitously abandoned.
Imperial troops besieged the place in mid-June 1717, and by the end of July large parts of the city had been destroyed by artillery fire.
His fourth brother, Emmanuel, had died aged 14 in 1676; his third, Louis Julius (already mentioned) had died on active service in 1683, and his second brother, Philippe, died of smallpox in 1693.
Eugene left Vienna in early June 1716 with a field army of between 80,000–90,000 men.
"The enemy would long ago have been beaten," he wrote to Vienna, "if everyone had done their duty."
News spread through Europe of Eugene's imminent destruction; but he had no intention of lifting the siege.
In January 1712 Eugene arrived in England hoping to divert the government away from its peace policy, but despite the social success the visit  was a political failure: Queen Anne and her ministers remained determined to end the war regardless of the Allies.
But the Treaty of Vienna had infuriated the court of King Louis XV: the French had been ignored and the Pragmatic Sanction guaranteed, thus increasing Habsburg influence and confirming Austria's vast territorial size.
However, when Baden was transferred west to fight the French in 1692, his successors, first Caprara, then from 1696, Frederick Augustus, the Elector of Saxony, proved incapable of delivering the final blow.
With the monarchy at the point of complete financial breakdown Leopold I was at last persuaded to change the government.
The Nine Years' War was professionally and personally frustrating for the Prince.
In England the new Tory government (the 'peace party' who had deposed the Whigs in October 1710) declared their unwillingness to see Charles VI become Emperor as well as King of Spain, and had already begun secret negotiations with the French.
Of his four brothers, only one was still alive at this time.
Only a handful of statesmen in England or the Dutch Republic realised the true implications of Austria's peril; foremost amongst these was the English Captain-General, the Duke of Marlborough.
It was not until January 1689 that he could return to active service.
So contemptuous was he of the Imperial commander, Count Caraffa, he threatened to leave Imperial service.
When de Prié's position became untenable Eugene felt compelled to resign his post as governor on 16 November 1724.
Eugene took command on the Rhine in April 1734, but vastly outnumbered he was forced onto the defensive.
History knows little of his life before 1683.
France declared war on Austria on 10 October 1733, but without the funds from the Maritime Powers – who, despite the Vienna treaty, remained neutral throughout the war – Austria could not hire the necessary troops to wage an offensive campaign.
Eugene spent most of his life in Vienna at his Winter Palace, the Stadtpalais, built by Fischer von Erlach.
Heartened by the Prince's confidence the Allied commanders devised a bold plan to engage the French army under Vendôme and the Duke of Burgundy.
The Imperial commander arrived in theatre in mid-April 1706, just in time to organise an orderly retreat of what was left of  Count Reventlow's inferior army following his defeat by Vendôme at the Battle of Calcinato on 19 April.
Napoleon considered Eugene one of the seven greatest commanders of history.
Eugene's remaining brother, Louis Thomas – ostracised for incurring the displeasure of Louis XIV – travelled Europe in search of a career, before arriving in Vienna in 1699.
The principal objectives of the war had been achieved: the task Eugene had begun at Zenta was complete, and the Karlowitz settlement secured.
By the terms of  the Treaty of Passarowitz, signed on 21 July 1718, the Turks surrendered the Banat of Temeswar, along with Belgrade and most of Serbia, although they regained the Morea from the Venetians.
Yet to her great disappointment, her chance to become queen passed by, and in 1657, Olympia married Eugene Maurice, Count of Soissons, Count of Dreux and Prince of Savoy.
"The danger to the monarchy," wrote Eugene to the Emperor in October, "cannot be exaggerated".
Once again the Allied commanders had co-operated remarkably well.
To Eugene it was 'an event that which is seldom to be found in history'.
Initially fighting on the Rhine with Max Emmanuel – receiving a slight head wound at the Siege of Mainz in 1689 – Eugene subsequently transferred himself to Piedmont after Victor Amadeus joined the Alliance against France in 1690.
Whatever the truth, Olympia, rather than face trial, subsequently fled France for Brussels in January 1680, leaving Eugene in the care of his father's mother, Marie de Bourbon, and her daughter, Hereditary Princess of Baden, mother of Prince Louis of Baden.
At the beginning of 1708 Eugene successfully evaded calls for him to take charge in Spain (in the end Guido Starhemberg was sent), thus enabling him to take command of the Imperial army on the Moselle and once again unite with Marlborough in the Spanish Netherlands.
From the beginning, the Emperor had refused to accept the will of Charles II, and he did not wait for England and the Dutch Republic to begin hostilities.
For his only surviving nephew, Emmanuel, the son of his brother Louis Thomas, Eugene arranged a marriage with one of the daughters of Prince Liechenstein, but Emmanuel died of smallpox in 1729.
Nevertheless, in Austria, Eugene's reputation remains unrivalled.
To Vienna it was clear that the Turks intended to attack Hungary and undo the whole Karlowitz settlement of 1699.
Against Eugene's advice, Amadeus insisted on engaging the French at Staffarda and suffered a serious defeat – only Eugene's handling of the Savoyard cavalry in retreat saved his cousin from disaster.
Expelled from France, Marie joined her mother in Brussels, before eloping with a renegade priest to Geneva, living with him unhappily until her premature death in 1705.
Serving under Baden, Eugene distinguished himself in the battle, earning commendation from Lorraine and the Emperor; he later received the nomination for the colonelcy of the Dragoon Regiment Kufstein.
His position was built on his military successes, but his actual power was expressed through his role as president of the war council, and as ''de facto'' president of the conference which dealt with foreign policy.
Elsewhere, however, the Austrians had made some progress – the Hungarian revolt had finally came to end.
By the beginning of 1733 the French army was ready for war: all that was needed was the excuse.
The Polish succession had afforded Louis XV's chief minister, Fleury, the opportunity to attack Austria and take Lorraine from Francis Stephen.
Began in 1701 the single-story building took twenty years to complete; yet, probably because of the Rákóczi revolt, the Prince seems to have visited it only once – after the siege of Belgrade in 1717.
Eugene died in his sleep at his home on 21 April 1736, aged 72.
Eugene crossed the Alps with some 30,000 men in May/June 1701.
Renewed hostilities against the Ottomans in the Austro-Turkish War consolidated his reputation, with victories at the battles of Petrovaradin (1716), and the decisive encounter at Belgrade (1717).
Eugene was never to fully trust his cousin again; although he continued to pay due reverence to the Duke as head of his family, their relationship would forever after remain strained.
On the night of July 26, 1683, Eugene left Paris and headed east.
On 1 September Eugene defeated Catinat's successor, Marshal Villeroi, at the Battle of Chiari, in a clash as destructive as any in the Italian theatre.
By the time of the War of the Polish Succession, therefore, the Austrians were outclassed by a better prepared French force.
Immediate steps were taken to improve efficiency within the army: encouragement and, where possible, money, was sent to the commanders in the field; promotion and honours were distributed according to service rather than influence; and discipline improved.
The French followed the victory by seizing the Allies' main supply magazine at Marchiennes, before reversing their earlier losses at Douai, Le Quesnoy and Bouchain.
Much about their acquaintance remains speculative (Eugene never mentions her in any of his surviving letters), and there is certainly no suggestion of a sexual relationship, but although they lived apart most foreign diplomats regarded Eleonora as his "official lover".
From him I learnt to hold grand objectives constantly in view, and direct all my resources to those ends."
The Grand Vizier, Kara Mustafa Pasha – encouraged by Imre Thököly's Magyar rebellion – had invaded Hungary with between 100,000–200,000 men; within two months approximately 90,000 were beneath Vienna's walls.
It was late in the day before the Imperial army struck.
His grandfather, Thomas Francis, founder of the Carignano line of the House of Savoy, was the son of Catherine Michelle – a daughter of Philip II of Spain – and the great-grandson of the Emperor Charles V. But of more immediate consequence to Leopold I was the fact that Eugene was the second cousin of Victor Amadeus, the Duke of Savoy, a connection that the Emperor hoped might prove useful in any future confrontation with France.
Austria itself was now facing the direct threat of invasion from across the border in Bavaria where the state's Elector, Maximilian Emanuel, had declared for the Bourbons in August the previous year.
After the fall of Tournai on 3 September (itself a major undertaking), the Allied generals turned their attention towards Mons.
Eugene and Villars (who had been old friends since the Turkish campaigns of the 1680s) initiated talks on 26 November.
The treaty compelled Charles VI to sacrifice the Ostend Company (a rival to the English and Dutch trading companies) and accept, unequivocally, the accession of Don Charles to Parma and Tuscany.
The huge equestrian statue in the centre of Vienna commemorates Eugene's achievements.
After the attempt on Toulon in 1707, he also became very wary of combined land/sea operations.
Villars was unable to save Mons, which subsequently capitulated on 21 October, but his resolute defence at Malplaquet – inflicting up to 25% casualties on the Allies – may have saved France from destruction.
Another acquaintance, Montesquieu, already famous for his ''Persian Letters'' when he arrived in Vienna in 1728, favourably recalled his time spent at the Prince's table.
Despite being one of the richest and most celebrated men of his age, Eugene never married and the suggestion is that he was predominantly homosexual.
After the Porte rejected an offer of mediation in April 1716, Charles VI despatched Eugene to Hungary to lead his relatively small but professional army.
Through successful feints and stratagems Landau fell to the French commander in August, followed in November by Freiburg.
