The province has very strict laws regarding use of road-side signs.
Several big bands including the Sons of Temperance Band and the Charlottetown Brass Band were active.
In September 1864, Prince Edward Island hosted the Charlottetown Conference, which was the first meeting in the process leading to the Quebec Resolutions and the creation of Canada in 1867.
The main island is  in size, slightly larger than the U.S. state of Delaware.
A much smaller urban area surrounds Summerside Harbour, situated on the southern shore  west of Charlottetown Harbour, and consists primarily of the city of Summerside.
During July and August, the average daytime high in PEI is ; however, the temperature can sometimes exceed  during these months.
As with all natural harbours on the island, Charlottetown and Summerside harbours are created by rias.
Today, Acadian, Celtic, folk, and rock music prevail, with exponents including Gene MacLellan, his daughter Catherine MacLellan, Al Tuck, Lennie Gallant, Two Hours Traffic and Paper Lions.
After the fall of Louisbourg, the resident French population of Ile Royal were deported to France.
The first British governor of St. John's Island, Walter Patterson, was appointed in 1769.
The Government of Prince Edward Island will fund abortions for women who travel to another province.
The coastline has a combination of long beaches, dunes, red sandstone cliffs, salt water marshes, and numerous bays and harbours.
Its southern shore bounds the Northumberland Strait.
Edmund Fanning, also a Loyalist exiled by the Revolution, took over as the second governor, serving until 1804.
Minister of Communities, Land and Environment Robert Mitchell tabled a discussion paper on the proposed ''Water Act'' for the province on 8 July 2015.
Specialist operations and treatments are also provided at larger tertiary referral hospitals in neighbouring provinces such as the IWK Health Centre and Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre in Nova Scotia or the Saint John Regional Hospital, Moncton Hospital, and Dr. Georges-L.-Dumont University Hospital Centre in New Brunswick.
All oil and natural gas exploration and exploitation activities on the Island are governed by the ''Oil and Natural Gas Act'' R.S.P.E.I.
The following island landmarks are also named after the Duke of Kent:
*Prince County Hospital (Summerside)
Between 250 and 300 million years ago, freshwater streams flowing from ancient mountains brought silt, sand and gravel into what is now the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
Winters are moderately cold and long but are milder than inland locations, with clashes of cold Arctic air and milder Atlantic air causing frequent temperature swings.
Average drinking water quality results are available, and information on the following parameters are provided: alkalinity, cadmium, calcium, chloride, chromium, iron, magnesium, manganese, nickel, nitrate, pH, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and sulfate, as well as the presence of pesticides.
This area was connected to the mainland by a strip of land, but when ocean levels rose as the glaciers melted this land strip was flooded, forming the island.
The Confederation Trail is a  recreational trail system.
A March 4/4 for bagpipes was composed in honour of Prince Edward Island.
Historically, PEI is one of Canada's older settlements and demographically still reflects older immigration to the country, with Celtic, Anglo-Saxon and French surnames being overwhelmingly dominant to this day.
The use of groundwater came under scrutiny as the potato industry, which accounts for $1 billion every year and 50% of farm receipts, has pressed the government to lift a moratorium on high-capacity water wells for irrigation.
than Scotland itself, as the settlers avoided English influence overseas.
The colony's new name honoured the fourth son of King George III, Prince Edward Augustus, the Duke of Kent (1767–1820), who subsequently led the British military forces on the continent as Commander-in-Chief, North America (1799–1800), with his headquarters in Halifax.
The climate is characterized by changeable weather throughout the year; it has some of the most variable day to day weather in Canada in which specific weather conditions seldom last for long.
The one-week-long series of concerts takes place at a multitude of venues including Murphy's Community Center, outdoor stages and churches in Charlottetown.
The island's lush landscape has a strong bearing on its economy and culture.
There are eight hospitals in the province.
''Source: Statistics Canada''
The Centre is one of the 22 National Historic Sites of Canada located in Prince Edward Island.
Some municipalities' by-laws also restrict the types of permanent signs that may be installed on private property.
Hence the formally existing Prince Edward Island Highland Regiment, founded 1875.
The Dominion Government of Canada assumed the colony's extensive railway debts and agreed to finance a buy-out of the last of the colony's absentee landlords to free the island of leasehold tenure and from any new immigrants entering the island (accomplished through the passage of the ''Land Purchase Act, 1875'').
These are operated either by a municipality or a private utility.
Roughly one thousand Acadians lived on the island, many of whom had fled to the island from mainland Nova Scotia during the first wave of the British-ordered expulsion in 1755, reaching a population of 5,000.
Many industrial operations have their own wastewater treatment facilities.
"the Island of the Prince", the local form of the longer 'Eilean a' Phrionnsa Iomhair/Eideard') or ''Eilean Eòin'' for some Gaelic speakers in Nova Scotia though not on PEI (lit.
In recent decades, Prince Edward Island's population has shown statistically significant and abnormally high rates of diagnosed rare cancers, particularly in rural areas.
The most prominent building in the province honouring this event is the Confederation Centre of the Arts, presented as a gift to Prince Edward Islanders by the 10 provincial governments and the Federal Government upon the centenary of the Charlottetown Conference, where it stands in Charlottetown as a national monument to the "Fathers of Confederation".
It is the only province of Canada to have no land boundary.
The Island has the highest concentration of roadways in Canada.
It is the 104th-largest island in the world and Canada's 23rd-largest island.
The British called their new colony St. John's Island (also the Island of St. John's).
In 1988, following the court decision ''R.
Rolling hills, woods, reddish white sand beaches, ocean coves and the famous red soil have given Prince Edward Island a reputation as a province of outstanding natural beauty.
The musical play ''Anne of Green Gables'' has run every year at the Charlottetown festival for more than four decades.
A family medicine residency program was established in 2009 with the Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine as a means to encourage new physicians to work in Prince Edward Island.
The troops fled and New Englanders burned the capital to the ground.
The Acadians of Ile Saint-Jean lived under the threat of deportation for the remainder of the war.
The IRAC regulates municipal water and sewer in the province, now under the ''Environmental Protection Act''.
Water testing services are provided for a variety of clients through the PEI Analytical Laboratories, which assesses according to the recommendations of the Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality published by Health Canada.
Assuming office in 1770, he had a controversial career during which land title disputes and factional conflict slowed the initial attempts to populate and develop the island under a feudal system.
aCensus agglomeration population: 58,358.bCensus agglomeration population: 16,200.cCensus agglomeration population: 6,011.
According to the 2011 census, the province of Prince Edward Island has 140,204 residents.
Prince Edward Island entered Confederation on July 1, 1873.
The provincial government has recently committed to enhancing primary care and home care services and has invested in health care facilities in recent capital budgets; mostly replacements and upgrades to provincial government operated nursing homes and hospitals.
A provincial cancer treatment centre at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital provides support to those dealing with various types of cancer-related illnesses.
The climate of the island is considered to be moderate and strongly influenced by the surrounding seas.
The high influx of Scottish Highlanders in the late 1700s resulted in P.E.I.
Despite Prince Edward Island's small size and reputation as a largely rural province, it is the most densely populated province in Canada.
Long-term-care services are also available with several programs in place to support seniors wishing to remain independent in their communities.
The 1787 dismissal of Governor Patterson and his recall to London in 1789 dampened his brother's efforts, leading John to focus on his interests in the United States (one of John's sons, Commodore Daniel Patterson, became a noted United States Navy hero, and John's grandsons, Rear Admiral Thomas H. Patterson and Lt. Carlile Pioou).
Significant rent charges (to absentee landlords) created further anger.
The smaller, rural communities as well as the towns and villages throughout the province, retain a slower-paced, old-world flavour.
Prince Edward Island is located in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, west of Cape Breton Island, north of the Nova Scotia peninsula, and east of New Brunswick.
On November 29, 1798, during Fanning's administration, Great Britain granted approval to change the colony's name from St. John's Island to Prince Edward Island to distinguish it from similar names in the Atlantic, such as the cities of Saint John, New Brunswick and St. John's in Newfoundland.
On June 1, 1997, the Confederation Bridge opened, connecting Borden-Carleton to Cape Jourimain, New Brunswick.
The government is also attempting to implement a comprehensive integrated Electronic Health Record system.
The beaches, dunes and sandstone cliffs consist of sedimentary rock and other material with a high iron concentration, which oxidises upon exposure to the air.
During the 19th century the colony of Prince Edward Island began to attract "adventurous Victorian families looking for elegance on the sea.
There is an extensive bicycling / hiking trail that spans the island.
Its capital is Charlottetown.
The geological properties of a white silica sand found at Basin Head are unique in the province; the sand grains cause a scrubbing noise as they rub against each other when walked on, and have been called the "singing sands".
The mean temperature is  in January.
The release of the discussion paper was to set off a consultation process in the autumn of 2015.
The economy of most rural communities on the island is based on small-scale agriculture.
Detailed information about the quality of drinking water in PEI communities and watersheds can be found at the Department of Environment, Labour and Justice.
Great Britain obtained the island from France under the terms of the ''Treaty of Paris'' in 1763 which settled the Seven Years' War.
Before the influx of Europeans, the Mi'kmaq First Nations inhabited Prince Edward Island.
The water removed is replenished by precipitation.
There is also an annual jazz festival, the P.E.I.
Women from Prince Edward Island may also travel to the nearest private user-pay, Morgentaler Clinic in Fredericton, New Brunswick, where they must pay for the procedure using their own funds.
The moving of its date to mid August caused in 2011 a serious loss in funding from Ottawa's regional development agency ACOA.
* Hillsborough Hospital (Charlottetown) - the province's only psychiatric hospital
There are standard direction information signs on roads in the province for various businesses and attractions in the immediate area.
Prince Edward Island offers programs and services in areas such as acute care, primary care, home care, palliative care, public health, chronic disease prevention, and mental health and addictions, to name a few.
In 2008, a new ascomycete species, ''Jahnula apiospora'' (Jahnulales, Dothideomycetes), was collected from submerged wood in a freshwater creek on Prince Edward Island, Canada.
In 1534, Jacques Cartier was the first European to see the island.
22 per cent of the student population is enrolled in French immersion.
* Kent College (Established in 1804 by Lieutenant Governor Edmund Fanning and his Legislative Council, the college would eventually become the University of Prince Edward Island), Charlottetown
The land was once owned and used by Canadian National Railway (CN) as a rail line on the island.
The land had been given to the absentee landlords with a number of conditions attached regarding upkeep and settlement terms; many of these conditions were not satisfied.
After Boishebert returned, Ramezay sent Joseph-Michel Legardeur de Croisille et de Montesson along with over 500 men, 200 of whom were Mi'kmaq, to Port-La-Joye.
Thirty-one municipalities have taken responsibility for planning.
Ownership of the land remained in the hands of landlords in England, angering Island settlers who were unable to gain title to land on which they worked and lived.
A day earlier the ''Violet'' sank and 280 died; several days later the ''Ruby'' sank with 213 on board.
The island's landscape is pastoral.
The provincial government has opened several family health centres in recent years in various rural and urban communities.
Prince Edward Island became a fashionable retreat in the nineteenth century for British nobility."
During the winter months, the island usually has many storms (which may produce rain as well as snow) and blizzards since during this time, storms originating from the North Pacific or the Gulf of Mexico frequently pass through.
In July 1746, the battle happened near York River.
To regain Acadia, Ramezay was sent from Quebec to the region to join forces with the Duc d'Anville Expedition.
Islanders spent decades trying to convince the Crown to confiscate the lots, however the descendants of the original owners were generally well connected to the British government and refused to give up the land.
Under the Planning Act of the province, municipalities have the option to assume responsibility for land-use planning through the development and adoption of official plans and land use bylaws.
Today, many of the same qualities that Montgomery and others found in the island are enjoyed by tourists who visit year-round.
The French troops and their allies were able to drive the New Englanders to their boats, nine New Englanders killed, wounded or made prisoner.
Some specialist services require patients to be referred to clinics and specialists in neighbouring provinces.
When Pleistocene glaciers receded about 15,000 years ago, glacial debris such as till was left behind to cover most of the area that would become the island.
The Utility has been working with its residents on a lead replacement program.
The Island receives an average yearly rainfall of  and an average yearly snowfall of .
Many medications for seniors are subsidized through a provincial pharmaceutical plan, however, Prince Edward Island remains one of the only provinces lacking a catastrophic drug coverage program for its residents.
Air ambulance service is provided under contract by LifeFlight.
Today 23.5 per cent of residents aged 15 to 19 have bilingual skills, an increase of 100 per cent in a decade.
As the land rebounded from the weight of the ice, the island rose up to elevate it further from the surrounding water.
In the mid-1760s, a survey team divided the Island into 67 lots.
The last abortion was performed in the province in 1982 prior to the opening of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital which saw the closure of the Roman Catholic-affiliated Charlottetown Hospital and the non-denominational Prince Edward Island Hospital; a condition of the "merger" being that abortions not be performed in the province.
Staff members with the Department of Environment, Labour and Justice provide advice to operators, as needed, on proper system maintenance.
Large dune fields on the north shore can be found on barrier islands at the entrances to various bays and harbours.
A plebiscite in 1967 was held in Charlottetown over fluoridation, and residents voted in favour.
Many of these lands also were fertile, and were some of the key factors to sustaining Prince Edward Island's economy.
The celebrated singer-songwriter Stompin' Tom Connors spent his formative years in Skinners Pond.
After the Siege of Louisbourg (1745) during the War of the Austrian Succession, the New Englanders also captured Île Saint-Jean (Prince Edward Island).
Robert Harris was a well-known artist.
The Island was reported by government to have only 0.08tcf of "technically recoverable" natural gas.
Altogether, the entire province has a land area of .
Prince Edward Island is the only province in Canada that does not provide abortion services through its hospitals.
They named the Island ''Epekwitk'', meaning "cradled on the waves"; Europeans represented the pronunciation as ''Abegweit''.
Although commercial deposits of minerals have not been found, exploration in the 1940s for natural gas beneath the northeastern end of the province resulted in the discovery of an undisclosed quantity of gas.
Under provincial legislation, the Utility is required to report to its residents on an annual basis.
With the age of the system in the older part of Charlottetown, concern has been raised regarding lead pipes.
0-5 and its associated regulations and orders.
As part of the French colony of Acadia, the island was called ''Île Saint-Jean''.
The island is named for Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn (1767–1820), the fourth son of King George III and the father of Queen Victoria.
Health officials, ecologists and environmental activists point to the use of pesticides for industrial potato farming as a primary contaminant.
v. Morgentaler'', the then-opposition Progressive Conservative Party of Prince Edward Island tabled a motion demanding that the ban on abortions be upheld at the province's hospitals; the then-governing Prince Edward Island Liberal Party under Premier Joe Ghiz acquiesced and the ban was upheld.
Several airlines service the Charlottetown Airport (CYYG); the Summerside Airport (CYSU) is an additional option for general aviation.
The climate is considered to be more continental than oceanic since the Gulf of St. Lawrence freezes over, thus eliminating any moderation.
In an attempt to attract settlers from Ireland, in one of his first acts (1770) Patterson led the island's colonial assembly to rename the island "New Ireland", but the British Government promptly vetoed this as exceeding the authority vested in the colonial government; only the Privy Council in London could change the name of a colony.
The water for City of Charlottetown is extracted from thirteen wells in three wellfields and distributed to customers.
* Prince Edward Battery, Victoria Park, Charlottetown
*Western Hospital (Alberton)
Prince Edward Island did not find the terms of union favourable and balked at joining in 1867, choosing to remain a colony of the United Kingdom.
In 1853, the Island government passed the Land Purchase Act which empowered them to purchase lands from those owners who were willing to sell, and then resell the land to settlers for low prices.
On July 1, 1767, these properties were allocated to supporters of King George III by means of a lottery.
The provincial government has projected that public school enrollment will decline by 40% during the 2010s.
Infrastructure in Charlottetown that was installed in 1888 is still in existence.
The provincial government has enacted laws to preserve the landscape through regulation, although there is a lack of consistent enforcement, and an absence of province-wide zoning and land-use planning.
Since the resurgence of exploration in the mid-1990s, all wells that have shown promising gas deposits have been stimulated through hydraulic fracture or “fracking”.
(Not to underestimate the highest percentage of Scottish on neighboring Cape Breton Island, however only being part thereof the province of Nova Scotia.)
The musician's line up in 2011 included Oliver Jones, Sophie Milman, Matt Dusk, Jack de Keyzer, Jack Semple, Meaghan Smith, Meaghan Blanchard, Hupman Brothers, Alex Dean, Charlie A'Court, Sean Ferris, Jimmy Bowskill, West End Blues Band, Bad Habits, Brian McConnell and Mellotones.
"John's Island" in reference to the island's former name); in Míkmaq as ''Abegweit'' or ''Epekwitk'' roughly translated "land cradled in the waves".
Almost half of respondents identified their ethnicity as "Canadian."
In the late 1860s, the colony examined various options, including the possibility of becoming a discrete dominion unto itself, as well as entertaining delegations from the United States, who were interested in Prince Edward Island joining the United States of America.
Springtime temperatures typically remain cool until the sea ice has melted, usually in late April or early May.
Hainan Province, China, has been the sister province of Prince Edward Island since 2001.
The Province of Prince Edward Island is totally dependent on groundwater for its source of drinking water.
In areas where municipalities have not assumed responsibility for planning, the Province remains responsible for development control.
Prince Edward has been called "Father of the Canadian Crown."
Industrial farming has increased as businesses buy and consolidate older farm properties.
By 1974, the Commission had spearheaded the development of a primary wastewater treatment plant, known as the Charlottetown Pollution Control Plant, together with the construction of several pumping stations along the City’s waterfront, and outfall piping deep into the Hillsborough River.
They enjoy a variety of leisure activities, including beaches, various golf courses, eco-tourism adventures, touring the countryside, and enjoying cultural events in local communities around the island.
Ground ambulance service in Prince Edward Island is provided under contract by Island EMS.
Since then, the Confederation Bridge's assured transportation link to the mainland has altered the province's tourism and agricultural and fisheries export economies.
The New Englanders had a force of two war ships and 200 soldiers stationed at Port-La-Joye.
*Souris Hospital (Souris)
The largest surrounds Charlottetown Harbour, situated centrally on the island's southern shore, and consists of the capital city Charlottetown, and suburban towns Cornwall and Stratford and a developing urban fringe.
In 1873, Canadian Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald, anxious to thwart American expansionism and facing the distraction of the Pacific Scandal, negotiated for Prince Edward Island to join Canada.
The New England troops left for Louisbourg.
It provides a summary of the ongoing testing of drinking water done by the Prince Edward Island Analytical Laboratories.
Early disposal practices, while advanced for their time, eventually were found to compromise the ecological integrity of the nearby Hillsborough River and the Charlottetown Harbour.
This tradition, largely Scottish, Irish and Acadian in origin is very similar to the music of Cape Breton and to a lesser extent, Newfoundland and is unique to the region.
Twenty exploration wells for hydrocarbon resources have been drilled on Prince Edward Island and offshore.
The natives believed that the island was formed by the Great Spirit placing on the Blue Waters some dark red crescent-shaped clay.
The provincially managed portion of the network consists of  of paved roadways and  of non-paved or clay roads.
The backbone of the economy is farming; it produces 25% of Canada's potatoes.
These sediments accumulated to form a sedimentary basin, and make up the island's bedrock.
As such, it is milder than inland locations owing to the warm waters from the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
As a result of having hosted the inaugural meeting of Confederation, the Charlottetown Conference, Prince Edward Island presents itself as the "Birthplace of Confederation" and this is commemorated through several buildings, a ferry vessel, and the Confederation Bridge (constructed 1993 to 1997).
Prince Edward Island's public school system has an English school district named the English Language School Board, as well as a Francophone district, the Commission scolaire de langue française.
*Kings County Memorial Hospital (Montague)
This scheme collapsed when the Island ran short of money to continue with the purchases.
Chinese Canadians are the largest visible minority group of Prince Edward Island, comprising 1.3% of the province's population.
This came about after Vice-Governor Lin Fanglue stayed for two days to hold discussions about partnership opportunities and trade.
Montesson and his troops killed forty New Englanders and captured the rest.
It is one of the three Maritime Provinces and is the smallest province in both land area and population.
This is one of the highest levels in the country.
Autumn is a pleasant season, as the moderating Gulf waters delay the onset of frost, although storm activity increases compared to the summer.
Prince Edward Island, along with most rural regions in North America, is experiencing an accelerated rate of youth emigration.
An English detachment landed at Port-la-Joye.
There is ample precipitation throughout the year, although it is heaviest in the late autumn, early winter and mid spring.
* Kent Street, Georgetown
In the winter months of January and February, the average daytime high is .
However, many more were forcibly deported during the second wave of the expulsion after the Siege of Louisbourg (1758).
*Community Hospital (O'Leary)
Since around 1900, the residents of the City of Charlottetown have benefited from a central sanitary sewer service.
