Most of these pregnancies are deemed as high risk.
In the Napoleonic wars, the broken down hulks were still in use for naval prisoners.
Corresponding with the advent of the state was the development of written language, which enabled the creation of formalized legal codes as official guidelines for society.
The first state prison in England was the Millbank Prison, established in 1816 with a capacity for just under 1000 inmates.
There was an increase in the use of forced labor throughout Europe.
Furthermore, incarcerated women are a source of free labor for private companies.
Goods and services, such as meals, laundry, commissary, educational materials, religious services and medical care can increasingly be brought to individual pods or cells as well.
As the practice of penal transportation was steadily curtailed in England at the end of the 18th century, a popular alternative emerged.
Conditions in terms of housing, food and medical care were bad in the Confederacy, and the Union retaliated by imposing harsh conditions.
Prison libraries can dramatically improve the quality of life for prisoners, who have large amounts of empty time on their hands that can be occupied with reading.
Most inmates are women of color from low socioeconomic backgrounds and therefore suffer from both chronic diseases that are common in minorities (such as diabetes, heart disease, and hypertension) and health problems that may result from living in poverty (such as malnutrition, etc.).
Old sailing vessels, which came to be called ''hulks'', were used as places of temporary confinement.
There are many security considerations, however, that are unique to the prison dining environment.
By the end of the 17th century, houses of correction were absorbed into local prison systems under the control of the local justice of the peace.
This notion of punishment as vengeance or retaliation can also be found in many other legal codes from early civilizations, including the ancient Sumerian codes, the Indian ''Manama Dharma Astra'', the ''Hermes Trismegistus'' of Egypt, and the Israelite Mosaic Law.
With electronic monitoring, prisoners are also allowed to visit their families in Helsinki and eat together with the prison staff.
The notion of prisoners being incarcerated as part of their punishment and not simply as a holding state until trial or hanging, was at the time revolutionary.
Reformers such as Benjamin Rush came up with a solution that would enable the continued used of forced labor, while keeping disorderly conduct and abuse out of the eyes of the public.
Prisons in wealthy, industrialized nations provide medical care for most of their inmates.
The system's fame spread and visitors to the U.S. to see the prisons included de Tocqueville who wrote ''Democracy in America'' as a result of his visit.
Suomenlinna Island facility in Finland is an example of one such "open" correctional facility.
Quakers were prominent in campaigning against and publicizing the dire state of the prisons at the time.
The turn of the 19th century would see the first organised prison reform movement, and by the 1810s, the first state prisons and correction facilities were established, thereby inaugurating the modern prison system as we know it today.
Officers received privileged treatment.
This theory, often referred to as ''deterrence'', claims that the primary purpose of prisons is to be so harsh and terrifying that they deter people from committing crimes out of fear of going to prison.
It is said that prison food of many developed countries is adequate to maintain health and dieting.
Additionally, a lack of maternity clothes and resources to deal with premature births, false labors, and miscarriages pose serious challenges to prisoners.
Furthermore, in recent times, supermax prisons have been created where the custody level goes beyond maximum security for people such as terrorists or political prisoners deemed a threat to national security, and inmates from other prisons who have a history of violent or other disruptive behavior in prison or are suspected of gang affiliation.
He was particularly appalled to discover prisoners who had been acquitted but were still confined because they couldn't pay the gaoler's fees.
Eventually, since impoverished Athenians could not pay their fines, leading to indefinite periods of imprisonment, time limits were set instead.
The majority of women incarcerated have experienced abuse before prison, and while they are incarcerated they may suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder.
But other measures passed in the next few years provided magistrates with the powers to implement many of these reforms, and eventually, in 1815, gaol fees were abolished.
Forced labor on public works projects was also a common form of punishment.
By 1917, juvenile courts had been established in all but 3 states.
The penalties for violations of the laws in Hammurabi's Code were almost exclusively centered on the concept of ''lex talionis'' ("the law of retaliation"), whereby people were punished as a form of vengeance, often by the victims themselves.
The pods contain tiers of cells arranged around a central control station or desk from which a single officer can monitor all the cells and the entire pod, control cell doors and communicate with the rest of the prison.
Because of the lack of opportunities for former prisoners, rates of recidivism are very high; according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, within three years of release, 67.8 percent of released prisoners are rearrested and within five years, 76.6 percent are rearrested.
Many countries maintain or have in the past had a system of prisons specifically intended for political prisoners.
After the unification of Italy in 1861, the government reformed the repressive and arbitrary prison system they inherited, and modernized and secularized criminal punishment by emphasizing discipline and deterrence.
There is much debate about who qualifies as a "political prisoner".
Giving prisoners a key to success is dealing with the spiritual, physical, mental stage of one's self, after he or she has reentered into freedom.
The prison has been open since 1971 and, as of September 2013, the facility's 95 male prisoners leave the prison grounds on a daily basis to work in the corresponding township or commute to the mainland for either work or study.
Sweden, Germany, and the Netherlands) have been working towards policies of large-scale decarceration, addressing crime and violence with alternative strategies such as fines, community service, and restorative justice processes.
Crowding can create extremely dangerous environments in juvenile detention centers and juvenile correctional facilities.
Elizabeth Fry documented the conditions that prevailed at Newgate prison, where the ladies' section was overcrowded with women and children, some of whom had not even received a trial.
As of 2012, the United States has the world's largest prison population, with over 2.3 million people in American prisons or jails—up from 744,000 in 1985—meaning 1 in every 100 American adults are in a prison.
Prison medical facilities include primary care, mental health services, dental care, substance abuse treatment, and other forms of specialized care, depending on the needs of the inmate population.
Besides the economic benefits of providing a free source of hard labor, the proponents of the new penal code also thought that this would deter criminal activity by making a conspicuous public example of consequences of breaking the law.
These parties have a strong interest in the expansion of the prison system since their development and prosperity directly depends on the number of inmates.
Although the offender is not locked away in a prison cell, the offender is still expected to stay at home during certain times of the day or night.
This becomes a major issue for pregnant women who may not physically be able to work but are in dire need of medical care.
During the Middle Ages in Europe, castles, fortresses, and the basements of public buildings were often used as makeshift prisons.
In 1786, the state of Pennsylvania passed a law which mandated that all convicts who had not been sentenced to death would be placed in penal servitude to do public works projects such as building roads, forts, and mines.
Another common punishment was sentencing people to galley slavery, which involved chaining prisoners together in the bottoms of ships and forcing them to row on naval or merchant vessels.
In many cases, citizens were sentenced to slavery, often in ergastula (a primitive form of prison where unruly slaves were chained to workbenches and performed hard labor).
The possession of the right and the capability to imprison citizens, however, granted an air of legitimacy to officials at all levels of government, from kings to regional courts to city councils; and the ability to have someone imprisoned or killed served as a signifier of who in society possessed power or authority over others.
Generally, when an inmate arrives at a prison, they go through a security classification screening and risk assessment that determines where they will be placed within the prison system.
Prison labor can soon deprive the free labor of jobs in a number of sectors, since the organized labor turns out to be uncompetitive compared to the prison counterpart.
Prisons are very attractive to employers, because prisoners can be made to perform a great array of jobs, under conditions that most free laborers wouldn't accept (and would be illegal outside of prisons): sub-minimum wage payments, no insurance, no collective bargaining, lack of alternative options, etc.
Pods may be designed for high-security "indirect supervision", in which officers in segregated and sealed control booths monitor smaller numbers of prisoners confined to their cells.
At most prisons, prisoners are made to wear prison uniform.
In some countries, dissidents can be detained,  tortured, executed, and/or "disappeared" without trial.
Some scholars, using the term "prison industrial complex", have argued that the trend of "hiring out prisoners" is a continuation of the slavery tradition, pointing out that the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution freed slaves but allowed forced labor for people convicted of crimes.
Teaching each individual of how to cope with life in general, once a man life is retained back unto him or her they too must learn to adapt with society over again.
Gaols contained both felons and debtors; the latter were allowed to bring in wives and children.
The laws quickly drew criticism from a humanitarian perspective (as cruel, exploitative and degrading) and from a utilitarian perspective (as failing to deter crime and delegitimizing the state in the eyes of the public).
''Administrative detention'' is a classification of prisons or detention centers where people are held without trial.
Penal colonies in French Guiana operated until 1951, such as the infamous ''Île du Diable'' (Devil's Island).
(In comparison, 19th-century prisons had large landings and cell blocks which permitted only intermittent observation of prisoners.)
Many prisons provide limited recreational and fitness facilities for prisoners.
These later reformers believed that prisons could be constructed as humane institutions of moral instruction, and that prisoners' behavior could be "corrected" so that when they were released, they would be model members of society.
Abolitionists see most anti-social acts (violence, theft, etc.)
Robert Peel's Gaols Act of 1823 introduced regular visits to prisoners by chaplains, provided for the payment of gaolers and prohibited the use of irons and manacles.
The quality of kitchen equipment varies from prison to prison, depending on when the prison was constructed, and the level of funding available to procure new equipment.
The provision of these services is controversial, with certain elements of society claiming that prisons are being "soft" on inmates, and others claiming that it is cruel and dehumanizing to confine people for years without any recreational opportunities.
In times of war, prisoners of war or detainees may be detained in military prisons or prisoner of war camps, and large groups of civilians might be imprisoned in internment camps.
Very few of these women receive prenatal care, which can be very detrimental to both the mother and child, especially when coupled with inmates’ histories of inadequate health care as well as sexual, physical and substance abuse.
They were modernized in 1852 and since their existence, are used variously to house prisoners of war, unlawful combatants, those whose freedom is deemed a national security risk by military or civilian authorities, and members of the military found guilty of a serious crime.
Rulers began looking for means to punish and control their subjects in a way that did not cause people to associate them with spectacles of tyrannical and sadistic violence.
In many poor neighborhoods in the U.S., as many as one fifth of the adult men are in prison at any given time.
Imprisonment as a penalty was used initially for those who could not afford to pay their fines.
Besides their use for punishing civil crimes, jails and prisons are frequently used by authoritarian regimes.
Prisons for juveniles are known by a variety of names, including "youth detention facilities", "juvenile detention centers", and "reformatories".
Prisons are most commonly used within a criminal justice system: people charged with crimes may be imprisoned until they are brought to trial; those pleading or being found guilty of crimes at trial may be sentenced to a specified period of imprisonment.
The needs of mothers during pregnancy and childbirth often conflict with the demands of the prison system.
Like adult facilities, youth detention centers in some countries are experiencing overcrowding due to large increases in incarceration rates of young offenders.
One French surgeon recalled his captivity in Spain, where scurvy, diarrhea, dysentery, and typhus abounded, and prisoners died by the thousands:
Alcatraz was formerly a military prison for soldiers during the American Civil War.
In the hot weather we had black army bread full of gritty particles, biscuit full of maggots, salt meat that was already decomposing, rancid lard, spoiled cod, and stale rice, peas, and beans."
However, the concept of the modern prison largely remained unknown until the early 19th-century.
The second theory, which saw prisons as a form of ''rehabilitation'' or ''moral reform'', was based on religious ideas that equated crime with sin, and saw prisons as a place to instruct prisoners in Christian morality, obedience and proper behavior.
Meanwhile, many nations that have historically lacked prison libraries are starting to develop them.
Prison administrators, however, generally find the provision of recreational opportunities to be useful at maintaining order in the prisons, because it keeps prisoners occupied and provides leverage to gain compliance (by depriving prisoners of recreation as punishment).
This was the only place any medical services were provided.
The inmates did their own cooking and washing in the small cells in which they slept on straw.
This can happen either legally, or extralegally (sometimes by falsely accusing people and fabricating evidence against them).
The first juvenile correctional institution in the United States opened in 1825 in New York City.
Most pregnant women are shackled on grounds of security in labor and delivery.
Following Howard's agitation, the Penitentiary Act was passed in 1779.
The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals established that is unconstitutional in 2009, and prohibited restraint of women during labor.
However, these were never built due to disagreements in the committee and pressures from wars with France, and gaols remained a local responsibility.
It was estimated that in 2011 more than 95,000 juveniles were locked up in prisons and jails in the United States (the largest youth prisoner population in the world).
This time spent reading has a variety of benefits including improved literacy, ability to understand rules and regulations (leading to improved behavior), ability to read books that encourage self-reflection and analysis of one's emotional state, consciousness of important real-world events, and education that can lead to successful re-entry into society after release.
The prison industry blurs the lines between free and coerced labor.
The prison in Ancient Athens was known as the ''desmoterion'' ("place of chains").
It is distinct from prison reform, which is the attempt to improve conditions inside prisons; however, relying on prisons less can significantly improve their conditions by eliminating overcrowding.
When they are released, they are unable to find work, earn less money when they do find work, and experience a wide range of medical and psychological issues that make it harder for them to integrate back into society.
The United States government refers to psychiatric prisons as "Federal Medical Centers (FMC)".
For instance, cutlery equipment must be very carefully monitored and accounted for at all times, and the layout of prison kitchens must be designed in a way that allows staff to observe activity of the kitchen staff (who are usually prisoners).
Incarcerated women suffer disproportionately from HIV/AIDS, infectious disease, reproductive issues, and chronic diseases.
Additionally, many prisons have an outdoor recreation area, commonly referred to as an "exercise yard".
Another prominent prison reformer who made important contributions was Alexander Paterson who advocated for the necessity of humanising and socialising methods within the prison system in Great Britain and America.
Victims take an active role in the process, while offenders are encouraged to take responsibility for their actions, "to repair the harm they've done—by apologizing, returning stolen money, or community service".
In 1817, she helped found the Association for the Reformation of the Female Prisoners in Newgate.
Some countries (such as Britain) also have "open" prisons where prisoners are allowed home-leave or part-time employment outside of the prison.
The levels of security within a prison system are categorized differently around the world, but tend to follow a distinct pattern.
In 2009, China's prison population was about 1.6 million, while the prison population of India was 332,112.
Lower-security prisons are often designed with less restrictive features, confining prisoners at night in smaller locked dormitories or even cottage or cabin-like housing while permitting them freer movement around the grounds to work or activities during the day.
The earliest known use of the term "juvenile delinquency" was in London in 1816, from where it quickly spread to the United States.
By 1824, 54 prisons had adopted the disciplinary system advocated by the SIPD.
Male correctional officials often violate women prisoners’ privacy by watching them undress, shower, and go to the bathroom.
“In federal women’s correction facilities, 70% of guards are male,”  reinforcing female inmates’ powerlessness.
Abolitionists criticize the focus on "crime" as violations of laws that are arbitrarily defined by those in power—especially when these lawmakers are seen as oppressive and corrupt.
It should be noted that prisons can only be used for detaining people for periods of time greater than one year, otherwise a person may be housed in jail as a punishment but for only up to one year.These tools of political repression are used  to punish what are deemed political crimes, often without trial or other legal due process; this use is illegal under most forms of international law governing fair administration of justice.
The British kept American sailors in broken down ship hulks with high death rates.
Prisons were closed in the towns of Åby, Håja, Båtshagen, and Kristianstad.
Movement in or out of the pod to and from exercise yards, work assignments or medical appointments can be restricted to individual pods at designated times and is generally centrally controlled.
Mass incarceration has a powerful negative influence on communities (particularly poor communities), creating broken families, economic disenfranchisement, and increases in criminal activity.
Nevertheless, in addition to the cell blocks that contain the prisoners, also there are certain auxiliary facilities that are common in prisons throughout the world.
As a result of the ineffectiveness of prisons at preventing crime, the high costs of maintaining them, and the detrimental socio-economic effects of mass incarceration, many nations (e.g.
The aim of this was rehabilitative: the reformers talked about the penitentiary serving as a model for the family and the school and almost all the states adopted the plan (though Pennsylvania went even further in separating prisoners).
From the Middle Ages up to the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe, imprisonment was rarely used as a punishment in its own right, and prisons were mainly to hold those awaiting trial and convicts awaiting punishment.
This sorting of prisoners is one of the fundamental techniques through which the prison administration maintains control over the inmate population, and creates an orderly and secure prison environment.
The prison reform charity, the Howard League for Penal Reform, was established in his honour.
“In 2007, the Bureau of Justice Statistics stated that, on average, 5% of women who enter into state prisons are pregnant and in jails 6% of women are pregnant”.
Military prisons in the United States have also been converted to civilian prisons, to include Alcatraz Island.
As of 2009, California's 158,000 inmates were detained in prisons that were designed to hold 84,000—almost 14,000 of these inmates were sleeping in very tight spaces, or in hallways, or on floors.
His views influenced the establishment of the first prisons used as criminal rehabilitation centers.
Conditions in prisons vary widely around the world, and the types of facilities within prisons depend on many intersecting factors including funding, legal requirements, and cultural beliefs/practices.
Sexual offenses against women prisoners can include rape, assault, and groping during pat frisks.
Some psychiatric facilities have characteristics of prisons, particularly when confining patients who have committed a crime and are considered dangerous.
will they be placed in a mental health unit), and many other factors.
Whatever their reasons for participating in educational programs, prison populations tend to have very low literacy rates and lack of basic mathematical skills, and many have not completed secondary education.
A small number of prison officers, sometimes a single officer, supervise each pod.
At a time when the implementation of capital punishment for a variety of relatively trivial offences was on the decline, the notion of incarceration as a form of punishment and correction held great appeal to reform-minded thinkers and politicians.
In the American Revolution, British prisoners held by the U.S. were assigned to local farmers as laborers.
Some prisons provide educational programs for inmates that can include basic literacy, secondary education, or even college education.
People are also being incarcerated at an increasing rate and new prisons cannot be built fast enough.
Most offenders who receive conditional sentences are low risk and are usually serving time for impaired driving where no death occurred.
:""These great trunks of ships were immense coffins, in which living men were consigned to a slow death....
The prison reform movement that arose at this time was heavily influenced by two somewhat contradictory philosophies.
Although conditions on these ships were often appalling, their use set a precedent, and persuaded many people that mass incarceration and labour were viable methods of crime prevention and punishment.
This introduced solitary confinement, religious instruction, a labor regime, and proposed two state penitentiaries (one for men and one for women).
In the first half of the 19th century, capital punishment came to be regarded as inappropriate for many crimes that it had previously been carried out for, and by the mid-19th century, imprisonment had replaced the death penalty for the most serious offenses except for murder.
In some countries, such as the United States, drastic budget cuts have resulted in many prison libraries being shut down.
Smaller, separate and self-contained housing units known as "pods" or "modules" are designed to hold 16 to 50 prisoners and are arranged around exercise yards or support facilities in a decentralized "campus" pattern.
Food and medical treatment were generally comparable to what active duty soldiers received, and housing was much better than front-line conditions.
Prisoners in Scandinavian facilities are permitted to wear their own clothes.
Overcrowding may also lead to the decrease in availability to provide the youth with much needed and promised programs and services while they are in the facility.
Modern prisons often hold hundreds or thousands of inmates, and must have facilities onsite to meet most of their needs, including dietary, health, fitness, education, religious practices, entertainment, and many others.
Punishment usually consisted of physical forms of punishment, including capital punishment, mutilation, flagellation (whipping), branding, and non-physical punishments, such as public shaming rituals (like the stocks).
That too might cut down on the possibility of reentering back into the system, alone with being productive people's when entering into our society.
The first was based in Enlightenment ideas of utilitarianism and rationalism, and suggested that prisons should simply be used as a more effective substitute for public corporal punishments such as whipping, hanging, etc.
A '''' or '''' (also called a "block" or "isolation cell") is a highly secure area of the prison, where inmates are placed in solitary confinement to isolate them from the general population.
The tension between these two opinions, coupled with lack of funding, leads to a large variety of different recreational procedures at different prisons.
Within the American prison system, HIV became more prevalent among women than among men.
In the United States alone, more than $74 billion per year is spent on prisons, with over 800,000 people employed in the prison industry.
Often these libraries are very small, consisting of a few shelves of books.
Prisoners can rent flat-screen televisions, sound systems, and mini-refrigerators with the prison-labor wages that they can earn—wages range between 4.10 and 7.30€ per hour.
She also began a system of supervision and required the women to sew and to read the Bible.
In particular, imposition of the death penalty for petty crimes, such as theft, was proving increasingly unpopular with the public, and many jurors were refusing to convict defendants of petty crimes when they knew the defendants would be sentenced to death.
By 1900 the legal framework of the Geneva and Hague Convention provided considerable protection.
The Romans were among the first to use prisons as a form of punishment, rather than simply for detention.
as the result of social problems (e.g.
Prisoners seek education for a variety of reasons, including the development of skills for after release, personal enrichment and curiosity, finding something to fill their time, or trying to please prison staff (which can often secure early release for good behavior).
They developed systems of mass incarceration, often with hard labor, as a solution.
A variety of existing structures were used to house prisoners, such as metal cages, basements of public buildings, and quarries.
The best known of these early legal codes is the Code of Hammurabi, written in Babylon around 1750 BC.
Bentham's panopticon introduced the principle of observation and control that underpins the design of the modern prison.
In order to verify that offenders are abiding by the restrictions placed on them, electronic monitoring is often used.
Restorative justice is an approach to justice that focuses on the needs of the victims and the offenders, as well as the involved community, instead of focusing on satisfying abstract legal principles or punishing offenders (such as imprisoning them).
But by 1820 faith in the efficacy of legal reform had declined as statutory changes had no discernible effect on the level of crime and the prisons, where prisoners shared large rooms and booty including alcohol, had become riotous and prone to escapes.
Examples of common facilities/programs that are available in some prisons are: gyms and weightlifting rooms, arts and crafts, games (such as cards, chess, or bingo), television sets, and sports teams.
'''' are sentences that are served outside of the prison walls and in the community with some sort of restrictions or conditions placed on the offender, in an effort to reduce prison populations.
John Howard was one of the most notable early prison reformers.
The theory of the modern prison system was born in London, influenced by the utilitarianism of Jeremy Bentham.
That same year, it was also reported that the United States government spent an estimated US$37 billion to maintain these prisons.
The use of prisons can be traced back to the rise of the state as a form of social organization.
This is a huge advantage to conditional sentencing, since offenders are not completely cut off from the external world.
This leads to a high demand for medical services, and in countries such as the US that don't provide free healthcare, prison is often the first place that people are able to receive medical treatment (which they couldn't afford outside).
On the other end are "minimum security" prisons which are most often used to house those for whom more stringent security is deemed unnecessary.
In addition, many prisons have psychiatric units dedicated to housing offenders diagnosed with a wide variety of mental disorders.
During the 18th century, popular resistance to public execution and torture became more widespread both in Europe and in the United States.
This lack of basic education severely limits their employment opportunities outside of prison, leading to high rates of recidivism, and research has shown that prison education can play a significant role in helping prisoners reorient their lives and become successful after reentry.
When the Confederacy refused to exchange black prisoners the system broke down, and each side built large-scale POW camps.
France also sent criminals to tropical penal colonies, including Louisiana, in the early 18th century.
Prison populations are largely from poor minority communities that experience greater rates of chronic illness, substance abuse, and mental illness than the general population.
The decrease in the number of Swedish prisoners was considered "out-of-the-ordinary" by the head of Sweden's prison and probation services, with prison numbers in Sweden falling by around 1% a year since 2004.
Prisons have formed part of military systems since the French Revolution.
The prison industry also includes private businesses that benefit from the exploitation of the prison labor.
