The earliest known purposely built prisoner-of-war camp was established at Norman Cross, England in 1797 to house the increasing number of prisoners from the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars.
Gavan Daws has calculated that "of all POWs who died in the Pacific War, one in three was killed on the water by friendly fire".
Likewise, the inhabitants of conquered cities were frequently massacred during the Crusades against the Muslims in the 11th and 12th centuries.
POWs in peace camps were reportedly treated with more consideration.
Research into the conditions of the camps has been conducted by The Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.
A very large number of these had been released ''en masse'' and sent across Allied lines without any food or shelter.
According to Russian military historian General Grigoriy Krivosheyev, 4.6 million Soviet prisoners were taken by the Axis powers, of which 1.8 million were found alive in camps after the war and 318,770 were released by the Axis during the war and were then drafted into the Soviet armed forces again.
The International Red Cross could do nothing for them, as they were not regarded as POW's, but the prisoners held the status of "Military Internees".
Each returning officer and man was given a message from King George V, written in his own hand and reproduced on a lithograph.
File:March of Death from Bataan to the prison camp - Dead soldiers.jpg|Many US and Filipino POWs died as a result of the Bataan Death March, in May 1942
This myth had been perpetuated after the release of people like John H. Noble.
Army Nurses in Santo Tomas Internment Camp, 1943
The German military used the Soviet Union's refusal to sign the Geneva Convention as a reason for not providing the necessities of life to Soviet POWs; and the Soviets similarly killed Axis prisoners or used them as slave labor.
Belligerents hold prisoners of war in custody for a range of legitimate and illegitimate reasons, such as isolating them from enemy combatants still in the field (releasing and repatriating them in an orderly manner after hostilities), demonstrating military victory, punishing them, prosecuting them for war crimes, exploiting them for their labor, recruiting or even conscripting them as their own combatants, collecting military and political intelligence from them, or indoctrinating them in new political or religious beliefs.
Of the 22,000 Japanese soldiers present at the beginning of the Battle of Iwo Jima, over 20,000 were killed and only 216 were taken prisoner.
The first Roman gladiators were prisoners of war and were named according to their ethnic roots such as Samnite, Thracian, and the Gaul (Gallus).
About 25% of other ranks died, many from malnutrition, while only one officer died.
The US also shipped 740,000 German POWs as forced labourers to France from where newspaper reports told of very bad treatment.
In September 1943, Italian officers were arrested and taken to German internment camps in East Europe, where they were held for the duration of WW2.
The aim was to achieve a reduction in the number of prisoners held, while at the same time alleviating shortages of skilled personnel in the home country.
German and Japanese military commanders were prosecuted for preparing and initiating a war of aggression, murder, ill treatment, and deportation of individuals, and genocide during World War II.
The writings of Mary Rowlandson, captured in the brutal fighting of King Philip's War, are an example.
After 20 March 1943, the Imperial Navy was under orders to execute all prisoners taken at sea.
Typically, little distinction was made between enemy combatants and enemy civilians, although women and children were more likely to be spared.
About 50% of the Australian prisoners were light horsemen including 48 missing believed captured on 1 May 1918 in the Jordan Valley.
As a result of these emerging conventions, a number of international conferences were held, starting with the Brussels Conference of 1874, with nations agreeing that it was necessary to prevent inhumane treatment of prisoners and the use of weapons causing unnecessary harm.
A public debate ensued in the UK, where words such as "forced labour", "slaves", "slave labour" were increasingly used in the media and in the House of Commons.
However, there are many cases of Muslim conquerors executing large numbers of civilians and prisoners.
In feudal Japan there was no custom of ransoming prisoners of war, who were for the most part summarily executed.
Typically women had no rights, and were held legally as chattel.
The system of exchanges collapsed in 1863 when the Confederacy refused to exchange black prisoners.
The United States handed over 740,000 German prisoners to France, a signatory of the Geneva Convention.
Some 930,000 more were found alive in camps after the war.
They were released after many approaches by the ICRC to the Allied Supreme Council.
The USSR had not signed the Geneva convention.
We are prosecuting plunder and our Allies are practicing it.
*1.3 million unknown
After the surrender of Germany in May 1945, the POW status of the German prisoners was in many cases maintained, and they were for several years used as forced labour in countries such as the UK and France.
They were afforded the courtesy of their rank within English society.
The privates were sent out to work.
The first British prisoners were released and reached Calais on 15 November.
Norman Cross was intended to be a model depot providing the most humane treatment of prisoners of war.
The last German POWs like Erich Hartmann, the highest-scoring fighter ace in the history of aerial warfare, who had been declared guilty of war crimes but without due process, were not released by the Soviets until 1955, three years after Stalin died.
Life in the POW camps was recorded at great risk to themselves by artists such as Jack Bridger Chalker, Philip Meninsky, Ashley George Old, and Ronald Searle.
Sometimes, the purpose of a battle, if not a war, was to capture women, a practice known as ''raptio''; the Rape of the Sabines was a large mass abduction by the founders of Rome.
In some instances, Japanese prisoners were tortured by a variety of methods.
A January 2008 directive states that the reasoning behind this is since "Prisoner of War" is the international legal recognized status for such people there is no need for any individual country to follow suit.
With the Soviet invasion of Manchuria, in 1945, Japanese soldiers became prisoners in the Soviet Union, where they, just as other Axis POWs, had to work.
About half of them worked for German agriculture, where food supplies were adequate and controls were lenient.
He wrote about the hungers of semi-starvation, the casual murder of individual prisoners by guards and how when they were released (now in a German camp) they found a deserted German town, filled with foodstuffs that they (with other released prisoners) ate.
Escapes among Caucasian prisoners were almost impossible because of the difficulty of men of Caucasian descent hiding in Asiatic societies.
The most notorious use of forced labour was in the construction of the Burma–Thailand Death Railway.
North Korean and North and South Vietnamese forces routinely killed or mistreated prisoners taken during those conflicts.
73 men who participated, or 21 percent of the detachment, perished in two months.
Peace camps and reform camps were for POWs that were either sympathetic to the cause or who had valued skills that could be useful in the army and thus these enemy soldiers were indoctrinated and sometimes conscripted into the North Korean army.
After the war, many Japanese were kept on as Japanese Surrendered Personnel until mid-1947 and used as forced labour doing menial tasks, while 35,000 were kept on in arms within their wartime military organisation and under their own officers and used in combat alongside British troops seeking to suppress the independence movements in the Dutch East Indies and French Indochina.
The War Ministry in Tokyo issued an order at the end of the war to kill all surviving POWs.
The German Empire held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.9 million, and Britain and France held about 720,000, mostly gained in the period just before the Armistice in 1918.
Allied POW camps and ship-transports were sometimes accidental targets of Allied attacks.
Like in previous conflicts, there has been speculation without evidence that there were a handful of American pilots captured by the North Koreans and the North Vietnamese who were transferred to the Soviet Union and were never repatriated.
About one third were released on various terms.
In 1952, the 1952 Inter-Camp P.O.W.
It read as follows:
Even worse conditions are reported in the book "Escape of a Princess Pat" by the Canadian George Pearson.
File:Giving a sick man a drink as US POWs of Japanese, Philippine Islands, Cabanatuan prison camp.jpg|POW art depicting Cabanatuan prison camp, produced in 1946
The death rate of Chinese was much higher.
However, in the American Civil War, both sides treated captured troops as POWs, presumably out of reciprocity, although the Union regarded Confederate personnel as separatist rebels.
Between the launching of Operation Barbarossa in the summer of 1941 and the following spring, 2.8 million of the 3.2 million Soviet prisoners taken died while in German hands.
However, after making approaches to the Allies in the autumn of 1945 it was allowed to investigate the camps in the British and French occupation zones of Germany, as well as to provide relief to the prisoners held there.
(The Convention recognizes a few other groups as well, such as "inhabitants of a non-occupied territory, who on the approach of the enemy spontaneously take up arms to resist the invading forces, without having had time to form themselves into regular armed units".)
To be entitled to prisoner-of-war status, captured persons must be lawful combatants entitled to combatant's privilege—which gives them immunity from punishment for crimes constituting lawful acts of war such as killing enemy combatants.
In 1991, during the Persian Gulf War, American, British, Italian, and Kuwaiti POWs (mostly crew members of downed aircraft and special forces) were tortured by the Iraqi secret police.
During the war, the armies of Western Allied nations such as the US, UK, Canada, and Australia were ordered to treat Axis prisoners strictly in accordance with the Geneva Convention.
The two were imprisoned as spies for three years before being interned in a mental asylum in Ranchi, where they spent the next 38 years under a special prisoner status.
However, one-third told him they had seen US troops kill German prisoners.
During the Sinai and Palestine campaign 217 Australian and unknown numbers of British, New Zealand and Indian soldiers were captured by Ottoman Empire forces.
One of the main provisions of the convention makes it illegal to torture prisoners and states that a prisoner can only be required to give their name, date of birth, rank and service number (if applicable).
In practice, these criteria are rarely interpreted strictly.
Many were weak and starved when they surrendered and 4,250 died in captivity.
The criteria are applied primarily to ''international'' armed conflicts; in civil wars, insurgents are often treated as traitors or criminals by government forces, and are sometimes executed.
Japanese prisoners sent to camps fared well; however, some Japanese were killed when trying to surrender or were massacred just after they had surrendered (see Allied war crimes during World War II in the Pacific).
Examples include the 13th century Albigensian Crusade and the Northern Crusades.
During World War II, Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany (towards Soviet POWs and Western Allied commandos) were notorious for atrocities against prisoners of war.
This created difficulties for the receiving Allies and many released prisoners died from exhaustion.
Some American prisoners were held in the prison called the Hanoi Hilton.
Prisoners of war from China, the United States, Australia, Britain, Canada, India, the Netherlands, New Zealand, and the Philippines held by the Japanese armed forces were subject to murder, beatings, summary punishment, brutal treatment, forced labour, medical experimentation, starvation rations, poor medical treatment and cannibalism.
Some American POWs claimed the Germans were victims of circumstance and did the best they could, while others accused their captors of brutalities and forced labor.
For this he was eventually canonized.
Many of these were for over three years after the German surrender used as forced labour, as a form of "reparations".
However, a small number of Allied personnel were sent to concentration camps, for a variety of reasons including being Jewish.
The Aztecs were constantly at war with neighbouring tribes and groups, with the goal of this constant warfare being to collect live prisoners for sacrifice.
All nations pledged to follow the Hague rules on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and in general the POWs had a much higher survival rate than their peers who were not captured.
For the re-consecration of Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan in 1487, "between 10,000 and 80,400 persons" were sacrificed.
In Germany food was short but only 5% died.
Some breaches of the Convention took place, however.
File:LeonardGSiffleet.jpg|Australian POW Leonard Siffleet captured at New Guinea moments before his execution with a Japanese shin gunto sword in 1943.
; "by September 1945 it was estimated by the French authorities that two thousand prisoners were being maimed and killed each month in accidents"
At Camp Douglas in Chicago, Illinois, 10% of its Confederate prisoners died during one cold winter month; and Elmira Prison in New York state, with a death rate of 25% (2,963), very nearly equalled that of Andersonville.
Aside from those who converted, most were ransomed or enslaved.
The prisoners had their own photographers, announcers, even reporters, who after each day's competition published a newspaper, the "Olympic Roundup".
Forced marches and crowded railway journeys preceded years in camps where disease, poor diet and inadequate medical facilities prevailed.
in France, until 1920.
"During their visits, the delegates observed that German prisoners of war were often detained in appalling conditions.
Out of the 230,000 Polish prisoners of war taken by the Soviet army, only 82,000 survived.
Nearly 375,000 of the 500,000 Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war taken by Russians perished in Siberia from smallpox and typhus.
Such narratives enjoyed some popularity, spawning a genre of the captivity narrative, and had lasting influence on the body of early American literature, most notably through the legacy of James Fenimore Cooper's ''Last of the Mohicans''.
After the German surrender, the International Red Cross was prohibited from providing aid such as food or visiting prisoner camps in Germany.
≈200,000 (135,000 taken in Europe, does not include Pacific or Commonwealth figures)
Number of POWs held in captivity
Of about 16,500 French soldiers who fought at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in French Indochina, more than 3,000 were killed in battle, while almost all of the 11,721 men taken prisoner died in the hands of the Viet Minh on death marches to distant POW camps, and in those camps in the last three months of the war.
Christians who were captured during the Crusades, were usually either killed or sold into slavery if they could not pay a ransom.
In very rare cases, some were beheaded by sword, and a severed head was once used as a soccer ball by Chinese National Revolutionary Army (NRA) soldiers.
File:Portrait of "Dusty" Rhodes by Ashley George Old.jpg|Water colour sketch of "Dusty" Rhodes by Ashley George Old
1,800,000 taken by Germany
80 of the 350 POWs were Jews."
In 2000, the U.S. military replaced the designation "Prisoner of War" for captured American personnel with "Missing-Captured".
have done or are doing some of the very things we are prosecuting the Germans for.
World War II (Total)
The Ottoman Empire often treated prisoners of war poorly.
The number of deaths which occurred when Japanese "hell ships"—unmarked transport ships in which POWs were transported in harsh conditions—were attacked by US Navy submarines was particularly high.
Early historical narratives of captured colonial Europeans, including perspectives of literate women captured by the indigenous peoples of North America, exist in some number.
When a country is responsible for breaches of prisoner of war rights, those accountable will be punished accordingly.
Human hair was often used for brushes, plant juices and blood for paint, and toilet paper as the "canvas".
For the P.O.W.s this was also an opportunity to meet with friends from other camps.
On 4 February 1946, the Red Cross was permitted to visit and assist prisoners also in the US occupation zone of Germany, although only with very small quantities of food.
Some 11,800 British soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the five-month Siege of Kut, in Mesopotamia, in April 1916.
Although thousands of Japanese were taken prisoner, most fought until they were killed or committed suicide.
*unknown number in Yugoslavia, Poland, Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark (the death rate for German prisoners of war was highest in Yugoslavia with over 50%)
Navy nurses rescued from Los Baños Internment Camp, March 1945
Upon arrival at the receiving camp the POWs were registered and "boarded" before being dispatched to their own homes.
Image:POWs Burma Thai RR.jpg|Australian and Dutch POWs at Tarsau, Thailand in 1943
When asked by a Crusader how to distinguish between the Catholics and Cathars once they'd taken the city of Béziers, the Papal Legate Arnaud Amalric famously replied, "''Kill them all, God will know His own''".
Despite the generous supply and quality of food, some prisoners died of starvation after gambling away their rations.
As Soviet ground forces approached some POW camps in early 1945, German guards forced western Allied POWs to walk long distances towards central Germany, often in extreme winter weather conditions.
This is a list of nations with the highest number of POWs since the start of World War II, listed in descending order.
No direct access to the POWs was provided to the International Red Cross.
A little over 500,000 either escaped or were liberated by the Red Army.
Consequently, western Allied officers were not usually made to work and some personnel of lower rank were usually compensated, or not required to work either.
Towards the end of the war in Europe, as large numbers of Axis soldiers surrendered, the US created the designation of Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEF) so as not to treat prisoners as POWs.
File:Bosbritsurrendergroup.jpg|Troops of the Suffolk Regiment surrendering to the Japanese, 1942
Judge Robert H. Jackson, Chief US prosecutor in the Nuremberg trials, in October 1945 told US President Harry S. Truman that the Allies themselves:
The others worked in factories or mines, where conditions were much harsher.
Homer's ''Iliad'' describes Greek and Trojan soldiers offering rewards of wealth to opposing forces who have defeated them on the battlefield in exchange for mercy, but their offers are not always accepted; see Lycaon for example.
File:Gaunt allied prisoners of war at Aomori camp near Yokohama cheer rescuers from U.S. Navy.
The US held 48,000.
The French are so violating the Geneva Convention in the treatment of prisoners of war that our command is taking back prisoners sent to them.
I do not recall a single act of compassion or mercy on the part of the Germans."
Another prisoner stated that "The German plan was to keep us alive, yet weakened enough that we wouldn't attempt escape."
There was however much harsh treatment of POWs in Germany, as recorded by the American ambassador to Germany (prior to America's entry into the war), James W. Gerard, who published his findings in "My Four Years in Germany".
After that about 56,000 of the 409,000 POWs died in prisons during the American Civil War, accounting for nearly 10% of the conflict's fatalities.
In Christian Europe, the extermination of heretics was considered desirable.
Of the remainder, the officers and non-commissioned officers were kept in camps and did not work.
The senior officer from each quadrangle was permitted to inspect the food as it was delivered to the prison to ensure it was of sufficient quality.
A lot of these soldiers were kept in open fields in makeshift camps in the Rhine valley (''Rheinwiesenlager'').
One American admitted "The only difference between the stalags and concentration camps was that we weren't gassed or shot in the former.
At the start of the civil war a system of paroles operated.
At Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered during the battle.
2.7-3 million taken by Germany (1.6 million died in German POW camps (56-68%))
Butler contacted Grant for guidance on the issue, and Grant responded to Butler on August 18, 1864 with his now famous statement.
Of the 27,465 United States Army and United States Army Air Forces POWs in the Pacific Theater, they had a 40.4% death rate.
Two possible reasons have been suggested for this incident: German authorities wanted to make an example of ''Terrorflieger'' ("terrorist aviators") and/or these aircrews were classified as spies, because they had been disguised as civilians or enemy soldiers when they were apprehended.
The British government went to great lengths to provide food of a quality at least equal to that available to locals.
During the Korean War, the North Koreans developed reputation for severely mistreating prisoners of war (see Crimes against POWs).
Of the 30,000 Japanese troops that defended Saipan, fewer than 1,000 remained alive at battle's end.
If he swore not to escape, he could gain better accommodations and the freedom of the prison.
About one million of them were released during the war, in that their status changed but they remained under German authority.
A cartel was usually arranged by the respective armed service for the exchange of like-ranked personnel.
To qualify under the Third Geneva Convention, a combatant must be part of a chain of command, wear a "fixed distinctive marking, visible from a distance", bear arms openly, and have conducted military operations according to the laws and customs of war.
The regular prisoners of war were usually very poorly treated.
They drew the attention of the authorities to this fact, and gradually succeeded in getting some improvements made".
All commissioned officers had to write a report on the circumstances of their capture and to ensure that they had done all they could to avoid capture.
Thus, uniforms and/or badges are important in determining prisoner-of-war status; and ''francs-tireurs'', terrorists, saboteurs, mercenaries, and spies do not qualify because they do not always follow the laws and customs of war and therefore they fall under the category of unlawful combatants.
*4,127,380 taken by USSR (474,967 died in captivity (15.2%)) (according to another source 1,094,250 died in captivity (35.8%))
Captives agreed not to fight until they were officially exchanged.
During his lifetime, Muhammad made it the responsibility of the Islamic government to provide food and clothing, on a reasonable basis, to captives, regardless of their religion; however if the prisoners were in the custody of a person, then the responsibility was on the individual.
The Soviet Union had not signed the Geneva Convention.
File:Army nurses rescued from Santo Tomas 1945h.jpg|U.S.
Controversy has arisen about how Eisenhower managed these prisoners (see ''Other Losses'').
U.S. forces also refused to accept the surrender of German troops attempting to surrender to them in Saxony and Bohemia, and handed them over to the Soviet Union instead.
≈130,000 (95,532 taken by Germany)
Noblemen could hope to be ransomed; their families would have to send to their captors large sums of wealth commensurate with the social status of the captive.
When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, 20,000 Russians became prisoners.
The book was translated and published as "My Secret Diary".
Waving flags of the United... - NARA - 520992.tif|Allied prisoners of war at Aomori camp near Yokohama, Japan waving flags of the United States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands in August 1945.
The released POWs were met by cavalry troops and sent back through the lines in lorries to reception centres where they were refitted with boots and clothing and dispatched to the ports in trains.
At the end of the war in 1918 there were believed to be 140,000 British prisoners of war in Germany, including 3,000 internees held in neutral Switzerland.
One third of all Australian prisoners were captured on Gallipoli including the crew of the submarine AE2 which made a passage through the Dardanelles in 1915.
Another well-known example was a group of 168 Australian, British, Canadian, New Zealand and US aviators who were held for two months at Buchenwald concentration camp; two of the POWs died at Buchenwald.
Between 1941 and 1945, the Axis powers took about 5.7 million Soviet prisoners.
An example of this is the Nuremberg and Tokyo Trials.
During the 19th century, there were increased efforts to improve the treatment and processing of prisoners.
Careful scholarly studies have demonstrated this is a myth based on a misinterpretation of a telegram that was talking about Soviet prisoners held in Italy.
In 2001, there were reports concerning two prisoners that India had taken during the Sino-Indian War, Yang Chen and Shih Liang.
It applies from the moment a prisoner is captured until he or she is released or repatriated.
By comparison, 8,348 Western Allied prisoners died in German camps during 1939–45 (3.5% of the 232,000 total).
Germany and Italy generally treated prisoners from the British Commonwealth, France, the USA, and other western Allies in accordance with the Geneva Convention, which had been signed by these countries.
Over half the Russian losses were prisoners as a proportion of those captured, wounded or killed.
Invasion of Poland, and Warsaw Uprising
Australian Flying Corps pilots and observers were captured in the Sinai Peninsula, Palestine and the Levant.
The expanding Mongol Empire was famous for distinguishing between cities or towns that surrendered - where the population were spared but required to support the conquering Mongol army - and those that resisted, where their city was ransacked and destroyed, and all the population killed.
