This is due to the fact that productivity is accounted as an independent variable separated from the entity it belongs to, i.e.
Income formation of production is always a balance between income generation and income distribution.
Additional resources are also attracted into production and can be profitably employed.
It is somewhat unclear what phenomenon is measured with this measure.
Improving the competitiveness of products means often to the producer lower product prices and therefore losses in incomes which are to compensated with the growth of sales volume.
The principle is to compare the growth of the value-added to the growth of labour and capital input.
We use here arithmetical models because they are like the models of management accounting, illustrative and easily understood and applied in practice.
Therefore, the calculation can be presented as a process advancing step by step.
In the case of a single production process (described above) the output is defined as an economic value of products and services produced in the process.
The profitability of production is the share of the real process result the owner has been able to keep to himself in the income distribution process.
The change of real income so signifies a move from the point 1 to the point 2 on the production function (above).
According to Davis, the price system is a mechanism through which productivity gains are distributed, and besides the business enterprise, receiving parties may consist of its customers, staff and the suppliers of production inputs.
The successful introduction of new products and new or altered processes, organization structures, systems, and business models generates growth of output that exceeds the growth of inputs.
2014,2) This is the case of income growth through production volume growth.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is a technical quantity of national accounts that measures the value-added generated by a nation (or other economic entity).
The production process consists of the real process and the income distribution process.
The difference (1.4% versus 1.5%) is caused by the different production volume used in the models.
Accordingly, the changes in real income and income distribution are always equal in terms of economic value.
It is important to examine each of them individually, yet, as a part of the whole, in order to be able to measure and understand them.
They differ from the factors of the real process in that the components of profitability are given at nominal prices whereas in the real process the factors are at periodically fixed prices.
Real production growth consists of two components.
In that case, the objects of measurement are components of total productivity, and interpreted correctly, these components are indicative of productivity development.
As a result, average productivity decreases but the real income per capita increases.
Therefore, a correct interpretation of a performance change is obtained only by measuring the real income change.
It measures the residual growth that cannot be explained by the rate of change in the services of labour, capital and intermediate outputs, and is often interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational innovation.
Value-added is obtained by subtracting the intermediate inputs from the outputs.
Outputs and inputs are defined in the total productivity measure as their economic values.
If we omit an input in productivity or income accounting, this means that the omitted input can be used unlimitedly in production without any cost impact on accounting results.
After that other variables are considered as constraints.
In order to understand the origin of the economic well-being we must understand these three production processes.
Ultimately, many policy, institutional and cultural factors determine a nation's success in improving productivity.
Average productivity can improve as firms move toward the best available technology; plants and firms with poor productivity performance cease operation; and as new technologies become available.
Improving the quality-price-ratio of commodities is to a producer an essential way to improve the competitiveness of products but this kind of gains distributed to customers cannot be measured with production data.
New enterprises compete with existing firms by new ideas and technologies increasing competition.
materials, services, energy and capital at the expense of producer income.
by production function) is always distributed to the stakeholders as economic values within the review period.
The matter is subject to a continuing debate that has grown beyond questioning whether just computers can significantly increase productivity to whether the potential to increase productivity is becoming exhausted.
The multifactor productivity model is an application of the growth accounting model depicted above.
Read challenges to the "output per worker" metric in "Validity" section below.
Nevertheless, there is one criterion by which we can generalise the rate of success in production.
Weighted growth rates (WG) are obtained by weighting growth rates with the weights.
The concept “real process” in the meaning quantitative structure of production process was introduced in Finnish management accounting in 1960´s.
Another production model ( Production Model Saari 1989) also gives details of the income distribution (Saari 2011,14).
Economic growth is defined as a production growth of an output of a production process.
Figure above is a somewhat exaggerated depiction because the whole production function is shown.
According to the definition above (OECD 2008,11) “MFP is often interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational innovation” .
quantities is helpful for understanding the welfare effects of production.
Another labour productivity measure, output per worker, is often seen as a proper measure of labour productivity as here: “Productivity isn't everything, but in the long run it is almost everything.
For this reason it is important to evaluate the validity of the measurements used, case by case.
This approach is called the dual approach because the framework is seen in terms of prices instead of quantities (ONS 3, 23).
real income formation.
The residual is often defined as the growth rate of output not explained by the share-weighted growth rates of the inputs (Hulten 2009, 6).
"Productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost everything.
The surplus value calculation is the only valid measure for understanding the connection between profitability and productivity or understanding the connection between real process and production process.
Labor and Capital (real.).
As just outlined, some of the most important immediate factors include technological change, organizational change, industry restructuring and resource reallocation, as well as economies of scale and scope.
Income growth can also take place without innovation through replication of established technologies.
They are improving quality-price-ratio of commodities and increasing incomes from growing and more efficient market production.
The most well-known and used measure of value-added is the GDP (Gross Domestic Product).
* productivity decreases and volume increases or
The real income generation follows the logic of the production function.
A toxic workplace is a workplace that is marked by significant drama and infighting, where personal battles often harm productivity.
The production performance can be measured as an average or an absolute income.
Another productivity measure is so called multi factor productivity (MFP) also known as total factor productivity (TFP).
Productivity measures that use one or more inputs or factors, but not all factors, are called partial productivities.
The most famous description of the productivity sources is that of Solow’s (1957): ”I am using the phrase ’technical change’ as a shorthand expression for any kind of shift in the production function.
The maximum average productivity is reached when the production volume is 3.0.
Productivity is considered a key source of economic growth and competitiveness and, as such, is basic statistical information for many international comparisons and country performance assessments.
Economic well-being is created in a production process, meaning all economic activities that aim directly or indirectly to satisfy human needs.
The maximum for production performance is the maximum of the real incomes.
However no instructions have been given how these assumptions should be taken into account in practical situations when the accounting results are interpreted.
In a way, measurements are defective but, by understanding the logic of total productivity, it is possible to interpret correctly the results of partial productivity and to benefit from them in practical situations.
The most well-known and used measure of value-added is the GDP (Gross Domestic Product).
Then the weights of inputs are computed as input shares of the total input (Period 1).
The accounting result of the growth accounting model is expressed as an index number, in this example 1.015, which depicts the average productivity change.
= Real output&nbsp;– Real input
It refers to a series of events in production in which production inputs of different quality and quantity are combined into products of different quality and quantity.
The income change created in a real process  (i.e.
It is worth noting that the maximum average productivity is not the same as the maximum of real income.
Productivity is a crucial factor in production performance of firms and nations.
This example reveals the difficulty to interpret the total productivity change correctly.
In this context we define the quality requirements for the production data used in productivity accounting.
Income generated per unit of input increases.
MFP-model reports a productivity change of 3.2% which is more than double compared to the result of the total productivity model, the change of 1.4%.
* Real income (abs.)
The real surplus value to the producer is an outcome of the real process, real income, and measured proportionally it means productivity.
Producer income and owner income are practical quantities because they are addable quantities and they can be computed quite easily.
The portion of growth caused by an increase in productivity is shown on line 2 with a steeper slope.
An efficient way to improve the understanding of production performance is to formulate different objective functions according to the objectives of the different interest groups.
Productivity measures are key indicators of economic performance and there is strong interest in comparing them internationally.
The magnitude of the change in income distribution is directly proportionate to the change in prices of the output and inputs and to their quantities.
Growth accounting based productivity models  were introduced in the 1980s (Loggerenberg van, 1982, Bechler, 1984) to be used in management accounting but they did not gain on as management tools.
Maximizing productivity leads to a suboptimum, i.e.
Expressing performance both in average (avg.)
Because the accounting techniques of the two models are different, they give differing, although complementary, analytical information.
Since then it has been a cornerstone in the Finnish management accounting theory.
For this reason GDP is systematically biased in favour of capital intensive production at the expense of knowledge and labour-intensive production.
The most familiar objective function is profit maximization which is also included in this case.
The performance of production measures production’s ability to generate income.
Furthermore, they are integrated to management accounting, which is a practical advantage.
Multi-factor productivity (MFP) is also known as total factor productivity (TFP) and it measures the residual growth that cannot be explained by the rate of change in the services of labour, capital and intermediate outputs, and is often interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational innovation.
* production process
In practice, there may be hundreds of products and inputs but the logic of measuring does not differ from that presented in the basic example.
*  Measuring Productivity – OECD Manual
A practical example illustrates this warning.
The absolute income of performance is obtained by subtracting the real input from the real output as follows:
The maximum for production performance is achieved at the volume where marginal productivity is zero.
It is generally accepted that the total number of hours worked is the most appropriate measure of labour input because a simple headcount of employed persons can hide changes in average hours worked, caused by the evolution of part-time work or the effect of variations in overtime, absence from work or shifts in normal hours.
It can be expressed as the ratio of output to inputs used in the production process, i.e.
We do not present the former approach here but refer to the survey “Growth accounting” by Hulten 2009.
A country's ability to improve its standard of living over time depends almost entirely on its ability to raise its output per worker.“  This measure (output per worker) is, however, more problematic than the GDP or even invalid because this measure allows maximizing all supplied inputs, i.e.
With the aid of the production model we can perform the average and absolute accounting in one calculation.
The figure is a traditional expression of average productivity and marginal productivity.
A productivity model is a typical production analysis model by help of which it is possible to calculate the outcome of the real process, income distribution process and production process.
All of them produce commodities which have value and contribute to well-being of individuals.
But, when there is productivity growth, even the existing commitment of resources generates more output and income.
The difference between the models can be explained with the modifications made to the MFP model.
The production process and its sub-processes, the real process and income distribution process occur simultaneously, and only the production process is identifiable and measurable by the traditional accounting practices.
Average productivity has never been accepted in management accounting (in business) as a performance criterion or an objective to be maximized because it would mean the end of the profitable business.
In macroeconomics the approach is different.
Although several possible causes for the slowdown have been proposed there is no consensus.
The theory of productivity have been studied with focus different aspects.
Production growth measures the growth of production output and, therefore, it is only a rough indicator of economic welfare.
In such situations, a bullying scenario in the boardroom may actually threaten the productivity of the entire organisation.
There are many explanations.
The total increase of real income (58.12) is distributed to the stakeholders of production, in this case 39.00 units to the customers and to the suppliers of inputs and the rest 19.12 units to the owners.
The most famous description is that of Solow’s (1957): ”I am using the phrase ’technical change’ as a shorthand expression for any kind of shift in the production function.
Surplus value indicates that the output has more value than the sacrifice made for it, in other words, the output value is higher than the value (production costs) of the used inputs.
If the object is not homogenous, then the measurement result may include changes in both quantity and quality but their respective shares will remain unclear.
The calculations of productivity of a nation or an industry are based on the time series of the SNA, System of National Accounts.
The production is on the part of “increasing returns” on the production function, when
The calculation resembles an income statement starting with the income generation and ending with the income distribution.
The characteristics created into the product by the producer imply surplus value to the consumer, and on the basis of the price this value is shared by the consumer and the producer in the marketplace.
In particular, statistical establishment and household surveys are difficult to use because of their varying quality of hours-worked estimates and their varying degree of international comparability.
The Value T2 (value at time 2) represents the growth in output from Value T1 (value at time 1).
Several statistical offices publish productivity accounting handbooks and manuals with detailed accounting instructions and definitions.
In the productivity model the input volume is used as a production volume measure giving the growth rate 1.063.
In companies in where the traditional hierarchy has been removed in favor of an egalitarian, team-based setup, the employees are often happier, and productivity is improved (as they themselves are better placed to increase the efficiency of the workfloor).
The accounting result is obtained by subtracting the weighted growth rates of the inputs from the growth rate of the output.
According to OECD, Gross Domestic Product per capita measures economic activity or income per person and is one of the core indicators of economic performance.
Other drivers of productivity growth include improved or intensified exchange with peers or co-workers, as more productive peers have a stimulating effect on one's own productivity.
The sources of productivity growth and production volume growth are explained as follows.
There are both advantages and disadvantages associated with the different input measures that are used in the calculation of labour productivity.
We have demonstrated above that the real income change is achieved by quantitative changes in production and the income distribution change to the stakeholders is its dual.
In macroeconomics one wants to examine an entity of many production processes and the output is obtained by summing up the value-added created in the single processes.
This results in growth in productivity or output per unit of input.
"all other things being the same," stating that at a time only the impact of one changing factor be introduced to the phenomenon being examined.
Yet another opinion: In practice, TFP is a measure of our ignorance, as Abramovitz (1956) put it, precisely because it is a residual.
It is a measure of total efficiency of a production process and as such the objective to be maximized in production process.
The volume measure of output reflects the goods and services produced by the workforce.
Hence, if we compare in a practical situation two growth accounting results of the same production process we do not know which one is better in terms of production performance.
Value added is also used as a measure of production volume instead of input volume.
In the basic example the combination of volume growth (+17.00) and productivity growth (+41.12) reports explicitly that the production is on the part of “increasing returns” on the production function (Saari 2006 a, 138–144).
* minus change of capital input x cost share of capital (1.030 x 0.525 = 0.541)
Measurement of partial productivity refers to the measurement solutions which do not meet the requirements of total productivity measurement, yet, being practicable as indicators of total productivity.
*  Bureau of Labor Statistics, Productivity Statistics (U.S.)
When we try to maximize the welfare effects of production we have to maximize real income formation.
It can also be expressed in the form of the arithmetical model, which way is used here because it is more descriptive and understandable.
We do not present the model here in detail but we only use its detailed data on income distribution, when the objective functions are formulated in the next section.
When we want to maximize the production performance we have to maximize the income generated by the production function.
* minus change of labour input x cost share of labour (1.150 x 0.475 = 0.546)
In this case the accounting result is 0.015 which implies a productivity growth by 1.5%.
This measure is called in macroeconomics Total Factor Productivity TFP or Multi Factor Productivity MFP.
Thus slowdowns, speed ups, improvements in the education of the labor force and all sorts of things will appear as ’technical change’ ” Since then more specific descriptions of productivity sources have emerged referring to investment, innovations, skills, enterprise and competition (ONS 3, 20).
Thus market production has a double role in creating well-being, i.e.
labour force, society and owners.
At the national level, productivity growth raises living standards because more real income improves people's ability to purchase goods and services (whether they are necessities or luxuries), enjoy leisure, improve housing and education and contribute to social and environmental programs.
The accounting results are easily interpreted and understood.
He refers to an article suggesting that the measurement of productivity shall be developed so that it ”will indicate increases or decreases in the productivity of the company and also the distribution of the ’fruits of production’ among all parties at interest”.
The growth accounting model is normally expressed in the form of the exponential growth function.
Let us assume we are studying the properties of water in putting out a fire.
A producer means here the producer community, i.e.
* productivity and production volume decrease
A practical example illustrates the case.
The table presents a surplus value calculation.
An important conclusion can be drawn.
The original MFP model (Solow 1957) involves several assumptions: that there is a stable functional relation between inputs and output at the economy-wide level of aggregation, that this function has neoclassical smoothness and curvature properties, that inputs are paid the value of their marginal product, that the function exhibits constant returns to scale, and that technical change has the Hicks’n neutral form (Hulten, 2009,5).
Productivity gains are distributed, for example, to customers as lower product sales prices or to staff as higher income pay.
Despite the proliferation of computers, productivity growth was relatively slow from the 1970s through the early 1990s.
The Office for National Statistics (UK) identifies five drivers that interact to underlie long-term productivity performance: investment, innovation, skills, enterprise and competition.
In order to evaluate validity of any measure we need to understand the phenomenon, the measure and the possible difference between them.
This takes place by simply creating one auxiliary column (4) in which a surplus value calculation is compiled using the quantities of Period 1 and the prices of Period 2.
Furthermore, the well-being of the society also grows.
Skills complement physical capital, and are needed to take advantage of investment in new technologies and organisational structures.
Productivity growth also helps businesses to be more profitable.
In other words, the inputs and the outputs are not allowed to be aggregated in measuring and accounting.
A result and a criterion of success of the owner is profitability.
The measure of input use reflects the time, effort and skills of the workforce.
The following question has remained unanswered: “Quantity based estimates of the residual are interpreted as a shift in the production function, but what is the interpretation of the price-based growth estimates?” (Hulten 2009, 18).
Although these two different measures can both be used as output measures, there is normally a strong correlation between the two.
minus Total Input, i.e.
In this case productivity is defined as follows: output volume per one unit of input volume.
Objective function formulations can be expressed in a single calculation which concisely illustrates the logic of the income generation, the income distribution and the variables to be maximized.
If they are aggregated, they are no longer homogenous and hence the measurement results may be biased.
Nothing contributes more to reduction of poverty, to increases in leisure, and to the country's ability to finance education, public health, environment and the arts’.
Value-added is obtained by subtracting the intermediate inputs from the outputs.
* ''Skills'' are defined as the quantity and quality of labour of different types available in an economy.
When a jobless person obtains a job in market production we may assume it is a low productivity job.
Maximizing production performance requires using the absolute measure, i.e.
Having an effective or knowledgeable supervisor (for example a supervisor who uses the Management by Objectives method) has an easier time motivating their employees to produce more in quantity and quality.
