The feud between Ric Flair and Ricky Steamboat lasted from the late 1970s into the early 1990s and allegedly spanned over two thousand matches (although most of those matches were mere dark matches).
There is a story for each match, and even a longer story for successive matches.
Others may have no noticeable effect on the character's status.
These violations are usually subject to a referee-administered five count and will result in disqualification if the wrestler does not cease the offending behavior in time.
Some matches are designed to further a story of only one participant.
The main event of a wrestling show is generally the one with the most heat behind it.
* Disqualification of the opponent.
This situation will most likely lead to a draw, and in some cases a continuation of the match or a future match to determine the winner.
While it is a rare feat in WWE, in TNA, ODB participates in singles intergender matches.
The most basic rule is that an action must be seen by a referee to be declared for a fall or disqualification.
Professional wrestling shows can be considered a form of theatre in the round, with the ring, ringside area, and entryway comprising a thrust stage.
In a Last Man Standing match, this form of a knockout is the only way that the match can end, so the referee will count when one or more wrestlers are down, and one wrestler standing up before the 10-count doesn't stop the count for another wrestler who is still down.
For example, the glass shattering in Stone Cold Steve Austin's entrance theme, The Undertaker's signature bell toll, or the sound of bells and a cow's moo in JBL's theme.
The 1999 theatrical documentary ''Beyond the Mat'' focused on Terry Funk, a wrestler nearing retirement; Mick Foley, a wrestler within his prime; Jake Roberts, a former star fallen from grace; and a school of wrestling student trying to break into the business.
This has been done by Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XII, by Sting many times in WCW and TNA, and has gained major controversy over its role in the death of wrestler Owen Hart at Over the Edge.
The special referee may enter the match appearing to be a heel, but often they ultimately perform a "face-turn" during the climax of the match, and also vice-versa.
For example, a wrestler may get whipped into a referee at a slower speed, knocking the ref down for short amount of time; during that interim period, one wrestler may pin their opponent for a three-count and would have won the match but for the referee being down (sometimes, another referee will sprint to the ring from backstage to attempt to make the count, but by then, the other wrestler has had enough time to kick-out on their own accord).
* Forcing the opponent to submit.
Three horizontal ropes or cables surround the ring, suspended with turnbuckles which are connected to the posts.
Managers have sometimes become major personalities, including Bobby Heenan, Paul Heyman, Ernie Roth, and Paul Bearer.
This led to a long (worked) feud with Jerry Lawler.
Instead, they use these free limbs to either grab one of the ring ropes (the bottom one is the most common, as it is nearest the wrestlers, though other ropes sometimes are used for standing holds such as Chris Masters' ''Master Lock'') or drape their foot across, or underneath one.
* Allowing heel wrestlers to use blatantly illegal tactics that most normal referees would instantly disqualify for, while not extending these relaxed rules to face wrestlers.
However, joshi puroresu promotions usually have agreements with male puroresu promotions such that they recognize each other's titles as legitimate, and may share cards.
This is usually for 20, 30 or 60 minutes, and is commonly called an Iron Man match.
The standard for modern matches is one fall.
Female wrestling is usually handled by promotions that specialize in joshi puroresu rather than divisions of otherwise male-dominated promotions, as is the case in the United States.
The stories usually contain characters like faces and heels, and less often antiheroes and tweeners.
American wrestler Ric Flair has had multiple world heavyweight championship reigns spanning over three decades.
As a result, the ladder can be used as a weapon.
There is no governing authority for professional wrestling rules, although there is a general standard which has developed.
Special ring entrances are also developed for big occasions, most notably the WrestleMania event.
The 2005 release ''Lipstick and Dynamite, Piss and Vinegar: The First Ladies of Wrestling'' chronicled the development of women's wrestling throughout the 20th century.
This is the most common form of defeat.
* Talking to the crowd using a distinctive patter.
Also, since Ken Shamrock (a legitimate UFC competitor in its early days) popularized it in 1997, a wrestler can indicate a voluntary submission by "tapping out", that is, tapping a free hand against the mat or against an opponent.
Several documentaries have been produced looking at professional wrestling, most notably, ''Beyond the Mat'' directed by Barry W. Blaustein, and ''Wrestling with Shadows'' featuring wrestler Bret Hart and directed by Paul Jay.
Fan communications by individual wrestlers and promotions through outside media (i.e., interviews) will often directly acknowledge the fictional nature of the spectacle, making the predetermined nature of the sport something of an open secret.
Often, individual matches will be part of a longer storyline conflict between "babyfaces" (often shortened to just "faces") and "heels".
The prizes include – but are not limited to any given championship belt (the traditional prize), a document granting the winner the right to a future title shot, or any document that matters to the wrestlers involved in the match (such as one granting the winner a cash prize).
The non-legal wrestlers must remain outside the ring or other legal area at all times (and avoid purposeful contact with the opposing wrestlers) or face reprimand from the referee.
It is common for legendary wrestlers to make one-time cameo appearances during the Royal Rumble match.
Many wrestlers (such as The Rock and The Undertaker) are strongly identified with their character, even responding to the name in public or between friends.
While the referee remains "unconscious", wrestlers are free to violate rules until the referee is revived or replaced.
While pro wrestling is often described simplistically as a "soap opera for males", it has also been cited as filling the role of past forms of literature and theatre; a synthesis of classical heroics, commedia dell'arte, revenge tragedies, morality plays, and burlesque.
* Driving a vehicle into the arena.
In the 1980s, mixed tag team matches began to take place, with a male and female on each team and a rule stating that each wrestler could only attack the opponent of the same gender.
Most referees are unnamed and essentially anonymous, though the WWE has let their officials reveal their names.
Wrestlers in Mexico are traditionally more agile and perform more aerial maneuvers than professional wrestlers in the U.S. who, more often, rely on power moves and strikes to subdue their opponents.
At least two stage plays set in the world of pro wrestling have been produced: ''The Baron'' is a comedy that retells the life of an actual performer known as Baron von Raschke.
* Additional visual graphics or staging props to complement the entrance video/routine or further emphasize the character.
Road Dogg, R-Truth).
Other matches are free-for-alls, with multiple combatants but no teams.
Certain colors of lighting have been associated with specific wrestlers; for instance, blue and purple lighting for The Undertaker, green lighting for Triple H, D-Generation X, and Shane McMahon, red and orange lighting for Kane, multicolored lighting for John Morrison, gold lighting for Goldust, pink lighting for Val Venis, and so forth.
The Rumble match is itself a spectacle in that it is a once-yearly event with multiple participants, including individuals who might not interact otherwise.
Wrestlers are generally expected to stay within the confines of the ring, though matches sometimes end up outside the ring, and even in the audience, to add excitement.
Fans of professional wrestling have their own subculture, comparable to those of science fiction, video games, or comic books (in some cases, the "fandoms" overlap; in recent years, some professional wrestlers, particularly those who nurture an anti-establishment rebel persona, such as CM Punk, have made guest appearances at comic book conventions).
Andy Kaufman used this to gain notoriety when he created an Intergender Championship and declared it open to any female challenger.
Occasionally, a wrestler will reach for a rope (see rope breaks below), only to put their hand back on the mat so they can crawl towards the rope some more; this is not a submission, and the referee decides what their intent is.
The key to winning this match is that the wrestler or team of wrestlers must try to incapacitate each other long enough for one wrestler to climb the ladder and secure that prize for their team.
It is still a popular form of entertainment in Mexican wrestling, mostly as a "sideshow".
This public reveal has garnered mixed reactions from the wrestling community, as some feel that exposure ruins the experience to the spectators as does exposure in illusionism.
The 2009 ''South Park'' episode "W.T.F."
This often results in pins that can easily be kicked out of, if the defensive wrestler is even slightly conscious.
With the introduction of the ''TitanTron'' entrance screen in 1997, WWF/E wrestlers also had entrance videos made that would play along with their entrance music.
New performers are expected to "pay their dues" for a few years by working in lower-profile promotions and working as ring crew before working their way upward.
For instance, chanting or rapping along with the music (i.e.
In modern day, internet programming has been utilized by a number of companies to air web shows, internet pay-per-views (iPPVs) or on-demand content, helping to generate internet-related revenue earnings from the evolving World Wide Web.
In a battle royal, all the wrestlers enter the ring to the point that there are 20-30 wrestlers in the ring at one time.
Unlike most Hollywood acting, large and highly visible handheld microphones are typically used and wrestlers often speak directly to the audience.
An alternative is a match set for a prescribed length of time, with a running tally of falls.
Also if two wrestlers have been given DQ by either the referee or the chairman, this is a no contest.
By and large, the true nature of the content is ignored by the performing promotion in official media in order to sustain and promote the willing suspension of disbelief for the audience by maintaining an aura of verisimilitude.
For example, an attacking wrestler who is half-conscious may simply drape an arm over an opponent, or a cocky wrestler may place their foot gently on the opponent's body, prompting a three-count from the referee.
In practice, not all rule violations will result in a disqualification as the referee may use their own judgement and is not obligated to stop the match.
The presentation of scripted events as legitimate is known as kayfabe.
Other non standard matches include Hell in a Cell, Elimination Chamber, Beat the Clock, ladder, tables, chairs, stairs, falls count anywhere, "I quit", Russian chain, no holds barred, battle royals, no disqualification, last man standing, and many others as well.
The characters and storylines portrayed by a successful promotion are seen to reflect the current mood, attitudes, and concerns of that promotion's society (and can, in turn, influence those same things).
It almost always is accomplished with a markable change in behavior on the part of the character.
are all contested under ''de facto'' Texas tornado tag team rules, since the lack of ability of a referee to issue a disqualification renders any tagging requirements moot.
This may be decided if the wrestler cannot continue the match due to an injury.
According to Barthes, the function of a wrestler is not to win: it is to go exactly through the motions which are expected of them and to give the audience a theatrical spectacle.
Another common specialty match is known as the battle royal.
* The opponent remaining outside the ring for too long (countout).
would admire themselves with a mirror on their way to the ring.
Matches are held between two or more sides ("corners").
John Cena and Triple H are particularly notable in recent years for their highly theatrical entrances at WrestleMania.
While invented long before, the practice of including music with the entrance gained rapid popularity during the 1980s, largely as a result of the huge success of Hulk Hogan and the WWF, and their Rock 'n' Wrestling Connection.
* Entering a Royal Rumble before one's scheduled entrance time.
Some terminology originating in professional wrestling has found its way into the common vernacular.
A cloth apron hangs over the edges of the ring.
The count is broken and restarted when a wrestler in the ring exits the ring.
For safety, the ropes are padded at the turnbuckles and cushioned mats surround the floor outside the ring.
* Entering in a manner in keeping with their character traits, such as a fast, highly energetic entrance, or a slow, stoic entrance.
In order to score by pinfall, a wrestler must pin both their opponent's shoulders against the mat while the referee slaps the mat three times (referred to as a "three count").
Occasionally a performer will deviate from the intended sequence of events.
* Any outside interference involving a person not involved in the match striking or holding a wrestler.
He, along with the stable of D-Generation X, is generally credited with ushering in the Attitude Era of WWF programming.
Some can be unrealistic and cartoon-like (such as Doink the Clown), while others carry more verisimilitude and can be seen as exaggerated versions of the performer's real life personality (such as Chris Jericho, The Rock, John Cena, Stone Cold Steve Austin, and CM Punk).
Submission was initially a large factor in professional wrestling, but following the decline of the submission-oriented catch-as-catch-can style from mainstream professional wrestling, the submission largely faded until the rise of the legitimate sport of mixed martial arts.
"The following contest is set for one fall with a 20-minute time limit").
Like sound effects, some entrance mannerisms often become signature to individual wrestlers.
Each successive generation has produced a number of wrestlers who extend their careers into the realms of music, acting, writing, business, politics or public speaking, and are known to those who are unfamiliar with wrestling in general.
Even if it is noticed, it is rare for such an attempt to result in a disqualification (see below), and instead it simply results in nullification of the pin attempt, so the heel wrestler rarely has anything to lose for trying it, anyway.
'''Professional wrestling''' (colloquially abbreviated to '''pro wrestling''' or '''wrestling''') is an athletic form of entertainment based on a portrayal of a combat sport.
As with personae in general, a character's face or heel alignment may change with time, or remain constant over its lifetime (the most famous example of the latter is Ricky Steamboat, a WWE Hall of Famer who remained a babyface throughout his entire career).
When one promotion absorbs or purchases another, the titles from the defunct promotion may continue to be defended in the new promotion or be decommissioned.
All other rules stay the same.
Although their actions are also frequently scripted for dramatic effect, referees are subject to certain general rules and requirements in order to maintain the theatrical appearance of unbiased authority.
Those who are interested in the backstage occurrences, future storylines, and reasonings behind company decisions read newsletters written by journalists with inside ties to the wrestling industry.
The match is essentially nullified, and called a draw or in some cases a restart or the same match being held at a pay-per-view or next night's show.
This may be an abrupt, surprising event, or it may slowly build up over time.
Brodus Clay enters with disco ball lighting effects to emphasize his "Funkasaurus" character.
Phrases such as "body slam", "sleeper hold" and "tag team" are used by those who do not follow professional wrestling.
In ''lucha libre'', many characters wear masks, adopting a secret identity akin to a superhero, a near-sacred tradition.
With examples such as Big Van Vader's bio-mechanical themed headdress which spewed steam, Pyro's fire shooting outfit, Shockmaster's bejeweled space helmet, and Ricky Steamboat's dragon costume, to name a few.
Some have expanded into radio shows.
Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably in practice, this usage is technically incorrect.
These are known as "worked shoots".
Celebrities would also be involved in storylines.
A wrestler with a signature submission technique is portrayed as better at applying the hold, making it more painful or more difficult to get out of than others who use it, or can be falsely credited as inventing the hold (such as when Tazz popularized the kata ha jime judo choke in pro wrestling as the "Tazzmission").
Although a countout can technically be considered a disqualification (as it is, for all intents and purposes, an automatic loss suffered as a result of violating a match rule), the two concepts are often distinct in wrestling.
Conversely, celebrities from other sports or general pop culture also become involved with wrestling for brief periods of time.
In championship matches, this means that, unlike one-on-one matches (where the champion can simply disqualify themselves or get themselves counted out to retain the title via the "champion's advantage"), the champion does not have to be pinned or involved in the decision to lose the championship.
Intergender singles bouts were first fought on a national level in the 1990s.
* Darkening of the arena, often accompanied by mood lighting or strobe lighting, such as in The Undertaker's, Triple H's, or Sting's entrances.
In most promotions, the wrestler to be tagged in must be touching the turnbuckle on their corner, or a cloth strap attached to the turnbuckle.
The music played during the ring entrance will usually mirror the wrestler's personality.
While each wrestling match is ostensibly a competition of athletics and strategy, the goal of each match from a business standpoint is to excite and entertain the audience.
Professional wrestler Davey Richards said in 2015, "We train to take damage, we know we are going to take damage and we accept that".
To check for a knockout in this manner, a referee will wave their hand in front of the wrestler's face; if the wrestler does not react in any way, the referee will award the victory to the other wrestler.
This is similar to other entertainers who perform with a persona that shares their own name (such as Stephen Colbert and his fictional persona).
Sometimes, however, this can work in heels' favor.
These titles are represented physically by a belt that can be worn by the champion.
In recent years, the popularity and prevalence of midgets in wrestling has greatly decreased due to wrestling companies depriving midget divisions of storyline and/or feud.
* Striking an opponent with a foreign object (an object not permitted by the rules of the match; see Hardcore wrestling) (sometimes the win decision can be reversed if the referee spots the weapon before pin attempt or after the match because they tried to strike when referee is either distracted or knocked out).
In Brazil, there was a very popular wrestling television program from the 1960s to the early 1980s called ''Telecatch''.
Finlay also occasionally threw him at his opponent(s).
Usually declawed and muzzled, they often wrestled shoot matches against audience members, offered a cash reward if they could pin the bear.
The last wrestler standing is declared the winner.
'', ''Nacho Libre'', and the Santo film series.
A referee may stop the match when they or official ring physician decides that a wrestler cannot safely continue the match.
When a match is won, the victor's theme music is usually also played in celebration.
It also serves as a catalyst for the company's ongoing feuds, as well as a springboard for new storylines.
For example, a heel may take a cheap shot at the female wrestler of the opposing team to draw a negative crowd reaction.
Since all contact between the wrestlers must cease if any part of the body is touching, or underneath, the ropes, many wrestlers will attempt to break submission holds by deliberately grabbing the bottom ropes.
The practice of bear wrestling has met strong opposition from animal rights activists in recent decades, contributing to its lack of mainstream acceptance.
Since the crowd is often too loud or the venue too large for promos to be heard naturally, wrestlers will use amplification when speaking in the ring.
Taking the form of live events held by touring promotions, it portrays a unique style of combat based on a combination of adopted styles, which include classical wrestling, catch wrestling and various forms of martial arts, as well as an innovative style based on grappling (holds/throws), striking, and aerialism.
Face special referees will often fight back against hostile heel wrestlers, particularly if the special referee is either a wrestler themselves or a famous martial artist (such as Tito Ortiz in the main event at TNA's Hard Justice in 2005).
As of 2006, it is banned in 20 U.S. states.
This is known as a shoot.
While it has greatly declined in Europe, in North America it has experienced several different periods of prominent cultural popularity during its century and a half of existence.
Upon Byers' retirement in 1964, The Fabulous Moolah, who won a junior heavyweight version of the NWA World Women's Championship (the predecessor to the WWE's Women's Championship) in a tournament back in 1958, was recognized by most NWA promoters as champion by default.
Lower ranked titles may also be used on the performers who show potential, thus allowing them greater exposure to the audience.
For example, New York State still regulates "professional wrestling" through the New York State Athletic Commission (SAC).
Despite these restrictions, many mixed tag matches do feature some physical interaction between participants of different genders.
It is a "triumph" if the face wins, while it is a "tragedy" if the heel wins.
A combination of a championship's lineage, the caliber of performers as champion, and the frequency and manner of title changes, dictates the audience's perception of the title's quality, significance and reputation.
The pinned wrestler must also be on their back; if they are lying on their belly, it usually does not count.
Others can keep one ring name for their entire career (cases in point include Chris Jericho, Shawn Michaels, CM Punk and Ricky Steamboat), or may change from time to time to better suit the demands of the audience or company.
The ring is often made out of 2 by 8 timber planks.
Despite the similarity to its American counterpart in that the outcome of the matches remains predetermined, the phenomena are different in the form of the psychology and presentation of the sport; it is treated as a full contact combat sport as it mixes hard hitting martial arts strikes with shoot style submission holds, while in the U.S. it is rather more regarded as an entertainment show.
The logical conclusion is given least importance over the theatrical performers of the wrestlers and the referee.
In WWE, a referee must see the violation with their own eyes to rule that the match end in a disqualification (simply watching the video tape is not usually enough) and the referee's ruling is almost always final, although Dusty finishes (named after, and made famous by, Dusty Rhodes) will often result in the referee's decision being overturned.
When the WWF purchased both WCW and ECW in 2001, they also obtained the entire past video libraries of both productions and have released many past matches online and on home video.
Special guest referees may be used from time to time; by virtue of their celebrity status, they are often scripted to dispense with the appearance of neutrality and use their influence to unfairly influence the outcome of the match for added dramatic impact.
Many television shows and films have been produced which portray in-character professional wrestlers as protagonists, such as ''Ready to Rumble'', ''¡Mucha Lucha!
In the wildly popular ''Rocky'' series of films about the fictional boxer Rocky Balboa, ''Rocky III'' saw its hero fighting a "boxer vs. wrestler" exhibition match against the enormous and villainous wrestler "Thunderlips", portrayed by real-life soon-to-be wrestling icon Hulk Hogan.
Regardless of rules of tagging, a wrestler cannot pin their own tag team partner, even if it is technically possible from the rules of the match (e.g.
Occasionally, there are instances where a pinfall is made where both wrestlers' shoulders were on the mat for the three-count.
These personalities are a gimmick intended to heighten interest in a wrestler without regard to athletic ability.
* Throwing an opponent over the top rope during a match (this move is still illegal in the National Wrestling Alliance)
In multi-man ''lucha libre'' matches, two referees are used, one inside the ring and one outside.
This is called a "rope break", and it is one of the most common ways to break a submission hold.
However other circumstances may also determine the use of a championship.
Another example is the WWE's Royal Rumble match, which involves thirty participants in a random and unknown order.
For many decades (and still to a lesser extent today), performers were expected to keep the illusions of wrestling's legitimacy alive even while not performing, essentially acting in character any time they were in public.
In 2016 Nine Legends was released combining real life interviews with wrestlers and a drama narrative to explore multiple aspects of the industry and its performers.
There have also been many fictional depictions of wrestling; the 2008 film ''The Wrestler'' received several Oscar nominations and began a career revival for star Mickey Rourke.
Hornswoggle has also been given a run with the Cruiserweight Championship and feuded with D-Generation X in 2009.
Unlike in Europe, show wrestling has become especially prominent in Japan, in Mexico and in North America.
If it drops to the mat or floor three consecutive times without the wrestler having the strength to hold it up, the wrestler is considered to have passed out.
In some team matches, only one entrant from each team may be designated as the "legal" or "active" wrestler at any given moment.
Professional wrestling is often portrayed within other works using parody, and its general elements have become familiar tropes and memes in American culture.
Participants compete for a championship, and must defend it after winning it.
In Latin America and English-speaking countries, most wrestlers (and other on-stage performers) portray character roles, sometimes with personalities wildly different from their own.
Guardrails or a similar barrier enclose this area from the audience.
Any wrestler who has a fall scored against them is forced out of the match, and the match continues until only one remains.
Those involved in producing professional wrestling have developed a kind of global fraternity, with familial bonds, shared language and passed-down traditions.
In the basic ladder match, the wrestlers or teams of wrestlers must climb a ladder to obtain a prize that is hoisted above the ring.
Such performers have historically employed a manager, who speaks on their behalf and adds to the performance.
All Japan Women's Pro-Wrestling was the dominant joshi organization from the 1970s to the 1990s.
Bloodstained Memoirs explored the careers of several pro wrestlers, including Chris Jericho, Rob Van Dam and Roddy Piper.
The term "smackdown", popularized by The Rock and WWF's ''SmackDown!''
These are each explained in greater detail below.
Less than 25 years after the 1990 WrestleMania VI, one third of its 36 competitors had died, including André the Giant and main event winner The Ultimate Warrior; all of these deaths had occurred before the age of 64.
Any rule described here is simply a standard, and may or may not correspond exactly with any given promotion's ruleset.
Any participant who stands up in time will end the count for everyone else.
A feud can exist between any number of participants and can last for a few days up to multiple decades.
