In Ireland a ''debutante ball'' or Debs may also be held.
Conversely, if a high school has separate dances for juniors and seniors, the term "prom" is reserved for the juniors, and the dance for the seniors is called a "graduation ball" (often abbreviated as "grad ball" or simply "ball".)
In the Netherlands, households where a child who has passed their high school exams often hang the student's backpack on a flagpole which is attached to the front of the house.
It usually starts at 6 p.m. and ends in the early hours of the next morning (4a.m.
It is usually organised by a student association, elected in the beginning of the school year by the students to organise school events.
Some schools hold their liên hoan cuối năm at restaurants.
It takes mostly part before the final exams.
Generally speaking, freshmen proms are the more popular, with college freshmen proms often being publicized as club events and promoted by radio stations, who take the opportunity to introduce bands and singers.
A multicourse meal is generally provided.
MORP dances can be similar to a Sadie Hawkins dance where the Girls ask a Boy date, informal attire, and the decor can be dark or less elegant reflecting the "anti prom" nature of MORP.
This is thrown simultaneously for fifth form and upper sixth form students during the months of June or July after the school's official graduation ceremony.
Usually, before the main event there is a big gathering in front of the high school’s building, where graduates count to 12 (as in 12 grades) and take photos with each other before going to the restaurant called ''izprashtane'' (“dispatchment”).
Competition blossomed, as teens strove to have the best dress, the best mode of transportation, and the best looking date.
Some even paint their faces and some seniors also carry a spray can (shaving cream or other fluids) to “attack” the non-seniors with.
In Slovenia, the equivalent is Maturantski ples.
If a school has a sister school the social is typically organised in conjunction with them, as a "social event" for people to mingle and meet new people.
At the conclusion of the prom evening, it is tradition to walk the whole night and watch sunrise in the morning (on a hill, if applicable, in Moscow&nbsp;– Sparrow Hills).
In Chile, proms, or "fiestas de graduación" (graduation parties), are usually held at convention centers or hotels after the "licenciatura," or graduation from High School.
The event is often associated with excess in drinking, drugs, sex and lavish nouveau-riche style of dressing and parading (there are families that would spend as much as a year's salary on their son or daughter' s night).
They are usually not black tie (informal).
Some of these post-prom events are chaperoned and some are unsupervised.
Costs for renting out the venue are covered by selling tickets to outsiders and the party is usually planned by the graduating classes themselves.
Some schools host their proms at hotel ballrooms or other venues where weddings typically take place.
It usually takes the form of a formal dinner and dance.
They are usually held at hotels with a formal dress code, prom dates, rented cars and, occasionally, prom kings and queens.
Proms worked their way down incrementally from college gatherings to high school extravaganzas.
Breakfast is often served the next day, at around 6–7 am.
Some high schools allow only the graduating class (Seniors) to have a prom.
After the dinner,the dance continues through the night into the next day.
Early proms were times of firsts: the first adult social event for teenagers; the first time taking the family car out after dark; the first real dress-up affair; and so forth.
Proms are commonly known as “JS Prom”, or, junior–senior prom.
One or more bands or singers are usually hired to provide entertainment.
Sometimes several schools organize a joint event.
Students can bring a date to the event which is usually held in a restaurant or a club.
All proceeds from the students’ entrance fee were donated to Donnons Leur Une Chance, a French non-profit organization that will help realize educational projects.
They are allowed to go with dates or friends.
It is a graduation tradition for seniors.
All the seniors are felicitated with souvenirs and superlatives are given awards.
As Americans gained more money and leisure time in the 1950s, proms became more extravagant and elaborate, bearing similarity to today’s proms.
Students calculate total participants including guests and family members then coordinate with the hall personal for the pricing including the food and the music and all, then the gross total is shared on the number of students.
Usually this is 1000AFs/student equal to $20.
They are usually held at hotels or clubs.
Similar events take place in many other parts of the world.
In most schools, the 11th grade class is responsible for arranging the event.
In Norway it is the norm to have proms for 8th, 9th, and 10th graders at Norwegian middleschool and most of the time, there is no division between formal and grad – students can attend in whatever clothing they choose, such as traditional knee-long dresses.
Dinner is served as well as alcoholic drinks and delicatessen.
In practice, this event may be a combined junior/senior dance.
In Zambia, private schools have a "leavers' dance/dinner" that is planned out by the grade 11 class and takes place on the Saturday after the Friday of their graduation ceremony.
Freshmen proms usually include a popularity contest of some sort, which designates 3 girls and 3 boys as places I, II and III "most popular" as chosen by student vote; the candidates have to undergo various entertaining challenges, which usually include pair dancing.
The balls usually have a theme and the classes perform choreographed dance routines at the beginning or during the evening.
Very rarely proms are held.
In Poland high schools organize a "studniówka".
On top of that, famous French music groups Psy4 de la Rime and Alibi Montana were the guest performance of the evening.
The prom is held for a maximum of 3 hours, where teachers attend and enjoy some time with their students.
Proms are never held on the 21st/22nd because they took place on June 21 in 1941, but on the 22nd all graduates were drafted to fight the German invasion during World War II.
These are honorary titles awarded to students elected in a school-wide vote prior to the prom, and seniors are usually awarded these titles.
Studentbalen is usually held during the final weeks before graduating and can be formal.
Other students may be honored with inclusion in a "Prom Court."
It starts with the students walking through the dance floor and dancing a waltz.
Sometimes, they just simply wear school uniform to the tea parties.
For the remainder of the school year, the second year students are called ''vanhat'' ("the old", or " the seniors").
a white blouse with a dark skirt or trousers.
In Scotland it is usually only held at the end of S6 (ages 17/18) because all high schools in Scotland have pupils up to age 18 years, whereas elsewhere in the UK many students have to go to college to study for A-Levels.
Alcohol is available at these events since the legal drinking age in Germany is 16 (for beer and wine), and most graduating students are 18 or older.
In Russia, Belarus and Ukraine proms are called "Vypusknоi vechеr" (''Выпускной вечер''), which literally means "evening of graduation."
Proms are usually held in June, after the end of year exams.
In Estonia, the equivalent of the prom is often called ''Saja päeva ball''.
Most "gradz" are held in popular clubs, hotels, halls or simply on the school's grounds.
Later during the day, students perform an act at school, usually a silly show involving school or a parody.
In Germany the events are informal and usually contain a series of student-organized activities that tend to make fun of teachers, sometimes with an extended hagiography about the favorite teacher.
The NSW Government announced the abolition of the School Certificate after 2011, with students in year 10 that year being the final cohort to sit the external examinations and receive the qualification.
The students are not allowed to bring people from outside the school.
The students dress in Formal wear and attend in couples.
In the Czech Republic, the last year in ''Gymnasium'' is celebrated with ''maturitní ples'' (“graduation ball”).
Every school organizes it independently and the event usually takes place in May.
High school juniors attending the prom may call it "junior prom" while high-school seniors may call it "senior prom".
The dinner comes after, and the rest of the night consists of dancing and celebration.
The parties start in late September, after most students come back from their senior trip to Bariloche and last until early December, after the graduation.
In the high schools at rural countrysides, they don't celebrate at all.
Sometimes even teachers join the party to show that they too have a wild side.
This involves dancing, singing and lots of beer to get a taste of fraternity life.
Some couples want to match their dates dress color to their tie or suit.
In some cases there is a combined Junior/Senior prom.
This prom-like evening dance is traditionally held in the ball season of January–February, but recently sometimes also before Christmas.
Unlike countries like USA and Canada there wouldn't be couple dances in India.
Except those proms within the academic field, there are also adult proms for charity yearly where celebrities and government officers always go to these functions.
In Albania, "mbrëmja e maturës", as graduation night, is the event held at the end of the senior year.
It is a custom that each student dances the last dance of the first sequence, a Vienna Walzer, with his mother/her father.
Some Colleges have an after Graduation dinner dance.
Afterward, the prom continues as a school ball, traditionally with classic dances.
In the early 1900s, prom was a simple tea dance where high school seniors wore their Sunday best.
In effect, schools became fundamentally important agencies in the nationwide campaign to fight homosexuality."
Each of the students receives a green ribbon with their name on it (thus the name Stužková, the Ribbon Ball).
The Valedictory Dinner (or Val as it is colloquially called) is an event that only occurs in Year 12.
Unlike other countries, the students don't dress up in fancy dresses or tuxedos.
In the 1920s and 1930s, prom expanded into an annual class banquet where students wore party clothes and danced afterward.
These events are most often organized by non-profit organizations focusing on the disabled, or large churches.
Generally after a formal, one or more after-parties are held.
In Colombia many private schools usually have prom balls as well, usually consisting of a dinner, dancing, live music, and contests.
In Brazil, ''bailes de formatura'' are usual at the end of high school and at college graduation.
A noisy march through town is also part of the gig.
Whereas graduation proms are more subdued and often not a public or even a school-wide event, many graduating classes choosing to restrict attendance just to the actual graduates and their teachers.
In France, high school students have only recently experienced prom.
The students wear formal suits and dresses.
The tradition of "i cento giorni" comes from Piedmontese military schools in the late 1800, where days remaining to graduation were counted starting from the 100th with the locution "Mak Π 100", from Piedmontese language "mac pì 100", translating as "just more 100 (days remaining)."
They are called graduation balls and freshmen ("boboci", meaning "hatchlings" in Romanian) balls, respectivelly.
Men wear formal suits and women formal dresses.
In previous years when 25–30% of students left high school in Year 10, the Formal was seen as a celebration for those departing, however Year 10 Formals are still sometimes celebrated in the name of tradition.
It usually takes place before graduation to celebrate the end of school.
Before prom, girls typically get their hair styled, often in groups as a social activity at a salon.
This ball takes place before exams are taken, usually in January or February, the traditional season for balls during the ''Fasching'' (e.g., List of balls in Vienna).
In Austria the Maturaball is formal and can be seen as a synergy of proms and cotillions and often are highlights of the regional ball season (between November and the end of Carneval) referencing the glamour of the great ball tradition of the former Austrian-Hungarian monarchy.
Prom couples then gather at a park, garden, or their own and their dates’ houses for single and/or group photographs.
In year 11, students occasionally organise a "semi-formal" or "social" at the end of the school year, which is a more casual version of a formal.
The concept of extending prom to homeschool students has been realized in recent years.
In recent years, American teens have started asking celebrities or famous models to their Proms.
This usually takes place during Christmas and Summer Break.
In New Zealand, most state school balls are held in the winter months, between June and August, while in Australia, a "formal" is held at the end of the year to mark the end of schooling, as is the Valedictory Dinner.
In Bulgaria, the ball is called ''abiturientski bal'' and is held at the end of 12th grade, when you are aged 18/19.
Prom attendees may be limited by their schools to be juniors or seniors and guests under age 21.
Students are allowed to take one guest, as a friend or as a partner.
The income is often used to finance a collective voyage of the students after the exams.
In earlier days, the prom may have also served as an announcement of engagement for the “best couple” after the prom court had been crowned and recognized.
Ceremonially it is very similar to prom nights in the United States.
Proms may be held in a Discothèque, but it must start with the school waltz.
In Turkey, the equivalent is called "Graduation Ball."
At Scottish formal events, boys usually wear kilts (kilts are also often seen in the other Celtic regions) and Highland dress outfitters often sell out in an area around this time of year due to demand from school events.
These consist of big parties hosted by the senior students in local discos or other venues, starting at 10 p.m. until about 5 or 6 in the morning.
In the past, the style was to dress in an old-fashioned way, but these days the attire is similar to U.S. proms.
The word prom at that time may just have been a fancy description for an ordinary junior or senior class dance, but prom soon took on larger-than-life meaning for high school students.
It is common to charge students an admission tax in order to offset the cost.
In Singapore, proms are held at the near end of a senior year for secondary schools.
In Poland, the prom (''studniówka'') is a very popular event held each year throughout the country; the word itself means "of or relating to 100 days".
Popular movies and novels attest to the importance of prom themes, prom dates, and prom queens.
In some places in Spain proms are also celebrated as parties after school.
In Israel, high school graduation parties usually combine a play and a humble ceremony, followed by a dance party.
On June 27, 2013, more than 300 students in Paris, France held a prom.
At the midnight, the classes perform "midnight surprise performance" – typically some sort of funny act.
In Belgium, as well as in some parts of the Netherlands, senior students celebrate their last 100 days of high school with a special day called ''Chrysostomos'' or ''100-dagen feest'' (“100-days party”).
Although some school districts in the United States and Canada allow homeschool students to attend the prom in the school district where they reside, many homeschool groups also organize their own proms.
In Honduras, they are called "Cena de Graduacion", they are held in luxury hotels, also familiars of the graduating students are invited.
The event takes place 100 days prior to the graduation and may be organized with several schools altogether.
In the past years, influenced by American culture, more and more graduates decide to hold a private graduation party similar to the American prom, with dress code, prom dates, limousines, and prom kings or queens, although usually not supported by the school.
In Malaysia, proms are gaining in popularity, especially in the bigger cities.
In the early days of high school proms, the nighttime dance served a function similar to a debutante ball.
The clothes are much the same kind as in proms of other countries.
This is more popular in the secondary education stage rather than in universities.
A slightly different take on the adult prom is that of the disabilities prom, dedicated to providing a prom experience to disabled adults at no charge to the attendees.
Anti-proms can be private, unofficial proms that are privately created, outside the control of the school, usually by people who disagree with their school's prom policies.
In Peru, proms—"Fiestas de Promoción"—are usually held at hotels, convention centers, or big residences.
The Swiss equivalent of a prom is the ''bal de printemps''.
It takes place in November or December.
In Australia some schools may also have a Valedictory Dinner, which is like the formal but has students, parents and teachers instead of students and dates.
This is a formal dance for students who have just graduated from secondary school (high school) and is traditionally held between September and October.
At some schools in the German speaking cantons, it is called "Maturaball."
The popular destinations are the Black sea coast and Turkey.
The principal and the class teacher are given big green ribbons as well.
They take place from the 18th to the 20th or the 23rd to the 25th of June, after all state exams are completed.
The students who are graduating may choose the halls based on the availability and pricing, usually the halls are not available because all the Afghan parties like wedding are held in rented halls.
In the evening, students head to a rented club to party.
Today, prom continues to be a notable event in the social climate of high schools.
After the prom night, students usually go to an excursion together for 3 to 5 days.
The students also receive a ribbon.
The dinner begins at 7pm and the grade 11 class pose as the servers as well as the entertainment throughout the duration of the dinner.
This is not always organized by the schools, but sometimes by a student's committee.
In Vietnam, the equivalent to the prom is called ''liên hoan cuối năm''.
In most cases a school formal is held at a local reception centre or ballroom.
Students can dance but other events may be involved, too, besides ball room dancing.
In Uruguay, graduation parties are usually held after graduation itself.
If the event is in the final year of high school, it is sometimes called a Dinner-dance, Leavers' Dinner or Debutante Ball but is also commonly called a School Formal or "Formal."
The dinner ends at midnight and is followed by the "after party" which is celebrated at another venue (usually a club) with no parents and no teachers.
There is no crowning of a "king" or a "queen," but evening gowns and suits are required.
Some schools also allow grade 11 (Juniors) to have a prom, and select high schools even have proms for Freshmen and Sophomores.
They may or may be not organised by the school, but by the students itself.
Proms that are specifically geared toward homeschool students can sometimes be significantly different from traditional high school proms.
The use of chaperones is intended to prevent the occurrence of violence and alcohol or drug use.
Subsequent Year 10 "Formals" have been deemed "unnecessary" due to the fact that the majority of Year 10 students now progress to Year 11.
Members of the Prom Court may be given sashes to wear and photographed together.
It is usually held during the winter months, and is often called "Nyttårsball" which means "the new years ball."
In Costa Rica, like many other American countries, the "Baile de graduación" is celebrated after finishing High School, where grade 11 is also the last year.
Proms figure greatly in popular culture and is a major event among high school students.
This is referred to as the "grad", or, informally, '''debs''' in Ireland.
In some areas, the traditions of prom are not as rigid as they used to be, with some areas allowing individuals or groups to attend instead of couples.
In Argentina there are "fiestas de egresados" for students finishing their last year of high school.
Event planning company White-Tie-Affair partnered up with multiple local companies to host the “Solidarity Prom Ball” charity gala.
It is colloquially referred to as "grad" or "gradz."
Usually a place is rented, and formal parties are held.
The event is called ''išleistuvės''.
In a way, prom became the pinnacle event of a high school student’s life, the ultimate dress rehearsal for a wedding.
The associated student body generally organizes the event.
There is usually an afterparty at a dance club.
The dance itself may have a band or DJ.
Prom attendees may rent limousines to transport groups of friends from their homes to the prom venue: a banquet hall or school gymnasium.
In 1975 U.S. First Daughter Susan Ford held her prom in the East Room of the White House.
In many cases homeschool proms are very similar to public school proms.
Then there is the "after-prom", where no teachers or parents are allowed, during that time, the real party begins with all the students dancing and enjoying their time.
In Sweden, this kind of event is usually known as Studentbalen.
Other traditions often include trips to nearby attractions, such as amusement parks, regional or local parks, or family or rented vacation houses.
In Lebanon, proms are held after the graduation ceremony at night.
Tradition states that on this winter day, seniors are allowed to pull pranks on their teachers and fellow students.
