The affected anxiety of the law-giver lest they should employ an improper person, is evidently as impertinent as it is oppressive."
Many things have existed that did not have an owner, sometimes called the commons.
The second, title, is the expectation that others will recognize rights to control resource, even when it is not in possession.
For example, the state requires payment for its services in the form of taxes whether or not people desire such services.
Hernando de Soto has argued that an important characteristic of capitalist market economy is the functioning state protection of property rights in a formal property system which clearly records ownership and transactions.
Pauline Peters argued that property systems are not isolable from the social fabric, and notions of property may not be stated as such, but instead may be framed in negative terms: for example the taboo system among Polynesian peoples.
However, religious pluralism makes it more convenient to have religious sites owned by the religious body that runs them.
Scenario the property might be not in a suitable condition to use or cannot be used to earn profits.
This seized land was then used for commercial ventures (sheep heading).
This is usually referred to as "possession property" or "usufruct".
On the contrary, it was the fact that life, liberty, and property existed beforehand that caused men to make laws in the first place."
However, not all property systems are founded on this basis.
Existing customs should not lightly be disregarded, because they have come to be what they are as a result of human nature.
A title, or a right of ownership, establishes the relation between the property and other persons, assuring the owner the right to dispose of the property as the owner sees fit.
* Clear, provable, and protectable ownership
*With contractual rights; retentions of collateral and risks of jeopardy of collateral may be involved.
This argument centers mainly on the idea that private ownership of capital always benefits one class over another, giving rise to domination through the use of this privately owned capital.
and "primary property" (a person's own ideas).
The distinction between "collective property" and "private property" is regarded as a confusion since different individuals often hold differing rights over a single object.
100 liters of wheat decreases over time, thus amounting to "gratis" satisfaction.
Law in all societies has tended to develop towards reducing the number of things not having clear owners.
:: "Life, liberty, and property do not exist because men have made laws.
From some anarchist points of view, the validity of property depends on whether the "property right" requires enforcement by the state.
*theft and robbery are sins of different species, and robbery is a more grievous sin than theft
For something to be economically scarce it must necessarily have the ''exclusivity property''&mdash;that use by one person excludes others from using it.
The term "commons," however, is also often used to mean something quite different: "general collective ownership"&mdash;i.e.
John Locke emphasized effort, "mixing your labor" with an object, or clearing and cultivating virgin land.
(Adam Smith, ''Wealth of Nations'')
Throughout the last centuries of the second millennium, with the development of more complex theories of property, the concept of personal property had become divided into tangible property (such as cars and clothing) and intangible property (such as financial instruments&mdash;including stocks and bonds&mdash;intellectual property&mdash;including patents, copyrights and trademarks&mdash;digital files, communication channels, and certain forms of identifier&mdash;including Internet domain names, some forms of network address, some forms of handle and again trademarks).
*Communism argues that only collective ownership of the means of production through a polity (though not necessarily a state) will assure the minimization of unequal or unjust outcomes and the maximization of benefits, and that therefore humans should abolish private ownership of capital (as opposed to property).
It is possible that when a person has constructive possession of personal property, but another person has actual possession, then the person having constructive possession has bare legal title, while the other person has actual possession.
There exist many theories of property.
The Roman property law was based on such a corporate system.
Most legal systems distinguish between different types of property, especially between land (immovable property, estate in land, real estate, real property) and all other forms of property&mdash;goods and chattels, movable property or personal property, including the value of legal tender if not the legal tender itself, as the manufacturer rather than the possessor might be the owner.
Proudhon's theory of property greatly influenced the budding socialist movement, inspiring anarchist theorists such as Mikhail Bakunin who modified Proudhon's ideas, as well as antagonizing theorists like Karl Marx.
Capitalism has as a central assumption that property rights encourage their holders to develop the property, generate wealth, and efficiently allocate resources based on the operation of markets.
Many tribal cultures balance individual ownership with the laws of collective groups: tribes, families, associations and nations.
Another member of the Hobbes/Harrington generation, Sir Robert Filmer, reached conclusions much like Hobbes', but through Biblical exegesis.
In his text ''The Common Law'', Oliver Wendell Holmes describes property as having two fundamental aspects.
The Restatement (First) of Property defines property as anything, tangible or intangible whereby a legal relationship between persons and the state enforces a possessory interest or legal title in that thing.
After much rethinking, land has come to be regarded as only a special case of the property genus.
From the RERUM NOVARUM, Pope Leo XIII wrote "It is surely undeniable that, when a man engages in remunerative labor, the impelling reason and motive of his work is to obtain property, and thereafter to hold it as his very own."
"The property which every man has in his own labour, as it is the original foundation of all other property, so it is the most sacred and inviolable.
He elaborates the differences between these two concepts, and proposes a history of how they came to be attached to persons, as opposed to families or to entities such as the church.
This nobody has a right to, but himself."
* Greater independence for individuals from local community arrangements to protect their assets
* Conservatism subscribes to the concept that freedom and property are closely linked.
Marx sees this "Primitive Accumulation as integral to the creation of English Capitalism.
Under United States law the principal limitations on whether and the extent to which the State may interfere with property rights are set by the Constitution.
This public ownership of wildlife is referred to as the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation and is based on The Public Trust Doctrine.
Upon the foundation of private property, great civilizations are built...
Once the person has that thing in that person's possession, that thing becomes that person's property by reason of discovery and conquest, and that person has the individual right to defend that property (property interest) against all others by reason of self-help.
Western legal theory is based, as mentioned, on the owner of property being a legal person.
The conservative acknowledges that the possession of property fixes certain duties upon the possessor; he accepts those moral and legal obligations cheerfully."
*Socialism's fundamental principles center on a critique of this concept, stating (among other things) that the cost of defending property exceeds the returns from private-property ownership, and that, even when property rights encourage their holders to develop their property or generate wealth, they do so only for their own benefit, which may not coincide with benefit to other people or to society at large.
From this has evolved the modern conception of property as a right enforced by positive law, in the expectation that this will produce more wealth and better standards of living.
Frédéric Bastiat's main treatise on property can be found in chapter 8 of his book ''Economic Harmonies'' (1850).
Supporters of property rights argue that this enables better protection of scarce resources, due to the tragedy of the commons, while critics argue that it leads to the 'exploitation' of those resources for personal gain and that it hinders taking advantage of potential network effects.
Comte's analysis would be used by later theorists in response to the socialist critique on property.
Since agriculture was so much more efficient than hunting and gathering, private property appropriated by someone for farming left remaining hunter-gatherers with more land per person, and hence did not harm them.
Intellectual property and air (airspace, no-fly zone, pollution laws, which can include tradable emissions rights) can be property in some senses of the word.
Property, in the first instance, is a thing-in-itself.
Military conscription is likewise an attack on a person’s primordial property.
In his 1849 treatise ''What is Property?
Upon expiration, the property, if of the intellectual category, becomes a part of public domain, to be used by but not owned by anybody, and possibly used by more than one party simultaneously due the inapplicability of scarcity to intellectual property.
Some apparent critics advocate general collective ownership rather than ownerlessness.
*With devices of proprietary design, the respective compositions of them may be more mangled, more convoluted and more complex than functionality warrants, hence confusing or obscure for protective purposes (though possibly to conceal unapproved copying instead).
According to Adam Smith, the expectation of profit from "improving one's stock of capital" rests on private property rights.
Seneca viewed property as only becoming necessary when men become avarice.
Aristotle, in ''Politics,'' advocates "private property."
(Russell Kirk, ''The Politics of Prudence'')
One categorization scheme specifies three species of property: land, improvements (immovable man-made things), and personal property (movable man-made things).
*With buildings or certain forms of transport, turrets may be involved.
Thus, saying one owns a glass of water is merely verbal shorthand for ''I may justly gift or trade this water to another person''.
Intellectual property&mdash;incorporeal things like ideas, plans, orderings and arrangements (musical compositions, novels, computer programs)&mdash;are generally considered valid property to those who support an effort justification, but invalid to those who support a scarcity justification, since the things don't have the exclusivity property (however, those who support a scarcity justification may still support other "intellectual property" laws such as Copyright, as long as these are a subject of contract instead of government arbitration).
Some philosophers assert that property rights arise from social convention, while others find justifications for them in morality or in natural law.
* Easier access to and more reliable information regarding such things as credit history and the worth of assets
As it hinders the one from working at what he thinks proper, so it hinders the others from employing whom they think proper.
Galambos taught that property is essential to a non-coercive social structure.
In every culture studied ownership and possession are the subject of custom and regulation, and "law" where the term can meaningfully be applied.
The "Takings" clause requires that the government (whether state or federal—for the 14th Amendment's due process clause imposes the 5th Amendment's takings clause on state governments) may take private property only for a public purpose, after exercising due process of law, and upon making "just compensation."
Anthropology studies the diverse systems of ownership, rights of use and transfer, and possession under the term "theories of property."
For example, hunter-gatherers did not consider land to be property, since there was no shortage of land.
In later years, the ranks of Harrington's admirers included American revolutionary and founder John Adams.
and private property (homes, material objects and so forth).
Note that both "persons ''and'' estates" are to be protected from the arbitrary power of any magistrate, inclusive of the "power and will of a legislator."
Also, property cannot be considered a reified concept, because in the first instance, property is very concrete as a physical thing-in-itself.
Section VIII, "Primitive Accumulation" of Capital involves a critique of Liberal Theories of property rights.
Only when items are relatively scarce with respect to people's desires do they become property.
Often property is defined by the code of the local sovereignty, and protected wholly or more usually partially by such entity, the owner being responsible for any remainder of protection.
(Alternately, in finance, the word as a countable noun refers to proof of ownership of investment instruments, or as an uncountable noun to collateral.)
Even when it keeps to proper legislative form, though, Locke held that there are limits to what a government established by such a contract might rightly do.
Benjamin Tucker preferred to look at the telos of property, i.e.
Typically, persons join together to form a political state which may develop a formal legal system which enforces and protects property rights so that the individual can go to court to get protection and enforcement of that person's property rights, rather than having to use self-help.
These rights include ownership and usage.
Treatment of intangible property is such that an article of property is, by law or otherwise by traditional conceptualization, subject to expiration even when inheritable, which is a key distinction from tangible property.
However, there is an expectation that each party's will (rather discretion) with regard to the property be clearly defined and unconditional, so as to distinguish ownership and easement from rent.
Positive law defines such rights, and the judiciary can adjudicate and enforce property rights.
- (Source: Adam Smith, ''The Wealth of Nations'', 1776, Book I, Chapter X, Part II.)
Depending on the nature of the property, an owner of property has the right to consume, alter, share, redefine, rent, mortgage, pawn, sell, exchange, transfer, give away or destroy it, or to exclude others from doing these things, as well as to perhaps abandon it; whereas regardless of the nature of the property, the owner thereof has the right to properly use it (as a durable, mean or factor, or whatever), or at the very least exclusively keep it.
Also, the same term is sometimes used by statists to mean government-owned property that the general public is allowed to access (public property).
This mediating relationship between individual, property and state is called a property regime.
"In general," he wrote, "it may be affirmed that there is no such passion in human mind, as the love of mankind, merely as such, independent of personal qualities, or services, or of relation to ourselves."
Different societies may have different theories of property for differing types of ownership.
In the United States and Canada wildlife are generally defined in statute as property of the state.
Corporate systems describe ownership as being attached to an identifiable group with an identifiable responsible individual.
Agrarian societies later made arable land property, as it was scarce.
Even a voluntary contract to surrender the product of labor to an employer was theft, according to Proudhon, since the controller of natural resources had no moral right to charge others for the use of that which he did not labor to create and therefore did not own.
:: "Separate property from private possession, and Leviathan becomes master of all...
On the one hand, some admire Locke, such as W.H.
Generally, the ground and any buildings which are permanently attached are considered real property, while movable goods and intangibles such as a copyright are considered personal property.
In a radical departure from traditional property theory, he defines property not as a physical object, but rather as a relationship between people with respect to an object.
Moreover, if the interference does not almost completely make the property valueless, the interference will not be deemed a taking but instead a mere regulation of use.
A much better situation (a stable republic) will exist once the commoners own most property, he suggested.
Both communism and some kinds of socialism have also upheld the notion that private ownership of capital is inherently illegitimate.
Investors also say that the properties where we stay are Dead Investments.
In ancient societies children were generally considered the property of their parents.
To explain the ownership of property Locke advanced a labor theory of property.
Since Filmer's views essentially require that the Stuart family be uniquely descended from the patriarchs of the Bible, and since even in the late 17th century that was a difficult view to uphold, Locke attacked Filmer's views in his First Treatise on Government, freeing him to set out his own views in the Second Treatise on Civil Government.
The nature of children under the age of majority is another contested issue here.
On the other hand, those such as Richard Pipes regard Locke's arguments as weak, and think that undue reliance thereon has weakened the cause of individualism in recent times.
*it is natural for man to possess external things
*theft is a sin; it is also a mortal sin
Marx cites several historical events in which large numbers of the peasantry were removed from their lands, which were then seized by the aristocracy.
Hutt (1956), who praised Locke for laying down the "quintessence of individualism".
:: "The reason why men enter into society is the preservation of their property."
But he wondered: How can anybody call anything his own?
Contemporary political thinkers who believe that natural persons enjoy rights to own property and to enter into contracts espouse two views about John Locke.
Galambos emphasized repeatedly that true government exists to protect property and that the state attacks property.
It is a manifest encroachment upon the just liberty both of the workman, and of those who might be disposed to employ him.
He did not believe in hypothetical contracts, or in the love of mankind in general, and sought to ground politics upon actual human beings as one knows them.
Dead Investment property, it is a property from which you cannot derive any profits.
In many countries women have limited access to property following restrictive inheritance and family laws, under which only men have actual or formal rights to own property.
The two major justifications given for original property, or the homestead principle, are '''effort''' and '''scarcity'''.
In economics and political economy, there are three broad forms of property: private property, public property, and collective property (also called cooperative property).
Marx notes that under Feudal Law, peasants were legally as entitled to their land as the aristocracy was to its manors.
(Frédéric Bastiat, ''The Law'')
These two justifications lead to different conclusions on what can be property.
*'''Primary property''', which includes ideas, thoughts, and actions
Thus, in this usufruct system, absentee ownership is illegitimate and workers own the machines or other equipment that they work with.
*'''Secondary property''', which includes all tangible and intangible possessions which are derivatives of the individual's primary property.
Degree of resistance to or protection from harm, use or taking; the property and any mechanisms of protection of it being ward.
* Increased trust arising from a greater certainty of punishment for cheating in economic transactions
early Roman law), religious sites (e.g.
The increasing proportion of communal wealth to private property results in a tendency toward equality of mankind.
The patrimony of a poor man lies in the strength and dexterity of his hands; and to hinder him from employing this strength and dexterity in what manner he thinks proper without injury to his neighbour, is a plain violation of this most sacred property.
Ownership of land can be held separately from the ownership of rights over that land, including sporting rights, mineral rights, development rights, air rights, and such other rights as may be worth segregating from simple land ownership.
:: "Wherever there is great property, there is great inequality … Civil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against those who have none at all."
Cicero held that there is no private property under natural law but only under human law.
In the Inca empire, the dead emperors, who were considered gods, still controlled property after death.
In other words, a person must make (more-or-less) continuous use of the item or else lose ownership rights.
In neither case are subjects required to allow themselves to become prey.
In his own words, Hobbes' reflection began with the idea of "giving to every man his own," a phrase he drew from the writings of Cicero.
He concluded: My own can only truly be mine if there is one unambiguously strongest power in the realm, and that power treats it as mine, protecting its status as such.
This transformation of private property into the communal domain, Bastiat points out, does not imply that private property will ever totally disappear.
The parties might expect their wills to be unanimous, or alternately every given one of them, when no opportunity for or possibility of dispute with any other of them exists, may expect his, her, its or their own will to be sufficient and absolute.
These property rights and the whole formal system of property make possible:
Economic leveling of property, conservatives maintain, especially of the forced kind, is not economic progress.
firearms, real property, personal property, animals).
* More formal and complex written statements of ownership that permit the easier assumption of shared risk and ownership in companies, and insurance against risk
His analysis of the product of labor upon natural resources as property (usufruct) is more nuanced.
He posited a communal "national" property consisting of non-scarce goods, such as land in ancient hunter-gatherer societies.
(John Locke, ''Second Treatise on Civil Government'')
Thus far or usually those are not considered property, or at least not private property, even though the party bearing right of exclusive use may transfer that right to another.
In sociology and anthropology, property is often defined as a relationship between two or more individuals and an object, in which at least one of these individuals holds a bundle of rights over the object.
* The standardization and integration of property rules and property information in a country as a whole
This development has been critiqued by the tragedy of the commons.
Both socialism and communism distinguish carefully between private ownership of capital (land, factories, resources, etc.)
"To this end" (to achieve the previously specified goal), he wrote, "it is that men give up all their natural power to the society they enter into, and the community put the legislative power into such hands as they think fit, with this trust, that they shall be governed by declared laws, or else their peace, quiet, and property will still be at the same uncertainty as it was in the state of nature."
His answer: to solve the scarcity problem.
These arguments have differing validity for different types of "property"&mdash;things that are not scarce are, for instance, not subject to the tragedy of the commons.
* Greater availability of loans for new projects, since more things can serve as collateral for the loans
In France, the revolution of the 1790s had led to large-scale confiscation of land formerly owned by church and king.
Different forms of "property" require different amounts of enforcement: intellectual property requires a great deal of state intervention to enforce, ownership of distant physical property requires quite a lot, ownership of carried objects requires very little, while ownership of one's own body requires absolutely no state intervention.
Perhaps one of the most popular is the natural rights definition of property rights as advanced by John Locke.
"That which is common to the greatest number has the least care bestowed upon it.
(Given such meaning, the word property is uncountable, and as such, is not described with an indefinite article or as plural.)
By "value," Bastiat apparently means ''market value''; he emphasizes that this is quite different from utility.
That the more widespread the possession of private property, the more stable and productive is a state or nation.
Therefore, he theorized that when one mixes one’s labor with nature, one gains a relationship with that part of nature with which the labor is mixed, subject to the limitation that there should be "enough, and as good, left in common for others."
*Libertarian socialism generally accepts property rights, but with a short abandonment period.
*With information; encryption, steganography or self-destruct capability may be involved.
Property includes all non-procreative derivatives of an individual’s life; this means children are not the property of their parents.
By either standard, one's body is one's property.
In general, there may be an involvement of obscurities, camouflage, barriers, armor, locks, alarms, booby traps, homing beacons, automated recorders, decoys, weaponry or sentinels.
*it is, however, lawful to steal through stress of need: ''"in cases of need all things are common property."''
The author of ''Oceana'', he may have been the first political theorist to postulate that political power is a consequence, not the cause, of the distribution of property.
This event created a large unlanded class which had to work for wages in order to survive.
For example, the 1839 Cherokee Constitution frames the issue in these terms:
One is the relatively rare first possession theory of property, where ownership of something is seen as justified simply by someone seizing something before someone else does.
Questions regarding the nature of ownership of the body also come up in the issue of abortion, drugs and euthanasia.
By the mid 19th century, the industrial revolution had transformed England and the United States, and had begun in France.
They would, he allowed, create a monarchy, but its task would be to execute the will of an elected legislature.
The restoration of the monarchy led to claims by those dispossessed to have their former lands returned.
In many ancient legal systems (e.g.
The canon law ''Decretum Gratiani'' maintained that mere human law creates property, repeating the phrases used by St. Augustine.
In common law, real property (immovable property) is the combination of interests in land and improvements thereto, and personal property is interest in movable property.
Pipes has written that Locke's work "marked a regression because it rested on the concept of Natural Law" rather than upon Harrington's sociological framework.
The first,  possession, can be defined as control over a resource based on the practical inability of another to contradict the ends of the possessor.
Communists do not oppose personal property that is "hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned" (as the Communist Manifesto puts it) by members of the proletariat.
