A series of studies published in ''Science'' involved introduced viruses known to cause cancerous mutation in prostate cells: AKT, ERG, and AR into isolated samples of basal and luminal cells and grafted the treated tissue into mice.
RUNX2 is a transcription factor that prevents cancer cells from undergoing apoptosis thereby contributing to the development of prostate cancer.
Folic acid supplements have no effect on the risk of developing prostate cancer.
The AUA recommends screening decisions in those 55 to 69 be based on shared decision making, and that if screening is performed it should occur no more often than every two years.
Many suggest that prostate cancer may be under reported, yet BPH incidence in China and Japan is similar to rates in Western countries.
The initial regimen of cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil was quickly joined by multiple regimens using a host of other systemic chemotherapy drugs.
It is not clear how the prostate cancer becomes androgen-independent or how it reestablishes progression, although a few possibilities (on how) have been proposed.
While some dietary factors have been associated with prostate cancer the evidence is still tentative.
Men who have first-degree family members with prostate cancer appear to have double the risk of getting the disease compared to men without prostate cancer in the family.
Prostate cancer is very uncommon in men younger than 45, but becomes more common with advancing age.
However, many men never know they have prostate cancer.
The data on the relationship between diet and prostate cancer is poor.
In particular, infection with the sexually transmitted infections chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis seems to increase risk.
This discovery of "chemical castration" won Huggins the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Only a subset of people respond to androgen signaling blocking drugs and certain cells with characteristics resembling stem cells remain unaffected.
In adult men, a typical prostate is about 3 centimeters long and weighs about 20 grams.
GnRH receptor agonists, such as leuprolide and goserelin, were subsequently developed and used to treat prostate cancer.
The primary risk factors are obesity, age and family history.
Vitamin supplements appear to have no effect and some may increase the risk.
Sometimes, however, prostate cancer does cause symptoms, often similar to those of diseases such as benign prostatic hyperplasia.
As of 2012, prostate cancer is the second most frequently diagnosed cancer (at 15% of all male cancers) and the sixth leading cause of cancer death in males worldwide.
The average annual incidence rate of prostate cancer between 1988 and 1992 among Chinese men in the United States was 15 times higher than that of their counterparts living in Shanghai and Tianjin.
Reducing the amount of ERK5 in cancerous cells reduces their invasiveness.
Prostate cancer in the spine can also compress the spinal cord, causing tingling, leg weakness and urinary and fecal incontinence.
Other important factors are age, general health, and a person's views about potential treatments and their possible side effects.
Most of those who are newly diagnosed and made a treatment choice can not correctly answer over half of the questions.
The PI3k/Akt signaling cascade works with the transforming growth factor beta/SMAD signaling cascade to ensure prostate cancer cell survival and protection against apoptosis.
A 2007 report by the U.S.-based National Prostate Cancer Coalition stated that for every prostate cancer drug on the market, there were seven used to treat breast cancer.
Such screening is controversial and, in some people, may lead to unnecessary disruption and possibly harmful consequences.
Brachytherapy with implanted seeds (for prostate cancer) was first described in 1983.
Small cell carcinoma is a very rare (1%) type of prostate cancer that cannot be diagnosed using the PSA.
Androgens include testosterone, which is made in the testes; dehydroepiandrosterone, made in the adrenal glands; and dihydrotestosterone, which is converted from testosterone within the prostate itself.
Rates have been increasing in the developing world.
It may initially cause no symptoms.
The journals ''Science'' and ''PlosONE'' both retracted XMRV related articles.
People with prostate cancer generally encounter significant disparities in awareness, funding, media coverage, and research—and therefore, inferior treatment and poorer outcomes—compared to other cancers of equal prevalence.
This SNP explains part of the increased prostate cancer risk of African American men as compared to American men of European descent, since the C allele is much more prevalent in the latter; this SNP is located in the promoter region of the ''MSMB'' gene, thus affects the amount of MSMB protein synthesized and secreted by epithelial cells of the prostate.
In 1941, Charles B. Huggins published studies in which he used estrogen to oppose testosterone production in men with metastatic prostate cancer.
If the cancer has spread beyond the prostate, treatment options significantly change, so most doctors that treat prostate cancer use a variety of nomograms to predict the probability of spread.
And the way the cancer changes, to overcome the lack of androgen, may vary between individual patients.
Research released in May 2007, found that US war veterans who had been exposed to Agent Orange had a 48% increased risk of prostate cancer recurrence following surgery.
Changes within the gland, therefore, directly affect urinary function.
The LNCaP cancer cell line was established from a human lymph node metastatic lesion of prostatic adenocarcinoma.
File:Scleroticmetastaticdiseasespine.png|Sclerosis of the bones of the thoracic spine due to prostate cancer metastases (CT image)
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is hypothesized to promote prostate cancer cell survival and growth and is a target of research because if this inhibitor can be shut down then the apoptosis cascade can carry on its function in preventing cancer cell proliferation.
AR, an androgen-activated transcription factor, belongs to the steroid nuclear receptor family.
Two large genome-wide association studies linking single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to prostate cancer were published in 2008.
In general, the higher the grade and the stage, the poorer the prognosis.
One of the goals of treatment in palliative care is symptom control rather than a cure of the underlying cancer.
However, there are exceptions: radiation therapy may be used for some advanced tumors, and hormonal therapy is used for some early stage tumors.
The Kattan score represents the likelihood of remaining free of disease at a given time interval following treatment.
Active surveillance is ''not'' synonymous with watchful waiting, an older term which implies no treatment or specific program of monitoring, with the assumption that ''palliative'', not curative, treatment would be used if advanced, symptomatic disease develops.
Red meat and processed meat also appear to have little effect in human studies.
The oncoprotein BCL-2 is associated with the development of androgen-independent prostate cancer, due to its high levels of expression in androgen-independent tumours in advanced stages of the pathology.
The most common symptom is bone pain, often in the vertebrae (bones of the spine), pelvis, or ribs.
Men with high blood pressure are more likely to develop prostate cancer.
This invasion of other organs is called metastasis.
It is possible that for further advances, a combination of androgen signaling blocking agent with stem-like cell directed differentiation therapy drug would prove ideal.
Cystoscopy shows the urinary tract from inside the bladder, using a thin, flexible camera tube inserted down the urethra.
About 99% of cases occur in those over the age of 50.
More recently, it has been shown to predict metastasis and mortality following prostatectomy, radiation therapy, watchful waiting, or androgen deprivation therapy.
There is some tentative evidence for foods containing lycopene and selenium.
It was the most common cancer in males in 84 countries, occurring more commonly in the developed world.
Also, where there is more access to screening programs, there is a higher detection rate.
Androgen ablation therapy causes remission in 80-90% of patients undergoing therapy, resulting in a median progression-free survival of 12 to 33 months.
Equality campaigners such as author Warren Farrell cite such stark spending inequalities as a clear example of governments unfairly favouring women's health over men's health.
Surgical removal of the testes (orchiectomy) to treat prostate cancer was first performed in the 1890s, but with limited success.
A molecular test that detects the presence of cell-associated PCA3 mRNA in fluid massaged from the prostate by the doctor and first-void urinated out has also been under investigation.
After 16 weeks, none of the luminal samples had undergone malignant mutation, while the basal samples had mutated into prostate-like tubules which had then developed malignancy and formed cancerous tumors, which appeared identical to human samples under magnification.
Having a first-degree relative with the disease increases the risk two to threefold.
Men who get regular exercise may have a slightly lower risk, especially vigorous activity and the risk of advanced prostate cancer.
In the United States, prostate cancers that are local or regional at the time of diagnosis have a 5-year survival rate of nearly 100%, while those with distant metastases have a 5-year survival rate of 28%.
In 2001, ''The Guardian'' noted that Britain had 3,000 nurses specializing in breast cancer, compared to only one for prostate cancer.
The immunotherapy treatment with sipuleucel-T in CRPC increases survival by 4 months.
Advanced prostate cancer can spread to other parts of the body, possibly causing additional symptoms.
File:ScleroticmetastaticdiseasespineLCT.png|Sclerosis of the bones of the thoracic spine due to prostate cancer metastases (CT image)
The androgen receptor helps prostate cancer cells to survive and is a target for many anti cancer research studies; so far, inhibiting the androgen receptor has only proven to be effective in mouse studies.
Spread of cancer into other bones such as the femur is usually to the proximal or nearby part of the bone.
Radiation therapy for prostate cancer was first developed in the early 20th century and initially consisted of intraprostatic radium implants.
PCA3 mRNA is expressed almost exclusively by prostate cells and has been shown to be highly over-expressed in prostate cancer cells.
PC-3 and DU-145 cells were established from human prostatic adenocarcinoma metastatic to bone and to brain, respectively.
There are also several other tests that can be used to gather more information about the prostate and the urinary tract.
LNCaP, PC-3 (PC3), and DU-145 (DU145) are commonly used prostate cancer cell lines.
Mutations in ''BRCA1'' and ''BRCA2'', important risk factors for ovarian cancer and breast cancer in women, have also been implicated in prostate cancer.
After remission, an androgen-independent phenotype typically emerges, wherein the median overall survival is 23–37 months from the time of initiation of androgen ablation therapy.
Finally, obesity and elevated blood levels of testosterone may increase the risk for prostate cancer.
Studies of twins in Scandinavia suggest that 40% of prostate cancer risk can be explained by inherited factors.
The upregulation of BCL-2 after androgen ablation in prostate carcinoma cell lines and in a castrated-male rat model further established a connection between BCL-2 expression and prostate cancer progression.
Prostate cancer screening is controversial.
The region of prostate gland where the adenocarcinoma is most common is the peripheral zone.
In prostate cancer, the cells of these prostate glands mutate into cancer cells.
The sum of these two numbers is the Gleason score.
The prostate contains many small glands which make about 20% of the fluid constituting semen.
In the United States in 2005, there were an estimated 230,000 new cases of prostate cancer and 30,000 deaths due to prostate cancer.
Lower blood levels of vitamin D may increase the risk of developing prostate cancer.
The predictions are based on the experience of large groups of patients suffering from cancers at various stages.
low grade disease had an approximately 20% overall survival at 15 years due to deaths from competing causes.
Many cases can be safely followed with active surveillance or watchful waiting.
The test result is currently reported as a specimen ratio of PCA3 mRNA to PSA mRNA.
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month takes place in September in a number of countries.
Some evidence supports lower rates of prostate cancer with a vegetarian diet.
The paradox is that androgens inhibit the proliferation of these androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.
If cancer is suspected, a biopsy is offered expediently.
The second line hormonal therapy abiraterone increases survival by 4.6 months when compared to placebo.
American Urological Association (AUA 2013) guidelines call for weighing the benefits of preventing prostate cancer mortality in 1 man for every 1,000 men screened over a ten-year period against the known harms associated with diagnostic tests and treatment.
However, these high rates may be affected by increasing rates of detection.
The cancer cells may spread from the prostate to other parts of the body, particularly the bones and lymph nodes.
It has been validated among over 10,000 prostatectomy patients, including patients from CaPSURE; the SEARCH registry, representing data from several Veterans Administration and active military medical centers; a multi-institutional cohort in Germany; and the prostatectomy cohort at Johns Hopkins University.
In 2012 it occurred in 1.1 million men and caused 307,000 deaths.
In general, they concluded, "it is uncertain whether the benefits associated with PSA testing for prostate cancer screening are worth the harms associated with screening and subsequent unnecessary treatment."
Starting at age 50, (45 if African American or brother or father suffered from condition before age 65) talk to your doctor about the pros and cons of testing so you can decide if testing is the right choice for you."
Prostate cancer rates are higher and prognoses are poorer in developed countries than in the rest of the world.
Zinc inhibits NF-κB pathways, is anti-proliferative, and induces apoptosis in abnormal cells.
Prostate cancer is classified as an adenocarcinoma, or glandular cancer, that begins when normal semen-secreting prostate gland cells mutate into cancer cells.
Other treatments may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, hormone therapy or chemotherapy.
Men with high grade disease (Gleason 8-10) experienced high prostate cancer mortality within 15 years of diagnosis, regardless of their age at diagnosis, underscoring the very aggressive nature of poorly differentiated prostate cancer.
No single gene is responsible for prostate cancer; many different genes have been implicated.
African-American men have 50–60 times more prostate cancer and prostate cancer deaths than men in Shanghai, China.
Palliative care is medical care which focuses on treatment of symptoms from serious illness, like cancer, and improving quality of life.
It was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on May, 15th 2013 ahead of schedule under the priority review program.
Other tumor suppressor genes that are thought to play a role in prostate cancer include PTEN (gene) and KAI1.
Sipuleucel-T, a cancer vaccine has been found to result in a benefit (a four-month increase in survival) for men with metastatic prostate cancer.
*The ''D'Amico classification'' stratifies men by low, intermediate, or high risk based on stage, grade, and PSA.
Digital rectal examination (DRE) may allow a doctor to detect prostate abnormalities.
The tissue samples are then examined under a microscope to determine whether cancer cells are present, and to evaluate the microscopic features (or Gleason score) of any cancer found.
The only test that can fully confirm the diagnosis of prostate cancer is a biopsy, the removal of small pieces of the prostate for microscopic examination.
The average age at the time of diagnosis is 70.
People can also use an 18-item questionnaire to learn whether they have good knowledge and understanding about their treatment options before they choose.
But even these combination will not affect stem-like cells that do not exhibit androgen signaling.
Nomograms can be used to calculate the estimated risk of the individual patient.
The prostate surrounds part of the urethra, the tube that carries urine from the bladder during urination and semen during ejaculation.
The American Cancer Society's position regarding early detection is "Research has not yet proven that the potential benefits of testing outweigh the harms of testing and treatment.
Other symptoms that can be addressed through palliative care include fatigue, delirium, lymphedema in the scrotum or penis, nausea, vomiting, and weight loss.
Evidence supports little role for dietary fruits and vegetables in prostate cancer occurrence.
A meta-analysis on the effects of voiding position during urination in males with prostate enlargement showed that sitting was superior to standing.
Elevation of AR expression is often observed in advanced prostate tumors in patients.
In Japan, death from prostate cancer was one-fifth to one-half the rates in the United States and Europe in the 1990s.
Active surveillance involves monitoring the tumor for signs of growth or the appearance of symptoms.
A pre-planned interim analysis showed improved survival and quality of life.
A complete understanding of the causes of prostate cancer remains elusive.
If he is both overweight and a smoker, he will lose 6.7 years, and if obese and a smoker, he will lose 13.7 years.
Disparities also extend into areas such as detection, with governments failing to fund or mandate prostate cancer screening while fully supporting breast cancer programs.
In light of this the rate of prostate cancer is linked to the consumption of the Western diet.
It also discovered that the waiting time between referral and diagnosis was two weeks for breast cancer but three months for prostate cancer.
High calcium intake has been linked to advanced prostate cancer.
Although there is no proof that PIN is a cancer precursor, it is closely associated with cancer.
*The ''Kattan nomograms'' predict recurrence after surgery and/or radiation therapy, based on data available either at time of diagnosis or after surgery.
For example, individuals with TT allele pair at SNP rs10993994 were reported to be at 1.6 times higher risk of prostate cancer than those with the CC allele pair.
Rates of prostate cancer vary widely across the world.
ZIP1 is now called a tumor suppressor gene product for the gene SLC39A1.
Initially, small clumps of cancer cells remain confined to otherwise normal prostate glands, a condition known as carcinoma in situ or prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN).
Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase has been identified as playing a significant role in the survival of prostate cancer cells.
People with low grade disease (Gleason 2-4) were unlikely to die of prostate cancer within 15 years of diagnosis.
Urologists use transrectal ultrasound during prostate biopsy and can sometimes see a hypoechoic area (tissues or structures that reflect relatively less of the ultrasound waves directed at them).
Points are assigned based on PSA, Grade, stage, age, and percentage of cores positive; the sum yields a 0–10 score, with every 2 points representing roughly a doubling of risk of recurrence.
During a biopsy a urologist or radiologist obtains tissue samples from the prostate via the rectum.
Although not a replacement for serum PSA level, the PCA3 test is an additional tool to help decide whether, in men suspected of having prostate cancer (especially if an initial biopsy fails to explain the elevated serum PSA), a biopsy/rebiopsy is really needed.
Also in trials for CRPC are : checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab, CYP17 inhibitor galeterone (TOK-001), and immunotherapy PROSTVAC.
Medical imaging may then be done to determine if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
Prostate cancer develops primarily in men over fifty.
Globally it is the second most common type of cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men.
In men who are candidates for active surveillance, fusion MR/US guided prostate biopsy detected 33% of cancers compared to 7% with standard ultrasound guided biopsy.
After a prostate biopsy, a pathologist looks at the samples under a microscope.
Men who have a first-degree relative (father or brother) with prostate cancer have twice the risk of developing prostate cancer, and those with two first-degree relatives affected have a fivefold greater risk compared with men with no family history.
The CAPRA score was derived from community-based data in the  CaPSURE database.
The pathologist assigns a number from 1 to 5 for the most common pattern observed under the microscope, then does the same for the second-most-common pattern.
Because of its location, prostate diseases often affect urination, ejaculation, and rarely defecation.
It is the second leading cause of cancer death in U.S. men after lung cancer.
"Up to 70 percent of men with prostate cancer have lost one copy of the PTEN gene at the time of diagnosis"
These studies identified several SNPs which substantially affect the risk of prostate cancer.
This pattern can be attributed to factors such as medical co-morbidity and patient preferences is regard to quality of life in addition to prostate cancer specific risk factors such as pretreatment PSA, Gleason score and clinical stage.
Therefore, the desire to improve outcome of people with CRPC has resulted in the claims of increasing doses further or combination therapy with synergistic androgen signaling blocking agents.
But US has poor tissue resolution and thus, is generally not clinically used.
A 2010 study found that prostate basal cells were the most common site of origin for prostate cancers.
It is also present in relapsed cancer following previous hormone therapy.
Although the widespread use of prostate specific antigen (PSA) screening in the USA has resulted in diagnosis at earlier age and cancer stage, the vast majority of cases are still diagnosed in men older than 65 years, and approximately 25% of cases are diagnosed in men older than 75 years.
Prostate cancer is associated with urinary dysfunction as the prostate gland surrounds the prostatic urethra.
Unfortunately, oral ingestion of zinc is ineffective since high concentrations of zinc into prostate cells is not possible without the active transporter, ZIP1.
Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 (MIC-1) stimulates the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signaling pathway which leads to prostate cancer cell growth and survival.
Prostate cancer, especially low-grade forms found in elderly men, often grows so slowly that no treatment is required.
It has also shown to help surgeons decide whether to resect or spare the neurovascular bundle, determine return to urinary continence, and help assess surgical difficulty.
The American Society of Clinical Oncology and the American College of Physicians discourages screening for those who are expected to live less than ten to fifteen years, while in those with a greater life expectancy a decision should be made by the person in question based on the potential risks and benefits.
Prostate specific membrane antigen is a transmembrane carboxypeptidase and exhibits folate hydrolase activity.
Life expectancy projections are averages for an entire male population, and many medical and lifestyle factors modify these numbers.
It is not currently clear whether both of these factors, or just one of them, contribute to the occurrence of prostate cancer.)
Studies of males who died from unrelated causes have found prostate cancer in 30% to 70% of those over age 60.
Detection increased significantly in the 1980s and 1990s in many areas due to increased PSA testing.
For Prostate MRI exist the PI-RADS Reporting system.
Which option is best depends on the stage of the disease, the Gleason score, and the PSA level.
The 5-year survival rate in the United States is 99%.
The major downside to the 3-level system is that it does not account for multiple adverse parameters (e.g., high Gleason score ''and'' high PSA) in stratifying patients.
Some androgen-independent LNCaP sublines have been developed from the ATCC androgen-dependent LNCaP cells after androgen deprivation for study of prostate cancer progression.
It is located in the pelvis, under the urinary bladder and in front of the rectum.
The route of metastasis to bone is thought to be venous as the prostatic venous plexus draining the prostate connects with the vertebral veins.
In those in whom the disease has spread to the bones, pain medications, bisphosphonates and targeted therapy, among others, may be useful.
The protein ZIP1 is responsible for the active transport of zinc into prostate cells.
(People who consume larger amounts of meat and dairy also tend to consume fewer portions of fruits and vegetables.
The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends against screening using the PSA test, due to the risk of overdiagnosis and overtreatment, as most cancer diagnosed would remain asymptomatic.
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing increases cancer detection but does not decrease mortality.
In 2006, a previously unknown retrovirus, Xenotropic MuLV-related virus or XMRV, was associated with human prostate tumors, but subsequent reports on the virus were contradictory, and the original 2006 finding was instead due to a previously undetected contamination.
