Sex industry premises should not be subject to any special regulation or laws", the current situation in New Zealand; the laws against operating a brothel, pimping and street prostitution are struck down, but prostitution is hardly regulated at all.
According to Zohar and the Alphabet of Ben Sira, there were four angels of sacred prostitution, who mated with archangel Samael.
In Germany, however, most prostitutes' organizations deliberately use the word ''Hure'' (whore) since they feel that ''prostitute'' is a bureaucratic term.
'Magdalene Homes' were particularly popular and peaked especially in the early fourteenth century.
In Russia and other countries of the former USSR, prostitution takes the form of an open-air market.
In escort prostitution, the act takes place at the customer's residence or hotel room (referred to as out-call), or at the escort's residence or in a hotel room rented for the occasion by the escort (called in-call).
This, in turn, has brought increased scrutiny from law enforcement, public officials, and activist groups toward online prostitution.
Among the oiran, the  was considered the highest rank of courtesan available only to the wealthiest and highest ranking men.
The legal status of prostitution varies from country to country, from being legal and considered a profession to being punishable by death.
Nevertheless, the report states that:"''The content, analysis, opinions and policy recommendations contained in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Development Programme''."
Some adults travel to other countries to have access to sex with children, which is unavailable in their home country.
In February 2014, the members of the European Parliament voted in a non-binding resolution, (adopted by 343 votes to 139; with 105 abstentions), in favor of the 'Swedish Model' of criminalizing the buying, but not the selling of sex.
Female prostitutes could be independent and sometimes influential women.
High-class or the most popular tawaifs could often pick and choose between the best of their suitors.
Children are sold into the global sex trade every year.
Payment may vary according to regulations made by pimps, brothel keepers, madams, and procurers, who usually take a slice out of a prostitute's income.
In this sense, "prostituting oneself" or "whoring oneself" the services or acts performed are typically not sexual.
Approximately 80 percent of transnational victims are women and girls and up to 50 percent are minors," estimated the US Department of State in a 2008 study, in reference to the number of people estimated to be victims of all forms of human trafficking.
The length of these prostitutes' working careers was estimated at a mean of 5 years.
In 1956, the United Kingdom introduced the Sexual Offences Act 1956.
An outbreak of syphilis in Naples 1494 which later swept across Europe, and which may have originated from the Columbian Exchange, and the prevalence of other sexually transmitted diseases from the earlier 16th century may have been causes of this change in attitude.
They face potential deportation, and so do not have recourse to the law.
The lives of prostitutes in brothels were not cloistered like that of nuns and "only some lived permanently in the streets assigned to them."
Brothels are establishments specifically dedicated to prostitution.
Several western countries have recently enacted laws with extraterritorial reach, punishing citizens who engage in sex with minors in other countries.
Many countries have sex worker advocacy groups which lobby against criminalization and discrimination of prostitutes.
Services may be advertised over the Internet, in regional publications, or in local telephone listings.
Reports disagree on whether prostitution levels are growing or declining in developed countries.
Prostitution was made illegal in almost all states between 1910 and 1915 largely due to the influence of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union.
Canon law defined a prostitute as "a promiscuous woman, regardless of financial elements."
''Sex tourism'' refers to the practice of traveling to engage in sexual relations with prostitutes in other countries.
Prostitution is one of the branches of the sex industry: other branches include pornography, stripping, nude modelling, and erotic dancing.
Those offering services to female customers are commonly known as ''gigolos''; those offering services to male customers are ''hustlers'' or ''rent boys''.
Lot lizards mainly serve those in the trucking industry at truck stops and stopping centers.
It is also the fastest growing criminal industry, predicted to outgrow drug trafficking.
In the early 17th century, there was widespread male and female prostitution throughout the cities of Kyoto, Edo, and Osaka, Japan.
Buyers were allowed to inspect naked men and women for sale in private and there was no stigma attached to the purchase of males by a male aristocrat.
Sex trafficking is defined as using coercion or force to transport an unwilling person into prostitution or other sexual exploitation.
Registering prostitutes makes the state complicit in prostitution and does not address the health risks of unregistered prostitutes.
Others advertise by putting numbers or location in phoneboxes or in online or newspaper ads.
A person who works in this field is called a prostitute, and is a kind of sex worker.
These feminists argue that prostitution has a very negative effect, both on the prostitutes themselves and on society as a whole, as it reinforces stereotypical views about women, who are seen as sex objects which can be used and abused by men.
These laws, however, proved no impediment to wealthier prostitutes because their glamorous appearances were almost indistinguishable from noble women.
Many feminists are opposed to prostitution, which they see as a form of exploitation of women and male dominance over women, and as a practice which is the result of the existing patriarchal societal order.
The Church's stance on prostitution was three-fold: “acceptance of prostitution as an inevitable social fact, condemnation of those profiting from this commerce, and encouragement for the prostitute to repent."
* introducing a system of registration for prostitutes that mandates health checks and other public health measures
However, a paper entitled "Prostitution and the sex discrepancy in reported number of sexual partners" concluded that men's self-reporting of prostitutes as sexual partners provides a serious underestimate.
This is most clearly demonstrated in St. Augustine's claim that "the removal of the institution would bring lust into all aspects of the world."
They usually dress in skimpy, provocative clothing, regardless of the weather.
Adult contact sites, chats and on-line communities are also used.
The Church was forced to recognize its inability to remove prostitution from the worldly society, and in the fourteenth century "began to tolerate prostitution as a lesser evil."
Sumptuary laws became the regulatory norm for prostitutes and included making courtesans "wear a shoulder-knot of a particular color as a badge of their calling" to be able to easily distinguish the prostitute from a respectable woman in society.
However, ''sex worker'' can also mean anyone who works within the sex industry or whose work is of a sexual nature and is not limited solely to prostitutes.
Soliciting was made illegal by the Street Offences Act 1959.
This legislation applied not only to the United Kingdom and France, but also to their overseas colonies.
Historically, and currently, church prostitutes exist, and the practice may be legal or illegal, depending on the country, state or province.
Simultaneously, religious houses were established with the purpose of providing asylum and encouraging the reformation of prostitution.
Depending on the jurisdiction, prostitution can be legal or illegal.
As Norma Ramos, Executive Director of the Coalition Against Trafficking in Women says "The more the commercial sex industry normalizes this behavior, the more of this behavior you get".
Brothels were also used to protect prostitutes and their clients through various regulations.
The clients of prostitutes are also known as ''johns'' or ''tricks'' in North America and ''punters'' in the British Isles.
Commercial phone sex services have been available for decades.
A "lot lizard" is a commonly encountered special case of street prostitution.
Their art and fashions often set trends among wealthy women.
), making it difficult to engage in prostitution without breaking any law; and in a few countries prostitution is legal and regulated.
Thailand is also a destination for child sex tourism.
Sunnis regard prostitution as sinful and forbidden.
The advent of the Internet has made other forms of virtual sex available for money, including computer-mediated cybersex, in which sexual services are provided in text form by way of chat rooms or instant messaging, or audiovisually through a webcam (see camgirl).
Sex work researcher and writer Gail Pheterson says that this additional definition exists because "the term "prostitute" gradually took on a Christian moralist tradition, as being synonymous with debasement of oneself or of others for the purpose of ill-gotten gains".
With the advent of the Protestant Reformation, numbers of Southern German towns closed their brothels in an attempt to eradicate prostitution.
Furthermore, outlawing brothel-keeping and prostitution was also used to  "strengthen the criminal law" system of the sixteenth century secular rulers.
International prostitutes' rights organizations include the International Committee for Prostitutes' Rights and the Network of Sex Work Projects.
Although there were wandering prostitutes in rural areas who worked based on the calendar of fairs, similar to riding a circuit, in which prostitutes stopped by various towns based on what event was going on at the time, most prostitutes remained in cities.
According to the International Labour Organization, the occurrence is especially common in places such as Thailand, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Cambodia, Nepal and India.
Some prostitutes in ancient Greece, such as Lais were as famous for their company as their beauty, and some of these women charged extraordinary sums for their services.
Typical responses to the problem are:
Thailand's Health System Research Institute reported that children in prostitution make up 40% of prostitutes in Thailand.
As British females began arriving in British India in large numbers from the early to mid-19th century, it became increasingly uncommon for British soldiers to visit Indian prostitutes, and miscegenation was despised altogether after the events of the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
Secular law, like most other aspects of prostitution in the Middle Ages, is difficult to generalize due to the regional variations in attitudes towards prostitution.
Prostitution occurs in a variety of forms.
Another commonly used word for a prostitute is ''hooker''.
France, instead of trying to outlaw prostitution began to view prostitution as an evil necessary for society to function.
A ''streetwalker'' solicits customers on the streets or in public places, while a ''call girl'' makes appointments by phone, or in recent years, through email or the internet.
Sex tourism emerged in the late 20th century as a controversial aspect of Western tourism and globalization.
Prostitutes have long plied their trades to the military in many cultures.
Prostitution may sometimes be associated with illegal, abusive, and dangerous activities.
In Bangladesh, child prostitutes are known to take the drug Oradexon, also known as dexamethasone.
Washington D.C. itself had Murder Bay which attracted the military of the Civil War.
In some countries, there is controversy regarding the laws applicable to sex work.
Women usually alternated their career of prostitution with "petty retailing, and victualing," or only occasionally turning to prostitution in times of great financial need.
For instance, the legal stance of punishing pimping while keeping sex work legal but "underground" and risky is often denounced as hypocritical; opponents suggest either going the full abolition route and criminalize clients or making sex work a regulated business.
Courts showed the conflicting views on the role of prostitutes in secular law as prostitutes could not inherit property, defend themselves in court, or make accusations in court.
As early as the 18th century BC, ancient Mesopotamia recognized the need to protect women's property rights.
Like the geisha tradition in Japan, their main purpose was to professionally entertain their guests, and while sex was often incidental, it was not assured contractually.
Although a popular etymology connects "hooker" with Joseph Hooker, a Union general in the American Civil War, the word more likely comes from the concentration of prostitutes around the shipyards and ferry terminal of the Corlear's Hook area of Manhattan in the 1820s, who came to be referred to as "hookers".
Prostitution in ancient Rome was legal, public, and widespread.
These groups generally oppose Nevada-style regulation and oversight, stating that prostitution should be treated like other professions.
Banning prostitution tends to drive it underground, making safe sex promotion, treatment and monitoring more difficult.
The degree of regulation varies very much, for example in Netherlands prostitutes are not required to undergo mandatory health checks (see Prostitution in the Netherlands) while in Nevada the regulations are very strict (see Prostitution in Nevada)
''Prostitute'' is derived from the Latin ''prostituta''.
However this did not prevent illegal brothels from thriving.
Originally, prostitution was widely legal in the United States.
These courtesans danced, sang, recited poetry and entertained their suitors at mehfils.
Some studies of prostitution in urban settings in developing countries, such as Kenya, have stated that prostitution acts as a reservoir of STDs within the general population.
A similar situation did in fact exist in the Russian Empire; prostitutes operating out of government-sanctioned brothels were given yellow internal passports signifying their status and were subjected to weekly physical exams.
This type of prostitution is common among the homeless and in refugee camps.
Servicing the customers is described as "turning tricks."
A tawaif was a courtesan who catered to the nobility of South Asia, particularly during the era of the Mughal Empire.
Prostitutes' salaries and payments fluctuate according to the economic conditions of their respective countries.
Brothels also settled the "obsessive fear of the sharing of women" and solved the issue of "collective security."
In 1949, the UN General Assembly adopted a convention stating that "prostitution and the accompanying evil of the traffic in persons for the purpose of prostitution are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human person", requiring all signing parties to punish pimps and brothel owners and operators and to abolish all special treatment or registration of prostitutes.
Some view prostitution as a form of exploitation of or violence against women and children, and helps to create a supply of victims for human trafficking.
Use of the word ''whore'' is widely considered pejorative, especially in its modern slang form of ''ho''.
Many became celebrities of their times outside the pleasure districts.
Indeed, abandoned children were almost always raised as prostitutes.
Another explanation is that ''prostituta'' is a composition of ''pro'' and ''statuere'' (to cause to stand, to station, place erect).
The sex is usually performed in the customer's car, in a nearby alley, or in a rented room.
In the United States of America, one such group is COYOTE (an abbreviation for "Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics") and another is the North American Task Force on Prostitution.
Thus it is obvious that the clergy were at least present in brothels at some point or another.
In some places, men who drive around red-light districts for the purpose of soliciting prostitutes are also known as ''kerb crawlers''.
They also worked as sex workers.
There are substantial differences in rates of victimization between street prostitutes and indoor prostitutes who work as escorts, call girls, or in brothels and massage parlors.
If there's one thing I hate, it's the movies.
The first known definition of prostitution was found in Marseille's thirteenth century statutes, which included a chapter entitled De meretricibus ("regarding prostitutes").
In countries and areas where safer sex precautions are either unavailable or not practiced for cultural reasons, prostitution is an active disease vector for all STDs, including HIV/AIDS, but the encouragement of safer sex practices, combined with regular testing for sexually transmitted diseases, has been very successful when applied consistently.
In the Code of Hammurabi, provisions were found that addressed inheritance rights of women, including female prostitutes.
Over the course of the Middle Ages, popes and religious communities made various attempts to remove prostitution or reform prostitutes, with varying success.
These slang terms are used among both prostitutes and law enforcement for persons who solicit prostitutes.
The oiran were considered a type of  "woman of pleasure" or prostitute.
The word ''prostitute'' was then carried down through various languages to the present-day Western society.
Prevalent in the late 1990s, this type of service has been steadily declining in recent years.
The most common destinations for victims of human trafficking are Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the US, according to a report by the UNODC (UN Office on Drugs and Crime).
Lack of condom use among prostitutes and their clients has been cited as a factor in the spread of HIV in Asia: "One of the main reasons for the rapid spread of HIV in Asian countries is the massive transmission among sex workers and clients".
Virtual sex, that is, sexual acts conveyed by messages rather than physically, is also the subject of commercial transactions.
It has been estimated that successful implementation of safe sex practices in India "would drive the HIV epidemic to extinction" while similar measures could achieve a 50% reduction in Botswana.
Beginning in the late 1980s, many states in the US increased the penalties for prostitution in cases where the prostitute is knowingly HIV-positive.
the County of London had 80,000 prostitutes and that 1 house in 60 was serving as a brothel.
For example, the law that "forbid brothel keepers from beating them."
A fourteenth-century English tract, Fasciculus Morum, states that the term prostitute (termed 'meretrix' in this document), "must be applied only to those women who give themselves to anyone and will refuse none, and that for monetary gain".
Other names for brothels include ''bordello'', ''whorehouse'', ''cathouse'', ''knocking shop'', and ''general houses''.
The ''Online Etymology Dictionary'' states, "The notion of 'sex for hire' is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one 'exposed to lust' or sex 'indiscriminately offered.'"
In Australia the lead sex worker rights organisation is Scarlet Alliance.
In Australia, a survey conducted in the early 2000s showed that 15.6% of men aged 16–59 reported paying for sex at least once in their life, and 1.9% had done so in the past year.
Meaning that without prostitutes to subvert male tendencies, men would go after innocent women instead, thus the prostitutes were actually doing society a favor.
Prostitution also occurs in some massage parlours, and in Asian countries in some barber shops where sexual services may be offered as a secondary function of the premises.
They were the queens of the demons Lilith, Naamah, Agrat Bat Mahlat and Eisheth Zenunim.
During the British East India Company's rule in India in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, it was initially fairly common for British soldiers to engage in inter-ethnic prostitution in India, where they frequently visited local Indian ''nautch'' dancers.
The prostitute was considered a "whore … who was available for the lust of many men," and was most closely associated with promiscuity.
Some think that the first two measures are counter-productive.
There are about 42 million prostitutes in the world, living all over the world (though most of Central Asia, the Middle East and Africa lacks data, studied countries in that large region rank as top sex tourism destinations).
They were required to wear distinctive dresses and had to pay taxes.
Sex trafficking has been described by Kul Gautum, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, as "the largest slave trade in history."
Prostitutes were only allowed to practice their trade in the brothel in which they worked.
Women who became prostitutes often did not have the familial ties or means to protect themselves from the lure of prostitution, and it has been recorded on several occasions that mothers would be charged with prostituting their own daughters in exchange for extra money.
Medieval civilians accepted without question the fact of prostitution, it was necessary part of medieval life.
The client selects a prostitute, whom he takes away in his car.
The United Nations stated in 2009 that sex trafficking is the most commonly identified form of human trafficking and estimates that about 79% of human trafficking reported is for prostitution (although the study notes that this may be the result of statistical bias and that sex trafficking tends to receive the most attention and be the most visible).
The English word ''whore'' derives from the Old English word ''hōra'', from the Proto-Germanic ''*hōrōn'' (prostitute), which derives from the Proto-Indo-European root ''*keh₂-'' meaning "desire", a root which has also given us Latin ''cārus'' (dear), whence the French ''cher'' (dear, expensive) and the Latin ''cāritās'' (love, charity).
The Ottoman texts describe who they were, their prices, how many times they could bring their customers to orgasm, and the details of their sexual practices.
A variety of terms are used for those who engage in prostitution, some of which distinguish between different types of prostitution or imply a value judgment about them.
These online forums are used to trade information between potential clients, and also by prostitutes to advertise the various services available.
In the United States, the homicide rate for female prostitutes was estimated to be 204 per 100,000.
In 2012, the Global Commission on HIV and the Law, which was convened by Ban Ki-moon, and which is an independent body, established at the request of the UNAIDS, and supported by a Secretariat based at the UNDP, reached the same conclusions, also recommending decriminalization of brothels and procuring.
They contributed to music, dance, theatre, film, and the Urdu literary tradition.
Throughout the Middle Ages the definition of a prostitute has been ambiguous, with various secular and canonical organizations defining prostitution in constantly evolving terms.
Currently, in most of these countries most prostitutes are immigrants, mainly from Eastern and Central Europe; in Spain and Italy 90% of prostitutes are estimated to be migrants, in Austria 78%, in Switzerland 75%, in Greece 73%, in Norway 70% (according to a 2009 TAMPEP report, ''Sex Work in Europe-A mapping of the prostitution scene in 25 European countries'').
Some remain in apartments which have hints or clues outside such as posters with "model" written on them to lure potential customers inside.
Around the twelfth century, the idea of prostitute saints took hold, with Mary Magdalene being one of the most popular saints of the era.
Prostitutes subverted the sexual tendencies of male youth, just by existing.
They were originally known as toruko-buro, meaning Turkish bath.
Sunni Muslims, who make up the majority of Muslims worldwide, believe the practice of fixed-term marriage was abrogated and ultimately forbidden by either Muhammad, or one of his successors, Umar.
According to social activists, the steroid can cause diabetes, high blood pressure and is highly addictive.
As opposed to regular sex tourism, which is often legal, a tourist who has sex with a child prostitute will usually be committing a crime in the host country, under the laws of his own country (notwithstanding him being outside of it) and against international law.
On the other hand, prostitution generated much national revenue in South Korea, hence military government encouraged the Prostitution for the U.S. military.
Government-sponsored research completed in 2006, approximately 800,000 people are trafficked across national borders, which does not include millions trafficked within their own countries.
Prices may further depend on demand; popular, high-end prostitutes can earn significant amounts of money (upwards of $5,000 per client), and virgins may receive even higher payments.
Some rich clients may pay for long-term contracts that may last for years.
Prostitutes will often proposition truckers using a CB radio from a vehicle parked in the non-commercial section of a truck stop parking lot, communicating through codes based on commercial driving slang, then join the driver in his truck.
This over-the-counter steroid, usually used by farmers to fatten cattle, makes child prostitutes look larger and older.
Furthermore, in both urban and rural areas of society, women who did not live under the rule of male authority were more likely to be suspected of prostitution that their oppressed counterparts because of the fear of women who did not fit into a stereotypical category outside of marriage or religious life.
Often they are kidnapped or orphaned, and sometimes they are sold by their own families.
One prostitute stands by a roadside, and directs cars to a so-called "tochka" (usually located in alleyways or carparks), where lines of women are paraded for customers in front of their car headlights.
However, brothel regulations also hindered prostitutes' lives by forbidding them from having "lovers other than their customers" or from having a favored customer.
In 2003, it was estimated that in Amsterdam, one woman in 35 was working as a prostitute, compared to one in 300 in London.
Another, however, believes that legalizing and regulating prostitution does not improve the situation, but instead makes it worse, creating a parallel illegal prostitution industry, and failing to dissociate the legal part of the sex trade from crime.
Common alternatives for ''prostitute'' include ''escort'' and ''whore''; however, not all professional escorts are prostitutes.
* educating prostitutes and their clients to encourage the use of barrier contraception and greater interaction with health care
One view maintains that this results from prostitution being stigmatized or illegal, or both.
Due in part to the illegal and underground nature of sex trafficking, the actual extent of women and children forced into prostitution is unknown.
Although brothels were still present in most cities and urban centers, and could range from private bordelages run by a procuress from her home to public baths and centers established by municipal legislation, the only centers for prostitution legally allowed were the institutionalized and publicly funded brothels.
Some sources cite the verb as a composition of "''pro''" meaning "up front" or "forward" and "''situere''", defined as "to offer up for sale".
One of the sources for the spread of HIV in Africa is prostitution, with one study finding that encounters with prostitutes produced 84% of new HIV infections in adult males in Accra, Ghana.
The BBC wrote in 2007 that devadasis are "sanctified prostitutes".
Thailand, Cambodia, India, Brazil and Mexico have been identified as leading hotspots of child sexual exploitation.
A difficulty facing migrant prostitutes in many developed countries is the illegal residence status of some of these women.
Charities say that 90% of prostitutes in the country's legalized brothels use the drug.
Some jurisdictions outlaw the act of prostitution (the exchange of sexual services for money); other countries do not prohibit prostitution itself, but ban the activities typically associated with it (soliciting in a public place, operating a brothel, pimping etc.
While this law did not criminalise the act of prostitution in the United Kingdom itself, it prohibited such activities as running a brothel.
Prostitution is sometimes described as '''commercial sex''' or '''hooking'''.
According to a 2012 report by ''Fondation Scelles'' there are between 40 and 42 million prostitutes in the world.
