The largest Baptist association is the Southern Baptist Convention, with the membership of associated churches totaling more than 15&nbsp;million.
Many of their families contributed to the development of intellectual elites in their countries.
Protestants can be differentiated according to how they have been influenced by important movements since the Reformation, today regarded as branches.
The members of a congregation had the right to elect a minister and, if necessary, to vote for his dismissal (Treatise ''On the right and authority of a Christian assembly or congregation to judge all doctrines and to call, install and dismiss teachers, as testified in Scripture''; 1523).
It is one of the three major divisions of Christendom, together with Roman Catholicism and Orthodoxy.
Episcopalians and Presbyterians, as well as other WASPs, tend to be considerably wealthier and better educated (having graduate and post-graduate degrees per capita) than most other religious groups in United States, and are disproportionately represented in the upper reaches of American business, law and politics, especially the Republican Party.
Since the term "magister" also means "teacher", the Magisterial Reformation is also characterized by an emphasis on the authority of a teacher.
Some Protestant denominations do have a worldwide scope and distribution of membership, while others are confined to a single country.
After 1820, membership rose rapidly among Baptist and Methodist congregations, whose preachers led the movement.
Evangelicalism is a prominent example.
File:Methodist Central Hall.JPG|Methodist Central Hall Westminster in City of Westminster, London, United Kingdom.
Therefore, Protestants desiring full communion with the Catholic Church are not re-baptized (although they are confirmed) and Protestant ministers who become Catholics may be ordained to the priesthood after a period of study.
The movement has encouraged the examination of the whole Bible, leading Seventh-day Adventists and some smaller Adventist groups to observe the Sabbath.
Because ''sola scriptura'' placed the Bible as the only source of teaching, ''sola fide'' epitomises the main thrust of the teaching the reformers wanted to get back to, namely the direct, close, personal connection between Christ and the believer, hence the reformers' contention that their work was Christocentric.
Unlike many other groups that emerged within Christianity, the Religious Society of Friends has actively tried to avoid creeds and hierarchical structures.
While it has since undergone many revisions and Anglican churches in different countries have developed other service books, the Book of Common Prayer is still acknowledged as one of the ties that bind the Anglican Communion together.
The second main principle, ''sola fide'' (by faith alone), states that faith in Christ is sufficient alone for eternal salvation.
Neo-charismatic churches are sometimes regarded as a subgroup of the Charismatic Movement.
Diverse from their beginning, those identifying as Baptists today differ widely from one another in what they believe, how they worship, their attitudes toward other Christians, and their understanding of what is important in Christian discipleship.
United States remains particularly religious in comparison to other developed countries.
Many consider the theological differences to be crucial differences in doctrine, while others find them to be relatively minor.
Modernism and liberalism do not constitute rigorous and well-defined schools of theology, but are rather an inclination by some writers and teachers to integrate Christian thought into the spirit of the Age of Enlightenment.
Although the Reformation was a religious movement, it also had a strong impact on all other aspects of life: marriage and family, education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy, and the arts.
The chart below shows the mutual relations and historical origins of the main interdenominational movements and other developments within Protestantism.
The United Nations Declaration and Universal Declaration of Human Rights also echo the American constitutional tradition.
According to Mark Jürgensmeyer of the University of California, popular Protestantism is the most dynamic religious movement in the contemporary world, alongside the resurgent Islam.
Generally, however, Reformed charismatics distance themselves from renewal movements with tendencies which could be perceived as overemotional, such as Word of Faith, Toronto Blessing, Brownsville Revival and Lakeland Revival.
Arminianism is known to some as a soteriological diversification of  Calvinism.
One of the central points of divergence was controversy over the Eucharist.
In this way, the economy, the sciences, and technology reinforced each other.
: All glory is due to God alone since salvation is accomplished solely through his will and action—not only the gift of the all-sufficient atonement of Jesus on the cross but also the gift of faith in that atonement, created in the heart of the believer by the Holy Spirit.
They founded most of the country's leading institutes of higher education.
Hussites defeated five continuous crusades proclaimed against them by the Pope.
It was made possible by a revolution against French hegemony under the regime of the regent Mary of Guise, who had governed Scotland in the name of her absent daughter.
The First Great Awakening was an evangelical and revitalization movement that swept through Protestant Europe and British America, especially the American colonies in the 1730s and 1740s, leaving a permanent impact on American Protestantism.
In the United Kingdom, Colin Urquhart, Michael Harper, David Watson and others were in the vanguard of similar developments.
File:First_Congregational_Church,_Cheshire_CT.jpg|A Congregational church in Cheshire, Connecticut, United States.
Much of the growth has occurred after World War II, when decolonization of Africa and abolition of various restrictions against Protestants in Latin American countries occurred.
The reformers posited that salvation is a gift of God (i.e., God's act of free grace), dispensed by the Holy Spirit owing to the redemptive work of Jesus Christ alone.
According to the Merton Thesis, there was a positive correlation between the rise of English Puritanism and German Pietism on the one hand and early experimental science on the other.
Later in history, Schwarzenau Brethren, Bruderhof, and the Apostolic Christian Church would emerge in Anabaptist circles.
Originally it appealed especially to workers, agricultural workers, and slaves.
On 31 October 1517, Martin Luther supposedly nailed his 95 theses against the selling of indulgences at the door of the All Saints', the Castle Church in Wittenberg.
The two systems of Calvinism and Arminianism share both history and many doctrines, and the history of Christian theology.
The English word ''evangelical'' usually refers to Evangelical Protestant churches, and therefore not to Protestantism as a whole.
The chance to participate in the economic success of technological inventions was a strong incentive to both inventors and investors.
He was excommunicated and burned at the stake in Constance, Bishopric of Constance in 1415 by secular authorities for unrepentant and persistent heresy.
Later on, Martin Luther himself read some of the friar's writings and praised him as a martyr and forerunner whose ideas on faith and grace anticipated Luther's own doctrine of justification by faith alone.
He also founded the Red Cross.
There are over 279 million Pentecostals worldwide, and the movement is growing in many parts of the world, especially the global South.
This predominantly religious movement was propelled by social issues and strengthened Czech national awareness.
Merton focused on English Puritanism and German Pietism as having been responsible for the development of the scientific revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries.
There were two separate parties among the Hussites: moderate and radical movements.
The faith continued to spread after Calvin's death in 1563.
These Congregationalists were convinced that the democratic form of government was the will of God.
The Fourth Great Awakening was a Christian religious awakening that some scholars—most notably, Robert Fogel—say took place in the United States in the late 1960s and early 1970s, while others look at the era following World War II.
These Lockean ideas were fundamental to the United States Declaration of Independence, which also deduced human rights from the biblical belief in creation: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness."
File:James and Ellen White.jpg|James Springer White and his wife, Ellen G. White founded the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
Both are put under a common label of Charismatic Christianity (so-called ''Renewalists''), along with Pentecostals.
As a result of their views on the nature of baptism and other issues, Anabaptists were heavily persecuted during the 16th century and into the 17th by both Magisterial Protestants and Roman Catholics.
The Global Value Development Index, calculated by Tausch, relies on the World Values Survey dimensions such as trust in the state of law, no support for shadow economy, postmaterial activism, support for democracy, a non-acceptance of violence, xenophobia and racism, trust in transnational capital and Universities, confidence in the market economy, supporting gender justice, and engaging in environmental activism, etc.
John Knox is regarded as the leader of the Scottish Reformation.
Toward the end of the 20th century, some have tended to confuse evangelicalism and fundamentalism, however the labels represent very distinct differences of approach that both groups are diligent to maintain, although because of fundamentalism's dramatically smaller size it often gets classified simply as an ultra-conservative branch of evangelicalism.
The largest church within the movement—the Seventh-day Adventist Church—has more than 18 million members.
For example, the Puritans who established Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1628 founded Harvard College only eight years later.
He rejected papal authority over secular power, translated the Bible into vernacular English, and preached anticlerical and biblically-centred reforms.
The name refers to belief in the imminent Second Coming (or "Second Advent") of Jesus Christ.
Nowadays, this word is still preferred among some of the historical Protestant denominations in the Lutheran and Calvinist traditions in Europe, and those with strong ties to them (e.g.
In 1534, King Henry VIII put an end to all papal jurisdiction in England, after the Pope failed to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon; this opened the door to reformational ideas.
This movement is cross-denominational and the most notable exponent in the movement is United Methodist theologian Thomas Oden.
In order to justify their departure from the Roman Catholic Church, Protestants often posited a new argument, saying that there was no real visible Church with divine authority, only a ''spiritual, invisible, and hidden church''—this notion began in the early days of the Protestant Reformation.
Members of mainline Protestant denominations have played leadership roles in many aspects of American life, including politics, business, science, the arts, and education.
It is opposed to the hierarchical system which puts the essence and authority of the Church in an exclusive priesthood, and makes ordained priests the necessary mediators between God and the people.
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 194-0798-29, Düsseldorf, Veranstaltung mit Billy Graham.jpg|Billy Graham, a prominent evangelical revivalist, preaching in Duisburg, Germany in 1954.
Wherever the Magisterial Reformation, which received support from the ruling authorities, took place, the result was a reformed national Protestant church envisioned to be a part of the whole ''invisible church'', but disagreeing, in certain important points of doctrine and doctrine-linked practice, with what had until then been considered the normative reference point on such matters, namely the Papacy and central authority of the Roman Catholic Church.
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the American democracy became a model for numerous other countries and regions throughout the world (e.g., Latin America, Japan, and Germany).
Thus a cultural climate was created that greatly enhanced the development of the humanities and the sciences.
Among leaders and major figures of the Evangelical Protestant movement were John Wesley, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, Billy Graham, Harold John Ockenga, John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-Jones.
Although the two movements agreed on many issues of theology, some unresolved differences kept them separate.
Protestant ecclesial leaders such as Hubmaier and Hofmann preached the invalidity of infant baptism, advocating baptism as following conversion ("believer's baptism") instead.
Early Protestants rejected the Roman Catholic dogma of transubstantiation, which teaches that the bread and wine used in the sacrificial rite of the Mass lose their natural substance by being transformed into the body, blood, soul, and divinity of Christ.
After his execution, a revolt erupted.
Among Protestants, the movement began around 1960.
The next generation of Lutheran charismatics cluster around the Alliance of Renewal Churches.
Even though Martin Luther himself insisted on ''Christian'' or ''Evangelical'' as the only acceptable names for individuals who professed Christ.
The Charismatic movement is the international trend of historically mainstream congregations adopting beliefs and practices similar to Pentecostals.
Some inspired the current transdenominational ones, such as Evangelicalism which has its foundation in the Christian fundamentalism.
Dutch Arminianism was originally articulated in the Remonstrance (1610), a theological statement signed by 45 ministers and submitted to the States General of the Netherlands.
;Scripture alone: The belief in the Bible as the highest source of authority for the church.
Luther's translation of the Bible into German was a decisive moment in the spread of literacy, and stimulated as well the printing and distribution of religious books and pamphlets.
They formed, and identified with various religious groups advocating greater purity of worship and doctrine, as well as personal and group piety.
Protestantism as a general term is now used in contradistinction to the other major Christian traditions, i.e.
Following the excommunication of Luther and condemnation of the Reformation by the Pope, the work and writings of John Calvin were influential in establishing a loose consensus among various groups in Switzerland, Scotland, Hungary, Germany and elsewhere.
A majority of Protestants are members of just a handful of denominational families:  Adventism, Anglicanism, Baptist churches, Reformed churches, Lutheranism, Methodism,  and Pentecostalism.
The most contentious idea at the time though was the notion that anyone could simply pick up the Bible and learn enough to gain salvation.
In the nineteenth century, throughout the Anglo-American world, numerous dedicated members of all Protestant denominations were active in social reform movements such as the abolition of slavery, prison reforms, and woman suffrage.
The movement is more divided theologically and ecclesiastically than either Eastern Orthodoxy or Roman Catholicism, lacking both structural unity and central human authority.
They largely adopted Sabbatarianism in the 17th century, and were influenced by millennialism.
Colleges and universities were founded.
Baptist churches are widely considered to be Protestant churches, though some Baptists disavow this identity.
Almost as many lived in each of Nigeria and China as in all of Europe.
In the post–World War II era, the trend began to swing back towards the conservative camp in America's seminaries and church structures.
File:John.Cotton.cropped.jpg|John Cotton, who sparked the Antinomian Controversy with his free grace theology
All major Protestant churches were represented in the First and Second Continental Congresses.
File:Wilberforce john rising.jpg|William Wilberforce, a British evangelical abolitionist.
The Magisterial reformers, such as Martin Luther, John Calvin, and Huldrych Zwingli, believed that they were reforming the Roman Catholic Church, which they viewed as having become corrupted.
A Protestant baptism is held to be valid by the Catholic Church if given with the trinitarian formula and with the intent to baptize.
Because of their authority, they were often criticized by Radical Reformers as being too much like the Roman Popes.
The Church of England declared its independence from the Catholic Church at the time of the Elizabethan Religious Settlement.
New groupings emerged, such as the Holiness, Nazarene, and Christian Science movements.
Radical Reformer, Andreas von Bodenstein Karlstadt, for example, referred to the Lutheran theologians at Wittenberg as the "new papists".
According to ''Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States'' by Harriet Zuckerman, a review of American Nobel prizes awarded between 1901 and 1972, 72% of American Nobel Prize laureates identified a Protestant background.
The General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists has compiled that church's core beliefs in the 28 Fundamental Beliefs (1980 and 2005), which use Biblical references as justification.
They disagreed with one another concerning the presence of Christ and his body and blood in Holy Communion.
Protestant values encouraged scientific research by allowing science to identify God's influence on the world—his creation—and thus providing a religious justification for scientific research.
God earnestly offers to all who receive the sacrament, forgiveness of sins, and eternal salvation.
It granted asylum to philosophers like Baruch Spinoza and Pierre Bayle.
The German Prince Philip of Hesse saw potential in creating an alliance between Zwingli and Luther.
With its origins in Germany, the modern movement is popularly considered to have begun in 1517 when Luther published his Ninety-Five Theses as a reaction against abuses in the sale of indulgences, which purported to offer remission of sin to their purchasers.
French Protestantism came to acquire a distinctly political character, made all the more obvious by the conversions of nobles during the 1550s.
Charismatic Lutheran congregations in Minnesota became especially large and influential; especially "Hosanna!"
File:Melanchthon-tauft.jpg|Philip Melanchthon, the co-founder of Lutheranism, baptizing an infant.
They include those with evangelical, holiness, liberal, and traditional conservative Quaker understandings of Christianity.
The theses debated and criticised the Church and the papacy, but concentrated upon the selling of indulgences and doctrinal policies about purgatory, particular judgment, and the authority of the pope.
Other tenets of Baptist churches include soul competency (liberty), salvation through faith alone, Scripture alone as the rule of faith and practice, and the autonomy of the local congregation.
The wars only concluded when Henry IV of France issued the Edict of Nantes, promising official toleration of the Protestant minority, but under highly restricted conditions.
Though the reformers were concerned with ecclesiology (the doctrine of how the church as a body works), they had a different understanding of the process in which truths in scripture were applied to life of believers, compared to the Catholics' idea that certain people within the church, or ideas that were old enough, had a special status in giving understanding of the text.
In the late 17th century many Huguenots fled to England, the Netherlands, Prussia, Switzerland, and the English and Dutch overseas colonies.
Although the group refused for many years to take any denominational name to itself—a stance that some of them still maintain—the title ''The Brethren'', is one that many of their number are comfortable with in that the Bible designates all believers as ''brethren''.
The Protestant movement began to diverge into several distinct branches in the mid-to-late 16th century.
The early Anabaptists believed that their reformation must purify not only theology but also the actual lives of Christians, especially their political and social relationships.
: The Protestants characterize the dogma concerning the Pope as Christ's representative head of the Church on earth, the concept of works made meritorious by Christ, and the Catholic idea of a treasury of the merits of Christ and his saints, as a denial that Christ is the ''only'' mediator between God and man.
Today there is a growing movement of Protestants, especially of the Reformed tradition, that either reject or down-play the designation ''Protestant'' because of the negative idea that the word invokes in addition to its primary meaning, preferring the designation ''Reformed'', ''Evangelical'' or even ''Reformed Catholic'' expressive of what they call a ''Reformed Catholicity'' and defending their arguments from the traditional Protestant confessions.
Various estimates put the percentage of Protestants in relation to the total number of world's Christians at 33%, 36%, 36.7%, and 40%, while in relation to the world's population at 11.6% and 13%.
This empowerment includes the use of spiritual gifts such as speaking in tongues and divine healing—two other defining characteristics of Pentecostalism.
Clarke and Beyer estimate that Protestants constituted 15% of all Europeans in 2009, while Noll claims that less than 12% of them lived in Europe in 2010.
Thus he and his followers resisted political absolutism and paved the way for the rise of modern democracy.
Nondenominational, evangelical, charismatic, independent and other churches are on the rise, and constitute a significant part of Protestant Christianity.
With approximately 80 million adherents, it constitutes the third most common Protestant confession after historically Pentecostal denominations and Anglicanism.
File:Worship-team.jpg|A modern Protestant worship band leading a contemporary worship session.
The Plymouth Brethren are a conservative, low church, evangelical movement, whose history can be traced to Dublin, Ireland, in the late 1820s, originating from Anglicanism.
According to ''100 Years of Nobel Prize (2005)'', a review of Nobel prizes awarded between 1901 and 2000, 65.4% of Nobel Prize Laureates, have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference (423 prizes).
Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf were among the first thinkers who made significant contributions to international law.
China is home to world's largest Protestant minority.
As modern Christian ecumenism progresses, unions between various Protestant traditions are becoming more and more common, resulting in a growing number of united and uniting churches.
Around the world, each united or uniting church comprises a different mix of predecessor Protestant denominations.
Pope Innocent X declared the treaty "null, void, invalid, iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all times" in his bull ''Zelo Domus Dei''.
In the United States and elsewhere in the world, there has been a marked rise in the evangelical wing of Protestant denominations, especially those that are more exclusively evangelical, and a corresponding decline in the mainstream liberal churches.
Paleo-orthodoxy is a movement similar in some respects to neo-evangelicalism but emphasizing the ancient Christian consensus of the undivided church of the first millennium AD, including in particular the early creeds and church councils as a means of properly understanding the scriptures.
A meeting was held in his castle in 1529, now known as the Colloquy of Marburg, which has become infamous for its failure.
*All parties would now recognise the Peace of Augsburg of 1555, by which each prince would have the right to determine the religion of his own state, the options being Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism, and now Calvinism.
As a result, productivity grew, which led to increased profits and enabled employers to pay higher wages.
Puritans adopted a Reformed theology, but they also took note of radical criticisms of Zwingli in Zurich and Calvin in Geneva.
Its opposition to the fundamentalist teaching resulted in religious debates, such as the Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy within the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America in the 1920s.
Following a brief Roman Catholic restoration during the reign of Mary I,  a loose consensus developed during the reign of Elizabeth I.
After the expulsion of its Bishop in 1526, and the unsuccessful attempts of the Bern reformer William Farel, Calvin was asked to use the organisational skill he had gathered as a student of law to discipline the city of Geneva.
These reforms were understood by one of those most responsible for them, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, as navigating a middle way between two of the emerging Protestant traditions, namely Lutheranism and Calvinism.
Nonconforming Protestants along with the Protestant refugees from continental Europe were the primary founders of the United States of America.
The United States has the largest concentration of Evangelicals.
bishops), in most Protestant churches.
Larry Christenson, a Lutheran theologian based in San Pedro, California, did much in the 1960s and 1970s to interpret the charismatic movement for Lutherans.
in Lakeville, and North Heights in St. Paul.
Australia, New Zealand, and India.
The French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was mainly based on Lafayette's draft of this document.
The necessity and inerrancy were well-established ideas, garnering little criticism, though they later came under debate from outside during the Enlightenment.
It was affiliated with the Social Gospel Movement, which applied Christianity to social issues and gained its force from the Awakening, as did the worldwide missionary movement.
Jurisdictions where a Protestant denomination has been established as a state religion include several Nordic countries; Denmark (including Greenland), the Faroe Islands (its church being independent since 2007), Iceland and Norway have established Evangelical Lutheran churches.
Therefore, the church should not be supported by the state, neither by tithes and taxes, nor by the use of the sword; Christianity was a matter of individual conviction, which could not be forced on anyone, but rather required a personal decision for it.
The Reformation in Scotland culminated ecclesiastically in the establishment of a church along Reformed lines, and politically in the triumph of English influence over that of France.
Broadly speaking, Calvinism stresses the sovereignty or rule of God in all things—in salvation but also in all of life.
In European countries which were most profoundly influenced by the Reformation, Protestantism still remains the most practiced religion.
File:Roger Williams statue by Franklin Simmons.jpg|Roger Williams was an early proponent of religious freedom and the separation of church and state.
Historians trace the earliest church labeled ''Baptist'' back to 1609 in Amsterdam, with English Separatist John Smyth as its pastor.
By the middle of the eighteenth century, the literacy rate in England was about 60 per cent, in Scotland 65 per cent, and in Sweden eight of ten men and women were able to read and to write.
The central unifying doctrine of these movements is the priesthood of all believers.
In 1869, Finland was the first Nordic country to disestablish its Evangelical Lutheran church by introducing the Church Act.
There are also ecumenical bodies at regional, national and local levels across the globe; but schisms still far outnumber unifications.
For Christians, this event commemorates the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the followers of Jesus Christ, as described in the second chapter of the Book of Acts.
File:Der breite und der schmale Weg 2008.jpg|''The Broad and the Narrow Way'', a popular German Pietist painting, 1866.
Over the last several decades, religious practice has been declining as secularization has increased.
The Hussite Wars concluded with the victory of Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, his Catholic allies and moderate Hussites and the defeat of the radical Hussites.
Martin Luther separated the religious and the worldly realms in principle (doctrine of the two kingdoms).
This system was taken over by the other reformed churches.
Among present-day Christians, Hussite traditions are represented in the Moravian Church, Unity of the Brethren, and the refounded Czechoslovak Hussite churches.
The Second Great Awakening in the South in the early 19th century increased church membership, as did the preachers' lessening of support for abolition and manumission of slavery, which had been part of the 18th-century teachings.
Later, the British took their democratic ideals to their colonies, e.g.
Collectively encompassing more than 900 million adherents, or nearly forty percent of Christians worldwide, Protestantism is present on all populated continents.
About a dozen other colleges followed in the 18th century, including Yale (1701).
File:NorthRidge megachurch Plymouth Michigan.JPG|NorthRidge megachurch in Plymouth, Michigan.
He would later write works on the Catholic devotion to Virgin Mary, the intercession of and devotion to the saints, the sacraments, mandatory clerical celibacy, monasticism, further on the authority of the pope, the ecclesiastical law, censure and excommunication, the role of secular rulers in religious matters, the relationship between Christianity and the law, good works, and the sacraments.
Puritans were blocked from changing the established church from within, and were severely restricted in England by laws controlling the practice of religion.
Pentecostalism eventually spawned hundreds of new denominations, including large groups such as the Assemblies of God and the Church of God in Christ, both in the United States and elsewhere.
Starting in 1475, an Italian Dominican friar Girolamo Savonarola was calling for a Christian renewal.
In 1814, Le Réveil swept through Calvinist regions in Switzerland and France.
Protestants reject the Roman Catholic Church's doctrine that it is the one true church, believing in the ''invisible church'', which consists of all who profess faith in Jesus Christ.
The believers were obliged to use reason to govern the worldly sphere in an orderly and peaceful way.
Methodism is known for its rich musical tradition; John Wesley's brother, Charles, was instrumental in writing much of the hymnody of the Methodist Church, and many other eminent hymn writers come from the Methodist tradition.
Reformed churches were founded primarily in Germany and its adjacent regions, Hungary, the Netherlands, Scotland, Switzerland and France by such reformers as John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli, and John Knox.
A noteworthy development in 20th-century Protestant Christianity was the rise of the modern Pentecostal movement.
Some of Hus' followers founded the Unitas Fratrum—"Unity of the Brethren"—which was renewed under the leadership of Count Nicolaus von Zinzendorf in Herrnhut, Saxony in 1722 after its almost total destruction in the Thirty Years' War and the Counter-Reformation.
