Reformers made heavy use of inexpensive pamphlets as well as vernacular bibles using the relatively new printing press, so there was swift movement of both ideas and documents.
The Reformation was a triumph of literacy and the new printing press.
Some Protestants left Italy and became outstanding activists of the European Reformation, mainly in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth (e.g.
The spread of Gutenberg's printing press provided the means for the rapid dissemination of religious materials in the vernacular.
His wife, Catherine of Aragon, bore him only a single child that survived infancy, Mary.
Finally, in 1717, the Silent Sejm banned non-Catholics from becoming deputies of the Parliament.
Until the 1960s, historians focused their attention largely on the great leaders and theologians of the 16th century, especially Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli.
In general, Northern Europe, with the exception of most of Ireland, came under the influence of Protestantism.
Luther strengthened his attacks on Rome by depicting a "good" against "bad" church.
Calvinism was less successful.
Despite the removal of the ban, it wouldn't be until the middle of the 19th century that Christmas would become a popular holiday in the Boston region.
Especially effective were writings in German, including Luther's translation of the Bible, his Smaller Catechism for parents teaching their children, and his Larger Catechism, for pastors.
The Reformation foundations engaged with Augustinianism; both Luther and Calvin thought along lines linked with the theological teachings of Augustine of Hippo.
In the more independent northwest the rulers and priests, protected now by the Habsburg Monarchy, which had taken the field to fight the Turks, defended the old Roman Catholic faith.
In the course of this religious upheaval, the German Peasants' War of 1524–1525 swept through the Bavarian, Thuringian and Swabian principalities, including the Black Company of Florian Geier, a knight from Giebelstadt who joined the peasants in the general outrage against the Roman Catholic hierarchy.
She finds, "in contemporary scholarship, the Reformation is now seen as a vast cultural upheaval, a social and popular movement, textured and rich because of its diversity."
When Henry died he was succeeded by his Protestant son Edward VI, who, through his empowered councillors (with the King being only nine years old at his succession and fifteen at his death) the Duke of Somerset and the Duke of Northumberland, ordered the destruction of images in churches, and the closing of the chantries.
Pope Alexander VI (1492–1503) was one of the most controversial of the Renaissance popes.
Protestant teachings were smuggled into Spain by Spaniards such as Julián Hernández, who in 1557 was condemned by the Inquisition and burnt at the stake.
Luther's translation of the Bible into German was a decisive moment in the spread of literacy, and stimulated as well the printing and distribution of religious books and pamphlets.
Though not personally interested in religious reform, Francis I (reigned 1515–1547) initially maintained an attitude of tolerance, in accordance with his interest in the humanist movement.
The new movement influenced the Church of England decisively after 1547 under Edward VI and Elizabeth I, although the Church of England had been made independent under Henry VIII in the early 1530s for political rather than religious reasons.
After establishing a colony at Plymouth (which became part of the colony of Massachusetts) in 1620, the Puritan pilgrims received a charter from the King of England that legitimised their colony, allowing them to do trade and commerce with merchants in England, in accordance with the principles of mercantilism.
There was also a growing party of reformers who were imbued with the Calvinistic, Lutheran and Zwinglian doctrines now current on the Continent.
Zwingli countered this saying that ''est'' in that context was the equivalent of the word ''significant'' (signifies).
Both Luther and Calvin thought along lines linked with the theological teachings of Augustine of Hippo.
Spain had a different political and cultural milieu from its Western and Central European neighbors in several aspects during the early 16th century, and these unique aspects affected the mentality and the reaction of the nation towards the Protestant Reformation.
Other Protestant movements grew up along lines of mysticism or humanism, sometimes breaking from Rome or from the Protestants, or forming outside of the churches.
The most famous emigration to America was the migration of Puritan separatists from the Anglican Church of England.
Under Edward VI the Church of England moved closer to continental Protestantism.
Henry had once been a sincere Roman Catholic and had even authored a book strongly criticising Luther, but he later found it expedient and profitable to break with the Papacy.
A significant community in France remained in the Cévennes region.
During his reign, Lutheranism made significant inroads among the Danish population.
Reform writers used pre-Reformation styles, clichés and stereotypes and changed items as needed for their own purposes.
Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472–1553), the great painter patronised by the electors of Wittenberg, was a close friend of Luther, and he illustrated Luther's theology for a popular audience.
Hus rejected indulgences and adopted a doctrine of justification by grace through faith alone.
Not only was the Church highly aggressive in seeking out heresy and suppressing it, but there was a shortage of Protestant leadership.
Although there had been significant earlier attempts to reform the Roman Catholic Church before Luther – such as those of Jan Hus, Peter Waldo, and John Wycliffe – Martin Luther is widely acknowledged to have started the Reformation with his 1517 work ''The Ninety-Five Theses''.
The compromise was uneasy and was capable of veering between extreme Calvinism on the one hand and Roman Catholicism on the other, but compared to the bloody and chaotic state of affairs in contemporary France, it was relatively successful in part because Queen Elizabeth lived so long, until the Puritan Revolution or English Civil War in the 17th century.
After the establishment of the Geneva academy in 1559, Geneva became the unofficial capital of the Protestant movement, providing refuge for Protestant exiles from all over Europe and educating them as Calvinist missionaries.
* All parties would now recognise the Peace of Augsburg of 1555, by which each prince would have the right to determine the religion of his own state, the options being Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism, and now Calvinism (the principle of ''cuius regio, eius religio'')
One such movement was Pietism, which impacted the Low Countries (hence the Reformed churches), Germany (hence also Lutheranism), and Great Britain, which led to a split in Anglicanism and which brought about the creation of some new churches (most notably Methodism).
Following a brief Roman Catholic restoration during the reign of Mary 1553–1558, a loose consensus developed during the reign of Elizabeth I, though this point is one of considerable debate among historians.
The Reformation in Ireland was a movement for the reform of religious life and institutions that was introduced into Ireland by the English administration at the behest of King Henry VIII of England.
Meanwhile, other reform movements continued to spring up, even within the Reformation churches.
Historians began to concentrate on the values, beliefs and behavior of the people at large.
In Switzerland, the teachings of the reformers and especially those of Zwingli and Calvin had a profound effect, despite the frequent quarrels between the different branches of the Reformation.
The Reformation was thus a media revolution.
Several thousand French Protestants fled the country, most notably John Calvin, who emigrated to Basel in 1535 before eventually settling in Geneva in 1536.
The core motivation behind these changes was theological, though many other factors played a part, including the rise of nationalism, the Western Schism that eroded faith in the Papacy, the perceived corruption of the Roman Curia, the impact of humanism, and the new learning of the Renaissance that questioned much traditional thought.
For the first time since the days of Luther, political and national convictions again outweighed religious convictions in Europe.
This changed in 1534 with the Affair of the Placards.
The Waldensian Church survived in the Western Alps through many persecutions and remains a Protestant church in Italy.
Pope Innocent X declared the treaty "null, void, invalid, iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all times" in his bull ''Zelo Domus Dei''.
The issue of religious faith having been thrown into the arena of politics, Francis came to view the movement as a threat to the kingdom's stability.
Ultimately Pope Clement VII refused the petition; consequently it became necessary for the King to assert his lordship over the Roman Catholic Church in his realm to give legal effect to his wishes.
After the expulsion of its Bishop in 1526, and the unsuccessful attempts of the Berne reformer Guillaume (William) Farel, Calvin was asked to use the organisational skill he had gathered as a student of law to discipline the "fallen city" of Geneva.
This successful, though initially quite difficult, colony strengthened the Protestant presence in America, which had started in the previous decade with the establishment of New Netherlands (the earlier French, Spanish and Portuguese settlements had been Roman Catholic) and became a kind of oasis of spiritual and economic freedom, to which persecuted Protestants and other minorities from the British Isles and Europe (and later, from all over the world) fled to for peace, freedom and opportunity.
One famous incident illustrating this was when radical Zwinglians fried and ate sausages during Lent in Zurich city square by way of protest against the Church teaching of good works.
The Reformation also spread widely throughout Europe over the next few decades.
The Reformation in the Netherlands, unlike in many other countries, was not initiated by the rulers of the Seventeen Provinces, but instead by multiple popular movements, which in turn were bolstered by the arrival of Protestant refugees from other parts of the continent.
Charles V did not wish to see either Spain nor the rest of Habsburg Europe divided, and in the light of a continual threat from the Ottomans, preferred to see the Catholic Church reform itself from within.
These missionaries dispersed Calvinism widely, and formed the French Huguenots in Calvin's own lifetime, as well as causing the conversion of Scotland under the leadership of the cantankerous John Knox in 1560.
During the Thirty Years' War, Royal (Habsburg) Hungary joined the Roman Catholic side, until Transylvania joined the Protestant side.
Luther became so angry that he famously carved into the meeting table in chalk ''Hoc Est Corpus Meum'' – a Biblical quotation from the Last Supper meaning 'This is my body'.
In Koenigsberg, in 1530, a Polish-language edition of Luther's Small Catechism was published.
The 17th century saw a complex struggle between Presbyterianism (particularly the Covenanters) and Episcopalianism.
His desire for an annulment of his marriage was known as the King's Great Matter.
Spanish Protestants that were able to flee the country were to be found in at least a dozen cities in Europe such as Geneva, where some of them embraced Calvinist teachings.
The later Puritan movement, often referred to as dissenters and nonconformists, eventually led to the formation of various reformed denominations.
The next year, following his victory in the Count's War, he became king as Christian III and continued the Reformation of the state church with assistance of Johannes Bugenhagen.
Despite heavy persecution by King Henry II of France (reigned 1547–1559), the Reformed Church of France, largely Calvinist in direction, made steady progress across large sections of the nation, in the urban bourgeoisie and parts of the aristocracy, appealing to people alienated by the obduracy and the complacency of the Catholic establishment.
After this first stage of the Reformation, following the excommunication of Luther and condemnation of the Reformation by the Pope, the work and writings of John Calvin were influential in establishing a loose consensus among various groups in Switzerland, Scotland, Hungary, Germany and elsewhere.
The largest groups were the Lutherans and Calvinists.
Pope Sixtus IV (1471–1484) established the practice of selling indulgences to be applied to the dead, thereby establishing a new stream of revenue with agents across Europe.
Protestants likely formed a majority of Hungary's population at the close of the 16th century, but Counter-Reformation efforts in the 17th century reconverted a majority of the kingdom to Roman Catholicism.
Unlike similar movements for religious reform on the continent of Europe, the various phases of the English Reformation as it developed in Ireland were largely driven by changes in government policy, to which public opinion in England gradually accommodated itself.
The Puritans objected to ornaments and ritual in the churches as idolatrous (vestments, surplices, organs, genuflection), which they castigated as "popish pomp and rags".
Using the German vernacular they expressed the Apostles' Creed in simpler, more personal, Trinitarian language.
From 1517 onward, religious pamphlets flooded Germany and much of Europe.
The Roman Catholic Church officially concluded this debate at the Council of Constance (1414–1417) by condemning Hus, who was executed by burning despite a promise of safe-conduct.
Reformation reached Poland in the 1520s, and quickly gained popularity among mostly German-speaking inhabitants of such major cities as Gdańsk, Toruń and Elbląg.
While the Anabaptist movement enjoyed popularity in the region in the early decades of the Reformation, Calvinism, in the form of the Dutch Reformed Church, became the dominant Protestant faith in the country from the 1560s onward.
Such strong measures only fanned the flames of protest, however.
In 1534, the Act of Supremacy recognized Henry as "the only Supreme Head on earth of the Church of England".
As early as 1521, the Pope had written a letter to the Spanish monarchy warning against allowing the unrest in Northern Europe to be repeated in Spain.
Luther, however, condemned the revolt in writings such as ''Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants''; Zwingli and Luther's ally Philipp Melanchthon also did not condone the uprising.
The Duchy of Prussia, which was a Polish fief, emerged as key center of the movement, with numerous publishing houses issuing not only Bibles, but also catechisms, in German, Polish and Lithuanian.
Luther began by criticizing the selling of indulgences, insisting that the Pope had no authority over purgatory and that the Catholic doctrine of the merits of the saints had no foundation in the gospel.
The ban was revoked in 1681 by Sir Edmund Andros, who also revoked a Puritan ban against festivities on Saturday night.
Between 1530 and 1540  Protestantism in Spain was still able to gain followers clandestinely, and in cities such as Seville and Valladolid adherents would secretly meet at private houses to pray and study the Bible.
Their refusal to endorse completely all of the ritual directions and formulas of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' and the imposition of its liturgical order by legal force and inspection sharpened Puritanism into a definite opposition movement.
The two men could not come to any agreement due to their disputation over one key doctrine.
The period of tolerance ended during the reign of King Sigismund III Vasa, who was under the strong influence of Piotr Skarga and other Jesuits.
The 16th century Commonwealth was unique in Europe, because of widespread tolerance confirmed by the Warsaw Confederation.
Calvin continued to take an interest in the religious affairs of his native land and, from his base in Geneva, beyond the reach of the French kings, regularly trained pastors to lead congregations in France.
The later Protestant Churches generally date their doctrinal separation from the Roman Catholic Church to the 16th century.
Margaret C. Jacob argues that there has been a dramatic shift in the historiography of the Reformation.
Word of the Protestant reformers reached Italy in the 1520s, but never caught on.
In response to the Edict of Fontainebleau, Frederick William I, Elector of Brandenburg declared the Edict of Potsdam (October 1685), giving free passage to Huguenot refugees, and tax-free status to them for ten years.
Radical Reformers, besides forming communities outside state sanction, often employed more extreme doctrinal change, such as the rejection of the tenets of the late antique councils of Nicaea and Chalcedon.
They dragged the Protestants to prison and the stake wherever they could.
Zwinglian and Lutheran ideas had influence with preachers within the regions that the Peasants' War occurred and upon works such as the Twelve Articles.
Lutheranism gained a significant following in Austria to a point where a big part of the population adhered to it, it was concentrated in the eastern half of the present-day Austria.
Reformation did not succeed in Portugal, as similar reasons to Spain prevented it from spreading.
In May 1559 16 Spanish Lutherans were burnt at the stake: 14 were strangled before being burnt, two were burnt alive.
This led to a Counter-Reformation in Spain in the 1530s.
The council did not address the national tensions or the theological tensions stirred up during the previous century and could not prevent schism and the Hussite Wars in Bohemia.
Under the reign of Frederick I (1523–33), Denmark remained officially Roman Catholic.
The Augustinianism of the Reformers struggled against Pelagianism, a heresy that they perceived in the Roman Catholic Church of their day.
The king was given possession of all church property, church appointments required royal approval, the clergy were subject to the civil law, and the "pure Word of God" was to be preached in the churches and taught in the schools – effectively granting official sanction to Lutheran ideas.
Giorgio Biandrata, Bernardino Ochino, Giovanni Alciato, Giovanni Battista Cetis, Fausto Sozzini, Francesco Stancaro and Giovanni Valentino Gentile) who propagated Nontrinitarianism there and were chief instigators of the movement of Polish Brethren.
They fled first to Holland, and then later to America, to establish the English colony of Massachusetts in New England, which later became one of the original United States.
Luxembourg, a part of the Spanish Netherlands, remained Roman Catholic.
In the late 17th century many Huguenots fled to England, the Netherlands, Prussia, Switzerland, and the English and Dutch overseas colonies.
The rulers of the nation stressed political, cultural, and religious unity, and by the time of the Lutheran Reformation the Spanish Inquisition was already 40 years old and had the capability of quickly dealing with any new movement that the Catholic Church perceived or interpreted to be religious heterodoxy.
The reformers saw these practices as evidence of the systemic corruption of the Church's hierarchy, which included the pope.
Although Zwinglianism does hold uncanny resemblance to Lutheranism (it even had its own equivalent of the Ninety-five Theses, called the 67 Conclusions), historians have been unable to prove that Zwingli had any contact with Luther's publications before 1520, and Zwingli himself maintained that he had prevented himself from reading them.
It is this "Elizabethan Religious Settlement" which largely formed Anglicanism into a distinctive church tradition.
Much work in battling Protestantism was done by the well-organised new order of the Jesuits.
There had long been a strong strain of anti-clericalism.
Atrocity and outrage became the defining characteristics of the time, illustrated at their most intense in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of August 1572, when the Roman Catholic party annihilated between 30,000 and 100,000 Huguenots across France.
Czech), having lay people receive communion in both kinds (bread ''and'' wine – that is, in Latin, communio sub utraque specie), married priests, and eliminating indulgences and the idea of Purgatory.
Primož Trubar is notable for consolidating the Slovene language and is considered to be the key figure of Slovenian cultural history and in many aspects a major Slovene historical personality.
In response to papal corruption, particularly the sale of indulgences, Luther wrote ''The Ninety-Five Theses''.
Some historians believe that the era of the Reformation came to a close when Roman Catholic France allied itself, first in secret and later on the battlefields, with Protestant states against the Habsburg dynasty.
Parallel to events in Germany, a movement began in the Swiss Confederation under the leadership of Huldrych Zwingli.
Frederick's son, Christian, was openly Lutheran, which prevented his election to the throne upon his father's death.
Motivating factors in their decision to adopt aspects of the Reformation included the historical rivalry and mistrust between the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic church along with their concerns of Jesuit priests entering Greek lands in their attempts to propagate the teachings of the Counter-Reformation to the Greek populace  He subsequently sponsored Maximos of Gallipoli's translation of the New testament into the Modern Greek language and was published in Geneva in 1638.
It was the rallying point and the battle cry that made the Reformation nearly unassailable.
Hus objected to some of the practices of the Roman Catholic Church and wanted to return the church in Bohemia and Moravia to early Byzantine-inspired practices: liturgy in the language of the people (i.e.
He dramatised Luther's views on the relationship between the Old and New Testaments, while remaining mindful of Luther's careful distinctions about proper and improper uses of visual imagery.
In this act, Protestants denounced the Catholic Mass in placards that appeared across France, even reaching the royal apartments.
The Reformation led to a series of religious wars that culminated in the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648), which devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40% of its population.
In 1565, the Polish Brethren appeared as yet another reformation movement.
The veneration of some saints, certain pilgrimages and some pilgrim shrines were also attacked.
* Christians living in principalities where their denomination was ''not'' the established church were guaranteed the right to practice their faith in public during allotted hours and in private at their will.
The Augustinianism of the reformers struggled against Pelagianism, a heresy that they perceived in the Roman Catholic Church.
The original intent of the colonists was to establish spiritual Puritanism, which had been denied to them in England and the rest of Europe, to engage in peaceful commerce with England and the natives, and to Christianize the peoples of the Americas.
Habsburg monarchy implemented the Counter Reformation and eventually got rid of Protestants, bringing the region back to Roman Catholicism.
Other Protestant movements grew up along the lines of mysticism or humanism (cf.
The English Reformation followed a different course from the Reformation in continental Europe.
He was the key figure of the Protestant Church of the Slovene Lands, as he was its founder and its first superintendent.
There were a series of other successful and unsuccessful anti-Habsburg (requiring equal rights and freedom for all Christian religions) uprisings between 1604 and 1711; the uprisings were usually organised from Transylvania.
Following the excommunication of Luther and condemnation of the Reformation by the Pope, the work and writings of John Calvin were influential in establishing a loose consensus among various groups in Switzerland, Scotland, Hungary, Germany and elsewhere.
But though Frederick initially pledged to persecute Lutherans, he soon adopted a policy of protecting Lutheran preachers and reformers, of whom the most famous was Hans Tausen.
Unrest due to the Great Schism of Western Christianity (1378–1416) excited wars between princes, uprisings among the peasants, and widespread concern over corruption in the Church.
The Pilgrims of New England disapproved of Christmas, and celebration was outlawed in Boston from 1659 to 1681.
Protestants in Spain were estimated at between 1000 and 3000, mainly among intellectuals who had seen writings such as those of Erasmus.
Long-standing resentment between the German states and the Swiss Confederation led to heated debate over how much Zwingli owed his ideas to Lutheranism.
The Reformation foundations engaged with Augustinianism.
Its development was stopped by the Counter-Reformation, the Inquisition and also popular disinterest.
Zwingli, inspired by Dutch theologian Cornelius Hoen, believed that the mass was only representative and memorial – Christ was not present.
New perspectives came from John Wycliffe at Oxford University and from Jan Hus at the Charles University in Prague.
The initial movement within Germany diversified, and other reform impulses arose independently of Luther.
Wycliffe was posthumously condemned as a heretic and his corpse exhumed and burned in 1428.
Among most important Protestants of the Commonwealth, there are such names, as Mikołaj Rej, Marcin Czechowic, Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski and Symon Budny.
The Protestant teachings of the Western Church were also briefly adopted by Eastern Orthodox Church through the Greek Patriarch Cyril Lucaris in 1629 with the publishing of the ''Confessio '' (Calvinistic doctrine) in Geneva.
The desire was for the Church of England to resemble more closely the Protestant churches of Europe, especially Geneva.
From 1618 to 1648 the Roman Catholic House of Habsburg and its allies fought against the Protestant princes of Germany, supported at various times by Denmark, Sweden and France.
Their ideas were studied in depth.
Ten years later, in 1568, the Diet extended this freedom, declaring that "It is not allowed to anybody to intimidate anybody with captivity or expelling for his religion".
Spain, which had only recently managed to reconquer the Peninsula from the Moors in 1492, had been preoccupied with converting the Muslim and Jewish population of the newly conquered regions through the establishment of the Spanish Inquisition in 1478.
The Reformation was born of Luther's dual declaration – first, the discovering of Jesus and salvation by faith alone; and second, identifying the papacy as the Antichrist.
In October another thirty were executed.
Several publishing houses were opened in Lesser Poland in the mid-16th century in such locations as Słomniki and Raków.
The theses debated and criticised the Church and the papacy, but concentrated upon the selling of indulgences and doctrinal policies about purgatory, particular judgment, and the authority of the pope.
The Presbyterians eventually won control of the Church of Scotland, which went on to have an important influence on Presbyterian churches worldwide, but Scotland retained a relatively large Episcopalian minority.
Harsh persecution of Protestants by the Spanish government of Philip II contributed to a desire for independence in the provinces, which led to the Eighty Years' War and, eventually, the separation of the largely Protestant Dutch Republic from the Roman Catholic-dominated Southern Netherlands (present-day Belgium).
A significant Protestant minority remained, most of it adhering to the Calvinist faith.
Southern Europe remained Roman Catholic, while Central Europe was a site of a fierce conflict, culminating in the Thirty Years' War, which left it devastated.
The different character of the English Reformation came rather from the fact that it was driven initially by the political necessities of Henry VIII.
Some followers of Zwingli believed that the Reformation was too conservative and moved independently toward more radical positions, some of which survive among modern day Anabaptists.
The Protestant reformers were unanimous in agreement and this understanding of prophecy furnished importance to their deeds.
These two movements quickly agreed on most issues, but some unresolved differences kept them separate.
Hussites made up the vast majority of the population, and Lutheranism also gained a substantial following.
They especially objected to the teaching and the sale of indulgences, and the abuses thereof, and to simony, the selling and buying of clerical offices.
In 1558 the Transylvanian Diet of Turda declared free practice of both the Catholic and Lutheran religions, but prohibited Calvinism.
Protestants were persecuted under the Habsburg monarchy, which controlled the region and eventually managed to recatholicize it.
However, this treaty did not mean that the Reformation was concluded.
The first books in Slovene, ''Catechismus'' and ''Abecedarium'', were written by Trubar.
A separate Protestant community, of the Lutheran faith, existed in the newly conquered (1639– ) province of Alsace, its status not affected by the Edict of Fontainebleau.
His "Ordinances" of 1541 involved a collaboration of Church affairs with the City council and consistory to bring morality to all areas of life.
Unfortunately, since Calvin and Luther disagreed strongly on certain matters of theology (such as double-predestination and Holy Communion), the relationship between Lutherans and Calvinists was one of conflict.
The spread of Protestantism in the country was aided by its large ethnic German minority, which could understand and translate the writings of Martin Luther.
Lutheran churches were founded mostly in Germany, the Baltics and Scandinavia, while the Reformed ones were founded in Switzerland, Hungary, France, the Netherlands and Scotland.
The vested interest thus created made for a powerful force in support of the dissolutions.
The early ''Puritan movement'' (late 16th–17th centuries) was Reformed or Calvinist and was a movement for reform in the Church of England.
Yet, at a popular level, religion in England was still in a state of flux.
Austria followed the same pattern of the German-speaking states within the Holy Roman Empire, and Lutheranism became the main Protestant confession among its population.
Some 100,000 peasants were killed by the end of the war.
By 1530, over 10,000 publications are known, with a total of ten million copies.
However, a number of factors complicated the adoption of the religious innovations in Ireland; the majority of the population there adhered to the Roman Catholic Church.
This led to the first major phase of anti-Protestant persecution in France, in which the ''Chambre Ardente'' ("Burning Chamber") was established (1535) within the Parlement of Paris to deal with the rise in prosecutions for heresy.
The faith continued to spread after Calvin's death in 1563 and reached as far as Constantinople by the start of the 17th century.
The highly educated Reformation leaders used prophecies of the Bible as their most powerful weapon in appealing to committed believers to break from the church, which they perceived as the new Babylon, and to convince them that the popes were the Antichrist who had assumed the place of God.
Notable reformers included Dr. Juan Gil and Juan Pérez de Pineda who subsequently fled and worked alongside others such as Francisco de Enzinas to translate the Greek New Testament into the Spanish language, a task completed by 1556.
The protests against the corruption emanating from Rome began in Germany when reformation ideals developed in 1517–1521 with Martin Luther expressing doubts over the legitimacy of indulgences and the ''plenitudo potestatis'' of the pope.
Four religions (Unitarianism became official in 1583, following the faith of the only Unitarian King John II Sigismund Zápolya 1541–1571) were declared as accepted (recepta) religions, while Eastern Orthodox Christianity was "tolerated" (though the building of stone Orthodox churches was forbidden).
Those that fled to England were given support by the Church of England.
