It was also widely referred to as such by others.
The offenders were usually given a punishment shooting and banished under threat of execution.
What would become the Provisional IRA received arms and funding from the Fianna Fáil-led Irish government in 1969, resulting in the 1970 Arms Crisis in which criminal charges were pursued against two former government ministers and others.
This was not the first time that an organization calling itself the IRA had issued orders to dump arms.
Opponents of this change argued strongly against the ending of abstentionism, and when the vote took place, Seán Mac Stíofáin, present as IRA Director of Intelligence, announced that he no longer considered that the IRA leadership represented republican goals.
In Kitson's view, the violence of the IRA represented an "insurrection" situation, with the enveloping atmosphere of belligerence representing a "low intensity conflict" – a conflict where the forces involved in fighting operate at a greatly reduced tempo, with fewer combatants, at a reduced range of tactical equipment and limited scope to operate in a military manner.
It has been argued that this bombing campaign helped convince the British government (who had hoped to contain the conflict to Northern Ireland with its Ulsterisation policy) to negotiate with Sinn Féin after the IRA ceasefires of August 1994 and July 1997.
All levels of the organisation were entitled to send delegates to IRA General Army Conventions (GACs).
In September 2008, the Independent Monitoring Commission stated in its nineteenth report that the IRA was "committed to the political path" and was no longer "a threat to peace or to democratic politics".
The success of the 1981 Irish hunger strike in mobilising support and winning elections led to the Armalite and ballot box strategy, with more time and resources devoted to political activity.
The US House of Representatives Committee on International Relations in its report of 24 April 2002 concluded "Neither committee investigators nor the Colombians can find credible explanations for the increased, more sophisticated capacity for these specific terror tactics now being employed by the FARC, other than IRA training".
The organisation remains classified as a proscribed terrorist group in the UK and as an illegal organisation in the Republic of Ireland.
The IRA decommissioned all of its remaining arms between July and September 2005.
The renewed bombings caused severe economic damage, with the Manchester bombing and the Docklands bombing causing approximately £800 million in combined damage.
Overall, the IRA was responsible for 87–90% of the total British security force deaths, and 27–30% of the total civilian deaths in the conflict.
In 2005, the then Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Michael McDowell told the Dáil that the organisation had "between 1,000 and 1,500" active members.
However, there was no walkout.
It supported the 1998 Good Friday Agreement and in 2005 it disarmed under international supervision.
On the other hand, public speeches from two Northern Ireland Secretaries of State, Peter Brooke and Patrick Mayhew hint that, given the cessation of violence, a political compromise with the IRA was possible.
Following negotiations with the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and secret talks with British civil servants, the IRA ultimately called a ceasefire in 1994 on the understanding that Sinn Féin would be included in political talks for a settlement.
In the 1970s, ETA also exchanged a quantity of handguns for training in explosives with the IRA.
Mitrokhin revealed that although the Soviet KGB gave some weapons to the Marxist Official IRA, it had little sympathy with the Provisionals.
In September 2008, the nineteenth report of the Independent Monitoring Commission stated that the IRA was "committed to the political path" and no longer represented "a threat to peace or to democratic politics", and that the Army Council was "no longer operational or functional".
It also announced that the IRA would complete the process of disarmament as quickly as possible.
In addition, roughly 50–60 members of Sinn Féin were killed.
The two main issues were the acceptance of the "National Liberation Strategy" and a motion to end abstentionism and to recognise the British, Irish and Northern Ireland parliaments.
The Troubles had begun a year before, when a largely Catholic, nonviolent civil rights campaign was met with violence from both Ulster loyalists and the Royal Ulster Constabulary, culminating in the August 1969 riots and deployment of British troops.
This activity culminated in the 1981 Irish hunger strike, when seven IRA and three Irish National Liberation Army members starved themselves to death in pursuit of political status.
After the 1981 hunger strike, Sinn Féin mobilised large electoral support and won 105,000 votes, or 43% of the nationalist vote in Northern Ireland, in the 1983 UK general election, only 34,000 votes behind the SDLP.
The Provisional IRA emerged in December 1969, following a split in the republican movement.
Within the Republican Movement (the IRA and Sinn Féin), the new strategy was described by the acronym "TUAS", meaning either "Tactical Use of Armed Struggle" or "Totally Unarmed Strategy".
It was agreed that the IRA would be responsible for policing there, but the agreement was short-lived.
It is suggested that the IRA needed the money to pay pensions to its volunteers, and to ensure that hardliners stuck with the peace strategy.
* 11 rocket-propelled grenade launchers
When a democratic and peaceful alternative to armed struggle was created the IRA left the stage."
Harold Wilson's secret 1971 meeting with IRA leaders with the help of John O'Connell angered the Irish government; Garret FitzGerald wrote 30 years later that "the strength of the feelings of our democratic leaders ... was not, however, publicly ventilated at the time" because Wilson was a former and possible future British prime minister.
In August 2015, the PSNI Chief Constable stated that the IRA no longer exists as a paramilitary organization.
Twelve, however, were secretly buried and became known as "the Disappeared".
The IRA is a proscribed organisation in the United Kingdom under the Terrorism Act 2000 and an unlawful organisation in the Republic of Ireland under the Offences Against the State Acts.
During the conflict, the IRA took on the role of policing in some Catholic/nationalist areas of Northern Ireland.
When the British government, dependent on Ulster Unionist Party votes at Westminster, then demanded the disarmament of the IRA before it allowed Sinn Féin into multiparty talks, the IRA called off its ceasefire in February 1996.
The IRA enjoyed some popular support in the Republic of Ireland in the early 70s.
The British refused the offer.
The exception to this reorganisation was the South Armagh Brigade, which retained its traditional hierarchy and battalion structure and used relatively large numbers of volunteers in its actions.
The hunger strike leader Bobby Sands and Anti H-Block activist Owen Carron were elected to the British Parliament, and two other protesting prisoners were elected to the Dáil.
In the 1993 Local District Council Elections in Northern Ireland, the SDLP won 136,760 votes to Sinn Féin's 77,600 votes.
In the early years of the conflict, IRA slogans spoke of, "Victory 1972" and then "Victory 1974".
By the mid-1970s, the hopes of the IRA leadership for a quick military victory were receding and the British military was unsure of when it would see any substantial success against the IRA.
The ASU's weapons were controlled by a brigade's quartermaster.
The IRA agreed to a ceasefire in February 1975, which lasted nearly a year before the IRA concluded that the British were drawing them away from military action without offering any guarantees in relation to the IRA's goals (as well as launching an intelligence offensive), and hopes of a quick victory receded.
While the motion on the "National Liberation Strategy" was passed unanimously the motion on abstentionism was only passed by 28 votes to 12.
He had been involved in Direct Action Against Drugs and it is believed he was killed by an organized crime gang.
The bodies of alleged informers were usually left in public as a warning to others.
Many Catholics/nationalists did not trust the official police force—the Royal Ulster Constabulary—and saw it as biased against their community.
At the beginning of February 2005, the IRA declared that it was withdrawing from the disarmament process, but in July 2005 it declared that its campaign of violence was over, and that transparent mechanisms would be used, under the de Chastelain process, to satisfy the Northern Ireland communities that it was disarming totally.
relevance in the global war on terrorism.'
On 26 September, the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning (IICD) announced that "the totality of the IRA's arsenal" had been decommissioned.
The US Department of State lists them in the category 'other selected terrorist groups also deemed of
Those responsible for minor offences would be given a warning, be made to compensate the offendee, or be made to do community work.
After its defeat in the Irish Civil War in 1924 and at the end of its unsuccessful Border Campaign in 1962, the IRA Army Council issued similar orders.
For day-to-day purposes, authority was vested in the Army Council which, as well as directing policy and taking major tactical decisions, appointed a Chief of Staff from one of its number or, less often, from outside its ranks.
She has refused to do so, and since then Scappaticci has not launched any libel actions against the media making the allegations.
Few Protestant voters voted for Sinn Féin.
However, from February 1996 until July 1997, the IRA called off its 1994 ceasefire because of its dissatisfaction with the state of negotiations.
In response, more than 500 prisoners refused to wear prison clothes.
The IRA's armed campaign, primarily in Northern Ireland but also in England and mainland Europe, caused the deaths of approximately 1,800 people.
Since then, there have been occasional claims in the media that the IRA had not decommissioned all of its weaponry.
* 100+ hand grenades
The campaign was supported by arms and funding from Libya and from some Irish American groups.
Iranian officials deposited £4 million into a secret Jersey bank account, funded by the sale of artwork from the Iranian Embassy in London.
In 1977, the Provisionals received a 'sizeable' arms shipment from the PLO, including small arms, rocket launchers and explosives, but this was intercepted at Antwerp after the Israeli intelligence alerted its European counterparts.
Most nationalists in Northern Ireland voted for the moderate Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) until 2001.
* 2 tonnes of Semtex
Between 1970 and 2005, the IRA had detonated 19,000 improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in the United Kingdom, an average of one every 17 hours for three and a half decades, arguably making it "the biggest terrorist bombing campaign in history".
When the British government then demanded the disarmament of the IRA before it allowed Sinn Féin into multiparty talks, the organisation called off its ceasefire in February 1996.
The Sinn Féin party split along the same lines on 11 January 1970, when a third of the delegates walked out of the Ard Fheis in protest at the party leadership's attempt to force through the ending of abstentionism, despite its failure to achieve a two-thirds majority vote of delegates required to change the policy.
Both reject the Good Friday Agreement and continue to engage in paramilitary activity.
However, most Protestants killed by the IRA in these areas were members of the security forces, and there was no exodus of Protestants.
The policy was outlined in a 1975 British strategy paper titled "The Way Ahead", which was not published but was referred to by Labour's first Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Merlyn Rees, and came to be the dominant British political theme in the conflict as it raged into the 1980s.
According to author Ed Moloney, the IRA made an attempt to escalate the conflict with the so-called "Tet Offensive" in the 1980s, which was reluctantly approved by the Army Council and did not prove successful.
At this time, the IRA leadership, short of money, weapons and members, was on the brink of calling off the campaign.
During the 1975 ceasefire, the government agreed to the setting up of 'incident centres' in nationalist areas.
Journalists Eamonn Mallie and Patrick Bishop estimate in their book ''The Provisional IRA'' that roughly 8,000 people passed through the ranks of the IRA in the first 20 years of its existence, many of them leaving after arrest (senior officers are required to surrender their post after being arrested), retiring from the armed campaign or "disillusionment".
Thereafter, Adams increasingly tried to disassociate Sinn Féin from the IRA, claiming they were separate organisations and refusing to speak on behalf of the IRA.
The popular support for the IRA's campaign in the Troubles is hard to gauge, given that Sinn Féin, the IRA's political wing, did not stand in elections until the early 1980s.
In May 2003, a number of newspapers named Freddie Scappaticci as the alleged identity of the British Force Research Unit's most senior informer within the IRA, code-named ''Stakeknife'', who is thought to have been head of the IRA's internal security force, charged with rooting out and executing informers.
The success of the 1981 Irish hunger strike in mobilising support and winning elections led to what was referred to by Danny Morrison as, "the Armalite and ballot box strategy" with more time and resources devoted to political activity.
In addition, they recruited many young nationalists from the north, who had not been involved in the IRA before but had been radicalised by the violence that broke out in 1969.
These were essential support activities.
In response, the UK government commissioned the Independent Assessment of Paramilitary Organisations.
Sinn Féin is widely regarded as the political wing of the IRA, but the party insists that the two organisations are separate.
According to former Irish Minister for Justice Michael McDowell, these organisations have little more than 150 members each.
In May 1996, the Federal Security Service (FSB), Russia's internal security service, publicly accused Estonia of arms smuggling, and claimed that the IRA had contacted representatives of Estonia's volunteer defence force, Kaitseliit, and some non-government groups to buy weapons.
It said that if any weapons had been kept, they would have been kept by individuals and against IRA orders.
However, some IRA members were involved in sectarian tit-for-tat violence.
Firstly, the old "company" structures were used for tasks such as "policing" nationalist areas, intelligence-gathering, and hiding weapons.
The report also said that the IRA is not involved in any criminal activity, but that some members have engaged in criminal activity without the sanction or support of the organization.
The perceived stalemate along with British government's hints of a compromise and secret approaches in the early 1990s led republican leaders increasingly to look for a political agreement to end the conflict, with a broadening dissociation of Sinn Féin from the IRA.
Apart from its armed campaign, the IRA has also been involved in many other activities.
This claim remains unsubstantiated so far.
Despite the declared support of that faction of Sinn Féin, the early Provisional IRA was extremely suspicious of political activity, arguing rather for the primacy of armed struggle.
Traditional republicans formed the "Provisional" Army Council in December 1969, after an IRA convention was held at Knockvicar House in Boyle, County Roscommon.
There have also been claims that the IRA is still active and has carried out punishment shootings (see Chronology of Provisional Irish Republican Army actions (2000–09)).
The Provisional IRA issued all its public statements under the pseudonym "P. O'Neill" of the "Irish Republican Publicity Bureau, Dublin".
PSNI Assistant Chief Constable Peter Sheridan, said it was unlikely the IRA as a whole would formally disband in the foreseeable future.
A little under 300 IRA members were killed in the Troubles.
Membership of the IRA remains illegal in both the UK and the Republic of Ireland, but IRA prisoners convicted of offences committed before 1998 have been granted conditional early release as part of the Good Friday Agreement.
However, the ceasefire was ended in January 1976 instead.
An RUC report of 1986 estimated that the IRA had 300 or so members in Active Service Units and up to 750 active members in total in Northern Ireland.
A Belfast newspaper has claimed that secret documents show that half of the IRA's top men were also British informers.
The IRA considers these groups to be all part of the same apparatus.
Adams said he was "too philosophical" to feel betrayed.
In response to such claims, the Independent Monitoring Commission (IMC) stated in its tenth report that the IRA had decommissioned all weaponry "under its control".
By 1971, the Provisionals had inherited most of the existing IRA organisation in the north, as well as the more militant IRA members in the rest of Ireland.
Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), complained that the witnesses were not unbiased, because they were appointed by the IRA itself.
In October 1997, the US stopped designating the IRA as a terrorist organisation.
More than 100,000 people attended the funeral of Sands, the first hunger striker to die.
At this time the IRA brought out the ''Éire Nua'' (New Ireland) policy, which advocated an all-Ireland federal republic, with decentralised governments and parliaments for each of the four historic provinces of Ireland.
According to ''Lost Lives'' (2006 edition), the IRA was responsible for 1,768 deaths, about 47% of the total conflict deaths.
The IRA also sought to minimize contact between residents and the RUC, because residents might pass on information or be forced to become a police informer.
In later years, the IRA's strength has been somewhat weakened by members leaving the organisation to join hardline splinter groups such as the Continuity IRA and the Real IRA.
The Gardaí believe this Semtex to have come from the Libyan connection back in the 1980s and therefore should have been decommissioned.
Some authors, like Patrick McCarthy, Peter Taylor and Brendan O'Brien concluded that, unlike previous IRA campaigns, the provisionals were not defeated.
On 16 December 2005, senior Sinn Féin member Denis Donaldson appeared before TV cameras in Dublin and confessed to being a British spy for twenty years.
Many were given punishment shootings or banished, and some were killed.
The IRA itself lost 275–300 members, of an estimated 10,000 total over the 30-year period.
In 1992, many of them voted for SDLP West Belfast candidate Joe Hendron rather than a unionist candidate to make sure Gerry Adams of Sinn Féin lost his seat in the constituency.
The 1977 edition of the Green Book, an induction and training manual used by the IRA, describes the strategy of the "Long War" in these terms:
Donaldson was a former IRA volunteer and subsequently highly placed Sinn Féin party member.
Many in the IRA opposed these sectarian attacks, but others deemed them effective in preventing sectarian attacks on Catholics.
The IRA's armed campaign, primarily in Northern Ireland but also in England and mainland Europe, caused the deaths of approximately 1,800 people.
The IRA agreed to a temporary ceasefire from 26 June to 9 July.
Another categorisation avoids the terms "guerrilla" or "terrorist" but does view the conflict in military terms.
It carried out an investigation, interrogated the suspect and passed judgement.
The IRA initially focused on defence, but it began an offensive campaign in 1971 (see timeline).
On 4 April 2006, Donaldson was found shot dead at his retreat near Glenties in County Donegal.
However, he went on to say "we refuse to criminalise those who break the law in pursuit of legitimate political objectives".
According to the book ''The Provisional IRA'' (by Eamon Mallie and Patrick Bishop), roughly 8,000 people passed through the ranks of the IRA in the first 20 years of its existence, many of them leaving after arrest, "retirement" or disillusionment.
The RUC found it difficult to operate in certain nationalist neighbourhoods and only entered in armoured convoys, due to the threat of attack from rioters and the IRA.
They claimed that their attacks on Protestants were "retaliation" for attacks on Catholics.
While others canvassed support throughout Ireland, Mac Stíofáin was a key person making a connection with the Belfast IRA under Billy McKee and Joe Cahill, who had refused to take orders from the IRA's Dublin leadership since September 1969, in protest at their failure to defend Catholic areas in August.
However, following the collapse of the Stormont power-sharing government in 2002, which was partly triggered by allegations that republican spies were operating within Parliament Buildings and the Civil Service, the IRA temporarily broke off contact with General de Chastelain.
The Sinn Féin leader apologized to victims who were "let down" by the IRA and admitted it "was ill-equipped to deal with such matters".
Members of the IRA suspected of being informants were usually killed.
It believed that any weaponry that had not been handed in had been retained locally and against the wishes of the IRA leadership.
This policy involved recruitment of volunteers and carrying out attacks on British forces, as well as mounting a bombing campaign against economic targets.
The IRA also targeted certain British government officials, politicians, judges, establishment figures, British Army and police officers in England, and in other areas such as the Republic of Ireland, West Germany and the Netherlands.
Some unionists allege that the IRA took part in "ethnic cleansing" of the Protestant minority in rural border areas, such as Fermanagh.
The British demand was quickly dropped after the May 1997 general election in the UK.
This saw them conduct a war of attrition against the British and increased emphasis on political activity, via the political party Sinn Féin.
In recent years, there have been complaints over the IRA's handling of sex crimes, especially those by its own members.
IRA prisoners convicted after March 1976 did not have Special Category Status applied in prison.
In December 2013 the report of the Smithwick Tribunal concluded that "on the balance of probability" collusion took place between the IRA and members of the Garda Síochána in the 1989 killing of two RUC officers; however, the report could not conclusively prove this.
In the United States in November 1982, five men were acquitted of smuggling arms to the IRA after they claimed the Central Intelligence Agency had approved the shipment, although the CIA denied this.
Two detailed studies of deaths in the Troubles, the Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN), and the book ''Lost Lives'', differ slightly on the numbers killed by the IRA and the total number of conflict deaths.
It is estimated that, by the 1990s, the IRA needed £10.5 million a year to operate.
The IRA was chiefly active in Northern Ireland, although it took its campaign to England and mainland Europe.
There are allegations of contact with the East German Stasi, based on the testimony of a Soviet defector to British intelligence Vasili Mitrokhin.
We declare our allegiance to the 32 county Irish republic, proclaimed at Easter 1916, established by the first Dáil Éireann in 1919, overthrown by forces of arms in 1922 and suppressed to this day by the existing British-imposed six-county and twenty-six-county partition states.
secretly passing information about IRA activity to British forces.
The Irish Republican Army wages an armed campaign... Sinn Féin maintains the propaganda war and is the public and political voice of the movement".
This policy involved recruitment of volunteers, increasing after the 1972 Bloody Sunday incident in which the British armed forces killed unarmed protesters, and launching attacks against British military and economic targets.
American support has been weakened by the War against Terrorism, and the fallout from the events of 11 September 2001.
The Provisional IRA was organised hierarchically.
Sinn Féin now has 29 members of the Northern Ireland Assembly (out of 108), four Westminster MPs (out of 18 from Northern Ireland) and 23 Republic of Ireland TDs (out of 166).
A system of two parallel types of unit within an IRA brigade was introduced in place of the battalion structures.
Since 1969, there have only been three, in 1970, 1986, and 2005, owing to the difficulty in organising such a large gathering of an illegal organisation in secret.
The dead included around 1,100 members of the British security forces, and about 630 civilians.
In the United Kingdom a person convicted of membership of a "proscribed organisation", such as the IRA, still nominally faces imprisonment for up to 10 years.
According to Danny Morrison, the pseudonym "S. O'Neill" was used during the 1940s.
In December 2004, attempts to persuade the IRA to disarm entirely collapsed when the Democratic Unionist Party, under Ian Paisley, insisted on photographic evidence.
No-one has been charged with his killing.
The IRA's initial strategy was to use force to cause the collapse of the government of Northern Ireland and to inflict enough casualties on British forces that the British government would be forced by public opinion in Britain to withdraw from the region.
Of those killed by the IRA, Sutton classifies 130 (about 7%) of them as sectarian killings of Protestants.
* 7 surface-to-air missiles (unused)
The IRA denied involvement, however.
On 26 July 2012, it was announced that some former members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army were merging with the Real Irish Republican Army, other independent republican paramilitary groups and the vigilante group Republican Action Against Drugs (but not with the Continuity Irish Republican Army) into a unified formation known simply as the "Irish Republican Army".
These were charged mainly with the importation and storage of arms for the Northern units and with raising finances through robberies and other means.
Republic of Ireland state documents from the same period say that the IRA had made a similar offer to the British the previous year.
The '''Provisional Irish Republican Army''' ('''IRA''' or '''PIRA''') was an Irish republican paramilitary organisation that sought to remove Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom and to bring about an independent republic encompassing all of Ireland.
Calls from Sinn Féin led the IRA to commence disarming in a process that was monitored by Canadian General John de Chastelain's decommissioning body in October 2001.
The civilian figure also includes civilians employed by British forces, politicians, members of the judiciary, and alleged criminals and informers.
The IRA killed 59 alleged informers, about half of them IRA members and half of them Catholic civilians.
Apart from the Libyan aid, this has been the main source of overseas IRA support.
For this reason the Armagh IRA unit is often referred to as the South Armagh Brigade.
Confidential documents released on 30 December 2008 from the British state archives show that the IRA leadership proposed a ceasefire and peace talks to the British government in 1978.
The decommissioning of its weaponry was supervised by the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning (IICD).
The PSNI, the Independent Monitoring Commission and the British and Irish governments all accused the IRA of involvement.
Generally, the IRA was against drug dealing and prostitution, "both for 'moral' reasons and because it would be unpopular within its own communities".
Speaking in 2005, Gerry Adams said "There is no place in republicanism for anyone involved in criminality".
This belief was based on a series of perceived political inheritances which constructed a legal continuity from the Second Dáil (see also Irish republican legitimatism).
Veteran republicans were critical of the IRA's Dublin leadership which, for political reasons, had refused to prepare for aggressive action in advance of the violence.
The IRA has also received weapons and logistical support from Irish Americans in the United States.
However, there are claims the IRA "licensed" certain dealers to operate and forced them to pay protection money.
The Provisional IRA's strategy was to use force to cause the collapse of the government of Northern Ireland and to inflict such casualties on the British forces that the British government would be forced by public opinion to withdraw from Ireland.
The Russian and British Intelligence services alleged that during the decommissioning process the IRA secretly purchased a consignment of 20 Russian special forces AN-94 rifles in Moscow.
The organization remains classified as a proscribed terrorist group in the UK and as an illegal organisation in the Republic of Ireland.
Members of IRA are tried in the Republic of Ireland in the Special Criminal Court.
Up until the late 1970s, IRA volunteers were organised in units based on conventional military structures.
The Chief of the RUC's Drugs Squad, Kevin Sheehy, said "the Provisional IRA did its best to stop volunteers from becoming directly involved in drugs" and noted one occasion when an IRA member caught with a small amount of cannabis was "disowned and humiliated" in his local area.
