Still, by the end of the century, many artisanal industries began to flourish; making perfumes in Grasse; olive oil in Aix and the Alpilles; textiles in Orange, Avignon and Tarascon; and faience pottery in Marseille, Apt, Aubagne, and Moustiers-Sainte-Marie.
The Verdon is best known for its canyon, the Verdon Gorge.
Outside of the Maritime Alps, Mont Ventoux (Occitan: Ventor in classical norm or Ventour in Mistralian norm), at , is the highest peak in Provence.
On 15 August 1944, two months after the Allied landings in Normandy (Operation Overlord), the Seventh United States Army under General Alexander Patch, with a Free French corps under General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, landed on the coast of the Var between St. Raphael and Cavalaire (Operation Dragoon).
In his later years, Folquet gave up poetry to become the Abbot of Le Thoronet Abbey, and then Bishop of Toulouse, where he fiercely persecuted the Cathars.
The lower Alps were re-attached to France after the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, but Nice did not return to France until 1860, during the reign of Napoleon III.
The Roman general Gaius Marius crushed the last serious resistance in 102 BC by defeating the Cimbri and the Teutons.
He then began building roads to facilitate troop movements and commerce between Rome, Spain and Northern Europe; one from the coast inland to Apt and Tarascon, and the other along the coast from Italy to Spain, passing through Fréjus and Aix-en-Provence.
This gave the game its name, ''lei peds tancats'', in the Provençal dialect of occitan, 'feet together.'
In 8 BC the Emperor Augustus built a triumphal monument at La Turbie to commemorate the pacification of the region, and he began to Romanize Provence politically and culturally.
Provençal writers and poets who wrote in Occitan include:
Although they are not particularly high – only some  at their highest point – the Alpilles stand out since they rise abruptly from the plain of the Rhône valley.
Nonetheless, the resistance grew stronger; the leader of the pro-German militia, the Milice, in Marseille was assassinated in April 1943.
There are 2200 hectares in this AOL.
One tribe, called the Segobriga, settled near modern-day Marseille.
*Pablo Picasso (1881–1973) spent each summer from 1919 to 1939 on the Côte d'Azur, and moved there permanently in 1946, first at Vallauris, then at Mougins, where he spent his last years.
The Germans began a systematic rounding-up of French Jews and refugees from Nice and Marseille.
The origins of the game are said to be ancient, going back to the Egyptians, ancient Greeks, and Ancient Romans, who are said to have introduced it to Provence first.
The study found that 17% of the Y-chromosomes of Provence may be attributed to Greek colonisation.
She was murdered in 1382 by her cousin and heir, Charles of Durazzo, who started a new war, leading to the separation of Nice, Puget-Théniers and Barcelonnette from Provence in 1388, and their attachment to the County of Savoy.
In about 6000 BC, the Castelnovian people, living around Châteauneuf-les-Martigues, were among the first people in Europe to domesticate wild sheep, and to cease moving constantly from place to place.
South of Avignon, it occupies the north and south slopes of the Alpilles, up to an altitude of 400 metres, and extends about thirty kilometres from east to west.
The city was brought to heel and the duke had to flee to an island.
Nicolas Froment (1435–1486) was the most important painter of Provence during the Renaissance, best known for his triptych of the Burning Bush (c. 1476), commissioned by King René I of Naples.
Napoleon restored the belongings and power of the families of the old regime in Provence.
'''Provence''' (; ; Provençal: ''Provença'' in classical norm or ''Prouvènço'' in Mistralian norm, ) is a geographical region and historical province of southeastern France, which extends from the left bank of the lower Rhône River to the west to the Italian border to the east, and is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the south.
The peninsula of Saint-Tropez is part of the Massif des Maures, along with the peninsula of Giens and the islands offshore of Hyères; Porquerolles, Port-Cros, and île du Levant.
In 1921 he lived in an apartment at 1 place Felix Faure in Nice, next to the flower market and overlooking the sea, where he lived until 1938.
Traces of the Ligures remain today in the dolmens and other megaliths found in eastern Provence, in the primitive stone shelters called 'Bories' found in the Luberon and Comtat, and in the rock carvings in the Valley of Marvels near Mont Bégo in the Alpes-Maritimes, at an altitude of 2,000 meters.
The ancient geographer Posidonios wrote of them: "Their country is savage and dry.
The study also concluded that "estimates of colonial Greek vs indigenous Celto-Ligurian demography predict a maximum of a 10% Greek contribution, suggesting a Greek male elite-dominant input into the Iron Age Provence population."
Between the 10th and 4th century BC the Ligures were found in Provence from Massilia as far as modern day Liguria.
A war between Rudolph III of Burgundy and his rival, the German Emperor Conrad the Salic in 1032 led to Provence becoming a fiefdom of the Holy Roman Empire, which it remained until 1246.
The landscape of the Alpilles is one of arid limestone peaks separated by dry valleys.
In November 1942, following Allied landings in North Africa (Operation Torch), the Germans occupied all of Provence (Operation Attila) and then headed for Toulon (Case Anton).
The main grapes for red wine are grenache, mourvèdre, and cinsaut; for the white wines clairette.
It largely corresponds with the modern administrative ''région'' of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur, and includes the ''départements'' of Var, Bouches-du-Rhône, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence and parts of Alpes-Maritimes and Vaucluse.
a year in the foothills and plateaus of the southwest, and in the valley of the Ubaye; and 900 to 1500&nbsp;mm.
At the beginning of the 16th century, Cardinal Richelieu began to build a naval arsenal and dockyard at Toulon to serve as a base for a new French Mediterranean fleet.
*Raoul Dufy (1877–1953), whose wife was from Nice, painted in Forcalquier, Marseille and Martigues.
The Germans in Toulon resisted until 27 August, and Marseille was not liberated until 25 August.
In the 13th century, the French kings started to use marriage to extend their influence into the south of France.
History and legend has given René the title "Good King René of Provence", though he only lived in Provence in the last ten years of his life, from 1470 to 1480, and his political policies of territorial expansion were costly and unsuccessful.
The original Roman province was called Gallia Transalpina, then Gallia Narbonensis, or simply ''Provincia Nostra'' ('Our Province') or ''Provincia''.
Montagne Sainte-Victoire is probably the best-known mountain in Provence, thanks to the painter Paul Cézanne, who could see it from his home, and painted it frequently.
In 49 BC, Massalia had the misfortune to choose the wrong side in the power struggle between Pompey and Julius Caesar.
*Paul Signac (1863–1935) visited St. Tropez in 1892, and bought a villa, La Hune, at the foot of citadel in 1897.
After uprisings in 1630–31 and 1648–1652, the young King Louis XIV had two large forts, fort St. Jean and Fort St. Nicholas, built at the harbour entrance to control the city's unruly population.
Silvacane Abbey, on the Durance river at La Roque-d'Anthéron, was founded in 1175.
It rains an average of 80 days a year, for a total of 693.4&nbsp;mm a year.
Inspired by the imported pottery from the eastern Mediterranean, in about 6000 BC they created the first pottery to be made in France.
They were farmers and warriors, and gradually displaced the earlier pastoral people from their lands.
On 17 October 1791 a massacre of royalists and religious figures took place in the ice storage rooms (''glaciere'') of the prison of the Palace of the Popes in Avignon.
Roman engineers and architects built monuments, theatres, baths, villas, fora, arenas and aqueducts, many of which still exist.
In 1309, Pope Clement V, who was originally from Bordeaux, moved the Roman Catholic Papacy to Avignon.
Nice, Antibes and Hyères became popular winter resorts for European royalty, including Queen Victoria.
The Romans made the region into the first Roman province beyond the Alps and called it ''Provincia Romana'', which evolved into the present name.
In the mountains, the snow is present from November to May
Published by the Réunion des musées nationaux, 2000.
The railroad connected Paris with Marseille (1848) and then with Toulon and Nice (1864).
It was predominantly rural, devoted to raising wheat, wine, and olives, with small industries for tanning, pottery, perfume-making, and ship and boat building.
Snow falls in the mountains from November to May, and in midwinter can be found down to altitude of 1000–1200 metres on the shady side of the mountains and 1300 to 1600 metres on the sunny side.
Meanwhile, the dynastic quarrels continued.
In the 1940s, Provence underwent a cultural renewal, with the founding of the Avignon Festival of theatre (1947), the reopening of the Cannes Film Festival (begun in 1939), and many other major events.
When the radical Montagnards seized power from the Girondins in May 1793, a real counter-revolution broke out in Avignon, Marseille and Toulon.
The end of the Paleolithic and beginning of the Neolithic period saw the sea settle at its present level, a warming of the climate and the retreat of the forests.
The ransom was paid and the abbot was released, but the people of Provence, led by Count William I rose up and defeated the Saracens near their most powerful fortress Fraxinet (La Garde-Freinet) at the Battle of Tourtour.
Most vineyards were destroyed by phylloxera in the 19th century, and very slowly were reconstituted.
* '''AOC Coteaux varois en Provence''' is a recent AOC in Provence.
The golden age of Provençal literature, more correctly called Occitan literature, was the 11th century and the 12th century, when the troubadours broke away from classical Latin literature and composed romances and love songs in their own vernacular language.
He devised a new set of rules where the field was much smaller, and players did not run before throwing the ball, but remained inside a small circle with their feet together.
Roman legions entered Provence three times; first in 181 BC the Romans suppressed Ligurian uprisings near Genoa; in 154 BC the Roman Consul Optimus defeated the Oxybii and the Deciates, who were attacking Antibes; and in 125 BC, the Romans put down an uprising of a confederation of Celtic tribes.
*Raimbaut de Vaqueiras (1180–1207)
In the 19th and 20th centuries, many of the most famous painters in the world converged on Provence, drawn by the climate and the clarity of the light.
Inside, the walls of the Cosquer Cave are decorated with drawings of bison, seals, auks, horses and outlines of human hands, dating to between 27,000 and 19,000 BC.
A second wave of colonists arrived in about 540 BC, when Phocaea was destroyed by the Persians.
Traders from the island of Rhodes were visiting the coast of Provence in the 7th century BC.
*André Derain (1880–1954) painted at L'Estaque and Martigues.
In 1423 the army of Alphonse of Aragon captured Marseille, and in 1443 they captured Naples, and forced its ruler, King René I of Naples, to flee.
By considering the Maritime Alps, along the border with Italy, as a part of the cultural Provence, they constitute the highest elevations of the region (the Punta dell'Argentera has an elevation of 3,297 m).
In the 2nd century BC the people of Massalia appealed to Rome for help against the Ligures.
*Louis Bellaud (1543–1588)
For the rosés, the main grapes are the syrah and cinsault.
It flows south-west through Embrun, Sisteron, Manosque, Cavaillon, and Avignon, where it meets the Rhône.
It produces 80 percent rosés, 17 percent red wines, and 3 percent white wines.
When he escaped from Elba on 1 March 1815, and landed at Golfe-Juan, he detoured to avoid the cities of Provence, which were hostile to him, and therefore directed his small force directly to the northeast of it.
A player pitches balls until he can regain the point (''reprenne le point'') by having his ball closest to the cochonnet.
On 30 April 1790, Fort Saint-Nicolas in Marseille was besieged, and many of the soldiers inside were massacred.
Many immigrants arrived from Liguria and the Piedmont in Italy.
The disappearance of the forests and the deer and other easily hunted game meant that the inhabitants of Provence had to survive on rabbits, snails and wild sheep.
*Maurice Denis (1870–1943) painted at St. Tropez and Bandol.
He continued to paint there until his death in 1919.
The Pax Romana in Provence lasted until the middle of the 3rd century.
at the altitude of 1000 metres; and the winter average temperature is 4 to 5&nbsp;°C.
The Caturiges, Tricastins, and Cavares settled to the west of the Durance river.
Celts and Ligurians spread throughout the area and the Celto-Ligures eventually shared the territory of Provence, each tribe in its own alpine valley or settlement along a river, each with its own king and dynasty.
Nice has an annual average of 2694 hours of sunshine.
Roman towns were built at Cavaillon; Orange; Arles; Fréjus; Glanum (outside Saint-Rémy-de-Provence); Carpentras; Vaison-la-Romaine; Nîmes; Vernègues; Saint-Chamas and Cimiez (above Nice).
The white limestone on the mountain's barren peak means it appears from a distance to be snow-capped all year round (its snow cover actually lasts from December to April).
Pytheas made mathematical instruments which allowed him to establish almost exactly the latitude of Marseille, and he was the first scientist to observe that the tides were connected with the phases of the moon.
The Cosquer cave is an underwater grotto in the Calanque de Morgiou,  underwater, that was inhabited during Paleolithic era, when the sea level was much lower than today.
The massif des Maures extends about sixty kilometres along the coast, and reaches inland about thirty kilometres.
It was ruled by the Counts of Provence from their capital in Aix-en-Provence until 1481, when it became a province of the Kings of France.
The Revolution was as violent and bloody in Provence as it was in other parts of France.
On the north side, the mountain borders the Drôme département.
It is usually drunk diluted with water, which it turns a cloudy color.
In 1125, Provence was divided; the part of Provence north and west of the Durance river went to the Count of Toulouse, while the lands between the Durance and the Mediterranean, and from the Rhône river to the Alps, belonged to the Counts of Provence.
The Massalians also established a series of small colonies and trading posts along the coast; which later became towns; they founded ''Citharista'' (La Ciotat); ''Tauroeis'' (Le Brusc);  ''Olbia'' (near Hyères); ''Pergantion'' (Breganson); ''Caccabaria'' (Cavalaire); ''Athenopolis'' (Saint-Tropez);   ''Antipolis'' (Antibes); ''Nikaia'' (Nice), and ''Monoicos'' (Monaco).
The cave dwellings of the early inhabitants of Provence were regularly inundated by the rising sea or left far from the sea and swept away by erosion.
For the white wines, clairette, vermentino, sémillon, and ugni blanc.
A Revolutionary Army laid siege to the British positions for four months (see the Siege of Toulon), and finally, thanks to the enterprise of the young commander of artillery, Napoleon Bonaparte, defeated the British and drove them out in December 1793.
The oldest Christian structure still surviving in Provence is the baptistery of the cathedral in Fréjus, dating from the 5th century.
Today the region is one of the smallest in France; just 47 hectares.
In the 12th century three Cistercian monasteries were built in remote parts of Provence, far from the political intrigues of the cities.
*Henri-Edmond Cross (1856–1910) discovered the Côte d'Azur in 1883 and painted at Monaco and Hyères.
They worshipped various aspects of nature, establishing sacred woods at Sainte-Baume and Gemenos, and healing springs at Glanum and Vernègues.
They established inland towns at ''Glanum'' (Saint-Remy) and ''Mastrabala'' (Saint-Blaise.)
A Neolithic site dating to about 6,000 BC was discovered in Marseille near the Saint-Charles railway station.
As recently as the 1970s the wines of Provence had the reputation of being rather ordinary: In 1971 wine critic Hugh Johnson wrote: "The whites are dry and can lack the acidity to be refreshing; the reds are straightforward, strong and a trifle dull; it is usually the rosés, often orange-tinted, which have most appeal."
The Roman province, which was called Gallia Narbonensis, for its capital, Narbo (modern Narbonne), extended from Italy to Spain, from the Alps to the Pyrenees.
Soon after Provence became part of France, it became involved in the Wars of Religion that swept the country in the 16th century.
As part of this effort, the first modern concrete apartment block, the Unité d'Habitation of Corbusier, was built in Marseille in 1947–52.
and a dolmen from the Bronze Age (2500–900 BC) can be found near Draguignan.
The object is to accumulate thirteen points.
Wines from Cassis are described in French literature as early as the 12th century.
Later, in the 5th and 4th centuries BC, the different tribes formed confederations; the Voconces in the area from the Isère to the Vaucluse; the Cavares in the Comtat; and the Salyens, from the Rhône river to the Var.
In 1112, the last descendant of Boson, Douce I, Countess of Provence, married the Catalan Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Barcelona, who as a result became Raymond Berenguer I, Count of Provence.
More sophisticated tools, worked on both sides of the stone and dating to 600,000 BC, were found in the Cave of Escale at Saint Estėve-Janson, and tools from 400,000 BC and some of the first fireplaces in Europe were found at Terra Amata in Nice.
The administrative region of Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur was created in 1982.
The point belongs to the ball the closest to the cochonnet.
Pastis is the traditional liqueur of Provence, flavoured with anise and typically containing 40–45% alcohol by volume.
There was considerable commerce along the coast, and up and down the Rhône river.
A modern day British film, "A Good Year", shows off the true beauty of Provence and its vineyards.
The title Côtes de Provence was already in use in 1848, but production was nearly destroyed by phylloxera later in that century, and took decades to recover.
He ruled Provence from 1112 until 1131, and his descendants, the '''Catalan Dynasty''' ruled Provence until 1246.
The first permanent Greek settlement was Massalia, established at modern-day Marseille in about 600 BC by colonists coming from Phocaea (now Foça, on the Aegean coast of Asia Minor).
Most of Provence remained strongly Catholic, with only one enclave of Protestants, the principality of Orange, Vaucluse, an enclave ruled by Prince William of the House of Orange-Nassau of the Netherlands, which was created in 1544 and was not incorporated into France until 1673.
Strabo distinctly states they were '''not''' of Celtic origin and a different race from the Gauls.
Production was nearly destroyed by the phylloxera and by the two wars, and only in 1946 was the region again producing fully.
His son, Louis the Blind (890–928) lost his sight trying to win the throne of Italy, after which his cousin, Hugh of Italy (died 947) became the Duke of Provence and the Count of Vienne.
Mercantour National Park is located in the Maritime Alps.
Traces of these early civilisations can be found in many parts of Provence.
After the fall of Louis Napoleon following the defeat in the Franco-Prussian War barricades went up in the streets of Marseille (23 March 1871) and the Communards, led by Gaston Cremieux and following the lead of the Paris Commune, took control of the city.
Because of the clear nights, the region is home of important observatories, such as the Observatory of Haute-Provence in Saint-Michel-Observatoire near of Forcalquier.
The Drachma coins minted in Massalia were found in all parts of Ligurian-Celtic Gaul.
Most of Provence has a Mediterranean climate, characterised by hot, dry summers, mild winters, little snow, and abundant sunshine.
The name is a souvenir of the Moors (''Maures'' in Old French), Arabs and Berbers from North Africa, who settled on the coast of Provence in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Cassis is the only area in Provence known for its white wines.
Between 330 and 320 BC he organised an expedition by ship into the Atlantic and as far north as England, and to visit Iceland, Shetland, and Norway.
Before Nice was returned to France in 1860, the Var marked the eastern border of France along the Mediterranean.
In 1545, the Parliament of Aix ordered the destruction of the villages of Lourmarin, Mérindol, Cabriéres in the Luberon, because their inhabitants were Vaudois, of Italian Piedmontese origin, and were not considered sufficiently orthodox Catholics.
Snow is extremely rare, usually falling once every ten years.
A revolutionary army under General Carteaux recaptured Marseille in August 1793 and renamed it "City without a Name" (''Ville sans Nom''.)
Since they were settled in one place they were able to develop new industries.
While it has been part of France for more than five hundred years, it still retains a distinct cultural and linguistic identity, particularly in the interior of the region.
*AOC Bellet; at the time of the French Revolution, the little town of Saint Roman de Bellet (now part of Nice) was the center of an important wine region.
The appellation covers 20,300 hectares.
They had weapons made of iron, which allowed them to easily defeat the local tribes, who were still armed with bronze weapons.
Haute-Provence has unusually high summer temperatures for its altitude and latitude (44 degrees north).
Another, Louis IX "the Saint" of France or Saint Louis (1214–1270), married Marguerite of Provence.
Charles attacked Avignon and Arles, garrisoned by the Umayyads.
The most characteristic grape is mourvèdre, used most famously in the red wines of Bandol.
The wines of Aix were originally planted by veterans of the Roman legions in the 1st century BC, and were promoted in the 15th century by René I of Naples, the last ruler of Provence.
He also painted frequently at L'Estaque.
By the end of the 5th century, Roman power in Provence had vanished, and an age of invasions, wars, and chaos began.
Its highest point is the ''Pic des mouches'' at 1,011&nbsp;m.
The entrance led to a cave above sea level.
At the end of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century, the residents of Provence were struggling to reconcile economic development and population growth with their desire to preserve the landscape and culture that make Provence unique.
The Garrigue is the typical landscape of Provence; is a type of low, soft-leaved scrubland or chaparral found on limestone soils around the Mediterranean Basin, generally near the seacoast, where the climate is moderate, but where there are annual summer drought conditions.
The grapes are grown on terraces along the left bank of the Var River, east of the town.
The region was thereafter under the rule of Carolingian Kings, descended from Charles Martel; and then was part of the empire of Charlemagne (742–814).
The appellation today covers 84 communes in the Var and Bouches-du-Rhône departments, and one in Alpes-Maritimes.
* AOC Les Baux de Provence; was established as an AOC for red and rosé wines in 1995.
In the 9th century, Arab pirates (called Saracens by the French) and then the Normans invaded Provence.
*Auguste Renoir (1841–1919) visited Beaulieu, Grasse, Saint Raphael and Cannes, before finally settling in Cagnes-sur-Mer in 1907, where he bought a farm in the hills and built a new house and workshop on the grounds.
Orange in the Vaucluse has 2595 hours of sunshine a year.
The Verdon River is a tributary of the Durance, rising at an altitude of 2,400 metres in the southwestern Alps near Barcelonette, and flowing southwest for 175 kilometres through the Alpes-de-Haute-Provence and Var (départements) before it reaches the Durance at near Vinon-sur-Verdon, south of Manosque.
* '''AOC Côtes de Provence'''.
France immediately ceded Lombardy to Piedmont, and, in return, Napoleon received Savoy and Nice in 1860, and Roquebrune-Cap-Martin and Menton in 1861.
There are three regional classifications (Appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC)) in Provence:
It is nicknamed the "Giant of Provence", or "The Bald Mountain".
The Mistral (wind) is a feature of the climate in the western part of the Department, blowing from the north and the northwest, bringing clear and dry weather.
Calm was only restored by the rise of Napoleon to power in 1795.
There are several regional variations: vivaro-alpin, spoken in the Alps; and the provençal variations of south, including the maritime, the rhoadanien (in the Rhône Valley) and the niçois (in Nice).
It was classified as an AOC in 1941.
* Bandol AOC, grown in the Var on the coast west of Toulon, mostly around the villages of La Cadiere d'Azur and Castellet.
The grapes most commonly used are the marsanne, the clairette, the ugni blanc, sauvignon blanc, and the Bourboulenc.
Then, in 1246, Charles, Count of Anjou, the youngest son of Louis VIII, married the heiress of Provence, Beatrice.
(See Winds of Provence.)
Early in 973, the Saracens captured Maieul, the Abbot of the Monastery at Cluny, and held him for ransom.
In 1962, Provence absorbed a large number of French citizens who left Algeria after its independence.
At its height, in the 4th century BC, it had a population of about 6,000 inhabitants, living on about fifty hectares surrounded by a wall.
Mistral achieved literary success with his novel ''Miréio'' (''Mireille'' in French); he was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1904.
The clear nights and sunny days cause a sharp difference between nighttime and daytime temperatures.
Each ball from a single team, if there are no other balls from the other team closer to the cochonnet, counts as a point.
The cities: Marseille, Toulon, Avignon and Aix-en-Provence, saw the construction of boulevards and richly-decorated private houses.
He went to war with Austria in 1859 and won a victory at Solferino, which resulted in Austria ceding Lombardy to France.
Its walls are covered with paintings and engravings dating back to between 27,000 and 19,000 BC, depicting animals such as bison, ibex, and horses, as well as sea mammals such as seals, and at least one bird, the auk.
It was governed as an aristocratic republic, by an assembly of the 600 wealthiest citizens.
Provençal was widely spoken in Provence until the beginning of the 20th century, when the French government launched an intensive and largely successful effort to replace regional languages with French.
