In 1613, John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg and Grand Duke of Prussia, declared himself for the Reformed creed and transferred the cathedral in Berlin from the Lutheran to the Reformed church.
In 1862 King Wilhelm I appointed Otto von Bismarck as Prime Minister of Prussia.
As a result of these territorial gains, Prussia now stretched uninterrupted across the northern two-thirds of Germany and contained two-thirds of Germany's population.
The black and white national colours were already used by the Teutonic Knights and by the Hohenzollern dynasty.
Anna, granddaughter of Albert I and daughter of Duke Albert Frederick (reigned 1568–1618), married her cousin Elector John Sigismund of Brandenburg.
Prussia suffered a devastating defeat against Napoleon Bonaparte's troops in the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt, leading Frederick William III and his family to flee temporarily to Memel.
In 1815 Prussia became part of the German Confederation.
The number of casualties is estimated 2 to 4 million, including those who fled the Soviet army during the last months of the war before the 1945 Treaty.
The term ''Prussian'' has often been used, especially outside of Germany, to emphasise the professionalism, aggressiveness, militarism and conservatism of the  class of landed aristocrats in the East who dominated first Prussia and then the German Empire.
But the empire itself had no right to collect taxes directly from its subjects; the only incomes fully under federal control were the customs duties, common excise duties, and the revenue from postal and telegraph services.
In the 13th century, the Teutonic Knights—an organized Catholic medieval military order of German crusaders—conquered the lands inhabited by them.
In 1225, he expelled them again, and they had to transfer to the Baltic Sea.
He was succeeded to the throne by his daughter, Maria Theresa.
What is clear is that Bismarck curried support from large sections of the people by promising to lead the fight for greater German unification.
The Kingdom of Prussia was now so large and so dominant in the new Germany that s and other Prussian élites identified more and more as Germans and less as Prussians.
Prussia's near-total control over the confederation was secured in the constitution drafted for it by Bismarck in 1867.
a republic, German: ''Freistaat'') within the new Weimar Republic and in 1920 received a democratic constitution.
The country then grew rapidly in influence economically and politically, and became the core of the North German Confederation in 1867, and then of the German Empire in 1871.
When the Danish government tried to integrate Schleswig, but not Holstein, into the Danish state, Prussia led the German Confederation against Denmark in the First War of Schleswig (1848–1851).
Voltaire, a close friend of the king, once described Frederick the Great's Prussia by saying "...it was Sparta in the morning, Athens in the afternoon."
The Frankfurt Parliament was forced to dissolve in 1849, and Frederick William issued Prussia's first constitution by his own authority in 1850.
Instead, the elector continued to appoint a governor (''Kurfürstlicher Rat'') for each territory, who in most cases was a member of the ''Geheimer Rat''.
The Kingdom of Denmark was at the time in personal union with the Duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, both of which had close ties with each other, although only Holstein was part of the German Confederation.
This led to conflict with the German Confederation, which authorised the occupation of Holstein by the Confederation, from which Danish forces withdrew.
The German government seriously considered breaking up Prussia into smaller states, but eventually traditionalist sentiment prevailed and Prussia became by far the largest state of the Weimar Republic, comprising 60% of its territory.
The margraviate's liabilities and tax income as well as the margrave's finances were in the hands of the ''Kreditwerk'', an institution not controlled by the elector, and of the ''Großer Ausschuß'' ("Great Committee") of the Estates.
However, he never gave up and on 3 November 1760 the Prussian king won another battle, the hard-fought Battle of Torgau.
In 1525, Grand Master Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach, a member of a cadet branch of the House of Hohenzollern, became a Lutheran Protestant and secularised the Order's remaining Prussian territories into the Duchy of Prussia.
Konrad I, the Polish duke of Masovia, unsuccessfully attempted to conquer pagan Prussia in crusades in 1219 and 1222.
The port cities of Stettin (Szczecin) in Pomerania, Danzig (Gdańsk) in Prussia, Riga in Livonia, Königsberg (Kaliningrad) and Memel (Klaipėda) rose on the back of this wheat production.
This concept, known as the constructive vote of no confidence, became part of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Lutherans made up the majority, and there were some Reformed minorities in the central and western part of the state.
The nationalisation of the railways slowed the economic development of Prussia because the state favoured the relatively backward agricultural areas in its railway building.
Furthermore, with his renunciation of the Order, Albert could now marry and produce legitimate heirs.
The prime minister of Prussia was, except for two brief periods (January–November 1873 and 1892–94), also imperial chancellor.
46 of 25 February 1947 the Allied Control Council formally proclaimed the dissolution of Prussia.
In the mid-16th century the margraves of Brandenburg had become highly dependent on the Estates (representing counts, lords, knights and towns - but not prelates, due to the Protestant Reformation in 1538).
From this time the Duchy of Prussia was in personal union with the Margraviate of Brandenburg.
This system was destroyed by the ''Preußenschlag'' ("Prussian coup") of Reich Chancellor Franz von Papen.
Upon the death of Albert Frederick in 1618, who died without male heirs, John Sigismund was granted the right of succession to the Duchy of Prussia, which was still a Polish fief.
Also in 1680, the ''Kreditwerk'' came under the aegis of the elector.
During the 19th century, Chancellor  united the German principalities into a "Lesser Germany" which excluded the Austrian Empire.
The Teutonic Order wore a white coat embroidered with a black cross with gold insert and black imperial eagle.
There was also a two-house parliament.
These territorial gains also meant the doubling of Prussia's population.
The rise of early Prussia was based on the raising and selling of wheat.
This allowed just over one-third of the voters to choose 85% of the legislature, all but assuring dominance by the more well-to-do men of the population.
Prussia nationalised its railways in the 1880s in an effort both to lower rates on freight service and to equalise those rates among shippers.
The Kingdom ended in 1918.
On the Austrian side stood the south German states (including Bavaria and Württemberg), some central German states (including Saxony), and Hanover in the north.
At the same time he built up Prussia's military power and participated in the First Partition of Poland with Austria and Russia (1772), an act that geographically connected the Brandenburg territories with those of Prussia proper.
The first half of the 19th century saw a prolonged struggle in Germany between liberals, who wanted a united, federal Germany under a democratic constitution, and conservatives, who wanted to maintain Germany as a patchwork of independent, monarchical states with Prussia and Austria competing for influence.
Prussia's first constitution dated from 1848.
The Teutonic Knights were forced to acknowledge the sovereignty of and to pay tribute to King Casimir IV Jagiellon of Poland in the Second Peace of Thorn, losing western Prussia (Royal Prussia) to Poland in the process.
The abolition of the political power of the aristocracy transformed Prussia into a region strongly dominated by the left wing of the political spectrum, with "Red Berlin" and the industrial centre of the Ruhr Area exerting major influence.
Almost all of Germany's territorial losses, specified in the Treaty of Versailles, were areas that had been part of Prussia: Eupen and Malmedy to Belgium; North Schleswig to Denmark; the Memel Territory to Lithuania; the Hultschin area to Czechoslovakia.
Frederick William I's excise tax (''Akzise''), which from 1667 replaced the property tax raised in Brandenburg for Brandenburg-Prussia's standing army with the Estates' consent, was raised by the elector without consultation with the Estates.
The Hanseatic League was officially formed in northern Europe in 1356 as a group of trading cities which came to have a monopoly on all trade leaving the interior of Europe and Scandinavia and on all sailing trade in the Baltic Sea for foreign countries.
In 1740, Prussian troops crossed over the undefended border of Silesia and occupied Schweidnitz.
In 1910, the population had increased to 40.17 million (62% of the Empire's population).
They saw the churches as channels for education, as a means of instilling morality and obedience, or for propagating useful things, just like bee-keeping or potato-farming.
From 1704 the Prussian estates ''de facto'' relinquished their right to approve the elector's taxes while formally still entitled to do so.
The upper house (First Chamber or ''Erste Kammer''), later renamed the Prussian House of Lords (''Herrenhaus''), was appointed by the king.
In the Soviet Zone of Occupation, which became East Germany in 1949, the former Prussian territories were reorganised into the states of Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt, with the remaining parts of the Province of Pomerania going to Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
Bismarck had barely any success in some of his domestic policies, such as the anti-Catholic ''Kulturkampf'', but he also had mixed success on ones like Germanisation or expulsion of Poles of foreign nationality (Russian or Austro-Hungarian).
The margraves further had to yield to the veto of the Estates in all issues concerning the "better or worse of the country", in all legal commitments, and in all issues concerning pawn or sale of the elector's real property.
Prussia also won full control of Schleswig-Holstein.
Furthermore, in the third Silesian War (usually grouped with the Seven Years' War) Frederick won a victory over Austria at the Battle of Lobositz on 1 October 1756.
Prussia was the dominant state in the new confederation, as the kingdom comprised almost four-fifths of the new state's territory and population.
In both the kingdom and the empire, the original constituencies were never redrawn to reflect changes in population, meaning that rural areas were grossly overrepresented by the turn of the 20th century.
Beyond that, the king was obliged to pay a large indemnity, to cap his army at 42,000 men, and to allow French troops to be garrisoned throughout Prussia, effectively making the Kingdom a French satellite.
In 1871, German states united to create the German Empire under Prussian leadership.
Despite being several times on the verge of defeat Frederick, allied with Great Britain, Hanover and Hesse-Kassel, was finally able to hold the whole of Silesia against a coalition of Saxony, Austria, France and Russia.
He introduced a general civil code, abolished torture and established the principle that the Crown would not interfere in matters of justice.
Frederick William's testament would have divided Brandenburg-Prussia among his sons, but his firstborn son Frederick III (I), with the emperor's backing, succeeded in becoming the sole ruler based on the Treaty of Gera of 1599, which forbade a division of Hohenzollern territories.
As a result, the grip of the landowning classes, the Junkers, remained unbroken, especially in the eastern provinces.
After the Livonian Brothers of the Sword joined the Teutonic Order in 1237, they also controlled Livonia (now Latvia and Estonia).
Prussia took a leading part in the French Revolutionary Wars, but remained quiet for more than a decade due to the Peace of Basel of 1795, only to go once more to war with France in 1806 as negotiations with that country over the allocation of the spheres of influence in Germany failed.
In exchange, Prussia withdrew from areas of central Poland to allow the creation of Congress Poland under Russian sovereignty.
Prussia entered the ranks of the great powers shortly after becoming a kingdom, and exercised most influence in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The Principality of Neuenburg, now the Canton of Neuchâtel in Switzerland, was a part of the Prussian kingdom from 1707 to 1848.
46 of 25 February 1947.
Moreover, the railway surpluses substituted for the development of an adequate tax system.
Around 1252, they finished the conquest of the northernmost Prussian tribe of the Skalvians as well as the western Baltic Curonians, and erected the Memel Castle, which developed into the major port city of Memel (Klaipėda).
This allowed just over 25% of the voters to choose 85% of the legislature, all but assuring dominance by the more well-to-do elements of the population.
As provided for in the "Greater Hamburg Law" ("Groß-Hamburg-Gesetz"), certain exchanges of territory took place.
The German Confederation was dissolved, and Prussia impelled the 21 states north of the Main River into forming the North German Confederation.
In 1226, Duke Konrad invited the Teutonic Knights, a German military order of crusading knights, headquartered in the Kingdom of Jerusalem at Acre, to conquer the Baltic Prussian tribes on his borders.
The presidency was a hereditary office of the Hohenzollern rulers of Prussia.
Women and those who paid no taxes had no vote.
This chamber functioned as a superior agency of the territories' ''Amtskammer'' chambers.
He retained full executive authority and ministers were responsible only to him.
After World War II, East Prussia, Silesia, most of Pomerania and the eastern part of Brandenburg were either annexed by the Soviet Union or given to Poland, and the German-speaking populations expelled.
Prussia, with its capital in  and from 1701 in Berlin, shaped the history of Germany.
During this period, he also opened Prussia's borders to immigrants fleeing from religious persecution in other parts of Europe, such as the Huguenots.
For centuries, the House of  ruled Prussia, successfully expanding its size by way of an unusually well-organised and effective army.
Also, the Saargebiet was created mainly from formerly Prussian territories.
Prussia had 17 of 43 votes, and could easily control proceedings through alliances with the other states.
The area of Greater Poland, where the Polish nation had originated, became the Province of Posen after the Partitions of Poland.
This included Danzig, Königsberg, Breslau, and Stettin.
Most historians regard the Prussian government during this time as far more successful than that of Germany as a whole.
The Austro-Prussian forces defeated the Danes, who surrendered both territories.
Under the Treaties of Tilsit in 1807, the state lost about one third of its area, including the areas gained from the second and third Partitions of Poland, which now fell to the Duchy of Warsaw.
Alarmed, King Frederick William IV agreed to convene a National Assembly and grant a constitution.
His successor, Frederick William I (1640–1688), reformed the army to defend the lands.
Papen appointed himself Reich commissioner for Prussia and took control of the government.
However, the democratic parties in coalition remained a majority, while Communists and Nazis were in the opposition.
In Prussia, this centralistic policy went even further.
The Imperial German Army was, in practice, an enlarged Prussian army, although the other kingdoms (Bavaria, Saxony and Württemberg) retained their own armies.
The East Prussian Otto Braun, who was Prussian minister-president almost continuously from 1920 to 1932, is considered one of the most capable Social Democrats in history.
Eventually, the better-armed Prussian troops won the crucial victory at the Battle of Königgrätz under Helmuth von Moltke the Elder.
In the resulting Gastein Convention of 1865 Prussia took over the administration of Schleswig while Austria assumed that of Holstein.
From 1933, Prussia lost its independence as a result of the Prussian coup, when the Nazi regime was successfully establishing its '''' laws in pursuit of a unitary state.
While all men above age 25 were eligible to vote in imperial elections, Prussia retained its restrictive three-class voting system.
It signalled the beginning of three Silesian Wars (1740–1763).
In view of the size of the army in relation to the total population, Mirabeau said later: ''Prussia, is not a state with an army, but an army with a state.''
Executive power was held by a president, assisted by a chancellor responsible only to him.
West Prussia and the Province of Posen had predominantly Roman Catholic Polish-speaking populations.
In 1689, a new central chamber for all Brandenburg-Prussian territories was established, called ''Geheime Hofkammer'' (from 1713: ''Generalfinanzdirektorium'').
From 1919 to 1932, Prussia was governed by a coalition of the Social Democrats, Catholic Centre and German Democrats; from 1921 to 1925, coalition governments included the German People's Party.
For the first time, these lands came into the hands of a branch of the Hohenzollern family.
In this coup d'état, the government of the Reich deposed the Prussian government on 20 July 1932, under the pretext that the latter had lost control of public order in Prussia (during the Bloody Sunday of Altona, Hamburg, which was still part of Prussia at that time) and by using fabricated evidence that the Social Democrats and the Communists were planning a joint ''putsch''.
The imperial crown was a hereditary office of the House of Hohenzollern, the royal house of Prussia.
As a result of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, the Second Polish Republic was granted not only these two areas, but also areas with a German majority in the Province of West Prussia.
The century-long struggle between Berlin and Vienna for dominance of Germany was now over.
In May 1939 Prussia had an area of 297,007&nbsp;km² and a population of 41,915,040 inhabitants.
The conclusion of the Second Northern War of 1655-1660 had strengthened the elector politically, enabling him to reform the constitution of Cleves and Mark in 1660 and 1661 to introduce officials loyal to him and independent of the local estates.
In November 1918, the monarchies were abolished and the nobility lost its political power during the German Revolution of 1918–19.
In practice, Prussia's relationship with the rest of the empire was somewhat confusing.
He also promoted an advanced secondary education, the forerunner of today's German gymnasium (grammar school) system, which prepares the brightest pupils for university studies.
When the Frankfurt Parliament offered Frederick William the crown of a united Germany, he refused on the grounds that he would not accept a crown from a revolutionary assembly without the sanction of Germany's other monarchs.
In 1864, Prussian and Austrian forces crossed the border between Holstein and Schleswig initiating the Second War of Schleswig.
In 1682 the elector introduced an ''Akzise'' to Pomerania and in 1688 to Magdeburg, while in Cleves and Mark an ''Akzise'' was introduced only between 1716 and 1720.
In 1914, Prussia had an area of 354,490&nbsp;km².
The lower house, or ''Landtag'' represented all taxpayers, who were divided into three classes according to the amount of taxes paid.
The Prussian education system was emulated in various countries, including the United States.
Prussia became a safe haven in much the same way that the United States welcomed immigrants seeking freedom in the 19th century.
Prussia was dominated by two Protestant confessions.
In 1211, Andrew II of Hungary granted Burzenland in Transylvania as a fiefdom to the Teutonic Knights.
Instead of lowering rates as far as possible, the government ran the railways as a profitmaking endeavour, and the railway profits became a major source of revenue for the state.
But in the Peace of Prague in 1866, Prussia annexed four of Austria's allies in northern and central Germany—Hanover, Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), Nassau and Frankfurt.
The ''Preußenschlag'' made it easier, only half a year later, for Hitler to take power decisively in Germany, since he had the whole apparatus of the Prussian government, including the police, at his disposal.
With his Ems Dispatch, Bismarck took advantage of an incident in which the French ambassador had approached William.
Frederick William I became known as the "Great Elector" for his achievements in organizing the electorate, which he accomplished by establishing an absolute monarchy (see absolutism) in Brandenburg-Prussia.
Honouring their treaties, however, the German states joined forces and quickly defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870.
The areas east of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, mainly Eastern Prussia, Western Prussia, and Silesia were handed over to Poland due to the 1945 Treaty of Potsdam between three of the Allies, the U.S., the UK, and the USSR.
For instance, a Prussian minister-president could be forced out of office only if there was a "positive majority" for a potential successor.
In 1863, Denmark introduced a shared constitution for Denmark and Schleswig.
During the Thirty Years' War, the disconnected Hohenzollern lands were repeatedly marched across by various armies, especially the occupying Swedes.
This was due to concessions made by Elector Joachim II in 1541 in return for financial aid by the estates; however, the ''Kreditwerk'' went bankrupt between 1618 and 1625.
This concept, known as the constructive vote of no confidence, was carried over into the Basic Law of the FRG.
While the council was permanently established in 1613, it failed to gain any influence until 1651 due to the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648)
These states were ''de facto'' abolished in 1952 in favour of ''Bezirke'' (districts), but were recreated after the fall of the Eastern Bloc in 1990.
The union of Brandenburg and the Duchy of Prussia in 1618 led to the proclamation of the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701.
Frederick I was succeeded by his son, Frederick William I (1713–1740) the austere "Soldier King", who did not care for the arts but was thrifty and practical.
The constitution of the German Empire was a slightly amended version of the North German Confederation's constitution.
The Kingdom of Prussia was thus abolished in favour of a republic—the Free State of Prussia, a state of Germany from 1918 until 1933.
Certainly his memoirs paint a rosy picture of an idealist , but these were written with the benefit of hindsight and certain crucial events could not have been predicted.
Until after the Thirty Years' War, the various territories of Brandenburg-Prussia remained politically independent from each other, connected only by the common feudal superior.
The Prussian Secret Police, formed in response to the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states, aided the conservative government.
There were numerous Roman Catholic populations in the Rhineland and parts of Westphalia.
The region, originally populated by Baltic Old Prussians who were Christianised, became a favoured location for immigration by (later mainly Protestant) Germans (''see Ostsiedlung''), as well as Poles and Lithuanians along the border regions.
Such chambers were introduced in Brandenburg in 1652, in Cleves and Mark in 1653, in Pomerania in 1654, in Prussia in 1661 and in Magdeburg in 1680.
The rest consisted of regular soldiers that were deemed excellent by most observers, and very determined to repair the humiliation of 1806.
Among their reforms were the liberation of peasants from serfdom, the Emancipation of Jews and making full citizens of them.
In the Western Zones of occupation, which became West Germany (officially, the Federal Republic of Germany) in 1949, the former Prussian territories were divided up among North Rhine-Westphalia, Lower Saxony, Hesse, Rhineland-Palatinate and Schleswig-Holstein.
He turned out to be a man of limited experience, narrow and reactionary views, poor judgment, and occasional bad temper, which alienated former friends and allies.
East Prussia's southern region of Masuria was mostly made up of Germanised Lutheran Masurians.
Under the rule of Frederick III (I) (in office: 1688-1713), the Brandenburg Prussian territories were ''de facto'' reduced to provinces of the monarchy.
The empire was a "Lesser German" solution (in German, "kleindeutsche Lösung") to the question of uniting all German-speaking peoples into one state, because it excluded Austria, which remained connected to Hungary and whose territories included non-German populations.
Their monastic state was mostly Germanised through immigration from central and western Germany and in the south, it was Polonised by settlers from Masovia.
Prussia was proclaimed a "Free State" (i.e.
Officially, the German Empire was a federal state.
Silesia, full of rich soils and prosperous manufacturing towns, became a vital region to Prussia, greatly increasing the nation's area, population, and wealth.
During the 18th century it had a major say in many international affairs under the reign of Frederick the Great.
The lower house, or ''Landtag'' was elected by all taxpayers, who were divided into three classes whose votes were weighted according to the amount of taxes paid.
The Defence Minister General Kurt von Schleicher, who was the prime mover behind the coup manufactured evidence that the Prussian police under Braun's orders were favouring the Communist ''Rotfrontkämpferbund'' in street clashes with the SA as part of an alleged plan to foment a Marxist revolution, which he used to get an emergency decree from President Paul von Hindenburg imposing ''Reich'' control on Prussia.
He retained full executive authority and ministers were responsible only to him.
(The Hohenzollern dynasty had ruled the Margraviate of Brandenburg to the west, a German state centred on Berlin, since the 15th century.)
Bismarck knew that his new German Reich was now a colossus out of all proportion to the rest of the continent.
''Suum cuique'' ("to each, his own"), the motto of the Order of the Black Eagle created by King Frederick I in 1701, was often associated with the whole of Prussia.
Many of the areas which Prussia had annexed in the partitions of Poland, such as the Provinces of Posen and West Prussia, as well as eastern Upper Silesia, went to the Second Polish Republic.
On the side of Prussia were Italy, most north German states, and some smaller central German states.
As crown prince, Frederick had focused, primarily, on philosophy and the arts.
Eventually Poland and Lithuania, allied through the Union of Krewo (1385), defeated the Knights in the Battle of Grunwald (Tannenberg) in 1410.
Frederick III was emperor for just 99 days in 1888 upon the death of his father, dying from cancer.
The lower house, or ''Reichstag'' (Diet), was elected by universal male suffrage.
Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI had died on 20 October 1740.
At the Congress of Vienna (1814–15), which redrew the map of Europe following Napoleon's defeat, Prussia acquired a large section of north western Germany, including the coal-rich .
This conservative document provided for a two-house parliament.
The Hohenzollern kingdom included three-fifths of the German territory and two-thirds of its population.
With this in mind, he declared Germany a satisfied power, using his talents to preserve peace, for example at the Congress of Berlin.
Additionally, mutual defence treaties were concluded.
Unlike its authoritarian pre-1918 predecessor, Prussia from 1918 to 1932 was a promising democracy within Germany.
In 1848 the liberals saw an opportunity when revolutions broke out across Europe.
Stalin was initially content to retain the name, Russia having a different historical view of its neighbour and sometime former ally.
In 1871, Prussia's population numbered 24.69 million, accounting for 60% of the German Empire's population.
'''Prussia''' (; ) was a historic state originating out of the Duchy of Prussia and the Margraviate of Brandenburg, and centered on the region of Prussia.
After the defeat of Napoleon in Russia, Prussia quit its alliance with France and took part in the Sixth Coalition during the "Wars of Liberation" (''Befreiungskriege'') against the French occupation.
With the end of the Nazi regime, the division of Germany into allied-occupation zones and the separation of its territories east of the  line, which were incorporated into Poland and the Soviet Union, the State of Prussia ceased to exist de facto in 1945.
