Although most species of psilocybin-containing mushrooms bruise blue when handled or damaged due to the oxidization of phenolic compounds, this reaction is not a definitive method of identification or determining a mushroom's potency.
Some psilocin is not broken down by enzymes and instead forms a glucuronide; this is a biochemical mechanism animals use to eliminate toxic substances by linking them with glucuronic acid, which can then be excreted in the urine.
Many modern techniques of analytical chemistry have been used to quantify psilocybin levels in mushroom samples.
Mature mycelia contain some psilocybin, while young mycelia (recently germinated from spores) lack appreciable amounts.
Recent studies in the United States have attracted attention from the popular press and thrust psilocybin back into the limelight.
Leary obtained synthesized psilocybin from Hofmann through Sandoz pharmaceutical.
However, the neurochemical basis of psilocybin's effects on the perception of time are not known with certainty.
6,000-year-old pictographs discovered near the Spanish town of Villar del Humo illustrate several mushrooms that have been tentatively identified as ''Psilocybe hispanica'', a hallucinogenic species native to the area.
Osamu Shirota and colleagues reported a method for the large-scale synthesis of psilocybin without chromatographic purification in 2003.
Instead, the term "hallucinogenic drugs" was meant to refer to those substances believed to have a "hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system".
The few existing historical accounts about psilocybin mushrooms typically lack sufficient information to allow species identification, and usually refer to the nature of their effects.
Group size, dosage, preparation, and expectancy were important determinants of the drug response.
Because their physiological effects last only about three and a half hours (about half as long as psilocybin), they proved more manageable in European clinics using "psycholytic therapy"—a form of psychotherapy involving the controlled use of psychedelic drugs.
Psilocin has a high affinity for the 5-HT2A serotonin receptor in the brain, where it mimics the effects of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT).
Open-eye visual hallucinations are common, and may be very detailed although rarely confused with reality.
Guzmán suggests this is a vestige of Spanish colonial influence from several hundred years earlier, when mushroom use was persecuted by the Catholic Church.
Almost one-third of the subjects reported that the experience was the single most meaningful or spiritually significant event of their lives, and over two-thirds reported it among their five most spiritually significant events.
Advances in neuropharmacology and neuropsychology, and the availability of brain imaging techniques have provided impetus for using drugs like psilocybin to probe the "neural underpinnings of psychotic symptom formation including ego disorders and hallucinations".
Panic reactions can occur after consumption of psilocybin-containing mushrooms, especially if the ingestion is accidental or otherwise unexpected.
After the defeat of the Aztecs, the Spanish forbade traditional religious practices and rituals that they considered "pagan idolatry", including ceremonial mushroom use.
A group of researchers from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine led by Griffiths conducted a study to assess the immediate and long-term psychological effects of the psilocybin experience, using a modified version of the mystical experience questionnaire and a rigorous double-blind procedure.
In response to concerns about the increase in unauthorized use of psychedelic drugs by the general public, psilocybin and other hallucinogenic drugs suffered negative press and faced increasingly restrictive laws.
Serotonin receptors are located in numerous parts of the brain, including the cerebral cortex, and are involved in a wide range of functions, including regulation of mood and motivation.
Although no studies have linked psilocybin with birth defects, it is recommended that pregnant women avoid its usage.
The new technique involved the use of ordinary kitchen implements, and for the first time the layperson was able to produce a potent entheogen in his own home, without access to sophisticated technology, equipment or chemical supplies."
Guzmán increased his estimate of the number of psilocybin-containing ''Psilocybe'' to 144 species in a 2005 review.
As it becomes converted to psilocin, it undergoes a first-pass effect, whereby its concentration is greatly reduced before it reaches the systemic circulation.
The intensity and duration of the effects of psilocybin are variable, depending on species or cultivar of mushrooms, dosage, individual physiology, and set and setting, as was shown in experiments led by Timothy Leary at Harvard University in the early 1960s.
Isotopic labeling experiments suggest that tryptophan decarboxylation is the initial biosynthetic step and that ''O''-phosphorylation is the final step.
Following the arrival of Spanish explorers to the New World in the 16th century, chroniclers reported the use of mushrooms by the natives for ceremonial and religious purposes.
Conversely, smaller groups (fewer than six individuals) were seen as more supportive.
Schedule&nbsp;I drugs are illicit drugs that are claimed to have no known therapeutic benefit.
Most national drug laws have been amended to reflect the terms of the convention; examples include the UK Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, the US Psychotropic Substances Act of 1978, Australia Poisons Standard (October 2015), the Canadian Controlled Drugs and Substances Act of 1996, and the Japanese Narcotics and Psychotropics Control Law of 2002.
The statutes themselves, however, did not list the "hallucinogenic drugs" that were being regulated.
In 2008, the Johns Hopkins research team published guidelines for responsibly conducting medical research trials with psilocybin and other hallucinogens in humans.
''P.&nbsp;semilanceata'' — considered by Guzmán to be the world's most widely distributed psilocybin mushroom — is found in Europe, North America, Asia, South America, Australia and New Zealand, but is entirely absent from Mexico.
A 2005 survey conducted in the United Kingdom found that almost a quarter of those who had used psilocybin mushrooms in the past year had experienced a panic attack.
Psilocin binds less tightly to other serotonergic receptors 5-HT1A, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT2C.
Taken together, these suggest that there may be an indirect dopaminergic contribution to psilocin's psychotomimetic effects.
Many species of mushrooms containing psilocybin also contain lesser amounts of the analog compounds baeocystin and norbaeocystin, chemicals thought to be biogenic precursors.
Later the same year they were accompanied on a follow-up expedition by French mycologist Roger Heim, who identified several of the mushrooms as ''Psilocybe'' species.
Psilocin is glucuronated by the glucuronosyltransferase enzymes UGT1A9 in the liver, and by UGT1A10 in the small intestine.
A 2011 prospective study by Roland R.&nbsp;Griffiths and colleagues suggests that a single high dosage of psilocybin can cause long-term changes in the personality of its users.
In contrast, there are some who require relatively high doses to experience noticeable effects.
As a prodrug, psilocybin is quickly converted by the body to psilocin, which has mind-altering effects similar, in some aspects, to those of LSD, mescaline, and DMT.
Recent evidence, however, has suggested against the contention that the use of psilocybin puts one at risk for developing long lasting mental disorders.
As an additional precaution to guide the experience, as with the 2006 study, the 2011 study included a "monitor" or "guide" whom the volunteers supposedly trusted.
In rats, the median lethal dose (LD50) when administered orally is 280&nbsp;milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg), approximately one and a half times that of caffeine.
Its pKa values are estimated to be 1.3 and 6.5 for the two successive phosphate OH groups and 10.4 for the dimethylamine nitrogen, so in general it exists as a zwitterionic structure.
In a 14-month followup, the researchers found that 94% of the volunteers rated their experiences with the drug as one of the top five most spiritually significant of their lives (44% said it was the single most significant).
The psilocybin contents of dried herbarium specimens of ''Psilocybe semilanceata'' in one study were shown to decrease with the increasing age of the sample: collections dated 11, 33, or 118 years old contained 0.84%, 0.67%, and 0.014% (all dry weight), respectively.
For the next four centuries, the Indians of Mesoamerica hid their use of entheogens from the Spanish authorities.
Further backlash against LSD usage swept psilocybin along with it into the Schedule&nbsp;I category of illicit drugs in 1970.
The pilot study found that, when administered by trained professionals in a medical setting, the use of psilocybin was associated with substantial reductions in OCD symptoms in several of the patients.
In one study, administration of gradually increasing dosages of psilocybin daily for 21 days had no measurable effect on electrolyte levels, blood sugar levels, or liver toxicity tests.
Several relatively simple chemical tests — commercially available as reagent testing kits — can be used to assess the presence of psilocybin in extracts prepared from mushrooms.
Once ingested, psilocybin is rapidly metabolized to psilocin, which then acts on serotonin receptors in the brain.
Archaeological artifacts from Mexico, as well as the so-called Mayan "mushroom stones" of Guatemala have also been interpreted by some scholars as evidence for ritual and ceremonial usage of psychoactive mushrooms in the Mayan and Aztec cultures of Mesoamerica.
The new molecules differed from psilocybin in the position of the phosphoryl or hydroxyl group at the top of the indole ring, and in the numbers of methyl groups (CH3) and other additional carbon chains.
Neither flashbacks nor HPPD are commonly associated with psilocybin usage, and correlations between HPPD and psychedelics are further obscured by polydrug use and other variables.
Possession and use of psilocybin mushrooms, including the bluing species of ''Psilocybe'', is therefore prohibited by extension.
Psilocybin is about 100 times less potent than LSD on a weight per weight basis, and the physiological effects last about half as long.
Ehrlich's reagent and DMACA reagent are used as chemical sprays to detect the drug after thin layer chromatography.
Psilocin is broken down by the enzyme monoamine oxidase to produce several metabolites that can circulate in the blood plasma, including 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetaldehyde, 4-hydroxytryptophol, and 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid.
These findings were affirmed in a later review by Jos ten Berge (1999), who concluded that dosage, set, and setting were fundamental factors in determining the outcome of experiments that tested the effects of psychedelic drugs on artists' creativity.
Despite the legal restrictions on psilocybin use, the 1970s witnessed the emergence of psilocybin as the "entheogen of choice".
Some studies, such as the Concord Prison Experiment, suggested promising results using psilocybin in clinical psychiatry.
Although most of the remaining drug is eliminated in this way within 8&nbsp;hours, it is still detectable in the urine after 7&nbsp;days.
In modern Mexico, traditional ceremonial use survives among several indigenous groups, including the Nahuas, the Matlatzinca, the Totonacs, the Mazatecs, Mixes, Zapotecs, and the Chatino.
These included recommendations on how to screen potential study volunteers to exclude those with personal or family psychiatric histories that suggest a risk of adverse reactions to hallucinogens.
In forensic toxicology, techniques involving gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC–MS) are the most widely used due to their high sensitivity and ability to separate compounds in complex biological mixtures.
The temporary increases in blood pressure caused by the drug can be a risk factor for users with pre-existing hypertension.
Both the caps and the stems contain the psychoactive compounds, although the caps consistently contain more.
Psilocybin is a member of the general class of tryptophan-based compounds that originally functioned as antioxidants in earlier life forms before assuming more complex functions in multicellular organisms, including humans.
In general, those placed in groups of more than eight individuals felt that the groups were less supportive, and their experiences were less pleasant.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) have been known to prolong and enhance the effects of psilocybin.
Typically used in small group community settings, they enhance group cohesion and reaffirm traditional values.
Other than the duration of the experience, the effects of psilocybin are similar to comparable dosages of LSD or mescaline.
A pilot study conducted by Johnson et al.
This sentiment was echoed by psychiatrist William A. Richards, who in a 2007 review stated "psychedelic mushroom use may constitute one technology for evoking revelatory experiences that are similar, if not identical, to those that occur through so-called spontaneous alterations of brain chemistry."
Psilocybin has a low toxicity and a relatively low harm potential, and reports of lethal doses of the drug are rare.
One of the participants was religious scholar Huston Smith, author of several textbooks on comparative religion; he later described his experience as "the most powerful cosmic homecoming I have ever experienced."
Other related indole-containing psychedelic compounds include dimethyltryptamine, found in many plant species and in trace amounts in some mammals, and bufotenine, found in the skin of psychoactive toads.
An analysis of information from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health showed that the use of psychedelic drugs such as psilocybin is associated with significantly reduced odds of past month psychological distress, past year suicidal thinking, past year suicidal planning, and past year suicide attempt.
The effects of the drug begin 10–40&nbsp;minutes after ingestion, and last 2–6&nbsp;hours depending on dose, species, and individual metabolism.
The statutes "permitted … people to possess such drugs so long as they were for the personal use of the possessor, for a member of his household, or for administration to an animal".
The most potent are members of the genus ''Psilocybe'', such as ''P.&nbsp;azurescens'', ''P.&nbsp;semilanceata'', and ''P.&nbsp;cyanescens'', but psilocybin has also been isolated from about a dozen other genera.
In the 1960s, Walter Pahnke and colleagues systematically evaluated mystical experiences (which they called "mystical consciousness") by categorizing their common features.
It is chemically related to the amino acid tryptophan, and is structurally similar to the neurotransmitter serotonin.
Sandoz marketed and sold pure psilocybin under the name Indocybin to physicians and clinicians worldwide.
Hofmann's employer Sandoz marketed and sold pure psilocybin to physicians and clinicians worldwide for use in psychedelic psychotherapy.
Psilocybin is rapidly dephosphorylated in the body to psilocin, which is a partial agonist for several serotonergic receptors.
The first clinical study of psilocybin approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) since 1970—led by Francisco Moreno at the University of Arizona and supported by the Heffter Research Institute and the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies—studied the effects of psilocybin on patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD).
In 1959, the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann isolated the active principle psilocybin from the mushroom ''Psilocybe mexicana''.
About 36% of participants also had a strong to extreme "experience of fear" or dysphoria (i.e., a "bad trip") at some point during the psilocybin session (which was not reported by any subject during the methylphenidate session); about one-third of these (13% of the total) reported that this dysphoria dominated the entire session.
The Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances assigns psilocybin a relatively high therapeutic index of 641 (higher values correspond to a better safety profile); for comparison, the therapeutic indices of aspirin and nicotine are 199 and 21, respectively.
In the early 1960s, Timothy Leary and colleagues at Harvard University investigated the role of set and setting on the effects of psilocybin.
One of the most popular of this latter group was published in 1976 under the pseudonyms O.T.&nbsp;Oss and O.N.&nbsp;Oeric by Jeremy Bigwood, Dennis J. McKenna, K. Harrison McKenna, and Terence McKenna, entitled ''Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide''.
In the 1990s, hallucinogens and their effects on human consciousness were again the subject of scientific study, particularly in Europe.
When asked in an interview about the similarity of his work with Leary's, Griffiths explained the difference: "We are conducting rigorous, systematic research with psilocybin under carefully monitored conditions, a route which Dr. Leary abandoned in the early 1960s."
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD) is characterized by a continual presence of visual disturbances similar to those generated by psychedelic substances.
Psychedelic drugs can induce states of consciousness that have lasting personal meaning and spiritual significance in individuals who are religious or spiritually inclined; these states are called mystical experiences.
Starting with 4-hydroxyindole, they generated psilocybin from psilocin in 85% yield, a marked improvement over yields reported from previous syntheses.
Psychedelic researcher Rick Doblin considered the study partially flawed due to incorrect implementation of the double-blind procedure, and several imprecise questions in the mystical experience questionnaire.
Despite the seemingly strict provisions of the law, many people were exempt from prosecution.
As ethnobiologist Jonathan Ott explains, "These authors adapted San Antonio's technique (for producing edible mushrooms by casing mycelial cultures on a rye grain substrate; San Antonio 1971) to the production of ''Psilocybe Stropharia cubensis''.
Psilocybin has additionally shown promise to ease the pain caused by cluster headaches, "one of the worst pain syndromes known to mankind."
The first reliably documented report of intoxication with ''Psilocybe semilanceata''—Europe's most common and widespread psychedelic mushroom—involved a British family in 1799, who prepared a meal with mushrooms they had picked in London's Green Park.
These qualitative somatic effects caused by psilocybin have been corroborated by several early clinical studies.
American banker and amateur ethnomycologist R. Gordon Wasson and his wife Valentina studied the ritual use of psychoactive mushrooms by the native population in the Mazatec village Huautla de Jiménez.
Some users of the drug consider it an entheogen and a tool to supplement practices for transcendence, including meditation and psychonautics.
Purified psilocybin is a white, needle-like crystalline powder with a melting point between , and a slightly ammonia-like taste.
These categories, according to Pahnke, "describe the core of a universal psychological experience, free from culturally determined philosophical or theological interpretations", and allow researchers to assess mystical experiences on a qualitative, numerical scale.
Psilocybin is a tryptamine compound with a chemical structure containing an indole ring linked to an ethylamine substituent.
Hofmann, who had in 1938 created LSD, led a research group that isolated and identified the psychoactive compounds from ''Psilocybe mexicana''.
In the 1962 Marsh Chapel Experiment, which was run by Pahnke at the Harvard Divinity School under the supervision of Timothy Leary, almost all of the graduate degree divinity student volunteers who received psilocybin reported profound religious experiences.
Although the presence or absence of psilocybin is not of much use as a chemotaxonomical marker at the familial level or higher, it is used to classify taxa of lower taxonomic groups.
On October 27, 1970, both psilocybin and psilocin became classified as Schedule I drugs and were simultaneously labeled "hallucinogens" under a section of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act known as the Controlled Substances Act.
In general, the psilocybin content of mushrooms is quite variable (ranging from almost nothing to 1.5% of the dry weight) and depends on species, strain, growth and drying conditions, and mushroom size.
The lethal dose from psilocybin toxicity alone is unknown at recreational or medicinal levels, and has rarely been documented—, only two cases attributed to overdosing on hallucinogenic mushrooms (without concurrent use of other drugs) have been reported in the scientific literature and may involve other factors aside from psilocybin.
Several websites emerged that have contributed to the accessibility of information on description, use, effects and exchange of experiences among users.
Several modern studies have investigated the possibility that psilocybin can ease the psychological suffering associated with end-stage cancer.
There were no reports of serious complications when psilocybin was used in this way.
These analytical techniques to determine psilocybin concentrations in body fluids are, however, not routinely available, and not typically used in clinical settings.
The toxicity of psilocybin is low.
This was due in large part to a wide dissemination of information on the topic, which included works such as those by author Carlos Castaneda, and several books that taught the technique of growing psilocybin mushrooms.
Psilocybin is known to strongly influence the subjective experience of the passage of time.
Psilocybin is metabolized mostly in the liver.
Reflecting the meaning of the word ''entheogen'' ("the god within"), the mushrooms are revered as powerful spiritual sacraments that provide access to sacred worlds.
In general, the effects include euphoria, visual and mental hallucinations, changes in perception, a distorted sense of time, and spiritual experiences, and can include possible adverse reactions such as nausea and panic attacks.
Terence McKenna documented the worldwide practices of psilocybin mushroom usage as part of a cultural ethos relating to the Earth and mysteries of nature, and suggested that mushrooms enhanced self-awareness and a sense of contact with a "Transcendent Other"—reflecting a deeper understanding of our connectedness with nature.
In general, psilocybin-containing species are dark-spored, gilled mushrooms that grow in meadows and woods of the subtropics and tropics, usually in soils rich in humus and plant debris.
Preliminary results indicate that low doses of psilocybin can improve the mood and reduce the anxiety of patients with advanced cancer, and that the effects last from two weeks to six months.
Because most psilocybin biosynthesis occurs early in the formation of fruit bodies or sclerotia, younger, smaller mushrooms tend to have a higher concentration of the drug than larger, mature mushrooms.
Murals dated 9000 to 7000&nbsp;BCE found in the Sahara desert in southeast Algeria depict horned beings dressed as dancers, clothed in garb decorated with geometrical designs, and holding mushroom-like objects.
In 1957, Wasson described the psychedelic visions that he experienced during these rituals in "Seeking the Magic Mushroom", an article published in the popular American weekly ''Life'' magazine.
The precise sequence of the intermediate enzymatic steps is not known with certainty, and the biosynthetic pathway may differ between species.
It tends to build connections between people, who are generally much more in communication than when they use LSD."
About a third of users report feelings of anxiety or paranoia.
Psilocybin mushrooms have been and continue to be used in indigenous New World cultures in religious, divinatory, or spiritual contexts.
The Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún wrote of witnessing mushroom usage in his Florentine Codex (published 1545–1590), and described how some merchants would celebrate upon returning from a successful business trip by consuming mushrooms to evoke revelatory visions.
A 2008 study concluded that, based on US data from the period 2000–2002, adolescent-onset (defined here as ages 11–17) usage of hallucinogenic drugs (including psilocybin) did not increase the risk of drug dependence in adulthood; this was in contrast to adolescent usage of cannabis, cocaine, inhalants, anxiolytic medicines, and stimulants, all of which were associated with "an excess risk of developing clinical features associated with drug dependence".
Leary and colleagues proposed that psilocybin heightens suggestibility, making an individual more receptive to interpersonal interactions and environmental stimuli.
These results are comparable to those obtained from early studies that explored the use of LSD to improve the psychological well-being of terminally ill patients, but without the experimental rigor employed in modern clinical psychopharmacology research.
Although hallucinogenic ''Psilocybe'' species are abundant in low-lying areas of Mexico, most ceremonial use takes places in mountainous areas of elevations greater than .
Common responses include: pupil dilation (93%); changes in heart rate (100%), including increases (56%), decreases (13%), and variable responses (31%); changes in blood pressure (84%), including hypotension (34%), hypertension (28%), and general instability (22%); changes in stretch reflex (86%), including increases (80%) and decreases (6%); nausea (44%); tremor (25%); and dysmetria (16%) (inability to properly direct or limit motions).
The possession and use of psilocybin is prohibited under almost all circumstances, and often carries severe legal penalties.
Individuals who had experience with psilocybin prior to the study reported more pleasant experiences than those for whom the drug was novel.
These techniques include ion mobility spectrometry, capillary zone electrophoresis, ultraviolet spectroscopy, and infrared spectroscopy.
However, in many national, state, and provincial drug laws, there has been a great deal of ambiguity about the legal status of psilocybin mushrooms, as well as a strong element of selective enforcement in some places.
The total potency varies greatly between species and even between specimens of a species collected or grown from the same strain.
In a 25-year followup to the experiment, all of the subjects given psilocybin described their experience as having elements of "a genuine mystical nature and characterized it as one of the high points of their spiritual life".
According to a 2008 review of safety guidelines in human hallucinogenic research, however, Leary and Alpert's well-publicized termination from Harvard and later advocacy of hallucinogen use "further undermined an objective scientific approach to studying these compounds".
English botanist John Parkinson included details about a "foolish mushroom" in his 1640 herbal ''Theatricum Botanicum''.
Tolerance to psilocybin builds and dissipates quickly; ingesting psilocybin more than about once a week can lead to diminished effects.
In general, the phrase "bad trip" is used to describe a reaction that is characterized primarily by fear or other unpleasant emotions, not just transitory experience of such feelings.
Alcohol consumption may enhance the effects of psilocybin, because acetaldehyde, one of the primary breakdown metabolites of consumed alcohol, reacts with biogenic amines present in the body to produce MAOIs related to tetrahydroisoquinoline and β-carboline.
Users having an unpleasant experience (a "bad trip") describe a reaction accompanied by fear, other unpleasant feelings, and occasionally by dangerous behavior.
In rare cases people have injected mushroom extracts intravenously.
Ingesting psilocybin in combination with other drugs, including alcohol, can also increase the likelihood of a bad trip.
Although the 5-HT2A receptor is responsible for most of the effects of psilocin, various lines of evidence have shown that interactions with non-5-HT2A receptors also contribute to the subjective and behavioral effects of the drug.
A small number of people are unusually sensitive to psilocybin, such that a normally threshold-level dose of about 2&nbsp;mg can result in effects usually associated with medium or high doses.
Two months after taking psilocybin, 79% of the participants reported moderately to greatly increased life satisfaction and sense of well-being.
The law—passed in July 1965 and effected on February 1, 1966—was an amendment to the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and was intended to regulate the unlicensed "possession, manufacture, or sale of depressant, stimulant and hallucinogenic drugs".
None of the 90 sessions that took place throughout the study were rated as decreasing well-being or life satisfaction.
However, in the ''Psychedelics Encyclopedia'', author Peter Stafford noted, "The psilocybin experience seems to be warmer, not as forceful and less isolating.
After ingesting psilocybin, a wide range of subjective effects may be experienced: feelings of disorientation, lethargy, giddiness, euphoria, joy, and depression.
Although psilocybin may be prepared synthetically, outside of the research setting, it is not typically used in this form.
The conditions of the experimental design included a single drug experience a month, on a couch, in a living-room-like setting, with eye shades and carefully chosen music (classical and world music).
The majority of these are found in Mexico (53 species), with the remainder distributed in the US and Canada (22), Europe (16), Asia (15), Africa (4), and Australia and associated islands (19).
A 2011 review of alternative headache treatments concluded that, despite flaws in the study design, these results suggest that LSD and psilocybin may warrant further study for use in the prevention of cluster headaches—only subhallucinogenic doses of the drugs are required for effective treatment, and no other medications have been reported to stop a cluster headache cycle.
Based on studies using animals, about 50% of ingested psilocybin is absorbed through the stomach and intestine.
The similarity of psilocybin-induced symptoms to those of schizophrenia has made the drug a useful research tool in behavioral and neuroimaging studies of this psychotic disorder.
The psychotomimetic (psychosis-mimicking) effects of psilocin can be blocked in a dose-dependent fashion by the 5-HT2A antagonist drugs ketanserin and risperidone.
The United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances (adopted in 1971) requires its members to prohibit psilocybin, and parties to the treaty are required to restrict use of the drug to medical and scientific research under strictly controlled conditions.
Other adverse effects less frequently reported include paranoia, confusion, prolonged derealization (disconnection from reality), and mania.
Probably the most common cause of hospital admissions resulting from psychedelic mushroom usage involve "bad trips" or panic reactions, in which affected individuals become extremely anxious, confused, agitated, or disoriented.
Some scholars have proposed that many of the qualities of a drug-induced mystical experience are indistinguishable from mystical experiences achieved through non-drug techniques, such as meditation or holotropic breathwork.
Since the 1990s, there has been a renewal of scientific research into the potential medical and psychological therapeutic benefits of psilocybin for treating conditions including obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), cluster headaches, and anxiety related to terminal cancer.
The volunteers and monitors all remained blind to the exact dosages for the purpose of the experiment.
About two-thirds indicated that the experience increased their sense of well-being or life satisfaction.
Nevertheless, he said that the study cast "a considerable doubt on the assertion that mystical experiences catalyzed by drugs are in any way inferior to non-drug mystical experiences in both their immediate content and long-term effects".
Based on the results of animal studies, the lethal dose of psilocybin has been extrapolated to be 6&nbsp;grams, 1000 times greater than the effective dose of 6&nbsp;milligrams.
According to the study authors, the finding is significant because "no study has prospectively demonstrated personality change in healthy adults after an experimentally manipulated discrete event."
Over 100,000 copies were sold by 1981.
Psilocybin is an alkaloid that is soluble in water, methanol and aqueous ethanol, but insoluble in organic solvents like chloroform and petroleum ether.
Repeated use of psilocybin does not lead to physical dependence.
Although the earliest methods commonly used gas chromatography, the high temperature required to vaporize the psilocybin sample prior to analysis causes it to spontaneously lose its phosphoryl group and become psilocin — making it difficult to chemically discriminate between the two drugs.
About half of the study participants—described as healthy, "spiritually active", and many possessing postgraduate degrees—showed an increase in the personality dimension of openness (assessed using the Revised NEO Personality Inventory), and this positive effect was apparent more than a year after the psilocybin session.
Flashbacks (spontaneous recurrences of a previous psilocybin experience) can occur long after having used psilocybin mushrooms.
Jurisdictions that have specifically enacted or amended laws to criminalize the possession of psilocybin mushroom spores include Germany (since 1998), and California, Georgia, and Idaho in the United States.
Users having a pleasant experience can feel a sense of connection to others, nature, and the universe; other perceptions and emotions are also often intensified.
For example, Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius (1526–1609) described the ''bolond gomba'' (crazy mushroom), used in rural Hungary to prepare love potions.
Although other researchers have described instances of psychedelic drug usage leading to new psychological understandings and personal insights, it is not known whether these experimental results can be generalized to larger populations.
There is evidence to suggest that psychoactive mushrooms have been used by humans in religious ceremonies for thousands of years.
Psilocybin has been a subject of medical research since the early 1960s, when Leary and Alpert ran the Harvard Psilocybin Project, in which they carried out a number of experiments to evaluate the therapeutic value of psilocybin in the treatment of personality disorders, or to augment psychological counseling.
The spores of these mushrooms do not contain psilocybin or psilocin.
Tobacco smokers may also experience more powerful effects with psilocybin, because tobacco smoke exposure decreases levels of MAO in the brain and peripheral organs.
Several modern bioanalytical methods have been adapted to rapidly and accurately screen the levels of psilocybin in mushroom samples and body fluids.
Likewise, in a recent (2010) web-based questionnaire study designed to investigate user perceptions of the benefits and harms of hallucinogenic drug use, 60% of the 503 psilocybin users reported that their use of psilocybin had a long-term positive impact on their sense of well-being.
