'''''Psittacosaurus''''' ( ; "parrot lizard") is a genus of extinct ceratopsian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of what is now Asia, existing between 123.2 and 100 million years ago.
While Psittacosauridae was an early branch of the ceratopsian family tree, ''Psittacosaurus'' itself was probably not directly ancestral to any other groups of ceratopsians.
French paleontologist Eric Buffetaut and a Thai colleague, Varavudh Suteethorn, described a partial upper and lower jaw from the Aptian-Albian Khok Kruat Formation of Thailand in 1992, giving it the name ''Psittacosaurus sattayaraki''.
An adult femur has a published length of about 16&nbsp;centimetres (6.3&nbsp;in).
houi'' a ''nomen dubium'' within ''Psittacosaurus''.
lujiatunensis'', ''P.
The skull was named ''P.
The source of the injury remains unknown.
Sereno (2010) regarded its distinct proportions as due to crushing and compression of the ''Hongshanosaurus'' skulls.
The generic name ''Hongshanosaurus'' was derived from the Mandarin Chinese words 紅 (''hóng'': "red") and 山 (''shān'': "hill"), as well as the Greek word ''sauros'' ("lizard") .
The lower jaws of psittacosaurs are characterised by a bulbous vertical ridge down the centre of each tooth.
Until the study, it was generally thought the brain of ''Psittacosaurus'' would have been similar to other ceratopsians with low Encephalisation Quotients.
However, the 2007 study dispelled this theory when it found the brain to be more advanced.
The frontal bone of ''P.
There is no evidence for parental care.
These include the presence of a pyramidal horn on the postorbital, a depression on the postorbital-jugal contact, and enamel thickness.
Psittacosaurids were basal to almost all known ceratopsians except ''Yinlong'' and perhaps the Chaoyangsauridae.
Behaviours influenced by high EQs include nest-building, parental care, and bird-like sleeping, some of which have been shown to be present in ''Psittacosaurus''.
mongoliensis'', with a proportionately longer skull and tail.
All ''Psittacosaurus'' fossils discovered so far have been found in Early Cretaceous sediments in Asia, from southern Siberia to northern China, and possibly as far south as Thailand.
mongoliensis'' has been described from Mongolia so far, these specimens are still in preparation and have not yet been assigned to a species.
They further suggested that some species of ''Psittacosaurus'' were more terrestrial than others.
This large amount of bone deposited around the injury indicates that the animal survived for quite a while despite the injury and subsequent infection.
The abundance of this dinosaur in the fossil record has led to the labelling of Lower Cretaceous sediments of east Asia the ''Psittacosaurus'' biochron.
However, more recent authors have noted that it can be distinguished by its proportionally long snout compared to other species of ''Psittacosaurus'', as well as a prominent bony protuberance, pointing outwards and downwards, on the maxilla of the upper jaw.
Uniquely, the premaxillary bone contacts the jugal (cheek) bone on the outside of the skull.
This same expedition turned up the remains of many other famous Mongolian dinosaurs, including ''Protoceratops'', ''Oviraptor'', and ''Velociraptor''.
meileyingensis'' has the shortest snout and neck frill of any species, making the skull nearly circular in profile.
neimongoliensis'' was probably smaller than ''P.
Sereno suggested in 2000 that ''P.
It is notable for being the most species-rich dinosaur genus.
One skeleton of ''Repenomamus robustus'', a large triconodont mammal, is preserved with the remains of a juvenile ''Psittacosaurus'' in its abdominal cavity.
Genus and species were both named by Chinese paleontologists You Hailu, Xu Xing, and Wang Xiaolin in 2003.
Out of the hundreds of known ''Psittacosaurus'' specimens, only one has been described to possess any sort of pathology.
osborni'' as a synonym of ''P.
Disarticulated postcranial remains representing multiple individuals were found at the same locality and were assigned to the species.
xinjiangensis'' is distinguished by a prominent jugal 'horn' that is flattened on the front end, as well as some features of the teeth.
There is a flange on the dentary of the lower jaw, similar to ''P.
The highly cornified bristles are arranged in tight clusters of three to six individual bristles, with each bristle being filled with pulp.
The bone exhibits a large round pit, evidence of necrosis due to a lack of blood supply to the region.
Another fossil from the Yixian Formation provides direct evidence of ''Psittacosaurus'' as a prey animal.
He named the type species ''P.
sibiricus'' is the number of 'horns' around the eyes, with three prominences on each postorbital, and one in front of each eye, on the palpebral bones.
There is generally negative allometry for brain size with development in vertebrates, but this was shown not to be true in ''Psittacosaurus''.
The authors (Farke ''et al.'')
He  provisionally designated ''P.
This indicates relatively rapid growth compared to most reptiles and marsupial mammals, but slower than modern birds and placental mammals.
When the skeleton was prepared further, it became clear that it was nearly identical to ''Psittacosaurus mongoliensis''.
Unlike most ceratopsians, their beaks did not form curved tips, but were instead rounded and flattened.
The collagen tissue fibres in ''Psittacosaurus'' are complex, virtually identical to all other vertebrates in structure but having an exceptional thickness of about forty layers.
ordosensis'', is 30% smaller than ''P.
meileyingensis'', and ''P.
gobiensis'' is named for the region it was found in 2001, and first described by Sereno, Zhao and Lin in 2010.
The difference is most likely due to artifacts of the fossilisation process.
lujiatunensis'', named in 2006 by Chinese paleontologist Zhou Chang-Fu and three Chinese colleagues, is one of the oldest known species, based on four skulls from the lower beds of Yixian Formation, near the village of Lujiatun.
osborni'' after Henry Fairfield Osborn.
youngi'' is generally considered a junior synonym of that better-known species.
Unfortunately, the skull was damaged while in the care of the Chinese Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology (IVPP), and several fragments have been lost, including all of the teeth.
One individual was found preserved with long filaments on the tail, similar to those of ''Tianyulong'', and scales across the rest of the animal.
The smallest is a ''P.
In 1958, Chinese paleontologist Yang Zhongjian (better known as C. C. Young) renamed the skeleton ''Psittacosaurus protiguanodonensis''.
It can be told apart from the other species of ''Psittacosaurus'' by a combination of 32 anatomical features, including six that are unique to the species.
Three other specimens were referred to this species but remain undescribed.
Seventeen species have been referred to the genus ''Psittacosaurus'', although only nine to eleven are considered valid today.
The ilium, one of the three bones of the pelvis, also bears a characteristically long bony process behind the acetabulum (hip socket).
The find of a herd of six ''Psittacosaurus'' individuals killed and buried by a volcanic mudflow indicates the presence of at least two age groups from two distinct clutches gathered together.
Using argon-argon dating, a team of Chinese scientists dated the lowest beds in the formation to about 128&nbsp;mya, and the highest to approximately 122&nbsp;mya.
mongoliensis'' has determined the growth rate of these animals.
lujiatunensis'' is well known; a study on the anatomy and functionality of three specimens was published in 2007.
Individuals of all ages are known, from hatchlings less than 13&nbsp;centimetres (5&nbsp;in) long, to very old adults reaching nearly 2&nbsp;metres (6.5&nbsp;ft) in length.
Such behaviour is also found in cooperative breeding modern birds.
In the 1950s, a new Chinese species of ''Psittacosaurus'' was found in the Aptian-Albian Qingshan Formation of Shandong Province, southeast of Beijing.
meileyingensis'' from the Jiufotang Formation, near the town of Meileyingzi, Liaoning Province, northeastern China.
The juveniles, all approximately the same age, are intertwined in a group underneath the adult, although all 34 skulls are positioned above the mass of bodies, as they would have been in life.
It is based on a nearly complete fossil skeleton, including most of the skull, found in the Early Cretaceous Ejinhoro Formation with seven other individuals.
The remains were not completely described until 2006.
sinensis'' and appears to be very similar, so ''P.
A very striking feature of ''P.
guyangensis'' and ''P.
A nut- or seed-rich diet would also match well with the gastroliths often seen in well-preserved psittacosaur skeletons.
lujiatunensis'' and ''H.
In 2005, Zhou and colleagues suggested that ''P.
Two new species of ''Psittacosaurus'' were described by Canadian Dale Russell and Zhao in 1996.
mongoliensis'' are flat on top, especially over the back of the skull, with a triangular depression, the antorbital fossa, on the outside surface of the maxilla (an upper jaw bone).
A higher EQ correlates with more complex behaviour, and various dinosaurs have high EQs, similar to birds, which range from 0.36 to 2.98.
Heavy predation on juvenile ''Psittacosaurus'' may have resulted in R-selection, the production of more numerous offspring to counteract this loss.
He regarded ''Hongshanosaurus'' as a junior synonym of ''Psittacosaurus'', and potentially the same as ''P.
As psittacosaurids were bipedal animals, a similar injury to a weight bearing bone in the leg would most likely have been fatal.
lujiatunensis'' and ''P.
mongoliensis'', for the location of its discovery in Mongolia, placing it in the new family Psittacosauridae.
If the jaws were aligned, the beaks could be used to crop objects, but if the lower jaw was retracted so that the lower beak was inside the upper beak, the jaws may have served a nutcracking function.
Several juvenile ''Psittacosaurus'' have been found.
Up to 11 species are known, from across Mongolia, Siberia, China, and possibly Thailand.
An adult skeleton was later discovered at a different locality in Xinjiang.
This material was recovered in Gansu Province, near the border with Inner Mongolia.
noted that all taxa outside of Leptoceratopsidae and Coronosauria with the exception of their genus ''Aquilops'' are from Asia, meaning the group likely originated there.
In contrast, most other dinosaur genera are monospecific, containing only a single known species.
The forelimbs were also too short to be used in digging or bringing food to the mouth, and Senter suggested that if ''Psittacosaurus'' needed to dig depressions in the ground it may have used its hindlimbs instead.
Similar bristles are found in extant birds such as the horned screamer; these structures differ from feathers in that they do not develop from a follicle, but both arise from discrete cell populations.
The maximum adult body weight was most likely over 20&nbsp;kilogrammes (44&nbsp;lb) in ''P.
The species of ''Psittacosaurus'' vary in size and specific features of the skull and skeleton, but share the same overall body shape.
However, the type specimen of ''P.
The ischium bone of the pelvis is also longer than the femur, which differs from other species in which these bones are known.
A darkened soft-tissue structure was also found near the jugal horn; this may represent a keratinous sheath or a skin flap.
However, ''Psittacosaurus'' may not have been entirely bipedal for its entire lifespan.
The complete type skull, probably adult, is 13.7&nbsp;centimetres (5.5&nbsp;in) long.
The dentary of ''P.
mongoliensis'', it falls within the range of individual variation seen in other specimens of that species and is no longer recognised as a valid species.
The skin remains could be observed by a natural cross-section to compare them to modern animals, showing that dinosaurian dermal layers evolved in parallel to those in many other large vertebrates.
Overall, this species is thought to exhibit several primitive characteristics compared to other species of ''Psittacosaurus'', which is consistent with its greater geological age.
The specimen also had dense clusters of pigment on its shoulders, face (possibly for display), and cloaca (which may have had an antimicrobial function), as well as large patagia on its hind legs that connected to the base of the tail.
Ford and Martin (2010) proposed that ''Psittacosaurus'' was semi-aquatic, swimming with its tail like a crocodile, and paddling and kicking.
In 1931, C. C. Young named a new species of ''Psittacosaurus'' for a partial skull discovered in Inner Mongolia, China.
It is also unlikely that a single female would have so many offspring at one time.
Another juvenile-only cluster shows that specimens of different ages grouped together.
The smallest known species, ''P.
Other authors have also defended its validity, while some continue to regard it as dubious.
The vast majority of these have not been assigned to any published species, although many are very well preserved and some have already been partially described.
You and colleagues described an additional specimen and concurred that it was distinct from ''P.
In a 2010 review, Sereno again regarded ''P.
The genera closely related to ''Psittacosaurus'' are all from Asia, with the exception of ''Aquilops'', from North America.
Extremely tall in height and short in length, the skull has an almost round profile in some species.
The earliest known species is ''P.
The pit is surrounded by a massive amount of swelling along the lower third of the bone.
In 2000, Sereno questioned the validity of this species, citing its eroded and fragmentary nature, and noted an absence of features characteristic of the genus ''Psittacosaurus''.
Bony horns protrude from the skull of ''P.
lujiatunensis'' is 0.31, significantly higher than genera such as ''Triceratops''.
''Psittacosaurus'' skulls share several adaptations with more derived ceratopsians, such as the unique rostral bone at the tip of the upper jaw, and the flared jugal (cheek) bones.
Psittacosaurs had self-sharpening teeth that would have been useful for cropping and slicing tough plant material.
houi'', which would normally have priority.
neimongoliensis'', this species was discovered in the Eijnhoro Formation.
Although many early studies using radiometric dating put the Yixian in the Jurassic Period, tens of millions of years outside of the expected temporal range of ''Psittacosaurus'', most recent work dates it to the Early Cretaceous.
mongoliensis''—can reach 2&nbsp;metres (6.5&nbsp;ft) in length.
Other specimens are larger, with the largest documented femur measuring about 21&nbsp;centimetres (8.25&nbsp;in) long.
One adult skull measures only 9.5&nbsp;centimeters (3.75&nbsp;in) in length.
While this bed has been dated differently by different authors, from 128&nbsp;Ma in the Barremian stage, to 125&nbsp;Ma in the earliest Aptian, revised dating methods have shown them to be about 123 million years old.
sattayaraki'' has a flange similar to that found in ''P.
The size of these bulbs are comparable to large predatory theropods, although they likely evolved to avoid predators instead of to seek out prey.
With a very high sample size, the diversity of ''Psittacosaurus'' can be analysed more completely than that of most dinosaur genera, resulting in the recognition of more species.
There is no sign of a bone fracture, but very clear signs of an infection can be seen near the midpoint of the right fibula.
ordosensis'' in 1996, after the Ordos prefecture of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region.
The skull of an adult ''P.
However, a 2013 paper pointed out that the adult specimen did not belong with the nest, its skull having no sedimentary connection to the main slab where the juveniles occurred, but had been glued onto it.
neimongoliensis'' and ''P.
Unlike later ceratopsians, they did not have teeth suitable for grinding or chewing their food.
Several of the juvenile's bones are still articulated, indicating that the carnivorous mammal swallowed its prey in large chunks.
gobiensis'' was small-bodied ( long) and differs from other species of ''Psittacosaurus'' by "significant, but structurally minor, details."
lujiatunensis'', and to a lesser degree in ''P.
The below cladogram is from their analysis, placing the genus as one of the most primitive ceratopsians.
These were confirmed by the authors, as well as an independent scientist, to not represent plant material.
The curvature of the semicircular canals is related to the agility of reptiles, and the large curved canals in ''Psittacosaurus'' show that the genus was much more agile than later ceratopsians.
In 2004, a specimen found in the Yixian Formation was claimed as evidence for parental care in dinosaurs.
He later synonymised the two species under the name ''P.
The study concluded that both represented a single species.
Adult skulls are smaller than those of ''P.
sibiricus'' is the largest known species of ''Psittacosaurus''.
Most age classes are represented, from hatchling through to adult, which has allowed several detailed studies of ''Psittacosaurus'' growth rates and reproductive biology.
This species is named ''P.
All other ceratopsians retained the fifth digit of the hand, a plesiomorphy or primitive trait, whereas all species of ''Psittacosaurus'' had only four digits on the hand.
It is considered highly unlikely that the fifth digit or antorbital fenestra would evolve a second time.
Several individuals of different ages were discovered in the early 1970s by Chinese paleontologists and described by Sereno and Zhao, although the holotype and most complete skeleton belonged to a juvenile.
Sereno's hypothesis was supported by a morphometric study in 2013, which found ''P.
This name refers to the ancient Hongshan culture of northeastern China, who lived in the same general area in which the fossil skull of ''Hongshanosaurus'' was found.
mongoliensis'', which had originally been found in Mongolia.
A more recent Chinese study, using uranium-lead dating, suggests that the lower beds are younger, approximately 123.2&nbsp;mya, while agreeing with an age of 122&nbsp;mya for the upper beds.
Fossil remains of over 75 individuals have been recovered, including nearly 20 complete skeletons with skulls.
Furthermore, the adult was also shown to be six years old, whereas histological studies have shown ''P.
sinensis'' to differentiate it from ''P.
Both specimens are from Mongolia.
The jugals flare out sideways, forming 'horns' proportionally wider than in any other known ''Psittacosaurus'' species except ''P.
He did not synonymise the two species because of difficulties with the holotype skull of ''H.
In 2014, the describers of a new taxon of basal ceratopsian published a phylogenetic analysis encompassing ''Psittacosaurus''.
lujiatunensis'' rather than ''P.
Larger scales were arranged in irregular patterns, with numerous smaller scales occupying the spaces between them, similarly to skin impressions known from other ceratopsians, such as ''Chasmosaurus''.
lujiatunensis'' was contemporaneous with another psittacosaurid species, ''Hongshanosaurus houi'', which was found in the same beds.
However, only the skull, lower jaw, and foot have been described.
The jugal bones flare outwards widely, making the skull wider than it is long, as seen in ''P.
The front half of a skull from Guyang County in Inner Mongolia was described as ''Psittacosaurus guyangensis'' in 1983.
ordosensis'' a ''nomen dubium''.
Sereno (2010) remained unconvinced of its validity.
Once in its own family, Psittacosauridae, with other genera like ''Hongshanosaurus'', it is now considered to be senior synonym of the latter and an early offshoot of the branch that led to more derived forms.
neimongoliensis'' is distinctly narrow compared to that of other species, resulting in a narrower skull overall.
Widely flared jugals are also found in ''P.
There are only four digits on the manus ('hand'), as opposed to the five found in most other ornithischians (including all other ceratopsians), while the four-toed hindfoot is very similar to many other small ornithischians.
In addition, the ''antorbital fenestra'', an opening in the skull between the eye socket and nostril, was lost during the evolution of Psittacosauridae, but is still found in most other ceratopsians and in fact most other archosaurs.
''Psittacosaurus'' postcranial skeletons are more typical of a 'generic' bipedal ornithischian.
It is known from a skull and partial articulated skeleton with gastroliths.
Several species approach ''P.
Because of the flared cheeks, the skull is actually wider than it is long.
Unlike the femur and tibia, the fibula is not a weight-bearing bone, so this animal would still have been able to walk to some extent.
mongoliensis'', but noted it was tentative because of the presence of multiple valid psittacosaur species in Inner Mongolia.
houi'', honours Hou Lianhai, a professor at the IVPP in Beijing, who curated the specimen.
An age determination study performed on the fossilized remains of ''P.
sattayaraki'', and ''P.
The most common age of geologic formations bearing ''Psittacosaurus'' fossils is from the late Barremian through Albian stages of the Early Cretaceous, or approximately 123 to 100&nbsp;mya (million years ago).
As the generic name suggests, the short skull and beak superficially resemble those of modern parrots.
mongoliensis'', was found in the lower beds of the Yixian Formation.
Its large eyes indicate that it also likely had good vision, which would have been useful in finding food or avoiding predators.
It is based on several skull fragments.
A histological examination of ''P.
