The activity of many types of immune cells found in the skin is also effectively suppressed by NBUVB phototherapy treatments.
The stratum granulosum layer of the epidermis is often missing or significantly decreased in psoriatic lesions; the skin cells from the most superficial layer of skin are also abnormal as they never fully mature.
Psoriasis is classified as a papulosquamous disorder and is most commonly subdivided into different categories based on histological characteristics.
Another classification scheme considers genetic and demographic factors.
File:Psoriasis of the palms.jpg|Psoriasis of the palms
Researchers have proposed differing descriptions of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis; some authors have classified them as autoimmune diseases while others have classified them as distinct from autoimmune diseases and referred to them as immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.
The immune response in those infected with HIV is typically characterized by cellular signals from Th2 subset of CD4+ helper T cells, whereas the immune response in psoriasis vulgaris is characterized by a pattern of cellular signals typical of Th1 subset of CD4+ helper T cells and Th17 helper T cells.
Many tools exist to measure the quality of life of patients with psoriasis and other dermatological disorders.
Some of these genes are also involved in other autoimmune diseases.
The cause of psoriasis is not fully understood, but a number of theories exist.
Psoriasis has a strong hereditary component, and many genes are associated with it, but it is unclear how those genes work together.
Dendritic cells bridge the innate immune system and adaptive immune system.
Targeted immunotherapy as well as psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy can reduce the number of dendritic cells and favors a Th2 cell cytokine secretion pattern over a Th1/Th17 cell cytokine profile.
About 75% of cases can be managed with creams alone.
During the same time period, psoriatic arthritis cases were treated with intravenously administered gold preparations in the same manner as rheumatoid arthritis.
The lack of neutralizing antibodies against etanercept is probably secondary to the innate presence of the TNF-α receptor, and the development of immune tolerance.
Plaque psoriasis typically appears as raised areas of inflamed skin covered with silvery-white scaly skin.
Guttate psoriasis has drop-shaped lesions.
A major mechanism of NBUVB is the induction of DNA damage in the form of pyrimidine dimers.
Around one-third of people with psoriasis report a family history of the disease, and researchers have identified genetic loci associated with the condition.
Dead Sea balneotherapy is also effective for psoriatic arthritis.
Psoriasis increases the risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the skin by 431% and increases the risk of basal cell carcinoma by 100%.
Individuals with psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis have a slightly higher risk of heart disease and heart attacks when compared to the general population.
The British dermatologist Thomas Bateman described a possible link between psoriasis and arthritic symptoms in 1813.
There is no cure for psoriasis.
Epidermal thickening is another characteristic histologic finding of psoriasis lesions.
Psoriasis is generally thought to be a genetic disease which is triggered by environmental factors.
The rate of psoriasis in HIV-positive individuals is comparable to that of HIV-negative individuals, however, psoriasis tends to be more severe in people infected with HIV.
IL-12 and IL-23 share a common domain, p40, which is the target of the recently FDA-approved ustekinumab.
The risk is around 20% for nonidentical twins.
Erythrodermic psoriasis occurs when the rash becomes very widespread, and can develop from any of the other types.
Other cytokines such as IL-17 and IL-22 also have been targets for inhibition as they play important roles in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
Psoriatic arthritis is a form of chronic inflammatory arthritis that has a highly variable clinical presentation and frequently occurs in association with skin and nail psoriasis.
About 30% of individuals with psoriasis will develop psoriatic arthritis.
Pustulosis palmaris et plantaris is another form of localized pustular psoriasis similar to acrodermatitis continua with pustules erupting from red, tender, scaly skin found on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet.
All of these treatments have been replaced with modern topical and systemic therapies.
Certain variations (mutations) of those genes are commonly found in psoriasis.
One hypothesis is that psoriasis involves a defect in regulatory T cells, and in the regulatory cytokine interleukin-10.
Long-term treatment is associated with squamous cell carcinoma (but not with melanoma).
This skin eruption is often accompanied by a fever, muscle aches, nausea, and an elevated white blood cell count.
Depending on the severity and location of outbreaks, individuals may experience significant physical discomfort and some disability.
Increased rates of cancer from treatment appear to be small.
Narrow band UVB light (NBUVB) phototherapy has been demonstrated to have similar efficacy to PUVA.
Few studies have evaluated the association of multiple sclerosis with psoriasis, and the relationship has been questioned.
Napkin psoriasis is a subtype of psoriasis common in infants characterized by red papules with silver scale in the diaper area that may extend to the torso or limbs.
Willan identified two categories: ''leprosa graecorum'' and ''psora leprosa''.
Diagnosis is typically based on the signs and symptoms.
Psychological distress can lead to significant depression and social isolation; a high rate of thoughts about suicide has been associated with psoriasis.
Itching and pain can interfere with basic functions, such as self-care and sleep.
The most common short-term side effect of this form of phototherapy is redness of the skin; less common side effects of NBUVB phototherapy are itching and blistering of the treated skin, irritation of the eyes in the form of conjunctival inflammation or inflammation of the cornea, or cold sores due to reactivation of the herpes simplex virus in the skin surrounding the lips.
Psoriasis has been described as occurring after strep throat, and may  be worsened by skin or gut colonization  with ''Staphylococcus aureus'', ''Malassezia'', and ''Candida albicans''.
Psoriasis is more common in countries farther from the equator.
The skin under and surrounding the pustules is red and tender.
Guttate psoriasis is characterized by numerous small, scaly, red or pink, droplet-like lesions (papules).
Another topical therapy used to treat psoriasis is a form of balneotherapy, which involves daily baths in the Dead Sea.
Several monoclonal antibodies target cytokines, the molecules that cells use to send inflammatory signals to each other.
They are increased in psoriatic lesions and induce the proliferation of T cells and type 1 helper T cells (Th1).
Symptoms often worsen during winter and with certain medications such as beta blockers or NSAIDs.
Psoriasis vulgaris (also known as chronic stationary psoriasis or plaque-like psoriasis) is the most common form and affects 85%–90% of people with psoriasis.
Genetic studies are valuable due to their ability to identify molecular mechanisms and pathways for further study and potential drug targets.
The majority of people experience a recurrence of psoriasis after systemic treatment is discontinued.
The major determinant is ''PSORS1'', which probably accounts for 35%–50% of psoriasis heritability.
Mild psoriasis has been defined as a percentage of body surface area (BSA)≤10, a Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) score ≤10, and a dermatology life quality index (DLQI) score ≤10.
These changes are believed to stem from the premature maturation of keratinocytes induced by an inflammatory cascade in the dermis involving dendritic cells, macrophages, and T cells (three subtypes of white blood cells).
No special blood tests or diagnostic procedures are needed to make the diagnosis.
'''Psoriasis''' is a long-lasting autoimmune disease which is characterized by patches of abnormal skin.
However, various treatments can help control the symptoms.
This is usually done for four weeks with the benefit attributed to sun exposure.
Persons of white European ancestry are more likely to have psoriasis and the condition is relatively uncommon in African Americans and extremely uncommon in Native Americans.
Psoriasis has been associated with obesity and several other cardiovascular and metabolic disturbances.
The incidence of the heart rhythm abnormality atrial fibrillation is 1.31 times higher in people with mild psoriasis and 1.63 times higher in people with severe psoriasis.
Limited evidence suggests removal of the tonsils may benefit people with chronic plaque psoriasis, guttate psoriasis, and palmoplantar pustulosis.
Skin manifestations of psoriasis tend to occur before arthritic manifestations in about 75% of cases.
Skin from a biopsy will show clubbed epidermal projections that interdigitate with dermis on microscopy.
Psoriasis is not contagious.
The word ''psoriasis'' is from Greek ψωρίασις, meaning "itching condition" or "being itchy" from ''psora'', "itch" and ''-iasis'', "action, condition".
Psoriasis can affect the nails and produces a variety of changes in the appearance of finger and toe nails.
It became known as ''Willan's lepra'' in the late 18th century when English dermatologists Robert Willan and Thomas Bateman differentiated it from other skin diseases.
Some of these genes express inflammatory signal proteins, which affect cells in the immune system that are also involved in psoriasis.
Emollients have been shown to be even more effective at clearing psoriatic plaques when combined with phototherapy.
Within those loci are genes on pathways that lead to inflammation.
APP tends to occur in women more frequently than in men, and is usually less severe than other forms of generalized pustular psoriasis such as impetigo herpetiformis.
Sulfur, iodine, phenol were also commonly used treatments for psoriasis during this era when it was incorrectly believed that psoriasis was an infectious disease.
Nail psoriasis occurs in 40–45% of people with psoriasis affecting the skin and has a lifetime incidence of 80–90% in those with psoriatic arthritis.
Most of the identified genes relate to the immune system, particularly the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and T cells.
Inverse psoriasis forms red patches in skin folds.
Psoriatic erythroderma (erythrodermic psoriasis) involves widespread inflammation and exfoliation of the skin over most of the body surface.
Abnormal production of skin cells (especially during wound repair) and an overabundance of skin cells result from the sequence of pathological events in psoriasis.
The use of the finger tip unit may be helpful in guiding how much topical treatment to use.
Another avenue of research has focused on the use of vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors to treat psoriasis.
Psoriasis is associated with an increased risk of psoriatic arthritis, lymphomas, cardiovascular disease, Crohn's disease, and depression.
There is no increased risk of melanoma associated with psoriasis.
These areas are called plaques and are most commonly found on the elbows, knees, scalp, and back.
Classic genome-wide linkage analysis has identified nine loci on different chromosomes associated with psoriasis.
Psoriasis is estimated to affect 2–4% of the population of the western world.
A much higher rate of psoriatic arthritis occurs in HIV-positive individuals with psoriasis than in those without the infection.
A combination therapy for moderate to severe psoriasis using PUVA plus acitretin resulted in benefit, but acitretin use has been associated with birth defects and liver damage.
It can occur at any age, although it most commonly appears for the first time between the ages of 15 and 25 years.
The safety of biologics during pregnancy has not been assessed.
A diagnosis of psoriasis is usually based on the appearance of the skin.
There is no consensus about how to classify the severity of psoriasis.
The UVB lamps should have a timer that will turn off the lamp when the time ends.
Plaque psoriasis, also known as psoriasis vulgaris, makes up about 90% of cases.
TNF-α is one of the main executor inflammatory cytokines.
Inflammatory infiltrates can typically be visualized on microscopy when examining skin tissue or joint tissue affected by psoriasis.
The exposure time should be controlled to avoid over exposure and burning of the skin.
This form of psoriasis can be fatal as the extreme inflammation and exfoliation disrupt the body's ability to regulate temperature and perform barrier functions.
Coal tars were widely used with ultraviolet light irradiation as a topical treatment approach in the early 1900s.
The microscopic appearance of oral mucosa affected by geographic tongue (migratory stomatitis) is very similar to the appearance of psoriasis.
Each form has a dedicated ICD-10 code.
Side-effects may be mild such as itchiness, folliculitis, sunburn, poikiloderma, and a theoretical risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer or melanoma has been suggested.
Psoriasis can also be classified into nonpustular and pustular types.
Fingernails and toenails are affected in most people at some point in time.
Pustular psoriasis appears as raised bumps filled with noninfectious pus (pustules).
A similar association was noted in people who have psoriatic arthritis—the odds of having hypertension were found to be 2.07 times greater when compared to odds of the general population.
The risk for development of non-melanoma skin cancers is also increased.
The incidence of diabetes is 27% higher in people affected by psoriasis than in those without the condition.
Gene mutations of proteins involved in the skin's ability to function as a barrier have been identified as markers of susceptibility for the development of psoriasis.
Areas of the body most commonly affected are the back of the forearms, shins, around the navel, and the scalp.
Napkin psoriasis is often misdiagnosed as napkin dermatitis (diaper rash).
Mercury was also used for psoriasis treatment during this time period.
These medications are generally well-tolerated and limited long-term outcome data have demonstrated biologics to be safe for long-term use in moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.
Fissured tongue is the most common finding in those with oral psoriasis and has been reported to occur in 6.5–20% of people with psoriasis affecting the skin.
Psoriasis in those with HIV/AIDS is often severe and may be untreatable with conventional therapy.
Two drugs that target T cells are efalizumab and alefacept.
Epidermal skin tissue affected by psoriatic inflammation often has many CD8+ T cells while a predominance of CD4+ T cells makes up  the inflammatory infiltrates of the dermal layer of skin and the joints.
The underlying mechanism involves the immune system reacting to skin cells.
Unlike generalised immunosuppressive drug therapies such as methotrexate, biologics target specific aspects of the immune system contributing to psoriasis.
The emollient salicylic acid is structurally similar to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), commonly found in sunscreen, and is known to interfere with phototherapy in psoriasis.
People with psoriasis also have a higher risk of celiac disease.
Pregnancy must be avoided for most of these treatments.
They may allow less steroids to be used.
Children with psoriasis may encounter bullying.
Skin characteristics typical for psoriasis are scaly, erythematous plaques, papules, or patches of skin that may be painful and itch.
They may vary in severity from small and localized to complete body coverage.
Topical agents are typically used for mild disease, phototherapy for moderate disease, and systemic agents for severe disease.
Specifically, neutralization occurs when the antidrug antibody binds to infliximab's antigen binding site instead of TNF-α.
Statin use in those with psoriasis and hyperlipidemia was associated with decreased levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and TNFα as well as decreased activity of the immune protein LFA-1.
This can result in a sausage-shaped swelling of the fingers and toes known as dactylitis.
The differential diagnosis of psoriasis includes dermatological conditions similar in appearance such as discoid eczema, seborrhoeic eczema, pityriasis rosea (may be confused with guttate psoriasis), nail fungus (may be confused with nail psoriasis) or cutaneous T cell lymphoma (50% of individuals with this cancer are initially misdiagnosed with psoriasis).
Severe psoriasis may be even more strongly associated with the development of diabetes than mild psoriasis.
Wavelengths of 311–313&nbsp;nanometers are most effective, and special lamps have been developed for this application.
People with inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis are at an increased risk of developing psoriasis.
PASI assesses the severity of lesions and the area affected and combines these two factors into a single score from 0 (no disease) to 72 (maximal disease).
This may include pits in the nails or changes in nail color.
Psoriasis has been associated with low self-esteem and depression is more common among those with the condition.
Withdrawal of corticosteroids (topical steroid cream) can aggravate psoriasis due to the rebound effect.
The classification of psoriasis as an autoimmune disease has sparked considerable debate.
However, these agents have potentially severe side-effects due to their immunosuppressive mechanisms.
However, due to their immunosuppressive actions, biologics have been associated with a small increase in the risk for infection.
Nearly half of individuals with psoriasis over the age of 65 have at least three comorbidities, and two-thirds have at least two comorbidities.
Neutralization occurs when an antidrug antibody prevents a monoclonal antibody such as infliximab from binding antigen in a laboratory test.
These immune cells move from the dermis to the epidermis and secrete inflammatory chemical signals (cytokines) such as tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-36 and interleukin-22.
These may include Auspitz's sign (pinpoint bleeding when scale is removed), Koebner phenomenon (psoriatic skin lesions induced by trauma to the skin), and itching and pain localized to papules and plaques.
Conversely, type 2 does not show a family history, presents before age 40, and is not associated with ''HLA-Cw6''.
Moisturizers and emollients such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, calcipotriol, and decubal (an oil-in-water emollient) were found to increase the clearance of psoriatic plaques.
There may be a slightly increased risk of stroke associated with psoriasis, especially in severe cases.
The Greeks used the term lepra (λεπρα) for scaly skin conditions.
Plaques on the scalp can be particularly embarrassing, as flaky plaque in the hair can be mistaken for dandruff.
DNA released from dying cells acts as an inflammatory stimulus in psoriasis and stimulates the receptors on certain dendritic cells, which in turn produce the cytokine interferon-α.
Moderate to severe psoriasis was defined by the same group as BSA >10 or PASI score >10 and a DLQI score >10.
It is often the result of an exacerbation of unstable plaque psoriasis, particularly following the abrupt withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids.
Type 1 has a positive family history, starts before the age of 40, and is associated with the human leukocyte antigen, ''HLA-Cw6''.
This type of phototherapy is useful in the treatment of psoriasis because the formation of these dimers interferes with the cell cycle and stops it.
Non-profit organizations the National Psoriasis Foundation in the United States, the Psoriasis Association in the United Kingdom and Psoriasis Australia offer advocacy and education about psoriasis in their respective countries.
Efalizumab is a monoclonal antibody that specifically targets the CD11a subunit of LFA-1.
The reverse is not true.
Clinical research has indicated individuals often experience a diminished quality of life.
European guidelines recommend avoiding biologics if a pregnancy is planned; anti-TNF therapies such as infliximab are not recommended for use in chronic carriers of the hepatitis B virus or individuals infected with HIV.
Generalized pustular psoriasis (pustular psoriasis of von Zumbusch), also known as impetigo herpetiformis during pregnancy, is a rare and severe form of psoriasis that may require hospitalization.
The development of generalized pustular psoriasis is often caused by an infection, abrupt withdrawal of topical corticosteroid treatment, pregnancy, hypocalcemia, medications, or following an irritating topical treatment for plaque psoriasis.
Image:Psoriasis2010a.JPG|Plaques of psoriasis
Oral psoriasis is very rare, in contrast to lichen planus, another common papulosquamous disorder that commonly involves both the skin and mouth.
Neutralizing antibodies have not been reported against etanercept, a biologic drug that is a fusion protein composed of two TNF-α receptors.
People with psoriasis often feel prejudiced against due to the commonly held incorrect belief that psoriasis is contagious.
Topical corticosteroid preparations are the most effective agents when used continuously for 8 weeks; retinoids and coal tar were found to be of limited benefit and may be no better than placebo.
These agents are also regarded as first-line treatments for psoriatic erythroderma.
Psoriatic arthritis affects up to 30% of individuals with psoriasis.
Eye protection is usually given during phototherapy treatments.
These changes include pitting of the nails (pinhead-sized depressions in the nail is seen in 70% with nail psoriasis), whitening of the nail, small areas of bleeding from capillaries under the nail, yellow-reddish discoloration of the nails known as the oil drop or salmon spot, thickening of the skin under the nail (subungual hyperkeratosis), loosening and separation of the nail (onycholysis), and crumbling of the nail.
These secreted inflammatory signals are believed to stimulate keratinocytes to proliferate.
Psoriatic arthritis can also affect the hips, knees, spine (spondylitis), and sacroiliac joint (sacroiliitis).
Decreases of PASI scores greater than 75% and remission for several months have commonly been observed.
The amount of light used is determined by a person's skin type.
People with psoriasis have a 52% increased risk cancers of the lung and bronchus, a 205% increase in the risk of developing cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract, a 31% increase in the risk of developing cancers of the urinary tract, a 90% increase in the risk of developing liver cancer, and a 46% increase in the risk of developing pancreatic cancer.
This form of psoriasis is characterized by an acute onset of numerous pustules on top of tender red skin.
Patients undergoing systemic treatment must have regular blood and liver function tests to check for medication toxicities.
The patient was deemed "impure" (see tumah and taharah) during their afflicted phase and is ultimately treated by the kohen.
Greater benefit has been observed with very potent corticosteroids when compared to potent corticosteroids.
The DLQI is a 10 question tool used to measure the impact of several dermatologic diseases on daily functioning.
Psoriasis has been associated with a 16% increase in overall relative risk for non-skin cancer.
The interruption of the cell cycle induced by NBUVB opposes the characteristic rapid division of skin cells seen in psoriasis.
Individuals with psoriasis may develop neutralizing antibodies against monoclonal antibodies.
Phototherapy in the form of sunlight has long been used for psoriasis.
Methotrexate may provide a degree of protection for the heart.
Compared to individuals without psoriasis, those affected by psoriasis are more likely to satisfy the criteria for metabolic syndrome.
These numerous spots of psoriasis appear over large areas of the body, primarily the trunk, but also the limbs and scalp.
Diet recommendations include consumption of cold water fish (preferably wild fish, not farmed) such as salmon, herring, and mackerel, extra virgin olive oil, legumes, vegetables, fruits, and whole grains; and avoid consumption of alcohol, red meat, and dairy products.
Infections and psychological stress may also play a role.
Interleukin-22 works in combination with interleukin-17 to induce keratinocytes to secrete neutrophil-attracting cytokines.
