Although every state is somewhat different in terms of requirements and licenses, there are three common elements—a degree from an approved educational program, a minimum amount of supervised clinical experience, and passing an examination.
While counseling and psychotherapy are common activities for psychologists,  these applied fields are just one branch in the larger domain of psychology.
or B.Sc., and, for Organisational Psychology, also B.Com.
• Occupational psychologist
The minimum requirement is the completion of university training in psychology at a Greek university, or at a university recognized by the Greek authorities.
• Sport and exercise psychologist
An alternate route is available for academics and practitioners who have gained appropriate experience and made substantial contribution to the field of psychology.
Licensure as a psychologist takes an additional 1 to 2 years post PhD/PsyD (licensure requires 3,000 hours of supervised training), depending on the state (see below under licensure).
At least 9,500 of these are clinical psychologists, which is the largest psychology group within clinical settings such as the NHS.
), which is a practitioner doctorate with both clinical and research components.
:*Coursework in Statistics and Research Design
* Industrial, organizational and community psychologists who apply psychological research, theories and techniques to "real-world" problems, questions and issues in business, industry, social benefit organizations, and government.
With the Bologna-reform, this degree was replaced by a master's degree.
* Academics conducting psychological research or teaching psychology in a college or university;
Both models envision practising Clinical Psychology in a research-based, scientifically valid manner, and are accredited by the American Psychological Association and many other English-speaking psychological societies.
is restricted by law, and a practitioner is legally required to hold the corresponding academic title, which is comparable to a higher MSc degree and requires at least five years of training at university.
In Finland, the title "psychologist" is protected by law.
:* Personal psychotherapy—many programs require students to undertake a certain number of hours of personal psychotherapy (with a non-faculty therapist) although in recent years this requirement has become less frequent.
Typically, psychologists must have completed a university degree in psychology, which is a master's degree in some countries and a doctorate in others.
Prior to enrolling for the Master’s, the student will have studied psychology for three years as an undergraduate (B.A.
These tests help to inform diagnostic decisions and treatment planning.
), followed by an additional postgraduate honours degree in psychology; see List of universities in South Africa.
In addition, most states require an oral exam.
Comparative Theories: 6
Systems Theory & Family: 5
Conversely, psychiatrists, as licensed physicians, have received training more broadly in other areas such as medicine and neurology and may bring this knowledge to bear in identifying and treating medical or neurological conditions that can present similarly to psychiatric diseases.
In the '''UK''' registration as a clinical psychologist with the Health Professions Council (HPC) is necessary.
In the U.S., Canada and the UK the practice of clinical psychology requires a license.
In addition, psychologists (particularly those from PhD programs) spend several years in graduate school being trained to conduct behavioral research, including research design and advanced statistical analysis.
A Diplom degree in psychology awarded in Germany which includes the subject of clinical psychology.
Others than psychologist usually have to complete their education with basic courses in psychotherapy to meet the demands for the applied psychotherapy classes.
This definition of psychologist is non-exclusive; in most jurisdictions, members of other professions (such as counselors and psychiatrists) can also evaluate, diagnose, treat, and study mental processes.
Similar to the MFT, the LPC license requires a Masters or Doctorate degree, a minimum number of hours of supervised clinical experience in a pre-doc practicum, and the passing of the National Counselor Exam.
The model licensing act for behavior analysts can be found at the Association for Behavior Analysis International's website.
*'''Licensed Psychological Associate (LPA)''' About twenty-six states offer a Masters-only license, a common one being the LPA, which allows for the therapist to either practice independently or (more commonly) under the supervision of a licensed psychologist, depending on the state.
Qualification thus requires at least five years of study, and at least one of internship.
This legislation has not come without considerable controversy.
APA accreditation is very important for U.S. clinical psychology programs and may affect employment prospects and licensure after one graduates.
The exception to this is the profession of a school psychologist who can be certified by boards of education to practice and use the title "psychologist" with an Education Specialist (Ed.S) degree.
In New Zealand, the use of the title "psychologist" is restricted by law.
The minimal requirement for full membership can be waived in certain circumstances where there is evidence that significant contribution or performance in the field of psychology has been made.
That is, they offer a license but do not require that marriage and family therapists obtain one.
* '''Psychologist.'''
This is a three-year full-time salaried program sponsored by the National Health Service (NHS) and based in universities and the NHS.
The threshold level of qualification for entry to the Register for clinical, counselling and educational psychologists is a professional doctorate (and in the case of the latter two the British Psychological Society's Professional Qualification which meets the standards of a professional doctorate).
Crisis Intervention: 2
It can only be used by people who are included as such on the list of a national government commission.
*State government: 
Normally, after the degree, the practitioner must fulfill a certain number of supervised postdoctoral hours ranging from 1,500-3,000 (usually taking 1 to 2 years), and passing the EPPP and any other provincial exams.
There are fewer programs resulting in a PsyD (doctor of psychology), many of which are in private schools and have a greater focus on treatment.
In the UK the following titles are restricted by law: "registered psychologist" and "practitioner psychologist"; in addition the specialist title "clinical psychologist" is also restricted by law.
• Health psychologist
"Psychotherapist" follows similar rules but the basic educational demands are another 1.5 years (spread out over three years) at a specialised course in psychotherapy (that do vary a lot concerning theoretical footing), in addition to an academical level degree within a field concerning the treatment of people (psychologist, social worker, psychiatrist a.s.o.).
Most practicum placements begin in either the first or second year of doctoral training
In three US states (Illinois, Louisiana, and New Mexico), some psychologists with post-doctoral pharmacology training have been granted prescriptive authority for certain mental health disorders upon agreement with the patient's physician.
The use of the titles "clinical psychologist" (klinisch psycholoog) and clinical neuropsychologist (klinisch neuropsycholoog) is reserved for those who have followed specialist post-licentiate training.
All other uses are banned, though often challenged.
'''Sample Curriculum for MA in Clinical Psychology in the U.S.'''
:*Individual differences—personality, lifespan development, psychopathology
:'''''Licensed behavior analysts''''' are licensed in five states to provide services for clients with substance abuse, developmental disabilities, and mental illness.
The title ‘psychologist’ is not protected on its own.
Most clinical psychologists who engage in research and teaching do so within a college or university setting.
Developmental Psych and pathology: 9
There is currently a significant internship crisis affecting U.S. clinical psychology programs for the past 10 years.
In Australia the psychology profession and the use of the title 'psychologist' is regulated by an Act of Parliament, Health Practitioner Regulation (Administrative Arrangements) National Law Act 2008 following an agreement between the state and territory governments.
mental health law) examination and/or an oral examination.
Most programs in the U.S. are PhD programs that have a strong focus on research and are typically housed in universities.
The Health Professions Council  (HPC-UK) is the statutory regulator for practitioner psychologists in the UK.
Entry into these programs is highly competitive, and requires at least a three-year undergraduate degree in psychology, plus some form of experience, usually in either the NHS as an Assistant Psychologist or in academia as a Research Assistant.
:* Child and adolescent
• Counselling psychologist
Similar courses have been lumped together, for example "Group Treatment Techniques" and "Couples Counseling" were combined, their units added together and called "Group and Couples Treatment"—just to keep the table of manageable size.''
Some jusrisdictions have exemptions that allow counseling to be practiced without meeting the requirements for a license.
Assessing and Planning: 3Brief Therapy: 2
Clinical psychologists in the U.S. undergo many years of graduate training—usually 5 to 7 years post-Bachelors—in order to gain demonstrable competence and experience.
The median salary in the U.S. in 2012 for clinical, counseling, and school psychologists was US$69,280 and the median salary for organizational psychologists was US$83,580.
The basic requirements are a completed five years specialised course in psychology (equivalent of a master's degree) and 12 months of practice under supervision.
Psychologists generally do not prescribe medication, although in some jurisdictions psychologists have limited prescribing privileges.
The most commonly recognized psychology professionals are clinical and counseling psychologists, those who provide psychotherapy and/or administer and interpret psychological tests.
MFTs, as the title implies, work mostly with families and couples, addressing a wide range of common psychological problems.
Associate membership requires at least two years of postgraduate studies in psychology or approved related discipline.
The minimum requirement is a completed five years university training in psychology (Master's degree or equivalent).
Psychologists are generally described as being either "applied" or "research-orientated".
Clinical Intervention with Adolescents: 2
By 1997, ten psychologists were trained in psychopharmacology and granted the ability to prescribe psychiatric medications.
Process and Psychotherapy: 4
The training models endorsed by the APA require that applied psychologists be trained as both researchers and practitioners, and that they possess advanced degrees.
• Forensic psychologist
There is stiff competition to gain acceptance into clinical psychology doctoral programs (acceptance rates of 2-5% are not uncommon).
Group and Couples Treatment: 6
Psychological Testing: 3
In Germany, the use of the title 'Diplom-Psychologe' ('Dipl.-Psych.')
Perhaps the most significant difference is that psychiatrists are licensed physicians.
There are a number of U.S. schools offering accredited programs in clinical psychology resulting in a Masters degree.
Association membership requires four years of APAC accredited undergraduate study.
Endorsement within a specific area of practice (e.g.
'''State Required'''
:* Comprehensive Exams and/or Master's Thesis: A thesis can involve original data collection and is distinct from a dissertation
Also the title of "neuropsychologist" is not protected at present.
Such programs can range from 48 to 84 units, most often taking 2 to 3 years to complete post-Bachelors.
The '''training and licensing of clinical psychologists''' ranges from 4 year undergraduate degree plus a 4 to 6 year doctorate program.
After many years of inter-professional political controversy, non-physician psychotherapy was at last given an adequate legal foundation through the creation of two new academic healthcare professions.
A '''psychologist''' is a professional who evaluates and studies behavior and mental processes (see also psychology).
:*Bases of behavior—biological, cognitive-affective, and cultural-social
In the UK the following titles are restricted by law: "registered psychologist" and "practitioner psychologist"; in addition the following specialist titles are restricted by law: "clinical psychologist", "counselling psychologist", "educational psychologist", "forensic psychologist", "health psychologist", "occupational psychologist" and "sport and exercise psychologist".
Chemical Dependency: 3
Most states also require a certain number of continuing education credits per year in order to renew a license, which can be obtained though various means, such as taking audited classes and attending approved workshops.
It takes 330 ECTS-credits (about six years) to accomplish the studies.
Under the national law, registration of psychologists is administered by the Psychology Board of Australia (PsyBA).
or similar), which is a doctorate with both clinical and research components.
:* Specific disorders (e.g.
Full membership with the American Psychological Association in United States and Canada requires doctoral training (except in some provinces like Alberta where a master's degree is sufficient).
Most states also require a certain number of continuing education credits per year in order to renew a license, which can be obtained though various means, such as taking audited classes and attending workshops.
:**Practicum—usually three or four years of working with clients under supervision in a clinical setting.
It is a requirement to be a member of the Health Professions Council in order to practice.
Common requirements are 2 to 4 years of post-Masters supervised clinical experience and passing a Psychological Associates Examination.
Many behavior analysts have a doctorate.
Registration with the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA) is required, and includes a Continuing Professional Development component.
• Practitioner psychologist
Psychopharmacology: 3
:* Neuropsychological disorders
Other related licenses open to Masters-level graduates in the U.S. include: Marriage and Family Therapist (MFT), Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC), and Licensed Psychological Associate (LPA).
The title of "Assistant Psychologist" is used by a psychology graduate under the supervision of a qualified clinical psychologist, and the title "Trainee Clinical Psychologist" is used during the three-year doctoral program.
The legislation does not currently include an exemption clause for any class of practitioner (e.g., academics, or government employees).
Psychologists in the United States have campaigned for legislation changes to enable specially trained psychologists to prescribe psychiatric medicine.
state and '''Canada''' province licensing boards are members of the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) which created and maintains the Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology (EPPP).
including neuropsychological testing).
In the UK, clinical psychologists undertake a Doctorate in Clinical Psychology (D.Clin.Psych., Clin.Psy.D.
'''School Required'''
To practice with the title of Psychologist, in almost all cases a Doctorate degree is required (a PhD or PsyD in the U.S.).
That is, they offer a license but do not require that counselors obtain one.
In the UK, those training to be clinical psychologists have to complete a Doctorate in Clinical Psychology (D.Clin.Psych.
The standard route to full membership (MAPS) of the APS technically requires a masters or doctoral degree in psychology in an accredited course.
Louisiana was the second state to provide such legislation.
Although clinical psychologists and psychiatrists can be said to share a same fundamental aim—the alleviation of mental distress—their training, outlook, and methodologies are often quite different.
It can only be used after receiving a license from the government.
(The titles "Clinical Psychologist", "Counselling Psychologist", "Educational Psychologist", "Intern Psychologist", and "Trainee Psychologist" are similarly protected.)
Clinical Psychologists are required to be licensed in the UK in order to practice.
In the UK there are currently protected 'psychologist' titles.
This profession draws on the evidence base of applied behavior analysis and the philosophy of behaviorism.
*Elementary and secondary schools:
Restriction is governed by National Supervisory Authority for Welfare and Health (Finland).
A professional in the U.S or Canada must hold a graduate degree in psychology (MA, PsyD, Ed.D., or PhD) or have a state license in order to use the title "psychologist".
The titles "psychotherapist" (psychotherapeut) and "healthcare psychologist" (gz-psycholoog / gezondheidszorgpsycholoog) are restricted through the Individual Healthcare Professions Act (wet BIG) to those who have followed further postgraduate (PsyD/DPsych or Licentiate level) training.
:* Dissertation—PhD programs usually require original quantitative empirical research, while PsyD dissertations involve original quantitative or qualitative research, theoretical scholarship, program evaluation or development, critical literature analysis, or clinical application and analysis.
These clinical psychology doctoral degrees are accredited by the British Psychological Society and the Health Professions Council (HPC).
Today, in America, about half of all clinical psychology graduate students are being trained in PhD programs—a model that emphasizes research and is usually housed in universities—with the other half in PsyD programs, which has more focus on practice (similar to professional degrees for medicine and law).
As such, psychiatrists often use the medical model to assess mental health problems and rely on psychotropic medications as the chief method of addressing mental health problems.
New legislation in Louisiana, New Mexico, and Illinois has granted those who take an additional masters program in psychopharmacology permission to prescribe medications for mental and emotional disorders in co-ordination with the patient's physician.
:*Specialized electives—many programs offer sets of elective courses for specializations, such as health, child, family, community, or neuropsychology
* Clinical, counseling, and school psychologists who work with patients in a variety of therapeutic contexts (contrast with psychiatrists, who are physician specialists).
:*History and systems—development of psychological theories, practices, and scientific knowledge
In Belgium, the title "psychologist" is protected by law since 1993.
Some jusrisdictions have exemptions that allow marriage and family therapy to be practiced without meeting the requirements for a license.
An MFT license requires a Doctorate or master's degree.
There are state-by-state differences in requirements for academics in psychology and government employees.
Mean debt related to doctoral education in clinical psychology currently exceeds $80,000, according to the 2011 Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC) match survey, and 44% of graduates accrue over $100,000 in debt.
Most typically, people encounter psychologists and think of the discipline as involving the work of clinical psychologists or counseling psychologists.
Some psychologists, such as clinical and counseling psychologists, provide mental health care, and some psychologists, such as social or organizational psychologists conduct research and provide consultation services.
In practice, clinical psychologists may work with individuals, couples, families, or groups in a variety of settings, including private practices, hospitals, mental health organizations, schools, businesses, and non-profit agencies.
For example, in a medical center, a patient with a complicated clinical presentation who is being seen by a psychiatrist might be referred to a clinical psychologist for psychological testing to aid in diagnosis and treatment.
Training usually emphasizes theory and treatment over research, quite often with a focus on school or couples and family counseling.
There are professions whose scope of practice overlaps with the practice of psychology (particularly with respect to providing psychotherapy) and for which a license is required.
Similar licenses are the Licensed Mental Health Counselor (LMHC), Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor (LCPC), and Clinical Counselor in Mental Health (CCMH).
There are more students enrolled in PsyD programs overall so that both degrees are about 50/50 in terms of number of students.
There are many different types of psychologists, as is reflected by the 56 different divisions of the American Psychological Association (APA).
The public can check whether a psychologist is registered on the Health Professions Council website (http://www.hpc-uk.org), which would prove they are genuine.
• Clinical psychologist
However, with the proclamation of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003, the use of the title "Psychologist" was limited to practitioners registered with the New Zealand Psychologists Board.
To attain the qualification, one must complete a recognised Master's degree in Psychology and an appropriate practicum at a recognised training institution, and also sit an examination set by the Professional Board for Psychology.
After having completed the training requirements, psychologists take a state-run exam, which, upon successful completion (Approbation), confers the official title of 'psychological psychotherapist' (Psychologischer Psychotherapeut).
In 1989 the U.S Department of Defense was directed to create the Psychopharmacology Demonstration Project.
• Registered psychologist
These notations are not 'specialist' titles (Western Australian psychologists may use 'specialist' in their titles during a three-year transitional period).
''Where subject is required by both the state and the school, it is shown under the school's required column.
Applied Therapeutic Techniques: 9
It is compulsory for a psychologist to register with the Health Professions Council in order to practice using one of the protected titles in the United Kingdom.
* Outpatient care centers: 
* '''''Licensed behavior analysts'''''
Many states require other examinations in addition to the EPPP, such as a jurisprudence (i.e.
Similar to doctoral programs, Masters-level students usually must fulfill time in a clinical practicum under supervision; some programs also require a minimum amount of personal psychotherapy.
The dissertation typically takes 2-3 years to complete.
Gay and Lesbian Issues: 2
It can only be used by people who hold a relevant licence to practice as a psychologist.
The minimum requirements for general registration in psychology and to use the title 'psychologist' is an APAC approved four year degree sequence in psychology followed by either: (1) a two-year masters program or (2) two years supervised by a registered psychologist.
Behavior analysts have at least a master's degree in behavior analysis or in a mental health related discipline as well as at least five core courses in applied behavior analysis.
The British Psychological Society is working with the HPC-UK to ensure that the title of "neuropsychologist" is regulated as a specialist title for practitioner psychologists; one of the options could be the use of post-doctoral level registers.
Existential Psychology: 2
However, the terms 'psychotherapist', 'social worker', and 'counsellor' are currently self-regulated with several organizations campaigning for government regulation.
Doctorate (PhD and PsyD) programs usually involve some variation on the following 5 to 7 year, 90-120 unit curriculum:
Prior to 2004, only the title "Registered Psychologist" was restricted (to people qualified and registered as such).
Clinical psychologists receive extensive training in psychological test administration, scoring, interpretation and reporting (psychiatrists are not trained in psychological testing and cannot administer Qualification Level C Tests).
The psychotherapeutical training combines in-depth theoretical knowledge with supervised patient care and self-reflection units.
:*Clinical practice—diagnostics, psychological assessment, psychotherapeutic interventions, psychopharmacology, ethical and legal issues
In Greece, the title "psychologist" has been protected by law since 1979.
While many graduates from Masters-level training go on to doctoral programs, a large number also go directly into practice—often as a Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC), Marriage and Family Therapist (MFT) or other similar license.
In the United Kingdom as of the end of December 2012 there were 19,000 practitioner psychologists registered, across 7 categories: clinical psychologist, counselling psychologist, educational psychologist, forensic psychologist, health psychologist, occupational psychologist, sport and exercise psychologist.
The HPC is the statutory regulator for practitioner psychologists in the UK.
The Australian Psychology Accreditation Council (APAC) oversees education standards for the profession of psychology.
Restrictions apply to all who want to use the title 'psychologist' in any form in all states and territories of Australia.
