In the 1950s and 1960s, influenced by philosophers Søren Kierkegaard and Martin Heidegger and, psychoanalytically trained American psychologist Rollo May pioneered an existential branch of psychology, which included existential psychotherapy: a method based on the belief that inner conflict within a person is due to that individual's confrontation with the givens of existence.
Classical psychoanalysis conceives of a struggle between the pleasure principle and the reality principle, roughly corresponding to id and ego.
It has changed multiple times over the decades since its adoption.
Psychology encompasses many subfields and includes different approaches to the study of mental processes and behavior:
Research designed to answer questions about the current state of affairs such as the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of individuals is known as ''descriptive research''.
Since modern computers process information quickly, simulations can be run in a short time, allowing for high statistical power.
Physiognomy remained current through the Enlightenment, and added the doctrine of phrenology: a study of mind and intelligence based on simple assessment of neuroanatomy.
In Canada and the US, practitioners get bachelor's degrees and doctorates, then spend one year in an internship and one year in postdoctoral education.
Social cognition fuses elements of social and cognitive psychology in order to understand how people process, remember, or distort social information.
Personnel psychology, a subfield of I–O psychology, applies the methods and principles of psychology in selecting and evaluating workers.
Some of these draw on a systemic neural network model rather than a localized function model.
Other well-known psychoanalytic scholars of the mid-20th century include Erik Erikson, Melanie Klein, D. W. Winnicott, Karen Horney, Erich Fromm, John Bowlby, and Sigmund Freud's daughter, Anna Freud.
A key aspect of behavior therapy is empirical evaluation of the treatment's effectiveness.
Psychologists employ empirical methods to infer causal and correlational relationships between psychosocial variables.
Feminist critiques along these lines have argued that claims to scientific objectivity obscure the values and agenda of (historically mostly male) researchers.
Russia, too, placed greater emphasis on the biological basis for psychology, beginning with Ivan Sechenov's 1873 essay, "Who Is to Develop Psychology and How?"
Comparative psychology refers to the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior.
Descriptive research can be qualitative or quantitative in orientation.
Positive psychology is the study of factors which contribute to human happiness and well-being, focusing more on people who are currently health.
Vohs and Baumeister suggest that contrary to the need-desire-fulfilment cycle of animal instincts, human motivations sometimes obey a "getting begets wanting" rule: the more you get a reward such as self-esteem, love, drugs, or money, the more you want it.
During World War II and the Cold War, the U.S. military and intelligence agencies established themselves as leading funders of psychology—through the armed forces and in the new Office of Strategic Services intelligence agency.
According to drive theory, the forces of instinct combine into a single source of energy which exerts a constant influence.
Theories of personality vary across different psychological schools and orientations.
Cognitive psychology was subsumed along with other disciplines, such as philosophy of mind, computer science, and neuroscience, under the cover discipline of cognitive science.
Chinese psychologists were encouraged to focus on education and language learning, with the aspiration that education would enable modernization and nationalization.
Although only 1/8 people worldwide fall into the WEIRD classification, the researchers claimed that 60–90% of psychology studies are performed on WEIRD subjects.
The word ''psychology'' derives from Greek roots meaning study of the psyche, or soul (ψυχή ''psukhē'', "breath, spirit, soul" and -λογία ''-logia'', "study of" or "research").
The ethics code of the American Psychological Association originated in 1951 as "Ethical Standards of Psychologists."
(Failure to correspond with party doctrine was "incorrect recognition".)
Raymond Cattell proposed a theory of 16 personality factors.
Some called this development the cognitive revolution because it rejected the anti-mentalist dogma of behaviorism as well as the strictures of psychoanalysis.
American psychology gained status during World War I, during which a standing committee headed by Robert Yerkes administered mental tests ("Army Alpha" and "Army Beta") to almost 1.8 million GIs.
Clark Hull formalized the latter idea with his drive reduction model.
The rise of computer science, cybernetics and artificial intelligence suggested the value of comparatively studying information processing in humans and machines.
Personality psychology is concerned with enduring patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion—commonly referred to as personality—in individuals.
School psychology combines principles from educational psychology and clinical psychology to understand and treat students with learning disabilities; to foster the intellectual growth of gifted students; to facilitate prosocial behaviors in adolescents; and otherwise to promote safe, supportive, and effective learning environments.
The Army rolled out its new General Classification Test and engaged in massive studies of troop morale.
Humanism focused on uniquely human issues, such as free will, personal growth, self-actualization, self-identity, death, aloneness, freedom, and meaning.
Positive psychological interventions have been limited in scope, but their effects are thought to be superior to that of placebos, especially with regard to helping people with body image problems.
Its membership has increased from 5,000 in 1945 to 100,000 in the present day.
University of Michigan psychologist Dorwin Cartwright reported that university researchers began large-scale propaganda research in 1939–1941, and "the last few months of the war saw a social psychologist become chiefly responsible for determining the week-by-week-propaganda policy for the United States Government."
The ''American Association for Humanistic Psychology'', formed in 1963, declared:
Wundt focused on breaking down mental processes into the most basic components, motivated in part by an analogy to recent advances in chemistry, and its successful investigation of the elements and structure of material.
However, Indian doctrines influenced Western thinking via the Theosophical Society, a New Age group which became popular among Euro-American intellectuals.
Prototypical experimental research is conducted in a laboratory with a carefully controlled environment.
As a discipline, psychology has long sought to fend off accusations that it is a "soft" science.
After the Chinese Communist Party gained control of the country, the Stalinist USSR became the leading influence, with Marxism–Leninism the leading social doctrine and Pavlovian conditioning the approved concept of behavior change.
In 1929, the Congress took place at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, attended by hundreds of members of the American Psychological Association Tokyo Imperial University led the way in bringing the new psychology to the East, and from Japan these ideas diffused into China.
After a hiatus for World War I, the Seventh Congress met in Oxford, with substantially greater participation from the war-victorious Anglo-Americans.
Although the field makes abundant use of randomized and controlled experiments in laboratory settings, such research can only assess a limited range of short-term phenomena.
The 1992 incarnation was the first to distinguish between "aspirational" ethical standards and "enforceable" ones.
The study of group dynamics reveals information about the nature and potential optimization of leadership, communication, and other phenomena that emerge at least at the microsocial level.
More recently, the availability of microarray molecular genetic or genome sequencing technologies allows researchers to measure participant DNA variation directly, and test whether individual genetic variants within genes are associated with psychological traits and psychopathology through methods including genome-wide association studies.
Early behavioral researchers studied stimulus–response pairings, now known as classical conditioning.
The American Psychological Association is the oldest and largest.
This method has several advantages.
It remains challenging to draw hard conclusions about where in the brain specific thoughts originate—or even how usefully such localization corresponds with reality.
Dewey integrated psychology with social issues, most notably by promoting the cause progressive education to assimilate immigrants and inculcate moral values in children.
They carry different assumptions about such issues as the role of the unconscious and the importance of childhood experience.
Researchers subsequently refined statistical methods for synthesizing the electrode data, and identified unique brain wave patterns such as the delta wave observed during non-REM sleep.
In 1977, National Institute of Mental Health director Bertram Brown described this shift as a source of "intense competition and role confusion".
Wundt assistant Hugo Münsterberg taught psychology at Harvard to students such as Narendra Nath Sen Gupta—who, in 1905, founded a psychology department and laboratory at the University of Calcutta.
Psychologists such as Hans Eysenck and philosophers including Karl Popper criticized psychoanalysis.
Existential psychologists differed from more "humanistic" psychologists in their relatively neutral view of human nature and their relatively positive assessment of anxiety.
The mother may both carry genes that contribute to her depression but will also have passed those genes on to her offspring thus increasing the offspring's risk for depression.
Research in this area explores the behavior of many species, from insects to primates.
The field has been especially influential in Latin America, where it has a regional organization known as ALAMOC: ''La Asociación Latinoamericana de Análisis y Modificación del Comportamiento''.
The majority of psychologists are involved in some kind of therapeutic role, practicing in clinical, counseling, or school settings.
Since 1966, the Union has published the ''International Journal of Psychology''.
In many countries, clinical psychology is a regulated mental health profession.
Cognitive psychologists have used a "filter" model of attention, according to which much information processing takes place below the threshold of consciousness, and only certain processes, limited by nature and by simultaneous quantity, make their way through the filter.
It includes the study and application of psychology for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress, dysfunction or mental illness and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.
Philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn's 1962 critique implied psychology overall was in a pre-paradigm state, lacking the agreement on overarching theory found in mature sciences such as chemistry and physics.
Similarly, Fanelli (2010) found that 91.5% of psychiatry/psychology studies confirmed the effects they were looking for, and concluded that the odds of this happening (a positive result) was around five times higher than in fields such as space- or geosciences.
However, this discipline did not yet embrace experimentation.
Cross-sectional observational studies use data from a single point in time, whereas longitudinal studies are used to study trends across the life span.
Experimental researchers typically use a statistical hypothesis testing model which involves making predictions before conducting the experiment, then assessing how well the data supports the predictions.
Other 19th-century contributors to the field include the German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus, a pioneer in the experimental study of memory, who developed quantitative models of learning and forgetting at the University of Berlin, and the Russian-Soviet physiologist Ivan Pavlov, who discovered in dogs a learning process that was later termed "classical conditioning" and applied to human beings.
Other types of modeling include dynamic systems and stochastic modeling.
The number of proposed traits has varied widely.
Myriad approach to systematically assess different personality types, with the Woodworth Personal Data Sheet, developed during World War I, an early example of the modern technique.
Fechner's 1860 ''Elements of Psychophysics'' challenged Kant's stricture against quantitative study of the mind.
When experimental psychology came to Britain, Francis Galton was a leading practitioner, and, with his procedures for measuring reaction time and sensation, is considered an inventor of modern mental testing (also known as ''psychometrics'').
The search for biological origins of psychological phenomena has long involved debates about the importance of race, and especially the relationship between race and intelligence.
Evolutionary psychology examines cognition and personality traits from an evolutionary perspective.
The definitions of this term are various and may include school psychology and counseling psychology.
Using crossover design, researchers can further increase the strength of their results by testing both of two treatments on two groups of subjects.
In this type of treatment, a specially trained therapist develops a close relationship with the patient, who discusses wishes, dreams, social relationships, and other aspects of mental life.
William James, John Dewey and Harvey Carr advanced a more expansive doctrine called functionalism, attuned more to human–environment actions.
Practitioners typically includes people who have graduated from doctoral programs in clinical psychology but may also include others.
Critics say there has been an increase in the number of mental health training programs that do not instill scientific competence.
Today the field of behaviorism is also commonly referred to as behavior modification or behavior analysis.
Folk psychology refers to the understanding of ordinary people, as contrasted with that of psychology professionals.
Observational studies analyze uncontrolled data in search of correlations; multivariate statistics are typically used to interpret the more complex situation.
Having consulted philosophers Hegel and Herbart, in 1825 the Prussian state established psychology as a mandatory discipline in its rapidly expanding and highly influential educational system.
On a broader level, cognitive science is an interdisciplinary enterprise of cognitive psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists, researchers in artificial intelligence, linguists, human–computer interaction, computational neuroscience, logicians and social scientists.
Thorndike wrote in 1911: "There can be no moral warrant for studying man's nature unless the study will enable us to control his acts."
In the 1890s, Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov famously used dogs to demonstrate classical conditioning.
In addition, or in opposition, to employing empirical and deductive methods, some—especially clinical and counseling psychologists—at times rely upon symbolic interpretation and other inductive techniques.
Another method is symbolic modeling, which represents many mental objects using variables and rules.
Skinner's behaviorism did not die, perhaps in part because it generated successful practical applications.
The measurement and operationalization of important constructs is an essential part of these research designs.
Wolfgang Kohler, Max Wertheimer and Kurt Koffka co-founded the school of Gestalt psychology (not to be confused with the Gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls).
The Association for Behavior Analysis International was founded in 1974 and by 2003 had members from 42 countries.
These range from public relations campaigns and outreach to governmental laws and policies.
Quasi-experimental design refers especially to situations precluding random assignment to different conditions.
Another modern psychotherapist was Morton Prince.
For example, physiological psychologists use animal models, typically rats, to study the neural, genetic, and cellular mechanisms that underlie specific behaviors such as learning and memory and fear responses.
It is closely related to other disciplines that study animal behavior such as ethology.
Some psychologists have responded with an increased use of effect size statistics, rather than sole reliance on the Fisherian ''p'' < .05 significance criterion (whereby an observed difference is deemed "statistically significant" if an effect of that size or larger would occur with 5% -or less- probability in independent replications, assuming the truth of the null-hypothesis of no difference between the treatments).
In some places, governments legally regulate who can provide psychological services or represent themselves as a "psychologist".
An early model, proposed by Hans Eysenck, suggested that there are three traits which comprise human personality: extraversion–introversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism.
Another important principle is informed consent, the idea that a patient or research subject must understand and freely choose a procedure they are undergoing.
The International Congress continued to be held, at different locations in Europe, with wider international participation.
For the most part, in the first part of the twentieth century, most mental health care in the United States was performed by specialized medical doctors called psychiatrists.
Cognitive psychology studies cognition, the mental processes underlying mental activity.
Social psychology is the study of how humans think about each other and how they relate to each other.
Computer simulations are sometimes used to model phenomena of interest.
Repeated-measures experiments are those which take place through intervention on multiple occasions.
Much of the Sanskrit corpus was suppressed under the British East India Company followed by the British Raj in the 1800s.
In this field, a professional practitioner or researcher is called a psychologist and can be classified as a social, behavioral, or cognitive scientist.
All researched psychological traits are influenced by both genes and environment, to varying degrees.
Swiss psychoanalyst Ludwig Binswanger and American psychologist George Kelly may also be said to belong to the existential school.
Under the influence of the Carnegie-funded Eugenics Record Office, the Draper-funded Pioneer Fund, and other institutions, the eugenics movement also had a significant impact on American psychology; in the 1910s and 1920s, eugenics became a standard topic in psychology classes.
Also since James defined it, the term more strongly connotes techniques of scientific experimentation.
Soon after, Carl Wernicke identified a related area necessary for the understanding of speech.
Christian Wolff identified psychology as its own science, writing ''Psychologia empirica'' in 1732 and ''Psychologia rationalis'' in 1734.
The U.S. military used the name Psychological Operations (PSYOP) until 2010, when these were reclassified as Military Information Support Operations (MISO), part of Information Operations (IO).
This psychotherapy aimed to align suitable Germans with the overall goals of the Reich; as described by one physician: "Despite the importance of analysis, spiritual guidance and the active cooperation of the patient represent the best way to overcome individual mental problems and to subordinate them to the requirements of the ''Volk'' and the ''Gemeinschaft''."
Humanistic psychology developed in the 1950s as a movement within academic psychology, in reaction to both behaviorism and psychoanalysis.
In recent years, many social psychologists have become increasingly interested in implicit measures, mediational models, and the interaction of both person and social variables in accounting for behavior.
In 2010 ''Clinical Psychological Review'' published a special issue devoted to positive psychological interventions, such as gratitude journaling and the physical expression of gratitude.
An example is the transmission of depression from a depressed mother to her offspring.
conformity, persuasion), and the formation of beliefs, attitudes, and stereotypes about other people.
This code has guided the formation of licensing laws in most American states.
These conditions are approximated best in laboratory settings.
Wang Qingren emphasized the importance of the brain as the center of the nervous system, linked mental disorder with brain diseases, investigated the causes of dreams and insomnia, and advanced a theory of hemispheric lateralization in brain function.
Because of this, more training programs and psychologists are now adopting an eclectic therapeutic orientation.
In China, psychological understanding grew from the philosophical works of Laozi and Confucius, and later from the doctrines of Buddhism.
A different strain of experimentalism, with more connection to physiology, emerged in South America, under the leadership of Horacio G. Piñero at the University of Buenos Aires.
Web-based surveys are increasingly used to conveniently reach many subjects.
Educational psychology is often included in teacher education programs in places such as North America, Australia, and New Zealand.
After the creation of experimental psychology, "ethnical psychology" emerged as a subdiscipline, based on the assumption that studying primitive races would provide an important link between animal behavior and the psychology of more evolved humans.
A significant hurdle in this research is proving that a subject's conscious mind has not grasped a certain stimulus, due to the unreliability of self-reporting.
In 1890 James wrote an influential book, ''The Principles of Psychology'', which expanded on the realm of structuralism, memorably described the human "stream of consciousness", and interested many American students in the emerging discipline.
While psychological knowledge is often applied to the assessment and treatment of mental health problems, it is also directed towards understanding and solving problems in several spheres of human activity.
Repeats of some famous studies have not reached the same conclusions, and some researchers have been accused of outright fraud in their results.
Many do scientific research on a wide range of topics related to mental processes and behavior, and typically work in university psychology departments or teach in other academic settings (e.g., medical schools, hospitals).
Pierre Janet advanced the idea of a subconscious mind, which could contain autonomous mental elements unavailable to the scrutiny of the subject.
Developmental psychologists draw on the full range of psychological theories to inform their research.
At least 30 other international groups organize psychologists in different regions.
For example, in research on the best way to affect reading achievement in the first three grades of school, school administrators may not permit educational psychologists to randomly assign children to phonics and whole language classrooms, in which case the psychologists must work with preexisting classroom assignments.
Longitudinal studies track the same people, and therefore detect more individual, rather than cultural, differences.
In Germany, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) applied his principles of calculus to the mind, arguing that mental activity took place on an indivisible continuum—most notably, that among an infinity of human perceptions and desires, the difference between conscious and unconscious awareness is only a matter of degree.
In 1920, Édouard Claparède and Pierre Bovet created a new applied psychology organization called the International Congress of Psychotechnics Applied to Vocational Guidance, later called the International Congress of Psychotechnics and then the International Association of Applied Psychology.
In Europe, mental assessment took a more physiological approach, with theories of physiognomy—judgment of character based on the face—described by Aristotle in 4th century BC Greece.
The study of human society is therefore a potentially valuable source of information about the causes of psychiatric disorder.
The researchers came to focus on workers' responses to observation itself, and the term Hawthorne effect is now used to describe the fact that people work harder when they think they're being watched.
By many accounts psychology ultimately aims to benefit society.
Animal experiments aid in investigating many aspects of human psychology, including perception, emotion, learning, memory, and thought, to name a few.
Exploratory data analysis refers to a variety of practices which researchers can use to visualize and analyze existing sets of data.
However, this meaning was contested, notably by radical behaviorists such as John Watson, who in his 1913 manifesto defined the discipline of psychology as the acquisition of information useful to the control of behavior.
A new method of "instrumental" or "operant" conditioning added the concepts of reinforcement and punishment to the model of behavior change.
Non-human primates, cats, dogs, pigeons, rats, and other rodents are often used in psychological experiments.
A true experiment with random allocation of subjects to conditions allows researchers to make strong inferences about causal relationships.
Black American psychologists Kenneth and Mamie Clark studied the psychological impact of segregation and testified with their findings in the desegregation case ''Brown v. Board of Education'' (1954).
They also provide insight which avoids the classic problems of subjective self-reporting.
Industrialists soon brought the nascent field of psychology to bear on the study of scientific management techniques for improving workplace efficiency.
Karl Lashley, a close collaborator with Watson, examined biological manifestations of learning in the brain.
Treatment type is the independent variable.
Psychologists such as William James initially used the term ''motivation'' to refer to intention, in a sense similar to the concept of ''will'' in European philosophy.
An important early study examined workers at Western Electric's Hawthorne plant in Cicero, Illinois from 1924–1932.
He created a variation of existential psychotherapy called logotherapy, a type of existentialist analysis that focuses on a ''will to meaning'' (in one's life), as opposed to Adler's Nietzschean doctrine of ''will to power'' or Freud's ''will to pleasure''.
Behavioral research ever aspires to improve the effectiveness of techniques for behavior modification.
However, surveys are also conducted over the phone or through e-mail.
For this reason, some psychologists prefer to distinguish between ''implicit'' and ''explicit'' memory.
Classical cognitive psychology is associated with a school of thought known as cognitivism, whose adherents argue for an information processing model of mental function, informed by functionalism and experimental psychology.
Psychoanalysis comprises a method of investigating the mind and interpreting experience; a systematized set of theories about human behavior; and a form of psychotherapy to treat psychological or emotional distress, especially conflict originating in the unconscious mind.
By the end of 20th century, psychology departments in American universities mostly marginalized Freudian theory, dismissing it as a "desiccated and dead" historical artifact.
G. Stanley Hall who studied with Wundt, formed a psychology lab at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland, which became internationally influential.
The work performed by clinical psychologists tends to be influenced by various therapeutic approaches, all of which involve a formal relationship between professional and client (usually an individual, couple, family, or small group).
An ancient text known as ''The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine'' identifies the brain as the nexus of wisdom and sensation, includes theories of personality based on yin–yang balance, and analyzes mental disorder in terms of physiological and social disequilibria.
In 1951 the Academy created a Psychology Research Office, which in 1956 became the Institute of Psychology.
The humanistic approach sought to glimpse the whole person, not just fragmented parts of the personality or isolated cognitions.
Thus, psychologists also rely on creative statistical methods to glean knowledge from clinical trials and population data.
Cartwright also wrote that psychologists had significant roles in managing the domestic economy.
The study of mental illnesses is called abnormal psychology.
There has been a growing movement to integrate the various therapeutic approaches, especially with an increased understanding of issues regarding culture, gender, spirituality, and sexual orientation.
The Interamerican Society of Psychology, founded in 1951, aspires to promote psychology and coordinate psychologists across the Western Hemisphere.
In research on the effectiveness of psychotherapy, experimenters often compare a given treatment with placebo treatments, or compare different treatments against each other.
However, they believed that these forces, especially the sexual instincts, could become entangled and transmuted within the psyche.
Some founders of the humanistic school of thought were American psychologists Abraham Maslow, who formulated a hierarchy of human needs, and Carl Rogers, who created and developed client-centered therapy.
Cognitive neuroscientists investigate the neural correlates of psychological processes in humans using neural imaging tools, and neuropsychologists conduct psychological assessments to determine, for instance, specific aspects and extent of cognitive deficit caused by brain damage or disease.
One of the earliest psychology societies was ''La Société de Psychologie Physiologique'' in France, which lasted 1885–1893.
Typically, these approaches encourage new ways of thinking, feeling, or behaving.
With the advent of more robust research findings regarding psychotherapy, there is evidence that most of the major therapies have equal effectiveness, with the key common element being a strong therapeutic alliance.
It is an academic discipline and a social science which seeks to understand individuals and groups by establishing general principles and researching specific cases.
In the 1970s, cognitive-behavior therapy arose, using similar methods and now including the cognitive constructs which had gained popularity in theoretical psychology.
They developed a concept of "recognition" (''jen-shih'') which referred the interface between individual perceptions and the socially accepted worldview.
A key practice in behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapy is exposing patients to things they fear, based on the premise that their responses (fear, panic, anxiety) can be deconditioned.
