(Wooden Boat Forum) During the war, Elco came up with stepped hull designs which achieved significant increase in top speed, ("ElcoPlane"), also Higgins developed the small and fast 70' ''Higgins Hellcat'' which was a slight variation on their original hull form, but the Navy rejected them for full production due to their increased fuel consumption and other considerations.
Ronald G. Sinn, who in 2012 sold the boat to "Fleet Obsolete" of Kingston NY.
In July 1942, ''PT-48'' (nicknamed "Prep Tom" and "Deuce") was assigned to MTB RON 3.
As a result, the Navy ordered further investigation and refinement of the existing designs until a satisfactory working design could be obtained.
These boats were constructed mainly out of aluminum and had 4 engines.
When these weapons were found to be successful, they were incorporated onto the PT boats as original armament.
All PTs prior to the  Elcos had been found defective, and it was probable the extended  Elco would not be an improvement.
Then were the three boats built by Andrew Higgins of Higgins Industries in New Orleans.
''PT-3'' was designed by George Crouch and employed lightweight planing hull construction methods.
Another automatic weapon commonly mounted on PT boats was the 20&nbsp;mm Oerlikon cannon.
She was transferred back to the United States in April 1945.
A PT boat carried 3,000 gallons (11,360 liters) of 100 octane aviation fuel, enough for an 4M-2500 equipped boat to conduct a maximum 12-hour patrol.
to build British-designed  Motor Torpedo Boats under license to help the war effort.
Common to all US PT boats were the two twin M2 .50 cal (12.7&nbsp;mm) machine guns.
The Admiralty representative for this sea sled demonstration was Lieutenant G.C.E.
Some boats shipped a 20 mm Oerlikon cannon.
Some served during the Battle of Normandy.
They also performed lifesaving and anti-shipping mine destruction missions during the invasion.
The larger boat was used for experiments until 1930.
By the war's end, most PTs had these weapons.
''PT-728'' was acquired by Fleet Obsolete and moved to Kingston.
With the exception of the experimental PT boats, all U.S. PT boats were powered by three marine modified derivations of the Packard 3A-2500 V-12 liquid-cooled, gasoline-fueled aircraft engine.
During the Guadalcanal and Solomon Island campaigns in 1942–1943, the PT boats of Squadrons (RON) 2, 3, 5 and 6 would lie in wait to ambush a target from torpedo range, generally about .
In February 1915, this Hickman sea sled demonstrated  speeds in rough winter seas off Boston to both US and foreign representatives but again, he received no contracts.
Some 200 gallons 760 l an hour were consumed at a cruising speed of 23 knots, increasing to 500 gallons 1,890 l per hour at top speed.
Several PT boats were lost due to "friendly fire" from both Allied aircraft and destroyers.
PT-3 served with the RCAF Fleet as the RCAF Bras d'Or M413 (B119) based at Eastern Air Command in Halifax.
U.S. Navy PTs were eventually fitted with Raytheon SO radar, which had about a 17 nm range.
After the initial competition, in late 1939, the Navy contracted Elco to build 11 copies of ''PT-9''.
Towards the end of the war, beginning in 1945, PTs received two eight-cell Mark 50 rocket launchers, launching  spin-stabilized flat trajectory Mark 7 and/or Mark 10 Rockets  with a range of .
As more PTs were fitted with dependable radar, they developed superior night-fighting tactics and used them to locate and destroy many enemy targets.
His plan was promptly rejected by the Admiralty, so Hickman built and launched his own privately financed  Sea Sled capable of carrying a single 18" Whitehead Mark 5 torpedo.
Improvements upon Packard's World War I Liberty L-12 2A engine, the successive "M" for "marine" designated 3M-2500, 4M-2500, and 5M-2500 generations all featured slight changes and more power.
Charles Schumann in the 1980s.
Only the British built ''PT-9'' prototype boat brought from England for Elco to examine and copy featured a Merlin.
The Huckins withdrew due to bilge stringer failure.
In order to evade return fire from the enemy ships, the PT boat could deploy a smoke screen using stern-mounted generators.
''PT-167'' (Elco) was holed through the bow off Bougainville on 5 November 1943, by a torpedo which failed to detonate; the boat remained in action and was repaired the next day.
PT 48 was one of the first 4 boats to arrive at Tulagi, on 12 October 1942.
''PT-21'' suffered minor cracks in the deck in the same location (but not to the same extent) as previously observed in ''PT-26'', ''PT-30'', and ''PT-33''.
The business was later sold to Capt.
The hull shape of the Elco and Higgins PT boats were similar to the warped "planing hull" found in pleasure boats of the time (and still in use today): a sharp V at the bow softening to a flat bottom at the stern.
On 8 June 1939, contracts were let to the Fogal Boat Yard, Inc., later known as the Miami Shipbuilding Co., of Miami, Florida, for ''PT-1'' and ''-2'' "Crash Boats", and to the Fisher Boat Works, Detroit, Michigan, for ''PT-3'' and ''-4''.
The Bofors cannon had a firing rate of 120 rounds/min (using 4-round clips) and had a range of .
PT boats lacked a large capacity refrigerator to store sufficient quantities of perishable foods.
George C. Sinn of Wildwood Crest, NJ on 9 October 1951 for $1,015.00.
The course started from the mouth of New London Harbor, to Sarah Ledge, then led around the eastern end of Block Island, then around Fire Island Lightship, finishing at Montauk Point Whistling Buoy.
In the Solomon Islands in 1943, three  PT boats, ''PT-59'', ''PT-60'', and ''PT-61'', were converted into "PT gunboats" by stripping them of all original armament except the two twin .50 cal (12.7&nbsp;mm) gun mounts, then adding two 40mm and four twin .50 cal (12.7&nbsp;mm) mounts.
Later that same year, Higgins was to build ''PT-70'' (at their own expense) that incorporated slight improvements over ''PT-6 Prime''.
The Elco, Higgins and Huckins companies used varying lightweight techniques of hull construction which included two layers of double diagonal mahogany planking utilizing a glue-impregnated cloth layer between inner and outer planks.
Holding all this together were thousands of bronze screws and copper rivets.
These 16 rockets plus 16 reloads gave them as much firepower as a destroyer's  guns.
For example, the forward half of future President John F. Kennedy's ''PT-109'' (Elco) stayed afloat for 12 hours after she was cut in half by the Japanese destroyer ''Amagiri''.
Hundreds of boats were deliberately stripped of all useful equipment and then dragged up on the beach and burned.
''PT-724'', a surviving Vosper built at the Annapolis Boat yard in Maryland, has been used as a yacht, and has since been acquired by the Liberty Aviation Museum to be restored back to original Vosper configuration.
The other two Elco boats, ''PT-30'' and ''PT 23'' (standby boat), followed ''PT-31'', placing before ''PT-69''.
The Mk13 torpedo had a range of  and a speed of .
In several engagements, the mere presence of PTs was sufficient to disrupt heavily escorted Japanese resupply activities at Guadalcanal.
Although not used in any other PT boat design, Huckins licensed the use of his patented Quadraconic hull in his PT boat construction.
They were also used during the D-Day landings on 6 June 1944.
At the time, only the Elco 77-footers had the actual ordnance loadout.
Conducted 24 July 1941, this open-water trial,  at full throttle, would forever after be referred to by PT personnel as the "Plywood Derby."
After the war, the ex-PT459 was cut down to  and highly modified into a sightseeing boat and fishing trawler.
After the start of the war and significantly revising their unit cost, Elco received the next PT boat order after Higgins and Huckins.
Perhaps the best example of a surviving  Higgins boat is ''PT-658'', the only 100% authentically restored and operational U.S. Navy PT boat afloat today.
While docked, PT boat squadrons were supported by PT boat tenders or base facilities which supplied boat crews with hot meals.
The design was enlarged and modified to meet the new requirements.
''PT-9'' was to serve as the prototype for all the early Elco PT boats.
The rest of the competitors had copper ingots added topside (mostly in the turrets) to make up the difference.
To accomplish the task, PTs in the Mediterranean and the Pacific (and RN and RCN MTBs in the Mediterranean) installed more and heavier guns which were able to sink the barges.
These torpedoes and tubes were replaced in mid-1943 by four lightweight  Mark 13 torpedoes, which weighed  and contained a  Torpex-filled warhead.
And, in early 1941, BuShips lent Packard engines to both Huckins and Higgins, which wanted to build competitive boats at their own expense.
was assigned during the war to RON22, and saw action against the Germans in the Mediterranean Sea.
Boats would have their tactical parameters of each design determined by photographs from an airship.
The Higgins 70' (British) boat did not complete this run because of engine trouble.
Starting in mid-1943, the installation of this gun had an immediate positive effect on the firepower available from a PT boat.
This boat (designated MT-72) was a  boat that became ''PT-69''.
Their superchargers, intercoolers, dual magnetos, and two spark plugs per cylinder reflected their aircraft origins.
The other six boats are in various states of disrepair, sunk or scrapped.
Most probably due to the lateness in joining the PT boat program and unlike Elco and Higgins, the Huckins yard was never provided any government support to construct a larger facility prior to the war.
Originally conceived as anti-ship weapons, PT boats were publicly credited with sinking several Japanese warships during the period between December 1941 and the fall of the Philippines in May 1942.
PT-69 and PT-21 experienced structural failures during the second run though these were much localized as compared with those found on PT70.
General visitors are not allowed inside the boat in order to help preserve her historic integrity.
Perhaps the most effective use of PTs was as "barge busters".
"During the first series of tests (July 21–24) the Huckins design (PT-69), the Philadelphia design (PT-8) and the Higgins design (PT-6) completed the open sea endurance run without structural damage.
Beginning in mid-1943, some boats were fitted with one or two .30 cal Browning machine guns on the forward torpedo racks on pedestal mounts.
Nicknamed "the mosquito fleet" &ndash; and "devil boats" by the Japanese &ndash; the PT boat squadrons were heralded for their daring and earned a durable place in the public imagination that remains strong into the 21st century.
While visiting the British Power Boat Company, they purchased a  design (''PV70'') (later renamed ''PT-9''), designed by Hubert Scott-Paine.
Not invited to participate in the original design competition, by late 1940, Huckins had a meeting with Captain James M. Irish, Chief of Design of BuShips, and offered to build a "planing seagoing hull" PT boat, on the condition the Navy loan Huckins engines and agree to look at the Huckins boat.
By war's end, more of the Elco  boats were built (326 in all) than any other type of motor torpedo boat.
"), was named in honor of Frank Sinatra, with whom the boats' Commanding Officer met at a nightclub shortly before MTBRON22 left New York for the Mediterranean Theatre.
One captured Japanese soldier's diary described their fear of PT boats by describing them as "the monster that roars, flaps its wings, and shoots torpedoes in all directions."
Of the Elco boats, only three hulls (one restored) are known to exist as of 2016.
Five 78-foot (24 m) boats were assigned to Squadron 14 (''PT-98'' through ''PT-102'') which was commissioned in early 1943; and ten boats assigned to Squadron 26 (PT-255 thru PT-264) which was commissioned in mid 1943.
(Huckins reported a profit of $28.60 on this transaction.
The Mark 3 and Mark 4 exploders were not subject to the same problems as the Mark 6 exploders on U.S. submarines' Mark 14 torpedoes.
The new launcher did not use any form of explosive to launch the torpedo, and weighed about  less than the old tube style launchers.
146 boats, armed with  torpedoes, were built for Lend Lease, and exported to Allied powers such as Canada, Britain, Norway, and the Soviet Union.
A  barrel-back (which provided increased strength to the sides and deck), a unique double longitudinal planked (mahogany outer planking and Port Orford cedar inner planking) lightweight hull on bent laminated oak framing, she was the "featherweight" of transportable PT boat design, but was later rejected by the Navy during trials in 1941 after being deemed too short to carry 4 torpedoes, as well as being able to only launch torpedoes stern first, which was a procedure considered too dangerous by BuOrd.
The primary anti-ship armament was two to four Mark 8 torpedoes, which weighed  and contained a  TNT warhead.
She was obtained from the backwaters of Florida and moved to its current location by JM "Boats" Newberry, the founder of PT Boats Inc. "Boats" along with the team at Battleship Cove Museum restored her during 1984–89, inside and out, at a cost of US$1 million.
Starting in mid-1943 and thereafter, the old black powder-actuated Mk13 torpedo tubes loaded with Mark 8 torpedoes were removed and replaced with a newer style of torpedo launcher.
She is located in San Diego and is now named ''Malahini''.
The use of PT boat torpedoes was ineffective against these sometimes heavily armed barges, since the minimum depth setting of the torpedo was about 10 feet (3 m) and the barges only drew 5 feet (1.5 m).
# The Huckins 72-foot (''PT-69'') and a reduced Higgins 81-foot (''PT-6'') design were to be placed into production.
Enemy forces would use searchlights or seaplane-dropped flares to illuminate fleeing PT boats.
U.S. Navy PT boats were organized into Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons (MTBRONs or simply RONs).
He named the vessel Schumann's "Big Blue" and ran the business until 2002.
This type of construction made it possible for damage to the wooden hulls of these boats to be easily repaired at the front lines by base force personnel.
On 11 July 1938, invitations to builders and designers (with the exception of inverted-V boat designers) were issued with prizes awarded for the winning PT boat designs given out on 30 March 1939.
The overall result was an extremely light and strong hull which could be easily repaired at the front lines when battle damage was sustained.
In the summer of 1915, Lieutenants Hampden, Bremner, and Anson approached John I. Thornycroft & Company about developing a small high speed torpedo boat, and this effort eventually led to the Coastal Motor Boat which first went into service in April 1916.
The M4/M9 37mm auto cannon had a relatively high rate of fire (125 rounds per minute) and large magazine (30 rounds).
PT boats were also well armed with numerous automatic weapons.
The success and ruggedness of the Huckins' 78-foot seagoing design is demonstrated by Squadron 26's constant ready-boat operations and Fleet torpedo boat training in the oceans around Midway and Hawaii during the last two years of the war.
Many Higgins boats were sent to the Soviet Union and Great Britain at the beginning of the war, so many of the lower-numbered squadrons in the U.S. Navy were made up exclusively of Elcos.
The effectiveness of PT boats in the Solomon Islands campaign, where there were numerous engagements between PTs and capital ships as well as against Japanese shipborne resupply efforts dubbed "The Tokyo Express" operating in New Georgia Sound (called "the Slot" by the Americans involved in the fighting) was substantially undermined by defective Mark 8 torpedoes.
All except the Huckins (''PT-69'') completed the run.
This boat is the only U.S. Coast Guard regulation-approved PT boat licensed to take passengers for hire, and the only surviving U.S.-built Vosper design.
During this trial, boats faced heavier seas, as high as .
World War II PT boats continued to exploit some of the advances in planing hull design borrowed from offshore powerboat racing and were able to grow in size due to advancements in engine technology.
While favorably received, Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels rejected the proposal since the US was not at war, but Hickman was advised to submit his plans and proposal to the British Admiralty, which was done the following month.
There are several recorded instances of PT boats trading fire with friendly aircraft, a situation also familiar to U.S. submariners.
This was done to minimize the amount of upkeep the Navy would have to do, since wooden boats require much continuous maintenance, and they were not considered worth the effort.
Though often said to be made of plywood, they were actually made of two diagonal layered  thick mahogany planks, with a glue-impregnated layer of canvas in between.
The second UK built boat is in private hands, floating on a canal north of London and being used as a private residence, though it is remarkably intact in its World War II configuration.
As a result, two types (45-ft and 55-ft) of British Royal Navy Coastal Motor Boats were obtained for testing.
These torpedoes were launched by Mark 18  steel torpedo tubes.
Additionally, a few PT boats were equipped to carry naval mines launched from mine racks, but these were not in common use.
During World War II, PT boats engaged enemy warships, transports, tankers, barges, and sampans.
This covers PT boat hull design and construction, and provides hull test data as well as detailed analysis of the various PT boat designs.
Several saw service with the Philippine Navy, where they were named "Q-boats" most probably after President Manuel L. Quezon
Afterwards, the PT mission in the Solomon Islands was deemed a success.
The average speed results from the   course were: Elco 77-footer (''PT-21''), ; Higgins 76-footer (''PT-70''), ; Higgins MRB and Philadelphia Navy Yard boat (''PT-8''), .
The Navy would provide engines, and Huckins would build a PT boat at their own expense, with the caveat that the boat (upon completion) would be offered to the Navy for a later sum.
Maintained by an all volunteer group, it is powered by the three Packard V12 5M-2500 gas engines and includes all weapons, electronics, equipment and accessories restored to appear as they did the day the US Navy accepted the boat, July 31, 1945.
''PT-323'' (Elco) was cut in half by a ''kamikaze'' aircraft on 10 December 1944 off Leyte, yet remained floating for several hours.
In 1944, several Higgins  boats (''PT222'', ''PT-283'', ''PT-284'', ''PT-285'', and ''PT-282'') were converted, releasing ''PT-59'', ''PT-60'', and ''PT-61'' for transfer back home to the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Training Command (MTBSTC) school in Melville, Rhode Island for use in training in hull repair techniques.
Forward of the chart house of some early Elco  boats (PT20 through PT44) were twin .30 cal (7.62&nbsp;mm) Lewis machine guns on pedestal mounts.
The squadron was operating under the British Coastal Forces, and saw action along the northwest cost of Italy and southern coast of France.
PTs would usually attack at night.
In April 1941, MTBRon 1 reported enthusiasm over the 81-foot Higgins (''PT-6'') and with the Higgins showing such good seakeeping, that further purchase of Scott-Paine boats was unnecessary.
A few (one 80' Elco, one 72' Vosper, and three 78' Higgins) were cut up and destroyed between 1998 and 2008, leaving (a known) total of 12 PT boats, and 2 experimental PT boat hulls in various states of repair, surviving today in the U.S.:
This was to be their new Elco 80-foot design.
In addition, the Canadian Power Boat Company produced four Scott-Paine designed PTs for the U.S.
The depth charge could be set to go off at , and by the time it exploded, the pursuing destroyer might be above it.
Operating personnel reported extreme discomfort and fatigue.
It was used in the training squadron (MTBRON)4 in Melville, Rhode Island during World War II until it was placed out of service 16 January 1946.
After the war ended PT-796 was used in the Key West/Miami area for experimental purposes.
Accelerometers were again installed in the pilot house of each boat, but the readings were incomplete because the violent motion of the boats made observations extremely difficult and in some cases necessitated abandonment of the observing stations.
The 4M-2500 initially generated 1200 hp (895&nbsp;kW), three roughly equaling the power of a Boeing B-17 bomber.
Initially, only a few boats were issued primitive radar sets.
These were to be provided to the Dutch forces under Lend Lease, but were re-requistioned to the USN as PT 368-371.
Lastly, there was a demonstration of seakeeping qualities and hull strength by making a run at maximum sustained speed in the open ocean.
These boats were ''PT-5'' and ''PT-6'' (built using government-required Sparkman and Stephens design, scaled to an overall length of ) and then ''PT-6 "Prime"'' which was redesigned by Andrew Higgins personally using his own methods.
These boats were never used by the U.S. Navy, and only about 50 were used by the Royal Navy; most were passed to other countries.
''PT-305'' is undergoing restoration (as of 2016) to become a seaworthy, operational vessel on Lake Pontchartrain.
Although the American Mark 8 torpedo did have problems with porpoising and circular runs, it could and did have success against common classes of targets.
In late June 1945 the squadron was shipped to the U.S. for refitting and transfer to the Pacific, but the war ended while still in New York.
The boat is owned by PT Boats, Inc., a World War II PT veterans organization headquartered in Germantown, Tennessee.
At the outbreak of war in August 1914, W. Albert Hickman devised the first procedures and tactics for employing fast maneuverable seaworthy torpedo motorboats against capital ships, and presented his proposal to Rear Admiral David W. Taylor, the Chief of the US Navy's Bureau of Construction and Repair.
''PT-658'' was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2012.
The resulting PT boat designs were the product of a small cadre of respected naval architects and the Navy.
The handcrafted Huckins PT was produced at their civilian facility at a speed of one per month.
Early PT boats (Elco PT20 through PT44) mounted Dewandre plexiglas-enclosed hydraulically operated rotating turrets.
Squadron 22 was operating with the British Royal Navy Coastal Forces, and saw action along the northwest coast of Italy and southern coast of France.
Accelerometers were installed in the pilot house of each design to record "pounding".
''PT-309'' is located at the National Museum of the Pacific War / Admiral Nimitz Museum in Fredericksburg, Texas, and was restored by the (now defunct) Defenders of America Naval Museum (DOANM).
She was reclassified as a harbor patrol boat (YP 110) for the duration of the war.
During the D-Day invasion, PTs patrolled the "Mason Line", forming a barrier against the German S-boats attacking the Allied landing forces.
This Squadron saw action in the Solomon Islands, Guadalcanal, and Funafuti.
Four boats returned: ''PT-8'', ''PT-69'', ''PT-70'', and MRB, and Elco sent two new boats, ''PT-21'' and ''PT-29''.
After testing was completed, PT-3 was transferred to Canada in April 1941 under lend-lease.
In 1943, an inquiry was held by the Navy to discuss planing, hull design, and fuel consumption issues, that resulted in the November 1943 Miami test trial between two Higgins and two Elco boats, but no major additional modifications were made before the end of the war.
Due to the problem with ingot loading, a  trial (with PTs fully fitted out) was conducted on August 12, 1941.
The PT boat was very different from the first generation of torpedo boat, which had been developed at the end of the 19th century and featured a "displacement" hull.
Following an October 1941 BuShips conference and its new set of navy design requirements which included room to support four  torpedoes and an upper length restriction of 82', the next two orders for pre-war PT boats (''PT-71'' through ''PT-102'') were awarded to Higgins and Huckins.
The first Higgins boats for the U.S. Navy were used in the Battle for the Aleutian Islands (Attu and Kiska) as part of Squadrons 13 and 16, and others (RON15 and RON22) in the Mediterranean against the Germans.
''PT-486'', an  Elco boat, was placed in service on 2 December 1943.
Later in the war, several more of these 20&nbsp;mm cannons were added amidships and on the forward deck.
Elco competed for the ''PT-71'' to ''PT-102'' contract but did not win due to their higher unit price.
Their answer was found in the 37mm Oldsmobile M4 aircraft automatic cannon cannibalized from crashed P-39 Airacobra fighter planes on Henderson Field, Guadalcanal.
The 5M-2500 introduced in late 1945 had a larger supercharger, aftercooler, and increased power output of 1850&nbsp;hp.
This resulted in severe conditions for several of the boats during the trial, and accounted for the transverse failure in ''PT-70''s deck and subsequent hull failure as the copper plunged into the hull.
Even though only half as many Higgins boats were produced, far more survive (seven hulls, three of which have been restored to their World War II configuration) than the more numerous Elco boats.
These first generation torpedo boats rode low in the water, displaced up to 300 tons, and had a top speed of .
Because of this boat's extensive combat history, having survived 22 months in the combat zone at Guadalcanal (more time in combat than any other surviving PT boat), a preservation group, "Fleet Obsolete" of Kingston, New York, acquired and transported it to Rondout Creek in 2008 for eventual repair.
In 1922, the US Navy reconsidered using small internal combustion engine powered torpedo boats.
Two of the experimental PT-Boats also still survive, ''PT-3'' (built by Fisher Boat Works) in New Jersey and ''PT-8''.
''PT-657'', a Higgins  boat, has been converted into a charter fishing boat.
11 October 1940, an agreement between the Navy and Huckins was finalized.
The boats also used a lot of high octane gasoline for their size, making them too expensive to operate for a peacetime navy.
Elco boats were found to pound heavily and confirmed previous reports of their discomfort.
In early July 1941, the Navy accepted ''PT-69''.
Relaunched after hull restoration from 1995 to 2005, it is located at Pier 308, Vigor Shipyard in Portland, Oregon's Swan Island Lagoon.
After having demonstrated its value on board PT boats, the M4 (and later M9) cannon was installed at the factory.
The accelerometers ranked the boats as follows: First was the Philadelphia Navy Yard ''PT-8'' with the least pounding, Second was the Huckins ''PT-69'', Third was the Higgins ''PT-6'', and last were the Elco 77-footers.
Much of this destruction (121 boats) occurred at PT Base 17, on Samar, Philippines, near Bobon Point.
Introduction of the Mark 13 torpedo to PT boats in mid-1943 all but eliminated the early problems that PT boats had with their obsolete Mark 8s.
''PT-305'' was acquired by the Defenders of America Naval Museum (DOANM), and then sold in May 2007 to the National World War II Museum in New Orleans.
