In the late 1960s "chicken in a basket", a portion of roast chicken with chips, served on a napkin, in a wicker basket became popular due to its convenience.
In the 1920s John Fothergill (1876–1957) was the innkeeper of the Spread Eagle in Thame, Berkshire, and published his autobiography: ''An Innkeeper's Diary'' (London: Chatto & Windus, 1931).
Various reasons are put forward for this, such as the failure of some establishments to keep up with customer requirements.
The meaning of the "weasel" is unclear but the two most likely definitions are: a flat iron used for finishing clothing; or rhyming slang for a coat (''weasel and stoat'').
The remotest pub on the British mainland is The Old Forge in the village of Inverie, Lochaber, Scotland.
They rapidly spread across the Kingdom, becoming so commonplace that in 965 King Edgar decreed that there should be no more than one alehouse per village.
The practice of adding hops to produce beer was introduced from the Netherlands in the early 15th century.
In the Manchester district the public bar was known as the "vault", other rooms being the lounge and snug as usual elsewhere.
This newly established Danish interest in British cask beer and the British pub tradition is reflected by the fact that some 56 British cask beers were available at the 2008 European Beer Festival in Copenhagen, which was attended by more than 20,000 people.
Some pubs still offer a regularly changing selection of guest beers.
Many of these establishments are now operated as pub restaurants or fast food outlets.
Simple natural or religious symbols such as 'The Sun', 'The Star' and 'The Cross' were incorporated into pub signs, sometimes being adapted to incorporate elements of the heraldry (e.g.
A few pubs have stage performances such as serious drama, stand-up comedy, musical bands, cabaret or striptease; however juke boxes, karaoke and other forms of pre-recorded music have otherwise replaced the musical tradition of a piano or guitar and singing.
The number of pubs in the UK has declined year on year, at least since 1982.
These restricted opening hours led to the tradition of lock-ins.
Scotland's and Northern Ireland's licensing laws have long been more flexible, allowing local authorities to set pub opening and closing times.
Since 1915, the UK licensing laws had changed very little, with comparatively early closing times.
Other subjects that lent themselves to visual depiction included the name of battles (e.g.
The centrepiece of each visit was a trip into the Rovers, the Queen Vic, or the Woolpack to be offered a drink.
Pub landlords had raised concerns prior to the implementation of the law that a smoking ban would have a negative impact on sales.
A "country pub" by tradition is a rural public house.
This number has been declining every year, so that nearly half of the smaller villages no longer have a local pub.
Pubs often have traditional names.
In Europe, it is the provision of accommodation, if anything, that now distinguishes inns from taverns, alehouses and pubs.
He showed a great concern for the welfare of his men, and on their retirement, provided funds for many of them to establish taverns, which were subsequently named after him.
Since the 1990s food has become a more important part of a pub's trade, and today most pubs serve lunches and dinners at the table in addition to (or instead of) snacks consumed at the bar.
The pub is equipped with a Division bell that summons MPs back to the chamber when they are required to take part in a vote.
The drunkenness and lawlessness created by gin was seen to lead to ruination and degradation of the working classes.
Likewise, The Berney Arms in Norfolk has no road access.
It was the pub that first introduced the concept of the bar counter being used to serve the beer.
Examples of theme pubs include sports bars, rock pubs, biker pubs, Goth pubs, strip pubs, karaoke bars and Irish pubs.
Pubs can be traced back to Roman taverns, through the Anglo-Saxon alehouse to the development of the tied house system in the 19th century.
Although the new licensing laws prevented new beer houses from being created, those already in existence were allowed to continue and many did not close until nearly the end of the 19th century.
Jamaica Inn near Bolventor in Cornwall gave its name to a 1936 novel by Daphne du Maurier and a 1939 film directed by Alfred Hitchcock.
A higher price was paid for beer in the snug and nobody could look in and see the drinkers.
They may have a separate dining room.
Under a banner of "reducing public drunkenness" the Beer Act of 1830 introduced a new lower tier of premises permitted to sell alcohol, the '''beer houses'''.
It forced distillers to sell only to licensed retailers and brought gin shops under the jurisdiction of local magistrates.
The original services of an inn are now also available at other establishments, such as hotels, lodges, and motels, which focus more on lodging customers than on other services, although they usually provide meals; pubs, which are primarily alcohol-serving establishments; and restaurants and taverns, which serve food and drink.
Some play pop music and hip-hop (dance bar), or show football and rugby union on big screen televisions (sports bar).
The Wetherspoon pub chain reported in June 2009 that profits were at the top end of expectations; however, Scottish & Newcastle's takeover by Carlsberg and Heineken was reported in January 2008 as partly the result of its weakness following falling sales due to the ban.
They would specify permitted hours, which might require Sunday closing, or conversely permit all-night opening near a market.
However, closing times were increasingly disregarded in the country pubs.
In the 1800s the term used was "public house" as in England but "pub culture" did not spread to Canada.
Critics claimed that these laws would lead to "24-hour drinking".
Licences were only granted, transferred or renewed at special Licensing Sessions courts, and were limited to respectable individuals.
CAMRA maintains a "National Inventory" of historical notability and of architecturally and decoratively notable pubs.
Objections might be made by the police, rival landlords or anyone else on the grounds of infractions such as serving drunks, disorderly or dirty premises, or ignoring permitted hours.
Shove ha'penny and Bat and trap were also popular in pubs south of London.
The Angel, Islington was formerly a coaching inn, the first on the route northwards out of London, where Thomas Paine is believed to have written much of ''The Rights of Man''.
They are typically located in the country or along a highway.
the coat of arms) of the local lords who owned the lands upon which the pub stood.
Herein lies the origin of the modern public house, or "Pub" as it is colloquially called in England.
In South East England (especially London) it was common until recent times for vendors selling cockles, whelks, mussels, and other shellfish to sell to customers during the evening and at closing time.
Another very common arrangement was (and is) for the landlord to own the premises (whether freehold or leasehold) independently of the brewer, but then to take a mortgage loan from a brewery, either to finance the purchase of the pub initially, or to refurbish it, and be required as a term of the loan to observe the solus tie.
By the end of the 18th century a new room in the pub was established: the saloon.
Otherwise, pickled cockles and mussels may be offered by the pub in jars or packets.
During his idiosyncratic occupancy many famous people came to stay, such as H. G. Wells.
Beer houses were not permitted to open on Sundays.
A traveller in the early Middle Ages could obtain overnight accommodation in monasteries, but later a demand for hostelries grew with the popularity of pilgrimages and travel.
The concept of a restaurant in a pub reinvigorated both pub culture and British dining, though has occasionally attracted criticism for potentially removing the character of traditional pubs.
"Their Majesties" referred to were William and Mary, who had recently arrived from the Netherlands and had been appointed joint monarchs.
It is said that Vladimir Lenin and a young Joseph Stalin met in the ''Crown and Anchor'' pub (now known as ''The Crown Tavern'') on Clerkenwell Green when the latter was visiting London in 1903.
The Eagle in Cambridge is where Francis Crick interrupted patrons' lunchtime on 28 February 1953 to announce that he and James Watson had "discovered the secret of life" after they had come up with their proposal for the structure of DNA.
After two years, the impact of the ban was mixed; some pubs suffered declining sales, while others developed their food sales.
Some pubs in the UK also have football teams composed of regular customers.
Some pub signs are in the form of a pictorial pun or rebus.
The earliest signs were often not painted but consisted, for example, of paraphernalia connected with the brewing process such as bunches of hops or brewing implements, which were suspended above the door of the pub.
The sale of beers, wines or spirits required a licence for the premises from the local magistrates.
There was a special case established under the State Management Scheme where the brewery and licensed premises were bought and run by the state until 1973, most notably in Carlisle.
However nine months later many pubs had not changed their hours, although some stayed open longer at the weekend, but rarely beyond 1:00&nbsp;am.
One of these is The Vine, known locally as The Bull and Bladder, in Brierley Hill near Birmingham, another the Cock at Broom, Bedfordshire a series of small rooms served drinks and food by waiting staff.
Ye Olde Man & Scythe in Bolton, Greater Manchester, is mentioned by name in a charter of 1251, but the current building is dated 1631.
While the names of saloon and public bar may still be seen on the doors of pubs, the prices (and often the standard of furnishings and decoration) are the same throughout the premises, and many pubs now comprise one large room.
The list includes a small number of parlour pubs, one of which is the Sun Inn in Leintwardine, Herefordshire.
The Wine and Beerhouse Act 1869 reintroduced the stricter controls of the previous century.
The more remote country pubs often have stand-alone signs directing potential customers to their door.
A '''pub''', or '''public house''', is a house licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to the general public.
Pubs were closed under the Act and compensation paid, for example in Pembrokeshire.
These alehouses quickly evolved into meeting houses for the folk to socially congregate, gossip and arrange mutual help within their communities.
Others claim the smoking ban of 2007, intense competition from gastro-pubs, the availability of cheap alcohol in supermarkets or the general economic climate are either to blame, or are factors in the decline.
Any Person that hath occasion for the said Engines may apply themselves to the Patentee at his house near St Thomas Apostle London or to Mr. Nicholas Wall at the Workshoppe near Saddlers Wells at Islington or to Mr. William Tillcar, Turner, his agent at his house in Woodtree next door to the Sun Tavern London."
There is however no longer a formal distinction between an inn and other kinds of establishment.
Referred to as their "local" by regulars, pubs are typically chosen for their proximity to home or work, the availability of a particular beer, a darts team, a skittles team, or a pool or snooker table.
The owner, tenant or manager (licensee) is known as the pub landlord or publican.
In Denmark—a country, like Britain, with a long tradition of brewing—a number of pubs have opened which eschew "theming", and which instead focus on the business of providing carefully conditioned beer, often independent of any particular brewery or chain, in an environment which would not be unfamiliar to a British pub-goer.
The largest pub in the UK is The Moon Under Water, Manchester; as are many Wetherspoons pubs it is in a converted cinema.
Their popularity ended with the outbreak of the Second World War when recreational road travel became impossible, and the advent of post-war drink driving legislation prevented their full recovery.
Many of London's pubs are known to have been used by famous people, but in some cases, such as the association between Samuel Johnson and Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese, this is speculative, based on little more than the fact that the person is known to have lived nearby.
The Eagle and Child and the Lamb and Flag, Oxford, were regular meeting places of the Inklings, a writers' group which included J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis.
There is no road access and it may only be reached by an  walk over mountains, or a  sea crossing.
In Ireland, pubs are known for their atmosphere or "craic".
Modern names are sometimes a marketing ploy or attempt to create "brand awareness", frequently using a comic theme thought to be memorable, ''Slug and Lettuce'' for a pub chain being an example.
A PubCo is a company involved in the retailing but not the manufacture of beverages, while a Pub chain may be run either by a PubCo or by a brewery.
A survey in 1577 of drinking establishment in England and Wales for taxation purposes recorded 14,202 alehouses, 1,631 inns, and 329 taverns, representing one pub for every 187 people.
Gin was brought to England by the Dutch after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and became very popular after the government created a market for "cuckoo grain" or "cuckoo malt" that was unfit to be used in brewing and distilling by allowing unlicensed gin and beer production, while imposing a heavy duty on all imported spirits.
These usually small establishments can still be identified in many towns, seemingly oddly located in the middle of otherwise terraced housing part way up a street, unlike purpose-built pubs that are usually found on corners or road junctions.
Many of these records survive and can be viewed, for example, at the London Metropolitan Archives centre.
Its cellars are the only surviving part of the older structure.
The anecdote is related in Watson's book ''The Double Helix''.
Later, the public bars gradually improved until sometimes almost the only difference was in the prices, so that customers could choose between economy and exclusivity (or youth and age, or a jukebox or dartboard).
Others are ancient buildings that saw uses other than as a pub during their history.
When the first pubs were built, the main room was the public room with a large serving bar copied from the gin houses, the idea being to serve the maximum number of people in the shortest possible time.
The permission did not extend to the sale of spirits and fortified wines, and any beer house discovered selling those items was closed down and the owner heavily fined.
Today's pub signs almost always bear the name of the pub, both in words and in pictorial representation.
That year was also the first to allow continuous opening for 36 hours from 11&nbsp;am on New Year's Eve to 11&nbsp;pm on New Year's Day.
This is usually a room or bar in the brewery itself, though the name may be applied to the nearest pub.
They were large establishments offering meals and refreshment and accommodation to motorists and parties travelling by charabanc.
Ye Olde Trip to Jerusalem in Nottingham is claimed to be the "oldest inn in England".
The highwayman Dick Turpin used the Swan Inn at Woughton-on-the-Green in Buckinghamshire as his base.
The Beer Orders, passed in 1989, were aimed at getting tied houses to offer at least one alternative beer, known as a guest beer, from another brewery.
Opening for the full licensed hours was compulsory, and closing time was equally firmly enforced by the police; a landlord might lose his licence for infractions.
The gastropub concept has caught on, as traditional British influences are to be found in many Canadian dishes.
Finally in 1869 the growth had to be checked by magisterial control and new licensing laws were introduced.
The saloon was a room where for an admission fee or a higher price of drinks, singing, dancing, drama or comedy was performed and drinks would be served at the table.
Pubs may be venues for pub songs and live music.
These pubs were named after John Manners, Marquess of Granby, who was the son of John Manners, 3rd Duke of Rutland and a general in the 18th century British Army.
Over half of the 15,000 drinking establishments in London were gin shops.
The sets of each of the three major television soap operas have been visited by some of the members of the royal family, including Queen Elizabeth II.
Typically they might require opening throughout the permitted hours, and the provision of food or lavatories.
In the 1950s some British pubs would offer "a pie and a pint", with hot individual steak and ale pies made easily on the premises by the proprietor's wife during the lunchtime opening hours.
In the 1970s, supermarkets and high street chain stores and off-licences undercut pub prices; and all but a handful closed their off-sale counters.
The Canonbury Tavern, Canonbury, was the prototype for Orwell's ideal English pub, ''The Moon Under Water''.
Samuel Pepys is also associated with the Prospect of Whitby and the Cock Tavern.
A pub chain will position itself in the marketplace for a target audience.
Because it was so easy to obtain permission and the profits could be huge compared to the low cost of gaining permission, the number of beer houses was continuing to rise and in some towns nearly every other house in a street could be a beer house.
All pubs granted their licence in 1780 were called the Royal George , after King George III, and the twentieth anniversary of his coronation.
However the modern importance of dining in pubs encourages some establishments to maintain distinct rooms or areas.
There were approximately 53,500 public houses in 2009 in the United Kingdom.
Likewise, The Nags Head in Burntwood, Staffordshire only dates back to the 16th century, but there has been a pub on the site since at least 1086, as it is mentioned in the Domesday Book.
After the departure of Roman authority in the 5th Century and the fall of the Romano-British kingdoms, the Anglo-Saxons established alehouses that grew out of domestic dwellings, the Anglo-Saxon alewife would put a green bush up on a pole to let people know her brew was ready.
William Shakespeare's father, John Shakespeare, was one such inspector.
In the UK betting is legally limited to certain games such as cribbage or dominoes, played for small stakes.
The major soap operas on British television each feature a pub, and these pubs have become household names.
The said Patentee hath also projected a Very Useful Engine for starting of beer and other liquors which will deliver from 20 to 30 barrels an hour which are completely fixed with Brass Joints and Screws at Reasonable Rates.
This law has now been repealed but while in force it dramatically altered the industry.
The 18th century saw a huge growth in the number of drinking establishments, primarily due to the introduction of gin.
It was mentioned by Charles Dickens, became a Lyons Corner House, and is now a Co-operative Bank.
Pubs near London's Smithfield market, Billingsgate fish market and Covent Garden fruit and flower market could stay open 24 hours a day since Victorian times to provide a service to the shift working employees of the markets.
It was argued that this would end the concentration of violence around 11.30&nbsp;pm, when people had to leave the pub, making policing easier.
Many pubs use "Inn" in their name, either because they are long established former coaching inns, or to summon up a particular kind of image, or in many cases simply as a pun on the word "in", as in "The Welcome Inn", the name of many pubs in Scotland.
The distinction was illustrated by William Hogarth in his engravings ''Beer Street'' and ''Gin Lane''.
In the first year, 400 beer houses opened and within eight years there were 46,000 across the country, far outnumbering the combined total of long-established taverns, pubs, inns and hotels.
Pubs hold special events, from tournaments of the aforementioned games to karaoke nights to pub quizzes.
Until the 1970s most of the larger pubs also featured an off-sales counter or attached shop for the sales of beers, wines and spirits for home consumption.
Detailed licensing records were kept, giving the Public House, its address, owner, licensee and misdemeanours of the licensees, often going back for hundreds of years.
Inns tend to be older and grander establishments: historically they provided not only food and lodging, but also stabling and fodder for the traveller's horse(s) and on some roads fresh horses for the mail coach.
By the end of the century almost all beer was brewed by commercial breweries.
It became easier to start a small pub after the passing of the 2003 Licensing Act, which became effective in 2005.
Further provisions regulated gaming, drunkenness, prostitution and undesirable conduct on licensed premises, enforceable by prosecution or more effectively by the landlord under threat of forfeiting his licence.
From this came the popular music hall form of entertainment—a show consisting of a variety of acts.
Family chain pubs which served food in the evenings gained popularity in the 1970s, and included Berni Inn and Beefeater.
The beer selection is mainly limited to beers brewed by that particular company.
Local events were often commemorated in pub signs.
In 2009 about half of Britain's pubs were owned by large pub companies.
The Lost Pubs Project listed 31,301 closed English pubs on 19 July 2016, with photographs of over 16,000.
When manually powered, the term "handpump" is often used to refer to both the pump and the associated handle.
The Sunday Closing (Wales) Act 1881 required the closure of all public houses in Wales on Sundays, and was not repealed until 1961.
It was used by the serial-killer Colin Ireland to pick up victims.
A brewery tap is the nearest outlet for a brewery's beers.
The Bull in the BBC Radio 4 soap opera ''The Archers'' is an important meeting point.
Licence conditions varied widely, according to local practice.
For this reason there was often no reason to write the establishment's name on the sign and inns opened without a formal written name, the name being derived later from the illustration on the pub's sign.
Pubs in Northern Ireland are largely identical to their counterparts in the Republic of Ireland except for the lack of spirit grocers.
It became famous (or according to others, infamous) during a period spanning the 1920s to the mid-1950s as a meeting place for many of London's artists, intellectuals and bohemians such as Dylan Thomas, Augustus John, and George Orwell.
However, Charles Dickens is known to have visited the Cheshire Cheese, the Prospect of Whitby, Ye Olde Cock Tavern and many others.
At the time beer was viewed as harmless, nutritious and even healthy.
The Fitzroy Tavern is a pub situated at 16 Charlotte Street in the Fitzrovia district, to which it gives its name.
A side effect of "The Troubles" was that the lack of a tourist industry meant that a higher proportion of traditional bars have survived the wholesale refitting of Irish pub interiors in the 'English style' in the 1950s and 1960s.
Ladies would often enjoy a private drink in the snug in a time when it was frowned upon for women to be in a pub.
Interesting origins are not confined to old or traditional names, however.
Only then was it made harder to get a licence, and the licensing laws which operate today were formulated.
The Gin Act 1751 however was more successful.
Ye Olde Salutation Inn in Nottingham dates from 1240, although the building served as a tannery and a private residence before becoming an inn sometime before the English Civil War.
and, if they did not simply name their place ''Smith's Beer House'', they would apply topical pub names in an effort to reflect the mood of the times.
For example, a pub in Crowborough, East Sussex called ''The Crow and Gate'' has an image of a crow with gates as wings.
In practice, alcohol-related hospital admissions rose following the change in the law, with alcohol involved in 207,800 admissions in 2006/7.
Trafalgar), explorers, local notables, discoveries, sporting heroes and members of the royal family.
In the past, many rural pubs provided opportunities for country folk to meet and exchange (often local) news, while others—especially those away from village centres—existed for the general purpose, before the advent of motor transport, of serving travellers as coaching inns.
Beer establishments had always provided entertainment of some sort—singing, gaming or sport.
Most offer a range of beers, wines, spirits, and soft drinks and snacks.
Traditionally the windows of town pubs were of smoked or frosted glass to obscure the clientele from the street but there has been a move towards clear glass and brighter interiors.
and commemorated with a blue plaque on the outside wall.
The highest pub in the United Kingdom is the Tan Hill Inn, Yorkshire, at  above sea level.
It has a claimed date of 1189, based on the fact it is constructed on the site of the Nottingham Castle brewhouse; the present building dates from around 1650.
The origin of the British lock-in was a reaction to 1915 changes in the licensing laws in England and Wales, which curtailed opening hours to stop factory workers from turning up drunk and harming the war effort.
The Hostellers of London were granted guild status in 1446 and in 1514 the guild became the Worshipful Company of Innholders.
A bar might be provided for the manager to do paperwork while keeping an eye on his or her customers, but the casks of ale were kept in a separate taproom.
The vast majority of the beer houses applied for the new licences and became full pubs.
The legislation stated "Whosoever shall brew ale in the town with intention of selling it must hang out a sign, otherwise he shall forfeit his ale."
Newly acquired pubs are often renamed by the new owners, and many people resent the loss of traditional names, especially if their favourite regional beer disappears at the same time.
The landlord of a tied pub may be an employee of the brewery—in which case he/she would be a manager of a managed house, or a self-employed tenant who has entered into a lease agreement with a brewery, a condition of which is the legal obligation (trade tie) only to purchase that brewery's beer.
It attracted many well-known patrons, such as Freddie Mercury, Kenny Everett and Rudolph Nureyev.
In more recent years, however, many country pubs have either closed down, or have been converted to establishments intent on providing seating facilities for the consumption of food, rather than a venue for members of the local community meeting and convivially drinking.
By the early 1970s there was a tendency to change to one large drinking room and breweries were eager to invest in interior design and theming.
There are now pubs in the large cities of Canada that cater to anyone interested in a "pub" type drinking environment.
Isambard Kingdom Brunel, the British engineer and railway builder, introduced the idea of a circular bar into the Swindon station pub in order that customers were served quickly and did not delay his trains.
Some pubs serve meals to a higher standard, to match good restaurant standards; these are sometimes termed gastropubs.
In England and Wales by 2000 pubs could legally open from 11&nbsp;am (12 noon on Sundays) through to 11&nbsp;pm (10:30&nbsp;pm on Sundays).
Patrons may put money behind the bar before official closing time, and redeem their drinks during the lock-in so no drinks are technically sold after closing time.
