Outcomes have generally indicated that early onset of puberty in girls can be psychologically damaging.
Exogenous GnRH pulses cause the onset of puberty.
Spontaneous erections are also known as involuntary or unwanted erections and are normal.
Regulation of adrenarche and its relationship to maturation of the hypothalamic-gonadal axis is not fully understood, and some evidence suggests it is a parallel but largely independent process coincident with or even preceding central puberty.
The earliest average onset of puberty is for African-American girls and the latest average onset for high altitude subsistence populations in Asia.
For boys, an androgen called testosterone is the principal sex hormone.
Adrenal maturation, termed adrenarche, typically precedes gonadarche in mid-childhood.
At this point in a male's life the testosterone levels slowly rise, and most of the effects are mediated through the androgen receptors by way of conversion dihydrotestosterone in target organs (especially that of the bowels).
In boys, testicular enlargement is the first physical manifestation of puberty (and is termed gonadarche).
The arcuate nucleus is affected and controlled by neuronal input from other areas of the brain and hormonal input from the gonads, adipose tissue and a variety of other systems.
Girls are especially sensitive to nutritional regulation because they must contribute all of the nutritional support to a growing fetus.
'''Puberty''' is the process of physical changes through which a child's body matures into an adult body capable of sexual reproduction.
Derived from the Latin ''puberatum'' (age of maturity), the word ''puberty'' describes the physical changes to sexual maturation, not the psychosocial and cultural maturation denoted by the term ''adolescent development'' in Western culture, wherein adolescence is the period of mental transition from childhood to adulthood, which overlaps much of the body's period of puberty.
Some men do not develop full facial hair for up to 10 years after the completion of puberty.
Sperm can be detected in the morning urine of most boys after the first year of pubertal changes, and occasionally earlier.
Rarely, menarche can occur before other signs of puberty in a few girls.
Estradiol levels rise earlier and reach higher levels in women than in men.
As the estradiol levels gradually rise and the other autoamplification processes occur, a point of maturation is reached when the feedback sensitivity of the hypothalamic "gonadostat" becomes positive.
Under the influence of androgens, the voice box, or larynx, grows in both sexes.
This often precedes thelarche and pubarche by one or more years.
BPA mimics and interferes with the action of estrogen—an important reproduction and development regulator.
Puberty is preceded by adrenarche, marking an increase of adrenal androgen production between ages 6–10.
The foreskin then gradually becomes retractable.
In about 15% of girls, the earliest pubic hair appears before breast development begins.
The '''pituitary gland''' responds to the pulsed GnRH signals by releasing LH and FSH into the blood of the general circulation, also in a pulsatile pattern.
The average adult male has about 150% of the lean body mass of an average female, and about 50% of the body fat.
While testosterone is produced, all boys' changes  are characterized as virilization, a substantial product of testosterone metabolism in males is estradiol.
A 2006 study in Denmark found  that puberty, as evidenced by breast development, started at an average age of 9 years and 10 months, a year earlier than when a similar study  was done in 1991.
By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle."
In a general sense, the conclusion of puberty is reproductive maturity.
The onset of this neurohormonal process may precede the first visible body changes by 1–2 years.
It is usually not a permanent phenomenon.
Adult pitch is attained at an average age of 15 years, although the voice may not fully settle until early twenties.
On average, girls begin puberty around ages 10–11; boys around ages 11–12.
While estradiol promotes growth of the breasts and uterus, it is also the principal hormone driving the pubertal growth spurt and epiphyseal maturation and closure.
Evidence is accumulating that the reproductive system is not totally inactive during the childhood years.
Pubic hair often appears on a boy shortly after the genitalia begin to grow.
This growth is far more prominent in boys, causing the male voice to drop and deepen, sometimes abruptly but rarely "overnight," about one octave, because the longer and thicker vocal folds have a lower fundamental frequency.
They exhibit positive behaviors in adolescence that continue to adulthood.
If genetic factors account for half of the variation of pubertal timing, environment factors are clearly important as well.
Generally, later onset of puberty in girls produces positive outcomes.
The exercise effect is often amplified by a lower body fat mass and cholesterol.
Whitish secretions (physiologic leukorrhea) are a normal effect of estrogen as well.
Leptin might be the cause of the GnRH rise.
Leptin levels rise throughout childhood and play a part in allowing the arcuate nucleus to resume operation.
The endocrine reproductive system consists of the hypothalamus, the pituitary, the gonads, and the adrenal glands, with input and regulation from many other body systems.
Puberty which starts later than usual is known as delayed puberty.
On average, at 10 years, girls have 6% more body fat than boys.
Initiation of ovulation after menarche is not inevitable.
Embarrassment about a more developed body may also result in the refusal to undress for gym.
Chronic diseases can delay puberty in both boys and girls.
The hormone that dominates female development is an estrogen called estradiol.
For instance, some early-maturing girls have older boyfriends, "attracted to the girls' womanly figure and girlish innocence."
It has neurons which generate and release pulses of GnRH into the portal venous system of the pituitary gland.
Typically estradiol will also cause pronounced growth of the labia minora and to a lesser degree of the labia majora.
It is caused by a failure in HPG axis at puberty which results in low or zero gonadotropin (LH and FSH) levels with the subsequent result of a failure to commence or complete puberty, secondary hypogonadism and infertility.
Growth finishes and adult height is attained as the estradiol levels complete closure of the epiphyses.
Most American girls experience their first period at 11, 12 or 13, but some experience it earlier than their 11th birthday and others after their 14th birthday.
These variations deserve medical evaluation because they can occasionally signal a disease.
Estrogen increase glycogen content in vaginal epithelium, which in future plays important part in maintaining vaginal pH.
The brain undergoes significant development by hormones which can contribute to mood disorders such as major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, dysthymia and schizophrenia.
Also, they experience problems with anxiety and depression and are more likely to be afraid of sex than other boys.
Early puberty in girls can be a harbinger of later health problems.
Testosterone will cause an enlargement of the clitoris and possibly has important effects on the growth and maturation of the vestibular bulbs, corpus cavernosum of the clitoris and urethral sponge.
Before puberty, the larynx of boys and girls is about equally small.
In most young women, this mound disappears into the contour of the mature breast (stage 5), although there is so much variation in sizes and shapes of adult breasts that stages 4 and 5 are not always separately identifiable.
Facial hair will continue to get coarser, darker and thicker for another 2–4 years after puberty.
The sequence of events of pubertal development can occasionally vary.
#Cells in the anterior pituitary respond by secreting LH and FSH into the circulation.
Not all men have chest hair.
Most of this sex difference in adult heights is attributable to a later onset of the growth spurt and a slower progression to completion, a direct result of the later rise and lower adult male levels of estradiol.
The definition of the onset of puberty may depend on perspective (e.g., hormonal versus physical) and purpose (establishing population normal standards, clinical care of early or late pubescent individuals, etc.).
This change increases the susceptibility to acne, a skin condition that is characteristic of puberty.
Most of these reported social effects are small and our understanding is incomplete.
The median age of menarche for a population may be an index of the proportion of undernourished girls in the population, and the width of the spread may reflect unevenness of wealth and food distribution in a population.
In the two years following thelarche, the uterus, ovaries, and the follicles in the ovaries increase in size.
Much evidence suggests that for most of the last few centuries, nutritional differences accounted for majority of variation of pubertal timing in different populations, and even among social classes in the same population.
The penis can regularly get erect during sleep and men or boys often wake-up with an erection.
IGF1 levels rise and then decline as puberty ends.
They have cited obesity as a cause of breast development before nine years and menarche before twelve years.
Arm, leg, chest, abdominal, and back hair become heavier more gradually.
Criteria for defining the conclusion may differ for different purposes: attainment of the ability to reproduce, achievement of maximal adult height, maximal gonadal size, or adult sex hormone levels.
There is theoretical concern, and animal evidence, that environmental hormones and chemicals may affect aspects of prenatal or postnatal sexual development in humans.
Surplus calories (beyond growth and activity requirements) are reflected in the amount of body fat, which signals to the brain the availability of resources for initiation of puberty and fertility.
In comparison with the effects of genetics, nutrition, and general health, social influences are small, shifting timing by a few months rather than years.
It leaches out of plastic into liquids and foods, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found measurable amounts of BPA in the bodies of more than 90 percent of the U.S. population studied.
In Canada, the average age of menarche is 12.72, and in the United Kingdom it is 12.9.
Production of progesterone in the ovaries begins with the development of ovulatory cycles in girls (during the lutheal phase of the cycle), before puberty low levels of progesterone are produced in the adrenal glands of both boys and girls.
This muscle develops mainly during the later stages of puberty, and muscle growth can continue even after boys are biologically adult.
Adrenarche is  sometimes accompanied by the early appearance of axillary and pubic hair.
The major landmark of puberty for females is menarche, the onset of menstruation, which occurs on average between ages 12–13; for males, it is the first ejaculation, which occurs on average at age 13.
Brain tumors which increase GnRH output may also lead to premature puberty.
The pubic hairs are usually first visible at the dorsal (abdominal) base of the penis.
Sex steroids are sometimes used in cattle farming but have been banned in chicken meat production for 40 years.
For much of puberty, nighttime levels of testosterone are higher than daytime.
Although available dietary energy (simple calories) is the most important dietary influence on timing of puberty, quality of the diet plays a role as well.
While 18–20&nbsp;cm3 is an average adult size, there is wide variation in testicular size in the normal population.
Smaller increases of FSH induce an increase in the aromatase activity of these granulosa cells, which converts most of the testosterone to estradiol for secretion into the circulation.
Estradiol also induces at least modest development of breast tissue (gynecomastia) in a large proportion of boys.
However, it is not unusual for a fully grown adult to suffer the occasional bout of acne, though it is normally less severe than in adolescents.
The rise in GnRH might also be caused by genetics.
A simple description of hormonal puberty is as follows:
Physical growth—height and weight—accelerates in the first half of puberty and is completed when an adult body has been developed.
The most important part of a child's psychosocial environment is the family, and most of the social influence research has investigated features of family structure and function in relation to earlier or later female puberty.
The average age at which the onset of puberty occurs has dropped significantly since the 1840s.
Mechanisms of these social effects are unknown, though a variety of physiological processes, including pheromones, have been suggested based on animal research.
Boys who develop mild gynecomastia or even developing swellings under nipples during puberty are told the effects are temporary in some male teenagers due to high levels of estradiol.
The levels of leptin increase with the onset of puberty, and then decline to adult levels when puberty is completed.
Nutritional factors are the strongest and most obvious environmental factors affecting timing of puberty.
Gonadotropin and sex steroid levels fall to low levels (nearly undetectable by current clinical assays) for approximately another 8 to 10 years of childhood.
Mucosa changes into a multilayered structure with superficial layer of squamous cells.
Those that involve chronic inflammation or interfere with nutrition have the strongest effect.
Maximal adult height is achieved at an average age of 15 years for an average girl and 18 years for an average boy.
An American physiologist, Ernst Knobil, found that the GnRH signals from the hypothalamus induce pulsed secretion of LH (and to a lesser degree, FSH) at roughly 1-2 hour intervals.
Stage 5 refers to spread of pubic hair to the thighs and sometimes as abdominal hair upward towards the navel.
Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6–12 months, when the hairs are too many to count.
This inhibition of the arcuate nucleus is an ongoing active suppression by other areas of the brain.
The main steroid hormones, testosterone, estradiol, and progesterone as well as prolactin play important physiological functions in puberty.
Subtle increases in gonadotropin pulses occur, and ovarian follicles surrounding germ cells (future eggs) double in number.
Such erections can be embarrassing if they happen in public, such as a classroom or living room.
The first androgenic hair resulting from adrenarche can be also transient and disappear before the onset of true puberty.
This is stage 3 of breast development.
Recent worldwide increased consumption of animal protein, other changes in nutrition, and increases in childhood obesity have resulted in falling ages of puberty, mainly in those populations with the higher previous ages.
By the end of puberty, adult men have heavier bones and nearly twice as much skeletal muscle.
Most of the increasing bulk of testicular tissue is spermatogenic tissue (primarily Sertoli and Leydig cells).
Any increase in height beyond the post-pubertal age is uncommon.
By the end of puberty, there is little day-night difference in the amplitude and frequency of gonadotropin pulses.
In postmenarchal girls, about 80% of the cycles were anovulatory in the first year after menarche, 50% in the third year and 10% in the sixth year.
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical used to make plastics, and is frequently used to make baby bottles, water bottles, sports equipment, medical devices, and as a coating in food and beverage cans.
Most of the voice change happens during stage 3-4 of male puberty around the time of peak growth.
Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6–12 months, when the hairs are too numerous to count and appear on the pubic mound as well.
The remaining testosterone, together with adrenal androgens is responsible for the typical androgenic changes of female puberty: pubic hair, other androgenic hair as outlined above, body odor, acne.
The testes have two primary functions: to produce hormones and to produce sperm.
Large amounts of incompletely metabolized estrogens and progestagens from pharmaceutical products are excreted into the sewage systems of large cities, and are sometimes detectable in the environment.
The hormonal maturation of females is considerably more complicated than in boys.
In the earlier example, the sample population was based on a small sample of white girls (200, from Britain).
An array of "autoamplification processes" increases the production of all of the pubertal hormones of the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads.
One possible cause of a delay in the onset of puberty past the age 14 in girls and 15 in boys is Kallmann syndrome, a form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH).
The primary clinical significance of the distinction between adrenarche and gonadarche is that pubic hair and body odor changes by themselves do not prove that central puberty is underway for an individual child.
Once a boy is able to retract his foreskin, penile hygiene should become an important feature of his routine body care.
These physical changes are the first visible signs of neural, hormonal, and gonadal function changes.
The usual sequence is: underarm (axillary) hair, perianal hair, upper lip hair, sideburn (preauricular) hair, periareolar hair, and the beard area.
Until the maturation of their reproductive capabilities, the pre-pubertal physical differences between boys and girls are the external sex organs.
By another 12 months (stage 4), the breasts are approaching mature size and shape, with areolae and nipples forming a secondary mound.
Changes of the vulva initiated by estradiol as well as its direct effects also appear to influence the functioning of the lower urinary tract.
Some of the least understood environmental influences on timing of puberty are social and psychological.
The genetic association of timing is strongest between mothers and daughters.
Puberty which starts earlier than usual is known as precocious puberty.
Although boys are on average  shorter than girls before puberty begins, adult men are on average about  taller than women.
The mucosal surface of the vagina also changes in response to increasing levels of estrogen, becoming thicker and duller pink in color (in contrast to the brighter red of the prepubertal vaginal mucosa).
This attainment of positive feedback is the hallmark of female sexual maturity, as it allows the mid cycle LH surge necessary for ovulation.
More extreme degrees of environmental stress, such as wartime refugee status with threat to physical survival, have been found to be associated with delay of maturation, an effect that may be compounded by dietary inadequacy.
It is referred to as pubarche.
The researchers hypothesized that Neurokinin B might play a role in regulating the secretion of Kisspeptin, a compound responsible for triggering direct release of GnRH as well as indirect release of LH and FSH.
As in girls, another androgen effect is increased secretion of oil (sebum) from the skin and the resultant variable amounts of acne.
Another androgen effect is increased secretion of oil (sebum) from the skin.
It usually precedes the development of significant facial hair by several months to years.
Several studies about puberty have examined the effects of an early or a late onset of puberty in males and females.
The endocrine reproductive system becomes functional by the end of the first trimester of fetal life.
Scientific researchers have linked early obesity with an earlier onset of puberty in girls.
#Rising levels of estradiol and testosterone produce the body changes of female and male puberty.
The highest estimated daily intakes of BPA occur in infants and children.
In the vulva and vagina, estradiol causes thickening (stratification) of the skin and the growth of both the myoepithelial layer and the smooth muscle of the vagina.
A result of the social pressure to be thin, the early-maturing girls develop a negative view of their body image.
In Norway, girls born in 1840 had their menarche at an average age of 17 years.
Girls usually complete puberty by ages 15–17, while boys usually complete puberty by ages 16–17.
In the years preceding physical puberty, Robert M. Boyar discovered that the gonadotropin pulses occur only during sleep, but as puberty progresses they can be detected during the day.
However, a significant portion of testosterone in adolescent boys is converted to estradiol.
However the rate of conversion from testosterone to estradiol (driven by FSH/LH balance) during early puberty is highly individual, resulting in very diverse development patterns of secondary sexual characteristics.
A high level of exercise, whether for athletic or body image purposes, or for daily subsistence, reduces energy calories available for reproduction and slows puberty.
LH stimulates the Leydig cells of the testes to make testosterone and blood levels begin to rise.
Neurons of the arcuate nucleus secrete gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) into the blood of the pituitary portal system.
As they physically develop, gaining weight in several areas of the body, early-maturing girls usually look larger than girls who have not yet entered puberty.
Often, the fat pads of the male breast tissue and the male nipples will develop during puberty; sometimes, especially in one breast, this becomes more apparent and is termed gynecomastia.
By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle."
Potential fertility (sometimes termed ''nubility'') usually precedes completion of growth by 1–2 years in girls and 3–4 years in boys.
As the amplitude of LH pulses increases, the theca cells of the ovaries begin to produce testosterone and smaller amounts of progesterone.
Some may desire using prescription topical creams or ointments to keep acne from getting worse, or even oral medication, due to the fact that acne is emotionally difficult and can cause scarring.
Boys who have earlier pubertal timing generally have more positive outcomes in adulthood but more negative outcomes in adolescence, while the reverse is true for later pubertal timing.
Individuals who are deficient in leptin fail to initiate puberty.
Accusations of bias based on political agenda sometimes accompany scientific criticism.
A common definition for the onset of puberty is physical changes to a person's body.
Statistical associations are not necessarily causal, and a variety of covariables and alternative explanations can be imagined.
The ovaries usually contain small follicular cysts visible by ultrasound.
This can be disguised or hidden by wearing close-fitting underwear, a long shirt and baggier clothes.
Significant exposure of a child to hormones or other substances that activate estrogen or androgen receptors could produce some or all of the changes of puberty.
Furthermore, interpretations of the data are politically controversial because of the ease with which this type of research can be used for political advocacy.
The time between menstrual periods (menses) is not always regular in the first two years after menarche.
The LH pulses are the consequence of pulsatile GnRH secretion by the arcuate nucleus that, in turn, is the result of an oscillator or signal generator in the central nervous system ("GnRH pulse generator").
Estradiol together with other ovarian steroids also cause the darker coloration of the areola.
There is a large range in amount of body hair among adult men, and significant differences in timing and quantity of hair growth among different racial groups.
Rising levels of adrenal androgens (termed adrenarche) can usually be detected between 6 and 11 years of age, even before the increasing gonadotropin pulses of hypothalamic puberty.
Ovulation is necessary for fertility, but may or may not accompany the earliest menses.
Some investigators have attributed the onset of puberty to a resonance of oscillators in the brain.
In girls, estradiol (the primary female sex hormone) causes thickening of lips and oral mucosa as well as further development of the vulva.
The average age of menarche is 12.5 in the United States.
In England, the average in 1840 was 16.5 years.
However, early puberty might also result in positive outcomes, such as popularity among peers, higher self-esteem and confidence, as a result of physical developments, such as taller height, developed muscles, and better athletic ability.
However, they have based their conclusions on a comparison of data from 1999 with data from 1969.
Adrenal androgens contribute to the development of pubic hair (pubarche), adult body odor, and other androgenic changes in both sexes.
