The Utuado uprising culminated in what is known as the Utuado massacre.
Like the different states of the United States, Puerto Rico lacks "the full sovereignty of an independent nation", for example, the power to manage its "external relations with other nations", which is held by the U.S. federal government.
Also, there are many non-Puerto Rican US citizens settling in Puerto Rico, from the mainland United States and the US Virgin Islands, as well as Nuyoricans (stateside Puerto Ricans) coming back to Puerto Rico.
In terms of financial control, almost 9.6% —or about $1.5 billion— of Puerto Rico's central government budget expenses for FY2014 is expected to be spent on debt service.
However, a 2013 GAO Study reported that, "Shippers doing business in Puerto Rico that GAO contacted reported that the freight rates are often—although not always—lower for foreign carriers going to and from Puerto Rico and foreign locations than the rates shippers pay to ship similar cargo to and from the United States, despite longer distances.
The offer was very successful, and European immigration continued even after 1898.
He asserted that the law as such was a violation of the civil rights of the people of Puerto Rico.
Someone accused of a criminal act at the federal level may not be accused for the same act in a Commonwealth court, unlike a state court, since Puerto Rico as a territory lacks sovereignty separate from Congress as a state does.
Projected deficits added substantial burdens to an already indebted nation which accrued a public debt of $71B or about 70% of Puerto Rico's gross domestic product.
On April 29, 2010, the U.S. House voted 223–169 to approve a measure for a federally sanctioned process for Puerto Rico's self-determination, allowing Puerto Rico to set a new referendum on whether to continue its present form of commonwealth, or to have a different political status.
The book described all the fruits and commercial establishments of the time, mostly centered in the towns of San Juan and Ponce.
In subsequent plebiscites organized by Puerto Rico held in 1993 and 1998 (without any formal commitment on the part of the U.S. Government to honor the results), the current political status failed to receive majority support.
Operated by the government of Puerto Rico.
These seismic events, along with landslides, represent some of the most dangerous geologic hazards in the island and in the northeastern Caribbean.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Puerto Rico experienced rapid industrialization, due in large part to ''Operación Manos a la Obra'' ("Operation Bootstrap"), an offshoot of FDR's New Deal.
Coastal waters temperatures around the years are about  in February to  in August.
The report concluded that Puerto Rico "... remains an unincorporated colony and does not have the status of 'free association' with the United States as that status is defined under United States law or international practice", that the establishment of local self-government with the consent of the people can be unilaterally revoked by the U.S. Congress, and that U.S. Congress can also withdraw the U.S. citizenship of Puerto Rican residents of Puerto Rico at any time, for a legitimate Federal purpose.
The Authority is ruled by a Governing Board appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate of Puerto Rico, and is run by an Executive Director.
Early Dutch, French, Italian, and Chinese immigrants influenced not only the culture but Puerto Rican cooking as well.
Historians consider this event the worst attack on San Juan.
When Columbus arrived in Puerto Rico during his second voyage on , 1493, the island was inhabited by the Taíno.
Academically, most of Puerto Rico's economic woes stem from federal regulations that expired, have been repealed, or no longer apply to Puerto Rico; its inability to become self-sufficient and self-sustainable throughout history; its highly politicized public policy which tends to change whenever a political party gains power; as well as its highly inefficient local government which has accrued a public debt equal to 68% of its gross domestic product throughout time.
The attack on unarmed protesters was reported by the U.S.
The first dioceses in the Americas, including that of Puerto Rico, were authorized by Pope Julius&nbsp;II in 1511.
At the time of Columbus' arrival, an estimated 30,000 to 60,000 Taíno Amerindians, led by the ''cacique'' (chief) Agüeybaná, inhabited the island.
Puerto Ricans who become residents of a U.S. state can vote in presidential elections.
All these losses were defrayed through the issuance of bonds compounding more than 40% of Puerto Rico's entire public debt today.
The local government of Puerto Rico has requested several times to the U.S. Congress to exclude Puerto Rico from the Jones Act restrictions without success.
''Circa'' 1890, Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan, a member of the Navy War Board and leading U.S. strategic thinker, wrote a book titled ''The Influence of Sea Power upon History'' in which he argued for the establishment of a large and powerful navy modeled after the British Royal Navy.
(''See also:'' "Voting rights in Puerto Rico").
Because of its culture, history, traditions and especially its people's unswerving will, Puerto Rico would continue to be a Latin American and Caribbean nation, with its own national identity.
By the end of the 18th century, merchant ships from an array of nationalities threatened the tight regulations of the Mercantilist system, which turned each colony solely toward the European metropole and limited contact with other nations.
The terms ''boricua'' and ''borincano'' derive from ''Borikén'' and ''Borinquen'' respectively, and are commonly used to identify someone of Puerto Rican heritage.
On June 9, 2016, in Commonwealth of Puerto Rico vs Sanchez Valle, an 6-2 majority of the United States Supreme Court determined that Puerto Rico is a territory and lacks sovereignty.
Disputes arose as to the definition of each of the ballot alternatives, and Commonwealth advocates, among others, reportedly urged a vote for "none of the above".
In 2015, the 25,832 Jehovah's Witnesses represented about 0.70% of the population, with 324 congregations.
:* San Jorge Children's Hospital: The most well known children's hospital in the San Juan Metropolitan Area.
From 2000 to 2010, the population decreased, the first such decrease in census history for Puerto Rico.
Though the Dutch set the village on fire, they failed to conquer the Morro, and its batteries pounded their troops and ships until Hendricksz deemed the cause lost.
Their residents do not have voting representation in the U.S. Congress.
Hundreds of non Spanish families, mainly from Corsica, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy and Scotland, also immigrated to the island.
Puerto Rican cuisine has its roots in the cooking traditions and practices of Europe (Spain), Africa and the native Taínos.
IMG 3392 - Centro Islamico de Ponce, PR.jpg|Islamic Center at Ponce
Shaare Zedeck.jpg|Inside Sha'are Zedeck in San Juan
At different times in the 20th century, the U.S. had about 25 military or naval installations in Puerto Rico, some very small ones, as well as large installations.
When compared to Latin America, Puerto Rico has the highest GDP per capita in the region.
By 1848 the first restaurant, La Mallorquina, opened in Old San Juan.
If vetoed the legislature can then either refer it back with amendments for the governor's approval, or approve it without the governor's consent by two-thirds of the bodies of each chamber.
Baloncesto Superior Nacional acts as the top-level professional basketball league in Puerto Rico, and has experienced success since its beginning in 1930.
In 1992, President George H. W. Bush issued a memorandum to heads of executive departments and agencies establishing the current administrative relationship between the federal government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
The Igneri tribe migrated to Puerto Rico between 120 and 400&nbsp;AD from the region of the Orinoco river in northern South America.
:* Hospital de Veteranos: The main Veterans hospital in the Caribbean.
:* ''Hospital Auxilio Mutuo Expreso''
The main mountain range is called "La Cordillera Central" (The Central Range).
The district is also characterized by numerous public plazas and churches including San José Church and the Cathedral of San Juan Bautista, which contains the tomb of the Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León.
Main dishes include ''mofongo'', ''arroz con gandules'', ''pasteles'', and pig roast (or lechón).
The island's name was briefly changed to "Porto Rico" by the United States after the Treaty of Paris of 1898.
El Vocero is distributed free of charge as well as Indice and Metro.
Puerto Rican soldiers have served in every US military conflict from World War I to the current military engagement known by the United States and its allies as the War against Terrorism.
His work ''The Indo-Antillano Vocabulary'' is valuable in understanding the way the Taínos lived.
The Constitution of Puerto Rico grants the right to an education to every citizen on the island.
Both budgets contrast each other drastically, with the consolidated budget being usually thrice the size of the general budget; currently $29B and $9.0B respectively.
The United States added English-language influence, the university system and the adoption of some holidays and practices.
The PPD, for example, seeks to maintain the island's status with the U.S. as a commonwealth, while the PNP, on the other hand, seeks to make Puerto Rico a state of the United States.
Other sports include professional wrestling and road running.
Pollster Pablo Ramos reported in 1998 that the population was 38% Catholic, 28% Pentecostals, 4% Baptist, and 18% members of independent churches; Protestants collectively numbered almost two million of an island population of 3.6 million.
The island is mostly mountainous with large coastal areas in the north and south.
However, strict remodeling codes were implemented to prevent new constructions from affecting the common colonial Spanish architectural themes of the old city.
Puerto Rico has representation in all international competitions including the Summer and Winter Olympics, the Pan American Games, the Caribbean World Series, and the Central American and Caribbean Games.
English is taught as a second language and is a compulsory subject from elementary levels to high school.
As an outcome of the war, Spain ceded Puerto Rico, along with the Philippines and Guam, then under Spanish sovereignty, to the U.S. under the Treaty of Paris.
Similarly, words attributed to primarily West African languages were adopted in the contexts of foods, music or dances, particularly in coastal towns with concentrations of descendants of Sub-Saharan Africans.
Puerto Rico has surprisingly been able to maintain a relatively low inflation in the past decade while maintaining a purchasing power parity per capita higher than 80% of the rest of the world.
The people of Puerto Rico made history by requesting, for the first time ever, the conclusion of the island's current territorial status.
Puerto Rico, by virtue of its long political association with the United States, is the most Protestant of Latin American countries, with a Protestant population of approximately 33 to 38 percent, the majority of whom are Pentecostal.
Puerto Rico is the smallest of the Greater Antilles.
This was the anniversary of the , 1898, landing of U.S. troops in the Puerto Rican Campaign of the Spanish–American War, until then celebrated as an annual Puerto Rico holiday.
Old San Juan is one of the two ''barrios'', in addition to Santurce, that made up the municipality of San Juan from 1864 to 1951, at which time the former independent municipality of Río Piedras was annexed.
Between winter and summer, there is a temperature change of around .
It began in the rural town of Lares, but was subdued when rebels moved to the neighboring town of San Sebastián.
It was authorized a non-voting member of Congress, by the title of "Resident Commissioner", who was appointed.
Once approved the Department of Treasury disburses funds to the Office of Management and Budget which in turn disburses the funds to the respective agencies, all while the Puerto Rico Government Development Bank (the government's intergovernmental bank) manages all related banking affairs including those related to the government-owned corporations.
He organized a protest at the University of Puerto Rico in 1935, in which four were killed by police.
From the diet of the Taíno people come many tropical roots and tubers like ''yautía'' (taro) and especially ''Yuca'' (cassava), from which thin cracker-like ''casabe'' bread is made.
The Roman Catholic Church was brought by Spanish colonists and gradually became the dominant religion in Puerto Rico.
It was the first non-Roman Catholic Church in the entire Spanish Empire in the Americas.
Eventually, traders and other maritime visitors came to refer to the entire island as Puerto Rico, and San Juan became the name of the main trading/shipping port.
Puerto Rico consists of the main island of Puerto Rico and various smaller islands, including Vieques, Culebra, Mona, Desecheo, and Caja de Muertos.
It was designed and built by the Czech architect Antonin Nechodoma.
Also, Medicare providers receive less-than-full state-like reimbursements for services rendered to beneficiaries in Puerto Rico, even though the latter paid fully into the system.
The Taínos also grew varieties of beans and some ''maíz'' (corn/maize), but ''maíz'' was not as dominant in their cooking as it was for the peoples living on the mainland of Mesoamerica.
The Padmasambhava Buddhist Center, whose followers practice Tibetan Buddhism, has a branch in Puerto Rico.
Over the past fifty years, Puerto Rican artists such as Jorge Emmanuelli, Yomo Toro, Ramito, Jose Feliciano, Bobby Capo, Tito Puente, Eddie Palmieri, Ray Barreto, Dave Valentin, Omar Rodríguez-López, Hector Lavoe, Ricky Martin and Marc Anthony have thrilled audiences around the world.
All official business of the U.S. District Court for the District of Puerto Rico is conducted in English.
By the time independence movements in the larger Spanish colonies gained success, new waves of loyal creole immigrants began to arrive in Puerto Rico, helping to tilt the island's political balance toward the Crown.
Orlando Antigua, whose mother is Puerto Rican, in 1995 became the first Hispanic and the first non-black in 52 years to play for the Harlem Globetrotters.
:* Psychiatric Hospital: The main psychiatric hospital in Puerto Rico.
In particular, the government-owned corporations add a heavy burden to the overall budget and public debt as not a single one is self-sufficient, all of them carrying extremely inefficient operations.
The island's population is approximately 3.4 million.
Puerto Rico has recently become the permanent home of over 100,000 legal residents.
While a state may try an individual for the same crime he/she was tried in federal court since a federated state's separate sovereignty protects it from double jeopardy, Puerto Rico's authority to enact a criminal code derives from the sovereignty of Congress which, as a territory, it lacks.
It is 80% of the size of Jamaica, just over 18% of the size of Hispaniola and 8% of the size of Cuba, the largest of the Greater Antilles.
Puerto Rico has the largest Jewish community in the Caribbean, numbering 3,000, and is the only Caribbean island in which the Conservative, Reform and Orthodox Jewish movements all are represented.
Title 48 of the United States Code outlines the role of the United States Code to United States territories and insular areas such as Puerto Rico.
The bill, which resembled the Smith Act passed in the United States, was signed and made into law on June 10, 1948, by the U.S. appointed governor of Puerto Rico, Jesús T. Piñero, and became known as "Law 53" (''Ley 53'' in Spanish).
Dr. Antonio S. Pedreira, described in his work ''Insularismo'' the cultural survival of the Puerto Rican identity after the American invasion.
Immigration and commercial trade reforms in the 19th century increased the island's ethnic European population and economy and expanded the Spanish cultural and social imprint on the local character of the island.
The Supreme Court of the United States has indicated that once the U.S. Constitution has been extended to an area (by Congress or the courts), its coverage is irrevocable.
In 1952, a handful of American Jews established the island's first synagogue in the former residence of William Korber, a wealthy Puerto Rican of Jewish German descent.
From town to town, there are also many regional distinctions.
Ponce Creole architecture borrows heavily from the traditions of the French, the Spaniards, and the Caribbean to create houses that were especially built to withstand the hot and dry climate of the region, and to take advantage of the sun and sea breezes characteristic of the southern Puerto Rico's Caribbean Sea coast.
Emigration is a major part of contemporary Puerto Rican history.
With no significant industries or large-scale agricultural production as yet, enslaved and free communities lodged around the few littoral settlements, particularly around San Juan, also forming lasting Afro-creole communities.
The Arcaico and Igneri co-existed on the island between the 4th and 10th centuries.
On June 9, 2016, in Commonwealth of Puerto Rico vs Sanchez Valle, an 6-2 majority of the Supreme Court of the United States determined that Puerto Rico is a territory and lacks Sovereignty.
The sections of this statute left in force were entitled the ''Puerto Rican Federal Relations Act''.
An increase of settlement saw the founding of 30 municipalities in the 18th century and 34 in the 19th.
A bill was introduced before the Puerto Rican Senate which would restrain the rights of the independence and nationalist movements in the island.
While the constitution establishes that the request must be submitted "at the beginning of each regular session", the request is typically submitted during the first week of May as the regular sessions of the legislature begin in January and it would be unpractical to submit a request so far ahead.
Both entities frequently assist the Department of State of Puerto Rico in engaging with Washington, D.C.-based ambassadors and federal agencies that handle Puerto Rico's foreign affairs, such as the U.S. Department of State, the Agency for International Development, and others.
Puerto Ricans have also been frequently appointed to high-level federal positions, including serving as United States Ambassadors to other nations.
The bill (to permit Puerto Rico to write its own constitution) merely authorizes the people of Puerto Rico to adopt their own constitution and to organize a local government...The bill under consideration would not change Puerto Rico's political, social, and economic relationship to the United States.
It is a blend of wood and masonry, incorporating architectural elements of other styles, from Classical revival and Spanish Revival to Victorian.
The scarce archaeological findings and early Spanish scholarly accounts from the colonial era constitute the basis of knowledge about them.
The population of Puerto Rico was 3,474,182 on July 1, 2015, a 6.75% decrease since the 2010 United States Census.
The legislative branch consists of a bicameral legislature called the Legislative Assembly, made up of a Senate as its upper chamber and a House of Representatives as its lower chamber.
It was modified and ratified by the U.S. Congress, approved by President Truman on  of that year, and proclaimed by Gov.
Puerto Rico experienced a recession from 2006 to 2011, interrupted by 4 quarters of economic growth, and entered into recession again in 2013, following growing fiscal imbalance and the expiration of the IRS Section 936 corporate incentives that the U.S. Internal Revenue Code had applied to Puerto Rico.
In 2009, Puerto Rico paid  into the US Treasury.
By the end of the 16th Century, the Spanish Empire was diminishing and, in the face of increasing raids from European competitors, the colonial administration throughout the Americas fell into a "bunker mentality".
The local conservative political factions opposed independence.
Six years after the first visit, AND1 returned as part of their renamed Live Tour, losing to the Puerto Rico Streetballers.
It required congressional approval of the Puerto Rico Constitution before it could go into effect, and repealed certain sections of the Organic Act of 1917.
There are also ten private hospitals in San Juan.
In 1967 Puerto Rico's Legislative Assembly polled the political preferences of the Puerto Rican electorate by passing a plebiscite act that provided for a vote on the status of Puerto Rico.
'Inauguration' on the 3-cent stamp refers to the election of Luis Munoz Marin, the first democratically elected governor of Puerto Rico.
The Puerto Rico Baseball League serves as the only active professional league, operating as a winter league.
In addition, approximately 17,000 people are members of the Puerto Rico Army and Air National Guards, or the U.S. Reserve forces.
In order to be eligible, applicants must have been born in Puerto Rico; born outside of Puerto Rico to a Puerto Rican–born parent; or be an American citizen with at least one year residence in Puerto Rico.
They called it ''Boriken'', meaning "the great land of the valiant and noble Lord".
:* Ashford Presbyterian Hospital
Traditionally, santos were seen as messengers between the earth and Heaven.
Ramón Power y Giralt, the first Spanish parliamentary representative from the island of Puerto Rico, died after serving a three-year term in the Cortes.
Wheat, chickpeas (garbanzos), capers, olives, olive oil, black pepper, onions, garlic, ''cilantrillo'' (cilantro), oregano, basil, sugarcane, citrus fruit, eggplant, ham, lard, chicken, beef, pork, and cheese all came to Borikén (Puerto Rico's native Taino name) from Spain.
A significant number of Puerto Ricans participate as members and work for the U.S. Armed Services, largely as National Guard members and civilian employees.
Eugenio María de Hostos wrote ''La peregrinación de Bayoán'' in 1863, which used Bartolomé de las Casas as a spring board to reflect on Caribbean identity.
In 1849 he published ''El Gíbaro'', a collection of verses whose main themes were the poor Puerto Rican country farmer.
Estimates of the Protestant population vary greatly.
If Puerto Ricans voted to continue as a commonwealth, the Government of Puerto Rico was authorized to conduct additional plebiscites at intervals of every eight years from the date on which the results of the prior plebiscite were certified; if Puerto Ricans voted to have a different political status, a second referendum would determine whether Puerto Rico would become a U.S. state, an independent country, or a sovereign nation associated with the U.S. that would not be subject to the Territorial Clause of the United States Constitution.
81-600), which allowed for a democratic referendum in Puerto Rico to determine whether Puerto Ricans desired to draft their own local constitution.
Puerto Rico adopted the name of ''Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico'' (literally "Associated Free State of Puerto Rico"), officially translated into English as Commonwealth, for its body politic.
"The United States Congress legislates over many fundamental aspects of Puerto Rican life, including citizenship, the currency, the postal service, foreign policy, military defense, communications, labor relations, the environment, commerce, finance, health and welfare, and many others."
Of these, eight are Diagnostic and Treatment Centers located in communities throughout San Juan.
Constitutionally, Puerto Rico is subject to the plenary powers of the United States Congress under the territorial clause of Article IV of the U.S. Constitution.
More roads began connecting previously isolated inland settlements to coastal cities, and coastal settlements like Arecibo, Mayaguez, and Ponce began acquiring importance of their own, separate from San Juan.
The population suffered extremely high fatalities from epidemics of European infectious diseases.
That is because "the Government of a territory owes its existence wholly to the United States".
While the Spanish spoken in all Iberian, Mediterranean and Atlantic Spanish Maritime Provinces was brought to the island over the centuries, the most profound regional influence on the Spanish spoken in Puerto Rico has been from that spoken in the present-day Canary Islands.
They raised what they called the Puerto Rican flag, which was adopted as the national flag.
Cayetano Coll y Toste was a Puerto Rican historian and writer.
Following the vote, the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico enacted a concurrent resolution to request the president and Congress of the United States to end its current status as an unincorporated U.S. territory and begin the process of admission to the union as a state.
Support for the pro-statehood party, Partido Nuevo Progresista (PNP), and the pro-commonwealth party, Partido Popular Democrático (PPD), remains about equal.
On , San Juan's Hiram Bithorn Stadium hosted the opening round as well as the second round of the newly formed World Baseball Classic.
Puerto Ricans often call the island ''Borinquen'' – a derivation of ''Borikén'', its indigenous Taíno name, which means "Land of the Valiant Lord".
Torresola was killed during the attack, but Collazo was wounded and captured.
On the island of Culebra, there is a small hospital in the island called ''Hospital de Culebra''.
and a U.S. territory has "no independent sovereignty comparable to that of a state.
Another researcher gave a more conservative assessment of the proportion of Protestants:
Protestantism, which was suppressed under the Spanish Catholic regime, has slightly reemerged under United States rule, making contemporary Puerto Rico more interconfessional than in previous centuries, although Catholicism continues to be the dominant religion.
Furthermore, among the possible alternatives, Sixty one percent (61%) of voters chose the statehood option, while one third of the ballots were submitted blank.
:* Industrial Hospital: This is the hospital for Puerto Rico government employees, whether municipal or Commonwealth government employees.
Normally, injured police officers and firefighters are cared for here.
The movement was discovered, and Governor Miguel de la Torre had its members imprisoned or exiled.
The most notable occurred in Jayuya and Utuado.
Baseball was one of the first sports to gain widespread popularity in Puerto Rico.
The vast majority of recent immigrants, both legal and illegal, come from the Dominican Republic and Haiti.
It is an archipelago that includes the main island of Puerto Rico and a number of smaller islands such as Mona, Culebra, and Vieques.
Even though the conspiracy was unsuccessful, Xiorro achieved legendary status and is part of Puerto Rico's folklore.
Current congressional rules have removed the Commissioner's power to vote in the Committee of the Whole, but the Commissioner can vote in committee.
Similar masks signifying evil spirits were used in both Spain and Africa, though for different purposes.
:* Pediatric Hospital: Operated by the government of the Commonwealth, this is the main trauma hospital for pediatric cases.
The mountains can also cause wide variation in local wind speed and direction due to their sheltering and channeling effects adding to the climatic variation.
These include Miguel Cotto, Félix Trinidad, Wilfred Benítez and Gómez among others.
The municipality of San Juan (previously called "town"), was founded first, in 1521, San Germán in 1570, Coamo in 1579, Arecibo in 1614, Aguada in 1692 and Ponce in 1692.
The Puerto Rico national baseball team has participated in the World Cup of Baseball winning one gold (1951), four silver and four bronze medals, the Caribbean Series (winning fourteen times) and the World Baseball Classic.
This board have significant degree of federal control involved in its establishment and operations.
Only one Category 5 hurricane has struck the island since 1851, the Lake Okeechobee Hurricane of September 1928.
Consequently, practitioners of this style have earned participation in international teams, including Orlando "El Gato" Meléndez, who became the first Puerto Rican born athlete to play for the Harlem Globetrotters.
During the four centuries of Spanish rule, the island's ethnic, cultural and physical landscapes were transformed, as the island was settled overwhelmingly by Spanish settlers, primarily from the Canary Islands and Andalusia, continuing right up until the end of the 19th century, as a result of which it is an overwhelmingly Catholic and markedly Hispanic territory in terms of culture and language.
Urban planning responded to the needs of keeping the colony in Spanish hands.
With the increasingly rapid growth of independent former Spanish colonies in the South and Central American states in the first part of the 19th century, the Spanish Crown considered Puerto Rico and Cuba of strategic importance.
It originated off the coast of Aguadilla, several kilometers off the northern coast, and was accompanied by a tsunami.
In 1993 the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit stated that Congress may unilaterally repeal the Puerto Rican Constitution or the Puerto Rican Federal Relations Act and replace them with any rules or regulations of its choice.
A 2012 referendum showed a majority (54% of the electorate) disagreed with "the present form of territorial status", with full statehood as the preferred option among those who voted for a change of status.
Between the 7th and 11th centuries, the Taíno culture developed on the island.
They may represent part of the oceanic crust and are believed to come from the Pacific Ocean realm.
Don Pedro Albizu Campos served many years in a federal prison in Atlanta, for seditious conspiracy to overthrow the U.S. government in Puerto Rico.
This style of Puerto Rican buildings is found predominantly in residential homes in Ponce that developed between 1895 and 1920.
Eventually traders and other maritime visitors came to refer to the entire island as Puerto Rico, while San Juan became the name used for the main trading/shipping port and the capital city.
:* Centro Medico Emergency Room: This is the main hospital for trauma cases for Puerto Rico and the Caribbean.
