The rate of fatal pulmonary embolisms has declined from 6% to 2% over the last 25 years in the United States.
There are several markers used for risk stratification and these are also independent predictors of adverse outcome.
CT pulmonary angiography is the recommended first line diagnostic imaging test in most people.
This will include testing ("thrombophilia screen") for Factor V Leiden mutation, antiphospholipid antibodies, protein C and S and antithrombin levels, and later prothrombin mutation, MTHFR mutation, Factor VIII concentration and rarer inherited coagulation abnormalities.
* Score >6.0 — High (probability 59% based on pooled data)
After a first PE, the search for secondary causes is usually brief.
The decision to perform medical imaging is based on clinical reasoning, that is, the medical history, symptoms and findings on physical examination, followed by an assessment of clinical probability.
Medication that breaks up blood
The development of thrombosis is classically due to a group of causes named Virchow's triad (alterations in blood flow, factors in the vessel wall and factors affecting the properties of the blood).
There is controversy over whether small subsegmental PEs need treatment at all and some evidence exists that patients with subsegmental PEs may do well without treatment.
Rates are similar in males and females.
If the risk is low a blood test known as a D-dimer may rule out the condition.
The most commonly used method to predict clinical probability, the Wells score, is a clinical prediction rule, whose use is complicated by multiple versions being available.
An abnormal D-dimer level at the end of treatment might signal the need for continued treatment among patients with a first unprovoked pulmonary embolus.
In this study which had a prevalence of detection was 32%, the positive predictive value of 67.0% and negative predictive value of 85.2% ( click here to adjust these results for people at higher or lower risk of detection).
*clinically suspected DVT — 3.0 points
This figure comes from a trial published in 1960 by Barrit and Jordan, which compared anticoagulation against placebo for the management of PE.
* Low clinical probability.
About 15% of all cases of sudden death are attributable to PE.
*history of DVT or PE — 1.5 points
They become more common as people get older.
However, this study's results may be biased due to possible incorporation bias, since the CT scan was the final diagnostic tool in people with pulmonary embolism.
In the 2000 publication, Wells proposed two different scoring systems using cutoffs of 2 or 4 with the same prediction rule.
Massive PE causing hemodynamic instability (shock and/or low blood pressure, defined as a systolic blood pressure 15 min if not caused by new-onset arrhythmia, hypovolemia or sepsis) is an indication for thrombolysis, the enzymatic destruction of the clot with medication.
If positive D-dimer, obtain MDCT and based treatment on results.
** Estrogen-containing hormonal contraception
Consider D-dimer to rule out PE.
If negative D-dimer, PE is excluded.
The test can be performed with planar two-dimensional imaging, or single photon emission tomography (SPECT) which enables three-dimensional imaging.
This study is the only placebo controlled trial ever to examine the place of anticoagulants in the treatment of PE, the results of which were so convincing that the trial has never been repeated as to do so would be considered unethical.
There have been other patient-related factors such as COPD and chronic heart failure thought to also play a role in prognosis.
The diagnosis of PE is based primarily on validated clinical criteria combined with selective testing because the typical clinical presentation (shortness of breath, chest pain) cannot be definitively differentiated from other causes of chest pain and shortness of breath.
In patients with an underlying malignancy, therapy with a course of LMWH is favored over warfarin; it is continued for six months, at which point a decision should be reached whether ongoing treatment is required.
*immobilization (≥ 3d)/surgery in previous four weeks — 1.5 points
In 2001, Wells published results using the more conservative cutoff of 2 to create three categories.
The typical cut off is 500&nbsp;ug/L, although this varies based on the assay.
People in this low risk category without any of these criteria may undergo no further diagnostic testing for PE: Hypoxia — SaO2 50, hormone use, tachycardia.
Historically, the gold standard for diagnosis was pulmonary angiography, but this has fallen into disuse with the increased availability of non-invasive techniques.
The conditions are generally regarded as a continuum termed ''venous thromboembolism'' (VTE).
The PESI and sPESI scoring tools can estimate mortality of patients.
Often these are recommended for six months or longer.
Strain on the right ventricle may be detected as a left parasternal heave, a loud pulmonary component of the second heart sound, and/or raised jugular venous pressure.
shortly after a major operation), or a person has a pulmonary embolus in spite of being anticoagulated.
Some have found that the treatment decreases the risk of death and increases the risk of bleeding including intracranial hemorrhage.
Symptoms of pulmonary embolism are typically sudden in onset and may include one or many of the following: dyspnea (shortness of breath), tachypnea (rapid breathing), chest pain of a "pleuritic" nature (worsened by breathing), cough and hemoptysis (coughing up blood).
Unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), or fondaparinux is administered initially, while warfarin, acenocoumarol, or phenprocoumon therapy is commenced (this may take several days, usually while the patient is in the hospital).
125 people must be treated for one to benefit.
PE usually results from a blood clot in the leg that travels to the lung.
A low-grade fever may be present, particularly if there is associated pulmonary hemorrhage or infarction.
Often, more than one risk factor is present.
While certain ECG changes may occur with PE, none are specific enough to confirm or sensitive enough to rule out the diagnosis.
Efforts to prevent PE include beginning to move as soon as possible after surgery, lower leg exercises during periods of sitting, and the use of blood thinners after some types of surgery.
ECG findings associated with pulmonary embolisms may suggest worse prognosis since the six findings identified with RV strain on ECG (heart rate > 100 beats per minute, S1Q3T3, inverted T waves in leads V1-V4, ST elevation in aVR, complete right bundle branch block, and atrial fibrillation) are associated with increased risk of circulatory shock and death.
Inferior vena cava filters should be removed as soon as it becomes safe to start using anticoagulation.
Some studies (see below) suggest that this finding may be an indication for thrombolysis.
Assessing the accuracy of CT pulmonary angiography is hindered by the rapid changes in the number of rows of detectors available in multidetector CT (MDCT) machines.
The prediction rule was revised in 1998 This prediction rule was further revised when simplified during a validation by Wells ''et al.''
Together deep vein thrombosis and PE are known as venous thromboembolism (VTE).
A pleural effusion is sometimes present that is exudative, detectable by decreased percussion note, audible breath sounds, and vocal resonance.
For people at similar risk to those in this study (2.0% had bleeding when not treated with low molecular weight heparin), this leads to an absolute risk reduction of 0.8%.
That said, the reported mortality rate of 26% in the placebo group is probably an overstatement, given that the technology of the day may have detected only severe PEs.
Those in classes I and II are low-risk and those in classes III-V are high-risk.
Mortality from untreated PEs was said to be 26%.
Improvement slows thereafter and some deficits may be permanent.
Catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT) is a new technique found to be relatively safe and effective for massive PEs.
Hybrid devices combining SPECT and CT (SPECT/CT) further enable anatomic characterization of any abnormality.
Occasionally, a pleural friction rub may be audible over the affected area of the lung (mostly in PE with infarct).
Although modern filters are meant to be retrievable, complications may prevent some from being removed.
The classic presentation for PE with pleuritic pain, dyspnea and tachycardia is likely caused by a large fragmented embolism causing both large and small PEs.
Severe cases can lead to passing out, abnormally low blood pressure, and sudden death.
Although the exact definitions of these are unclear, an accepted definition of massive PE is one in which there is hemodynamic instability such as sustained low blood pressure, slowed heart rate, or pulselessness.
Recent recommendations for a diagnostic algorithm were published by the PIOPED investigators; however, these recommendations do not reflect research using 64 slice MDCT.
As smaller pulmonary emboli tend to lodge in more peripheral areas without collateral circulation they are more likely to cause lung infarction and small effusions (both of which are painful), but not hypoxia, dyspnea or hemodynamic instability such as tachycardia.
Similarly, pregnant women are often maintained on low molecular weight heparin until at least six weeks after delivery to avoid the known teratogenic effects of warfarin, especially in the early stages of pregnancy.
This is the finding of akinesia of the mid-free wall but a normal motion of the apex.
The rationale behind this decision is that further testing (specifically CT angiogram of the chest) may cause more harm (from radiation exposure and contrast dye) than the risk of PE.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is routinely done on people with chest pain to quickly diagnose myocardial infarctions (heart attacks), an important differential diagnosis in an individual with chest pain.
There are additional prediction rules for PE, such as the Geneva rule.
Evidence to support one approach versus the other is weak.
The primary use of the ECG is to rule out other causes of chest pain.
If another episode of PE occurs under warfarin treatment, the INR window may be increased to e.g.
* ''Alterations in blood flow'': immobilization (after surgery), injury, pregnancy (also procoagulant), obesity (also procoagulant), cancer (also procoagulant)
In the United States between 300,000 and 600,000 cases occur each year, which results in between 50,000 and 200,000 deaths.
If one of these is abnormal, further investigations might be warranted.
* High clinical probability.
In these instances, it may be implanted to prevent new or existing DVTs from entering the pulmonary artery and combining with an existing blockage.
LMWH may reduce bleeding among people with pulmonary embolism as compared to heparin according to a systematic review of randomized controlled trials by the Cochrane Collaboration.
* Moderate clinical probability.
The PERC rule has a sensitivity of 97.4% and specificity of 21.9% with a false negative rate of 1.0% (16/1666).
However, recently, it has gone through a resurgence with the revision of the surgical technique and is thought to benefit certain people.
Only when a second PE occurs, and especially when this happens while still under anticoagulant therapy, a further search for underlying conditions is undertaken.
The risk of blood clots is increased by cancer, prolonged bed rest, smoking, stroke, certain genetic conditions, pregnancy, obesity, and after some types of surgery.
In other words, a positive D-dimer is not synonymous with PE, but a negative D-dimer is, with a good degree of certainty, an indication of absence of a PE.
Severe cases may require thrombolysis using medication such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), or may require surgery such as a pulmonary thrombectomy.
In people with a low or moderate suspicion of PE, a normal D-dimer level (shown in a blood test) is enough to exclude the possibility of thrombotic PE, with a three-month risk of thromboembolic events being 0.14%.
In 1995, Philip Steven Wells, initially developed a prediction rule (based on a literature search) to predict the likelihood of PE, based on clinical criteria.
clots is released through the catheter so that its highest concentration is directly
*hemoptysis — 1.0 points
Warfarin therapy often requires a frequent dose adjustment and monitoring of the international normalized ratio (INR).
Pulmonary embolisms affects about 430,000 people each year in Europe.
It puts the subjects into one of five classes (I-V), with 30-day mortality ranging from 1.1% to 24.5%.
This is occasionally present (occurring in up to 20% of people), but may also occur in other acute lung conditions, and, therefore, has limited diagnostic value.
** Genetic thrombophilia (factor V Leiden, prothrombin mutation G20210A, protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, antithrombin deficiency, hyperhomocysteinemia and plasminogen/fibrinolysis disorders)
An additional version, the "modified extended version", using the more recent cutoff of 2 but including findings from Wells's initial studies were proposed.
If negative D-dimer, PE is excluded.
After a massive PE, the embolus must be resolved somehow if the patient is to survive.
In thrombotic PE, the blood clot may be broken down by fibrinolysis, or it may be organized and recanalized so that a new channel forms through the clot.
''The Wells score'':
This involves accessing the venous system by placing a catheter into a vein in the
Some ECG changes including S1Q3T3 also correlate with worse short-term prognosis.
next to the pulmonary embolus.
If blood thinners are not appropriate a vena cava filter may be used.
Treatment is typically with blood thinners such as heparin or warfarin.
The authors noted that a negative single slice CT scan is insufficient to rule out pulmonary embolism on its own.
groin and guiding it through the veins by using fluoroscopic imaging until it
*tachycardia (heart rate > 100) — 1.5 points
About 90% of embolisms are from proximal leg deep vein thromboses (DVTs) or pelvic vein thromboses.
* Score  4 — PE likely.
People are often admitted to hospital in the early stages of treatment, and tend to remain under inpatient care until the INR has reached therapeutic levels.
Symptoms may include shortness of breath, chest pain particularly upon breathing in, and coughing up blood.
Acutely, supportive treatments, such as oxygen or analgesia, may be required.
DVTs are at risk for dislodging and migrating to the lung circulation.
CDT is performed by interventional radiologists,
On physical examination, the lungs are usually normal.
It results in between 50,000 and 200,000 deaths per year in the United States.
Thus, small PEs are often missed because they cause pleuritic pain alone without any other findings and large PEs often missed because they are painless and mimic other conditions often causing ECG changes and small rises in troponin and BNP levels.
It is also recommended in those in cardiac arrest with a known PE.
For those with small PEs (known as subsegmental PEs) the effects of anticoagulation is unknown as it has not been properly studied as of 2014.
2.5–3.5 (unless there are contraindications) or anticoagulation may be changed to a different anticoagulant e.g.
CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is a pulmonary angiogram obtained using computed tomography (CT) with radiocontrast rather than right heart catheterization.
These investigators recommended:
In this situation, it is the best available treatment in those without contraindications and is supported by clinical guidelines.
Traditional interpretation
This study noted that additional testing is necessary when the clinical probability is inconsistent with the imaging results.
A ventilation/perfusion scan (or V/Q scan or lung scintigraphy) shows that some areas of the lung are being ventilated but not perfused with blood (due to obstruction by a clot).
Others have found no decrease in the risk of death.
In PE, INRs between 2.0 and 3.0 are generally considered ideal.
*malignancy (with treatment within six months) or palliative — 1.0 points
When a PE is being suspected, several blood tests are done in order to exclude important secondary causes of PE.
More importantly, the use of ''any'' rule is associated with reduction in recurrent thromboembolism.
These include hypotension, cardiogenic shock, syncope, evidence of right heart dysfunction, and elevated cardiac enzymes.
This includes a full blood count, clotting status (PT, aPTT, TT), and some screening tests (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, renal function, liver enzymes, electrolytes).
and in medical centers that offer CDT, it should be considered first-line treatment.
Symptoms of a blood clot in the leg may also be present such as a red, warm, swollen, and painful leg.
If positive, treat, if negative, more tests are needed to exclude PE.
Surgical management of acute pulmonary embolism (pulmonary thrombectomy) is uncommon and has largely been abandoned because of poor long-term outcomes.
Signs include low blood oxygen levels, rapid breathing, rapid heart rate, and sometimes a mild fever.
Prognosis depends on the amount of lung that is affected and on the co-existence of other medical conditions; chronic embolisation to the lung can lead to pulmonary hypertension.
A separate study with a mixture of 4 slice and 16 slice scanners reported a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 96%, which means that it is a good test for ruling out a pulmonary embolism if it is not seen on imaging and that it is very good at confirming a pulmonary embolism is present if it is seen.
*alternative diagnosis is less likely than PE — 3.0 points
The most commonly seen signs in the ECG are sinus tachycardia, right axis deviation, and right bundle branch block.
* Score 4 or less — PE unlikely.
In this study, the sensitivity was 69% and specificity was 84%.
Chronic pulmonary embolism leading to pulmonary hypertension (known as ''chronic thromboembolic hypertension'') is treated with a surgical procedure known as a pulmonary thromboendarterectomy.
The risk in those who are hospitalized is around 1%.
Following the completion of warfarin in those with prior PE, long-term aspirin is useful to prevent recurrence.
More severe cases can include signs such as cyanosis (blue discoloration, usually of the lips and fingers), collapse, and circulatory instability because of decreased blood flow through the lungs and into the left side of the heart.
Usually, anticoagulant therapy is the mainstay of treatment.
According to a cohort study, single-slice spiral CT may help diagnose detection among people with suspected pulmonary embolism.
The relative risk reduction was 40%.
The use of thrombolysis in non-massive PEs is still debated.
In spite of the device's theoretical advantage of preventing pulmonary emboli, there is a lack of evidence supporting its effectiveness.
An ECG may show signs of right heart strain or acute cor pulmonale in cases of large PEs — the classic signs are a large S wave in lead I, a large Q wave in lead III, and an inverted T wave in lead III (S1Q3T3), which occurs in 12-50% of people with the diagnosis, yet also occurs in 12% without the diagnosis.
** Cancer (due to secretion of pro-coagulants)
However, in those over the age of 50, changing the cut-off value to the person's age multiplied by 10&nbsp;ug/L (accounting for assay which has been used) is recommended as it decreases the number of falsely positive tests without missing any additional cases of PE.
Pulmonary embolisms occur in more than 600,000 people in the United States each year.
A small proportion of cases are due to the embolization of air, fat, or amniotic fluid.
Not every person with a (suspected) pulmonary embolism requires an echocardiogram, but elevations in cardiac troponins or brain natriuretic peptide may indicate heart strain and warrant an echocardiogram, and be important in prognosis.
Diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms in combination with test results.
This type of examination is as accurate as multislice CT, but is less used, due to the greater availability of CT technology.
It is particularly useful in people who have an allergy to iodinated contrast, impaired renal function, or are pregnant (due to its lower radiation exposure as compared to CT).
'''Pulmonary embolism''' ('''PE''') is a blockage of an artery in the lungs by a substance that has traveled from elsewhere in the body through the bloodstream (embolism).
The Geneva prediction rules and Wells criteria are used to calculate a pre-test probability of patients to predict who has a pulmonary embolism.
Increasingly, however, low-risk cases are managed at home in a fashion already common in the treatment of DVT.
* Score 2.0 to 6.0 — Moderate (probability 29% based on pooled data)
Ultrasound of the legs can confirm the presence of a PE but cannot rule it out.
Warfarin therapy is usually continued for 3–6 months, or "lifelong" if there have been previous DVTs or PEs, or none of the usual risk factors is present.
The PESI algorithm comprises 11 routinely available clinical variables.
Its advantages are clinical equivalence, its non-invasive nature, its greater availability to people, and the possibility of identifying other lung disorders from the differential diagnosis in case there is no pulmonary embolism.
Once anticoagulation is stopped, the risk of a fatal pulmonary embolism is 0.5% per year.
PEs are sometimes described as massive, submassive and nonmassive depending on the clinical signs and symptoms.
Sinus tachycardia, however, is still only found in 8–69% of people with PE.
If positive D-dimer, obtain MDCT and based treatment on results.
Otherwise a CT pulmonary angiography, lung ventilation/perfusion scan, or ultrasound of the legs may confirm the diagnosis.
* ''Factors affecting the properties of the blood'' (procoagulant state):
D-dimer is highly sensitive but not specific (specificity around 50%).
Consider diagnostic imaging.
Larger PEs, which tend to lodge centrally, typically cause dyspnea, hypoxia, low blood pressure, fast heart rate and fainting, but are often painless because there is no lung infarction due to collateral circulation.
There are two situations when an inferior vena cava filter is considered advantageous, and those are if anticoagulant therapy is contraindicated (e.g.
Presumably, the 5% error rate will fall as 64 slice MDCT is more commonly used.
These scores are tools to be used with clinical judgment in deciding diagnostic testing and types of therapy.
Barritt and Jordan performed their study in the Bristol Royal Infirmary in 1957.
The long-term safety profile of permanently leaving a filter inside the body is not known.
* ''Factors in the vessel wall'': surgery, catheterizations causing direct injury ("endothelial injury")
''However'', the authors were not concerned that a negative MDCT with negative D-dimer in this setting has a 5% probability of being false.
is located next to the PE in the lung circulation.
** Acquired thrombophilia (antiphospholipid syndrome, nephrotic syndrome, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria)
Most recently, a further study reverted to Wells's earlier use of a cutoff of 4 points to create only two categories.
CTPA is non-inferior to VQ scanning, and identifies more emboli (without necessarily improving the outcome) compared to VQ scanning.
This phenomenon has a 77% sensitivity and a 94% specificity for the diagnosis of acute pulmonary embolism in the setting of right ventricular dysfunction.
