The Jamrud Fort at the entry of Khyber Pass was built by Ranjit Singh.
He was born in 1780 to Maha Singh and Raj Kaur in Gujranwala, Punjab.
That is why recently sports like Speed reading, Mental abacus, historical and IQ tests are arranged as well.
"Bhangra" dance is the most famous aspect of Punjabi dance tradition.
Dupatta with embroidery of different styles with Matthay da Tikka is also very famous in Punjabi culture.
In the 1980s, Sikh separatism combined with popular anger against the Indian Army's counter-insurgency operations (especially Operation Bluestar) led to violence and disorder in Indian Punjab, which only subsided in the 1990s.
Its identity is independent of historical origin or religion, and refers to those who reside in the Punjab region, or associate with its population, and those who consider the Punjabi language their mother tongue.
Consequently, since the independence they are now divided between Pakistani Punjab and Indian Punjab.
Punjabis have also emigrated to Australia, New Zealand and Southeast Asia including Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore and Hong Kong.
The grandson of Ahmed Shah Durrani (Zaman Shah Durrani), lost it to Ranjit Singh, a Punjabi Sikh.
Islam arrived in Punjab when the Muslim Umayyad army led by Muhammad bin Qasim conquered Sindh in 711 AD, by defeating Raja Dahir.
Indoor sports are specially famous during the long summer season in Punjab.
The recent definition of Punjabi people, in Pakistani Punjab, is not based on racial classification, common ancestry or endogamy, but based on geographical and cultural basis and thus makes it a unique definition.
American missionaries also played a significant part  proselytizing in Punjab.
People from a few provinces of Pakistan have made Punjab their home in recent times and now their consecutive generations identify themselves as Punjabis.
Punjabi women also have the strong literary tradition.
Ranjit took a leading role in organising a Sikh militia and got control of the Punjab region from Zaman Shah Durrani.
The Punjabis found in Pakistan belong to groups known as biradaris.
The region of Punjab is the birthplace of one monotheistic religion that is known as Sikhism.
The other Indian kings did not like the fact that Porus was now an ally of Western forces.
The Mughals controlled the region from 1524 until 1739 and would also lavish some parts of the province with building projects such as the Shalimar Gardens and the Badshahi Mosque, both situated in Lahore.
The province became an important centre and Lahore was made into a second capital of the Turk Ghaznavid Empire.
The 1947 independence of India and Pakistan, and the subsequent partition of Punjab, is considered by historians to be the beginning of the end of the British Empire.
The remains of the ancient Indo-Aryan city of Taxila, and many ornaments that have been found in this region,suggests that, one of the centres of Indus Valley Civilization was established at many parts of Punjab, most notably Taxila and Harappa, Punjab became a centre of early civilisation from around 3300 BC.
The Delhi Sultanate and later Mughal Empire ruled the region.
Today Muslims constitute only 1.53% of Eastern Punjab in India as now the majority of Muslims live in Western Punjab in Pakistan.
Communal violence on the eve of Indian independence led to the dismissal of the coalition government, although the succeeding League ministry was unable to form a majority.
There are also large communities in East Africa including the countries of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.
The earliest known notable local king of this region was known as '''King Porus''' and he fought a famous Battle of the Hydaspes against Alexander.
Bhangra describes dance-oriented popular music with Punjabi rhythms, developed since the 1980s.
Christianity was mainly brought by the British rulers of India in the later 18th and 19th century.
A variety of related sub-groups exist in Pakistan and are often considered by many Pakistani Punjabis to be simply regional Punjabis including the Seraikis (who overlap and are often considered transitional with the Sindhis).
Some of the Muslims are said to have settled in the region and adopted the local culture.
Population % '''1911'''
To date, this is considered the largest mass migration in human history.
There are an estimated 102 million Punjabi speakers around the world.
Also indoor sports are played by children in homes and in schools.
This is evidenced in cities established by the British, such as the port city of Karachi, where the majestic St. Patrick's Cathedral, Pakistan's largest church stands, and the churches in the city of Rawalpindi, where the British established a major military cantonment.
The Sikh Empire slowly began to weaken after the death of Hari Singh Nalwa at the Battle of Jamrud in 1837.
The second largest community after Kashmiris are people of India, who identify themselves as Punjabis.
Also many well known followers of Sufism were born in Punjab.
As the most ardent supporters of a Pakistani state, the Punjabis in Pakistan have shown a strong predilection towards the adoption of the Urdu language but nearly all speak Punjabi, and still identify themselves as ethnic Punjabis.
They are still considered and treated as leaders among many Punjabi villages.
There has also been continuous migration of Punjabi Hindus to western countries like USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, European Union, UAE and UK.
Of these, approximately half are Roman Catholic and half Protestant.
The goal is to gain the favour of the Goddess, to obtain some material benefit, or repay her for one already received.
In Pakistani Punjab, there is not a great emphasis on a single dialect of the language and Pakistani Punjabis speak many distinct dialects, which include Hindko, Seraiki, Potohari or Pahari and still identify themselves as Punjabis.
In men Pagri (turban) is also worn as a traditional cap in many occasions.
The total number of Punjabi Christians in Pakistan is approximately 2,800,000 and 300,000 in Indian Punjab.
Regions of North India and Punjab were annexed into the Afghan Durrani Empire later on in 1747, being a vulnerable target.
rhythm for dancing) and less on the singer and the lyrics.
Population % '''1941'''
As a result of these population exchanges, both parts are now relatively homogeneous, where religion is concerned.
The jagrātā, also called jāgā or jāgran, means an all night vigil.
Historically, the Punjabi people were a heterogeneous group and were subdivided into a number of clans called ''biradari'' (literally meaning "brotherhood") or ''tribes'', with each person bound to a clan.
Following the independence of Pakistan and the subsequent partition of British India, a process of population exchange took place in 1947 as Muslims began to leave India and headed to the newly created Pakistan and Hindus and Sikhs left Pakistan for the newly created state of India.
By 1850 the British took over control of the Punjab region after defeating the Sikhs in the Anglo-Sikh wars, establishing their rule over the region for around the next 100 years as a part of the British Raj.
Punjabi culture is the culture of the Punjab region.
Following this a variety of Muslim dynasties and kingdoms ruled the Punjab region, including Ghaznavids under Mahmud of Ghazni, the Delhi Sultanate, the Mughal Empire and finally the Durrani Empire.
Punjabis are also found in large communities in the largest city of Pakistan, Karachi, located in the Sindh province.
Punjabis make up about half of the population of Pakistan.
Punjabi is also spoken as a minority language in several other countries where Punjabis have emigrated in large numbers, such as the United Kingdom (where it is the second most commonly used language) and Canada, in which Punjabi has now become the fourth most spoken language after English, French and Chinese, due to the rapid growth of immigrants from Pakistan and India.
Moreover, Punjabi women fought in the past along with the men when the time arose.
Some Punjabi Hindus can also be found in the surrounding areas as well as the recent cosmopolitan migrants in other big cities like Mumbai.
Religious homogeneity remains elusive as a predominant Islamic Sunni-Shia  population with Ahmadiyya and Christian minority.
Its literature spread Punjab's unique voice of peace and spirituality to the entire civilisation of the region.
The earliest written Punjabi dates back to the writing of Sufi Muslim poets of the 11th Century.
The Hindu-majority areas were formed into the states of Himachal Pradesh and Haryana respectively, making Sikhs the majority in the state of Punjab itself.
Under his command the Sikh army began invading neighbouring territories outside of Punjab.
Numerous Bollywood film productions use the Punjabi language in their songs and dialogue as well as traditional dances such as bhangra.
Special emphasis is put to develop both the mental and physical capacity while playing sports.
Punjab literally means the ''land of five waters'' (Persian: panj ("five") āb ("waters").
Peero Preman was the first Punjabi woman poet of the mid 18th century.
Many Sikhs and Punjabis later pledged their allegiance to the British, serving as sepoys (native soldiers) within the Raj.
The coalescence of the various tribes, castes and the inhabitants of the Punjab into a broader common "Punjabi" identity initiated from the onset of the 18th century CE.
The shorter version of Dhoti that is unique to Punjab is known as Chatki with close resemblance to Kilt but use of Chatki for formal occasions is very very rare and not many people are familiar with Chatkis.
Punjabi Prime Ministers of India include Gulzarilal Nanda, Inder Kumar Gujral and Dr. Manmohan Singh.
Backgammon locally known as Dimaagi Baazi( Mental game) is famous in some regions as well.
Stapu is famous among young girls of Punjab.
The Sikhs are largely concentrated in the modern-day state of Punjab forming 58% of the population with Hindus forming 38%.
Sikh organisations became alarmed at the rate of conversions among the Mazhabi Sikhs and responded by immediately dispatching Sikh missionaries to counteract the conversions.
However, Punjabi identity also included those who did not belong to any of the historical tribes.
The scope, history, sophistication and complexity of the culture are vast.
The Punjab region within India maintains a strong influence on the perceived culture of India towards the rest of the world.
Majority of Punjabi women were considered as warriors upon a time, they excelled in the art of both leadership and war.
However, a small community still exists today, mainly in Malerkotla and Qadian , the only Muslim princely state among the seven that formed the erstwhile Patiala and East Punjab States Union (PEPSU).
West Punjab was virtually cleansed of its Hindu and Sikh populations, who were forced to leave for India, while East Punjab and Delhi were virtually cleansed of the Muslim population.
The welcoming nature of Punjab have led to successful integration of almost all ethnic groups in Punjab over time.
The vast majority were converted from the Mazhabi Sikh communities of Punjab, and to a lesser extent Hindu Churas; under the influence of enthusiastic British army officers and Christian missionaries.
Today, the majority of Pakistani Punjabis follow Islam with a small Christian minority, while the majority of Indian Punjabis are either Sikhs or Hindus with a Muslim minority.
These kings fought local battles to gain more ground.Taxiles or '''Omphis''' another local north Indian king, wanted to defeat his eastern adversary Porus in a turf war and he invited Alexander the Great to defeat Porus.
According to the 2008 Census of Pakistan, there are approximately 76,335,300 native speakers of Punjabi in Pakistan, and according to the Census of India, there are over 29,102,477 Punjabi speakers in India.
Thus in bhangra music the emphasis is usually on the music (i.e.
The dances range from solo to group dances and also sometimes dances are done along with musical instruments like Dhol, Flute, Supp, Dhumri, Chimta etc.
If regarded as an ethnic group, they are among the world's largest.
Prior to that the sense and perception of a common "Punjabi" ethno-cultural identity and community did not exist, even though the majority of the various communities of the Punjab had long shared linguistic, cultural and racial commonalities.
English is sometimes used, and older people who lived in the undivided Punjab may be able to speak and write in Urdu.
Punjab is often referred to as the breadbasket in both Pakistan and India.
Like the Punjabi Muslim society, these various castes are associated with particular occupations or crafts.
By the 1960s, Indian Punjab underwent reorganisation as Sikh demands for an autonomous state increased.
The '''Punjabis''' (Punjabi: , ਪੰਜਾਬੀ, पंजाबी),  or '''Punjabi people''', are an Indo-Aryan ethnic group originating from the Punjab region, found in Pakistan and northern India.
In Chandigarh, 80.78% people of the population are Hindus, 13.11% are Sikhs, 4.87% are Muslims and minorities are Christians, Buddhists and Jains.
In the traditional Punjabi culture women do wear traditional dresses but work side by side with men in all the fields.
Sufi music and Qawali are other important genres in Punjab.
Pittu Garam is also famous among children.
Centuries later, areas of the Punjab region were ruled by local kings followed by the Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Mughals, and others.
The main language of the Punjabi people is Punjabi and its associated dialects, which differ depending on the region of Punjab the speaker is from; there are notable differences in the Lahnda languages, spoken in the Pakistani Punjab.
In addition, Punjabi society is divided into two divisions, the zamindar groups or qoums, traditionally associated with farming and the moeens, who are traditionally artisans.
Some of the main areas include Punjabi poetry, philosophy, spirituality, artistry, dance, music, cuisine, military weaponry, architecture, languages, traditions, values and history.
The most notable are Carrom, Ludo (board game), Scrabble, Chess, Draughts, Go Monopoly.
At the beginning of the fifteenth century, the religion of Sikhism was born, and during the Mughal period its Misls gradually emerged as a formidable military force, however, their rebellion was crushed by the Mughals when the Sikhs were defeated at Gurdas Nangal.
This type of vigil is found throughout India and is usually held to worship a deity with song and ritual.
In the Pakistani Punjab, the vast majority still speak Punjabi, even though the language has no governmental support.
Shalwar Kameez and Sherwani are for formal occasions and office work while Dhoti is mostly worn by people who are involved in farming throughout Punjab.
Centuries later, the Ghaznavids introduced aspects of foreign Persian and Turkic culture in Punjab.
Due to religious tensions, emigration between Punjabi people started far before the partition and dependable records.
Punjabi cuisine uses unique spices.
They reside predominantly in the province of Punjab, neighbouring Azad Kashmir in the region of Jammu and Kashmir and in Islamabad Capital Territory.
Ranjit started a Punjabi military expedition to expand his territory.
The Punjabi wedding has many rituals and ceremonies that have evolved since traditional times.
In certain divisions Punjabi philosophy states that Men are raised to be warriors and women are raised to be leaders.
The total number of Indian Punjabis is unknown due to the fact that ethnicity is not recorded in the Census of India.
Indian Punjab remains one of the most prosperous of India's states and is considered the "breadbasket of India."
In South Asia, they are the second largest ethnic group after the Bengali People.
In addition, Punjabis in Pakistan have been quite prominent politically, having had many elected members of parliament.
Various types of sports are played in Punjab.
This marked the first intrusion of the West in the Indian subcontinent and North India in general.
According to the Ethnologue 2005 estimate, there are 130 million native speakers of the Punjabi language, which makes it the ninth most widely spoken language in the world.
The largest community to assimilate in Punjabi culture and now identify themselves as Punjabis are Kashmiris which include noted personalities like Nawaz Sharif, Sheikh Rasheed, Hamid Mir and the most noted poet Muhammad Iqbal, to name a few.
It includes Shalwar Kameez, Kurta, Achkan and Dhoti in men while in women there is wide range of clothing but mainly it comprises Shalwar Kameez, Patiala salwar, Punjabi suit, Churidars with Dupatta with traditional Paranda Ghari worn on the hair.
His kingdom, known as '''Pauravas''', was situated between Hydaspes (modern Jhelum and Acesines (modern day Chenab).
Historically, the Punjab/Punjabis, in addition to their rural-agrarian lands and culture, have also enjoyed a unique urban cultural development in two great cities, Lahore and Amritsar.
Early classical Punjabi epics, such as Heer Ranjha were written by the sufi, Waris Shah.
Muslims in Delhi are 13% of the population.
;Population trends for major religious groups in the Punjab Province of British India (1881–1941)
The Tabletop games games include billiards and snooker.
Traditionally, Punjabi identity is primarily linguistic, geographical and cultural.
The Punjab region became predominantly Muslim due to missionary Sufi saints whose dargahs dot the landscape of Punjab region.
Today Punjabi Hindus are mostly found in Indian Punjab and in neighbouring states like Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi, which together forms a part of the historical greater Punjab region.
In the early 20th century, many Punjabis began settling in the United States, including independence activists who formed the Ghadar Party.
The Punjabi traditional clothing is very diverse and for various occasions various clothing is chosen.
The other six ''(mostly Sikh)'' states were: Patiala, Nabha, Jind, Faridkot, Kapurthala and Kalsia.
The name refers to one of the traditional and folkloric Punjabi dances.
Punjabi receptions of all sorts are known to be very energetic, filled with loud Bhangra music, people dancing, and a wide variety of Punjabi food.
Bollywood has been dominated by Punjabi artists including actors Prithviraj Kapoor, Raj Kapoor, Dev Anand, Vinod Khanna, Dharmendra, Shammi Kapoor, Rishi Kapoor, Shashi Kapoor, Kabir Bedi, Rajesh Khanna, Angad Singh, Amitabh Bacchan (from his mother's side), Pran, Prem Chopra,  Vinod Mehra, Manoj Kumar, Akshay Kumar Sunny Deol, Anil Kapoor, Poonam Dhillon, Juhi Chawla, Hrithik Roshan and Kareena Kapoor, singers Mohammed Rafi, Mahendra Kapoor, and Narendra Chanchal.
Muslims established Punjabi literature, utilised Shahmukhi as the predominant script of the Punjab, as well as made major contributions to the music, art, cuisine and culture of the region.
The UNHCR estimates 14 million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were displaced during the partition.
Sufis played a major role in the establishment of the literary and cultural traditions of the region, and comprised the educated elites of the Punjab for many centuries.
With the division of Punjab and the subsequent independence of Pakistan and later India, mass migrations of Muslims from Indian Punjab to Pakistan, and those of Sikhs and Hindus from Pakistan to Indian Punjab occurred.
But such was the valor of Porus and his kingdom forces in Punjab, that despite being defeated, he was appreciated by Alexander the Great for his skill and valor and he was granted further territories in the North.
Missionaries accompanied the colonising forces from Portugal, France, and Great Britain.
Linguistic data cannot accurately predict ethnicity: for example, Punjabis make up a large portion of Delhi's population but many descendants of the Punjabi Hindu refugees who came to Delhi following the partition of India now speak Hindi as their first language.
Indian Punjab is also home to small groups of Muslims and Christian.
Owing to the long history of the Punjabi culture and of the Punjabi people, there are a large number of dances normally performed at times of celebration, the time of festivals known as Melas and the most prominent dances are at Punjabi weddings, where the elation is usually particularly intense.
Along with the province of Bengal, Punjab was partitioned on religious lines – the Muslim-majority West becoming part of the new Muslim state of Pakistan, and the Hindu and Sikh East remaining in India.
Large communities of Punjabis are also found in the Jammu region of Jammu and Kashmir and in Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh.
Population % '''1931'''
Integration and assimilation are important parts of Punjabi culture, since Punjabi identity is not based solely on tribal connections.
Today, Punjabis continue to be the largest ethnic group in Pakistan, accounting for half of the country's population.
Punjab being part of South Asia, the sport of cricket is very popular.
Punjabi is the most spoken language in Pakistan and eleventh most spoken language in India.
There are numerous players in the Indian cricket team both past and present including Bishen Singh Bedi, Kapil Dev, Mohinder Amarnath, Navjot Sidhu, Harbhajan Singh, Yuvraj Singh Virat Kohli, and Yograj Singh.
A denizen of the city of Gujranwala, the capital of Ranjit Singh's empire was Lahore.
While the actual religious marriage ceremony among Muslims, Sikhs, Hindus, and Jains may be conducted in Arabic, Punjabi, Sanskrit, by the Kazi, Pandit or Granthi, there are also many commonalities in ritual, song, dance, food, make-up and dress.
The other communities to assimilate in Punjabis include Baloch who can be found throughout Punjab, and Baltis.
The Churas were largely converted to Christianity in North India during the British raj.
New forms of sports are also being introduced and adopted in particular by the large overseas Punjabis, such as Ice hockey, Soccer, Boxing, Mixed martial arts as part of the globalisation of sports.
They are basically divided into outdoor and indoor sports.
Punjabi cuisine has an immense range of dishes and has become world-leader in the field; so much so that many entrepreneurs that have invested in the sector have built large personal fortunes due to the popularity of Punjabi cuisine throughout the world.
Two years later, in 1839, Ranjit Singh died and his son took over control of the empire.
The majority of Pakistani Punjabis speak the standard Punjabi dialect of Majhi, which is considered the Punjabi dialect of the educated class, as well as Lahnda (including Hindko and Saraiki).
People from neighbouring regions, such as Kashmiris, Pashtun and Baluch, also form important elements in the Punjabi population.
In less than ten years another Indian king '''Chandragupta Maurya''' defeated the forces and conquered the Northern Indian regions up to the Kabul river (in modern-day Afghanistan).
As Muslim separatism increased, the opposition from Punjabi Hindus and Sikhs increased substantially.
It is one of the oldest and richest cultures in world history, dating from ancient antiquity to the modern era.
Some still have managed to retain the Punjabi dialects spoken in Western Punjab, but many have also adopted Hindi.
The Punjabi culture is the culture of the Punjabi people, who are now distributed throughout the world.
Rohilkhand saw a mass conversion of its entire population of 4500 Mazhabi Sikhs into the Methodist Church.
Alexander mostly ruled this land with the help of local allies like Porus.
More or less all Punjabis share the same cultural background.
Other religions / No religion
Mai Bhago is a good example in this regard.
The folk tales of Punjab include many stories which are passing through generations and includes folk stories like Heer Ranjha, Mirza Sahiban, Sohni Mahiwal etc.
Ethnic Punjabis are believed to account for at least 35% of Delhi's total population and are predominantly Hindi-speaking Punjabi Hindus.
Many of the modern Punjabi Christians are descended from converts during British rule, however, other modern Punjabi Christians have converted from Churas.
After the independence of Pakistan in 1947, the minority Hindus and Sikhs migrated to India while the Muslim refugees from India settled in the Pakistan.
The Urdu, Punjabi and other language speakers who arrived in Punjab in 1947 have now assimilated and their second and third generations identify themselves as Punjabis even though it is not the same in Sindh Pakistan where they form distinct ethnic groups.
The outdoor sports include Kusti (a wrestling sport), Kabaddi, Rasa Kashi (a rope pulling game), Patang (Kite Flying) and Naiza Baazi or Tent pegging (a cavalry sport).Gatka, is also taken as a form of sports, Punjabi's are naturally dominant in sports because of their physical attributes and genetic advantage.
After fighting Ahmad Shah Durrani, the Sikhs wrested control of the Punjab from his descendants and ruled in a confederacy, which later became the Sikh Empire of the Punjab under Maharaja Ranjit Singh.
Alcohol consumption by the menfolk is part of the tradition amongst Hindu and some Sikh communities that allow it.
Punjabis are linguistically and culturally related to the other Indo-Aryan peoples of South Asia.
Punjabi Jutti and Tillay wali Jutti is a very famous footwear for both men and women in Punjab.
Punjabis in India can be found in the states of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
The Punjabi-speaking people make 2.83% of India's population as of 2001.
There are also sizeable communities in the United States, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Persian Gulf countries, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand.
In the 1970s, a large wave of emigration of Punjabis (predominately from Pakistan) began to the Middle East, in places such as the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
According to Historians this region was ruled by many small kingdoms and tribes around 4th and 5th BC.
Bhangra music is appreciated all over the globe.
The Hindu Punjabis speak different dialects including Lahnda, as well as Majhi (Standard Punjabi) and others like Doabi and Malwi.
Most of the East Punjab's Muslims ''(in today's states of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and Chandigarh)'' left for West Punjab in 1947.
