Soon you had endless solos that went nowhere.
The administration of George W. Bush provided them and similarly minded acts eight years of conservative government to excoriate.
Young women in punk demolished the typical female types in rock of either "coy sex kittens or wronged blues belters" in their fashion.
They were followed by the Cro-Mags, Murphy's Law, and Leeway.
Drawing on sources ranging from the Stooges to the Beatles and the Beach Boys to Herman's Hermits and 1960s girl groups, the Ramones condensed rock 'n' roll to its primal level: "'1-2-3-4!'
Stinky Toys' debut single, "Boozy Creed", came out in September.
Bloomington, Indiana, had MX-80 Sound and Detroit had the Sillies.
the Dils, from Carlsbad, moved between the two major cities.
Lester Bangs would use the term "punk rock" in several articles written in the early 1970s to refer to mid-1960s garage acts.
With riot grrrl, they were grounded in girl punk past, but also rooted in modern feminism.
One thing I remember having had a really depressing effect on me was the first Ramones album.
The term eventually came to describe "a young male hustler, a gangster, a hoodlum, or a ruffian".
With Nirvana's success, the major record companies once again saw punk bands as potentially profitable.
In the 1990s, the queercore movement developed around a number of punk bands with gay, lesbian, bisexual, or genderqueer members such as God Is My Co-Pilot, Pansy Division, Team Dresch, and Sister George.
''NME'' journalist Roy Carr is credited with proposing the term's use (adopted from the cinematic French New Wave of the 1960s) in this context.
Moshing (Slam Dancing) is typical at hardcore shows.
By 1976, the Saints were hiring Brisbane local halls to use as venues, or playing in "Club 76", their shared house in the inner suburb of Petrie Terrace.
In December 1976, the English fanzine ''Sideburns'' published a now-famous illustration of three chords, captioned "This is a chord, this is another, this is a third.
By late 1976, bands such as Television and the Ramones in New York City, and the Sex Pistols, the Clash, and the Damned in London were recognized as the vanguard of a new musical movement.
Alongside the musical roots shared with their American counterparts and the calculated confrontationalism of the early Who, the British punks also reflected the influence of glam rock and related bands such as Slade, T.Rex, and Roxy Music.
were among the other initial hardcore groups.
It was a hardcore confrontation with the black side of history and culture, right-wing imagery, sexual taboos, a delving into it that had never been done before by any generation in such a thorough way".
In Los Angeles, the opposing factions were often described as "Hollywood punks" and "beach punks", referring to Hollywood's central position in the original L.A. punk rock scene and to hardcore's popularity in the shoreline communities of South Bay and Orange County.
Los Angeles punk rock bands laid the groundwork for a wide variety of styles: the Flesh Eaters with deathrock; the Plugz with Chicano punk; and Gun Club with punk blues.
Anomie, variously expressed in the poetic terms of Hell's "Blank Generation" and the bluntness of the Ramones' "Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue", is a common theme.
Elsewhere around the world, "punkabilly" band the Living End became major stars in Australia with their self-titled 1998 debut.
''...And Out Come the Wolves'', the 1995 album by Rancid—which had evolved out of Operation Ivy—became the first record in this ska revival to be certified gold; Sublime's self-titled 1996 album was certified platinum early in 1997.
Green Day and ''Dookie''s enormous sales paved the way for a host of bankable North American pop punk bands in the following decade.
Across North America, many other first and second wave punk bands also dissolved, while younger musicians inspired by the movement explored new variations on punk.
Having earned a "reputation as the first underground rock band," the Velvet Underground inspired, directly or indirectly, many of those involved in the creation of punk rock.
Garage punk bands from all over—such as Medway's Thee Mighty Caesars, Chicago's Dwarves, and Adelaide's Exploding White Mice—pursued a version of punk rock that was close to its roots in 1960s garage rock.
In the hardcore realm, stage invasion is often a prelude to stage diving.
Singer-guitarists Corin Tucker of Heavens to Betsy and Carrie Brownstein of Excuse 17, bands active in both the queercore and riot grrrl scenes, cofounded the indie/punk band Sleater-Kinney in 1994.
Rock critic Richard Meltzer cofounded VOM (short for "vomit") in Los Angeles.
The best of the American punk rockers have moved on.
The Ramones' third album, ''Rocket to Russia'', appeared in November 1977.
Other groups in the movement, led by Amebix and Antisect, developed the extreme style known as crust punk.
Other groups included Subway Sect, Eater, the Subversives, the aptly named London, and Chelsea, which soon spun off Generation X.
In the United States, bands such as Hüsker Dü and their Minneapolis protégés the Replacements bridged the gap between punk rock genres like hardcore and the more melodic, explorative realm of what was then called "college rock".
Crossing the lines between "classic" punk, post-punk, and hardcore, San Francisco's Flipper was founded in 1979 by former members of Negative Trend and the Sleepers.
and the Mysterians, one of the most popular 1960s garage rock acts, as giving a "landmark exposition of punk rock".
The underground punk rock movement inspired countless bands that either evolved from a punk rock sound or brought its outsider spirit to very different kinds of music.
An associated punk subculture emerged, expressing youthful rebellion and characterized by distinctive styles of clothing and adornment (ranging from deliberately offensive T-shirts, leather jackets, spike bands and other studded or spiked jewelry to bondage and S&M clothes) and a variety of anti-authoritarian ideologies.
The classic punk rock look among male American musicians harkens back to the T-shirt, motorcycle jacket, and jeans ensemble favored by American greasers of the 1950s associated with the rockabilly scene and by British rockers of the 1960s.
In the beginning, the heavy metal created by Judas Priest was music of slow tempos and little aggression.
Bikini Kill's lead singer, Kathleen Hanna, the iconic figure of riot grrrl, moved on to form the art punk group Le Tigre in 1998.
One of the groups openly acknowledging that influence were the Undertones, from Derry in Northern Ireland.
Post-punk reflected a range of art rock influences from Captain Beefheart to David Bowie and Roxy Music to Krautrock and, once again, the Velvet Underground.
Among the earliest hardcore bands, regarded as having made the first recordings in the style, were Southern California's Middle Class and Black Flag.
inscribed a catchphrase for punk's basic musical approach.
Bad Religion's ''Stranger Than Fiction'' was certified gold.
Following the lead of Stinky Toys, Métal Urbain played its first concert in December 1976.
Dave Laing suggests that some punk-identified British acts pursued the new wave label in order to avoid radio censorship and make themselves more palatable to concert bookers.
came out in March 1975, mixing absurdist originals such as "Master Race Rock" and loud, straight-faced covers of cheese pop like Sonny & Cher's "I Got You Babe".
These opposing factions were mutually attracted by a view of punk rock as "politically as well as musically...'against the system'."
Reconstituted as the Dead Boys, they played their first CBGB gig in late July.
The anarcho-punk scene also spawned bands such as Napalm Death, Carcass, and Extreme Noise Terror that in the mid-1980s defined grindcore, incorporating extremely fast tempos and death metal–style guitarwork.
In some cases, punk's do it yourself ethic reflected an aversion to commercial success, as well as a desire to maintain creative and financial autonomy.
When punk rock exploded in '77 in the music scene mainstream, many bands like Motörhead (pioneer NWOBHM) combine the dense sound of heavy metal with dirt and speed of punk rock creating a new movement called New wave of British heavy metal where many bands were influenced by many punk bands like Sex Pistols, the Damned and Ramones, among other bands.
Musical virtuosity was often looked on with suspicion.
The Clash album ''London Calling'', released in December 1979, exemplified the breadth of classic punk's legacy.
Among the other bands constituting Australia's second wave were Johnny Dole & the Scabs, the Hellcats, and Psychosurgeons (later known as the Lipstick Killers) in Sydney; the Leftovers, the Survivors, and Razar in Brisbane; and La Femme, the Negatives, and the Babeez (later known as the News) in Melbourne.
Bad Brains—all of whom were black, a rarity in punk of any era—launched the D.C. scene.
Another Sex habitué, Johnny Rotten, auditioned for and won the job.
The inaugural issue of ''Punk'' appeared in December.
The title of a 1980 single by the New York punk band Stimulators, "Loud Fast Rules!"
bands were reluctant to endorse criticism of their fans from what they perceived as the "middle-class establishment".
Siouxsie and the Banshees and Subway Sect debuted on the festival's first night; that same evening, Eater debuted in Manchester.
The acts featured ranting vocals, discordant instrumental sounds, primitive production values, and lyrics filled with political and social content, often addressing issues such as class inequalities and military violence.
concerts by shouting fascist slogans and starting fights, but some Oi!
A major scene developed in Vancouver, spearheaded by the Furies and Victoria's all-female Dee Dee and the Dishrags.
The Dead Boys' debut LP, ''Young, Loud and Snotty'', was released at the end of August.
Bands primarily inspired by British punk sparked what became known as the Neue Deutsche Welle (NDW) movement.
The movement spun off several subgenres of a similar political bent.
Milwaukee's Violent Femmes jumpstarted the American folk punk scene, while the Pogues did the same on the other side of the Atlantic, influencing many Celtic punk bands.
That same night, the Clash debuted, opening for the Sex Pistols in Sheffield.
The EP ''Spiral Scratch'', self-released by Manchester's Buzzcocks, was a benchmark for both the DIY ethic and regionalism in the country's punk movement.
McLaren envisioned the Sex Pistols as central players in a new youth movement, "hard and tough".
Eddie and the Hot Rods, a London pub rock group, headlined.
Holmstrom, McNeil, and Ged Dunn's magazine ''Punk'', which debuted at the end of 1975, was crucial in codifying the term.
In December, one of the first books about punk rock was published: ''The Boy Looked at Johnny'', by Julie Burchill and Tony Parsons.
In Durham, there was Penetration, with lead singer Pauline Murray.
In Bloomington, Indiana, the Gizmos played in a jokey, raunchy, Dictators-inspired style later referred to as "frat punk".
By the end of the year, the Ramones had performed seventy-four shows, each about seventeen minutes long.
A distinctive style of punk, characterized by superfast, aggressive beats, screaming vocals, and often politically aware lyrics, began to emerge in 1978 among bands scattered around the United States and Canada.
Between the late 16th and the 18th centuries, ''punk'' was a common, coarse synonym for ''prostitute''; William Shakespeare used it with that meaning in ''The Merry Wives of Windsor'' (1602) and ''Measure for Measure'' (1623).
In Boston, the scene at the Rat was joined by the Nervous Eaters, Thrills, and Human Sexual Response.
Some new bands, such as London's Alternative TV, Edinburgh's Rezillos, and Leamington's the Shapes, identified with the scene even as they pursued more experimental music.
's ''New Wave'' was named best album of 2007 by ''Spin''.
Shifts in pitch, volume, or intonational style are relatively infrequent.
In 1975, Rocket from the Tombs split into Pere Ubu and Frankenstein.
"I told ya the New York Dolls were the real thing," he wrote, describing the album as "perhaps the best example of raw, thumb-your-nose-at-the-world, punk rock since the Rolling Stones' ''Exile on Main Street''."
In August 1969, the Stooges, from Ann Arbor, premiered with a self-titled album.
October saw two more debut albums from the scene: Richard Hell and the Voidoids' first full-length, ''Blank Generation'', and the Heartbreakers' ''L.A.M.F.''
Marketers capitalized on the style and hipness of punk rock to such an extent that a 1993 ad campaign for an automobile, the Subaru Impreza, claimed that the car was "like punk rock".
The first Swedish punk single was "Vårdad klädsel"/"Förbjudna ljud" released by Kriminella Gitarrer in February 1978, which started an extensive Swedish punk scene featuring act such as Ebba Grön, KSMB, Rude Kids, Besökarna, Liket Lever, Garbochock, Attentat, and many others.
By 1979, the hardcore punk movement was emerging in Southern California.
The lack of conventional dance rhythms was a central factor in limiting punk's mainstream commercial impact.
The previous year, when the punk rock revolution began in Great Britain, was to be both a musical and a cultural "Year Zero".
bass-player Dee Dee Ramone shouted at the start of every song, as if the group could barely master the rudiments of rhythm."
Punk rock lyrics are typically frank and confrontational; compared to the lyrics of other popular music genres, they frequently comment on social and political issues.
At the end of the 20th century, punk rock had been adopted by the mainstream, as pop punk and punk rock bands such as Green Day, the Offspring and Blink-182 brought the genre widespread popularity.
Many of the shows were cancelled by venue owners in response to the media outrage following the Grundy confrontation.
"When I first saw the Ramones", critic Mary Harron later remembered, "I couldn't believe people were doing this.
The garage and beat boom dissipated in the late 1960s, but a handful of maverick acts, carried its influence into the 1970s, seizing on its protopunk elements, but brandishing them with greater intensity.
The cover of the Ramones' 1976 debut album, featuring a shot of the band by ''Punk'' photographer Roberta Bayley, set forth the basic elements of a style that was soon widely emulated by rock musicians both punk and nonpunk.
By 1974, the scene's top act, Dr. Feelgood, was paving the way for others such as the Stranglers and Cock Sparrer that would play a role in the punk explosion.
That June, Green Day's "Longview" reached number one on ''Billboard''s Modern Rock Tracks chart and became a top forty airplay hit, arguably the first ever American punk song to do so; just one month later, the Offspring's "Come Out and Play" followed suit.
They were soon playing regularly at Max's Kansas City.
In the December 1970 issue of ''Creem'', Lester Bangs, mocking more mainstream rock musicians, ironically referred to Iggy Pop as "that Stooge punk".
Scholar John Strohm suggests that they did so by creating personas of a type conventionally seen as masculine: "They adopted a tough, unladylike pose that borrowed more from the macho swagger of sixties garage bands than from the calculated bad-girl image of bands like the Runaways."
The mainstream pop punk of latter-day bands such as Blink-182 is criticized by many punk rock devotees; in critic Christine Di Bella's words, "It's punk taken to its most accessible point, a point where it barely reflects its lineage at all, except in the three-chord song structures."
Out in Forest Hills, Queens, several miles from lower Manhattan, the members of a newly formed band adopted a common surname.
Sacramento's Tales of Terror, which mixed psychedelic rock into their hardcore sound, were an early influence on the grunge genre.
Melbourne's art rock–influenced Boys Next Door featured singer Nick Cave, who would become one of the world's best-known post-punk artists.
The typical male punk haircut was originally short and choppy; the Mohawk later emerged as a characteristic style.
According to Holmstrom, punk rock was "rock and roll by people who didn't have very much skills as musicians but still felt the need to express themselves through music".
formed in 1971, building on the Krautrock tradition of groups such as Can.
By 1975, ''punk'' was being used to describe acts as diverse as the Patti Smith Group, the Bay City Rollers, and Bruce Springsteen.
spawned the superfast thrashcore genre.
Later in 1971, in his fanzine ''Who Put the Bomp'', Greg Shaw wrote about "what I have chosen to call "punkrock" bands—white teenage hard rock of '64–66 (Standells, Kingsmen, Shadows of Knight, etc.)".
In historian Tim Gosling's description, they saw "safety pins and Mohicans as little more than ineffectual fashion posturing stimulated by the mainstream media and industry....
We’re going to be labeled as influenced by the Ramones", when nothing could have been further from the truth.
The first known use of the phrase ''punk rock'' appeared in the ''Chicago Tribune'' on March 22, 1970, attributed to Ed Sanders, cofounder of New York's anarcho-prankster band the Fugs.
According to a later description, "Like all cultural watersheds, ''Ramones'' was embraced by a discerning few and slagged off as a bad joke by the uncomprehending majority."
That November, the Offspring's ''Americana'' on the major Columbia label debuted at number two on the album chart.
Other early German punk acts included the Fred Banana Combo and Pack.
Inspired by Crass, its Dial House commune, and its independent Crass Records label, a scene developed around British bands such as Subhumans, Flux of Pink Indians, Conflict, Poison Girls, and the Apostles that was concerned as much with anarchist and DIY principles as it was with music.
More closely associated with Max's Kansas City were Suicide and the band led by Jayne County, another Mercer Arts Center alumna.
Both developed in multiple locations.
In February 1977, EMI released the Saints debut album, ''(I'm) Stranded'', which the band recorded in two days.
The characteristic style was originally the pogo.
There were numerous garage rock bands in India during the 1960s, perpetuating the style even into the early 1970s.
Farther afield, Sham 69 began practicing in the southeastern town of Hersham.
By the turn of the decade, the punk rock movement had split deeply along cultural and musical lines, leaving a variety of derivative scenes and forms.
Punk rock bands often emulate the bare musical structures and arrangements of 1960s garage rock.
featured strident vocals and an emphasis on provocation.
1977 also saw the debut album from Hamburg's Big Balls and the Great White Idiot, arguably West Germany's first punk band.
In October, the Damned became the first UK punk rock band to release a single, the romance-themed "New Rose".
X-Ray Spex' "Oh Bondage Up Yours!"
Led by the Primitive Calculators, Melbourne's Little Band scene would further explore the possibilities of post-punk.
Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, performer Alice Bag formed the punk music group the Bags in 1977.
Early female punk musicians displayed styles ranging from Siouxsie Sioux's bondage gear to Patti Smith's "straight-from-the-gutter androgyny".
The New York duo Suicide played spare, experimental music with a confrontational stage act inspired by that of the Stooges.
We wanted to get rid of the bullshit, strip it down to rock 'n' roll.
The Misfits formed in nearby New Jersey.
Britain's Deviants, in the late 1960s, played in a range of psychedelic styles with a satiric, anarchic edge and a penchant for situationist-style spectacle presaging the Sex Pistols by almost a decade.
The band's ''Take Off Your Pants and Jacket'' (2001) and ''Blink-182'' (2003) respectively rose to numbers one and three on the album chart.
Three months later, Billy Altman launched the short-lived ''punk magazine'', which pre-dated the better-known 1975 publication of the same name, but, unlike the later magazine, was largely devoted to discussion of 1960s garage and psychedelic acts.
A Ted-aligned band recorded "The Punk Bashing Boogie".
Leftist punk band Against Me!
The lyrical content of hardcore songs is often critical of commercial culture and middle-class values, as in Dead Kennedys' celebrated "Holiday in Cambodia" (1980).
One song in particular, the Exploited's "Punks Not Dead", spoke to an international constituency.
Jones called Grundy a "dirty fucker" on live television, triggering a media controversy.
Early in 1976, Hell left the Heartbreakers; he soon formed a new group that would become known as the Voidoids, "one of the most harshly uncompromising bands" on the scene.
didn't chart, but it became a requisite item for punk fans.
and anarcho-punk movements were emerging.
Radio Birdman broke up in June 1978 while touring the UK, where the early unity between bohemian, middle-class punks (many with art school backgrounds) and working-class punks had disintegrated.
The no wave movement that developed in New York in the late 1970s, with artists such as Lydia Lunch and James Chance, is often treated as the phenomenon's U.S. parallel.
From this new style of heavy metal, they grew others even more aggressive styles but always influenced by punk rock, like Speed metal (much influenced by punk rock and NWOBHM), Thrash metal (influenced by hardcore punk and speed metal), Death metal (which combined the thrash metal and D-beat) and Black metal (influenced by death metal and Horror punk).
Straight edge bands like Minor Threat, Boston's SS Decontrol, and Reno, Nevada's 7 Seconds rejected the self-destructive lifestyles of many of their peers, and built a movement based on positivity and abstinence from cigarettes, alcohol, drugs, and casual sex.
The following year saw punk rock spreading around the world, and it became a major cultural phenomenon in the United Kingdom.
Scholar Dave Laing describes how bassist Gaye Advert adopted fashion elements associated with male musicians only to generate a stage persona readily consumed as "sexy".
In 1974, an updated garage rock scene began to coalesce around the newly opened Rathskeller club in Kenmore Square.
Early Ontario punk bands included the Diodes, the Viletones, Battered Wives, the Demics, Forgotten Rebels, Teenage Head, the Poles, and the Ugly.
The first wave of punk rock was aggressively modern, distancing itself from the bombast and sentimentality of early 1970s rock.
Bass guitar lines are often uncomplicated; the quintessential approach is a relentless, repetitive "forced rhythm", although some punk rock bass players—such as Mike Watt of the Minutemen and Firehose—emphasize more technical bass lines.
Along with the mohawk, long spikes have been associated with the punk rock genre.
By the end of 1977, according to music historian Clinton Heylin, they were "England's arch-exponents of New Musick, and the true heralds of what came next."
A July festival at CBGB featuring over thirty new groups brought the scene its first substantial media coverage.
However, since the advent of New York and London scenes of 1975-1978 and the subculture that grew out of them, the term has become most commonly applied to music emerging after 1974.
In several places in a 1971 article in ''Who Put the Bomp'', Bangs refers to Britain's the Troggs and bands of their ilk as "punk."
At its core was Television, described by critic John Walker as "the ultimate garage band with pretensions".
Still developing what would become their signature B movie–inspired style, later dubbed horror punk, they made their first appearance at CBGB in April 1977.
Over the next several months, many new punk rock bands formed, often directly inspired by the Sex Pistols.
In July, the Sex Pistols' third single, "Pretty Vacant", reached number six and the Saints had a top-forty hit with "This Perfect Day".
San Francisco's second wave included the Avengers, Negative Trend, the Mutants, and the Sleepers.
Others, such as Robert Quine, lead guitarist of the Voidoids, have employed a wild, "gonzo" attack, a style that stretches back through the Velvet Underground to the 1950s recordings of Ike Turner.
Anarcho-punk musicians and fans disdained the older punk scene from which theirs had evolved.
According to music journalist Ben Myers, Bad Religion "layered their pissed off, politicized sound with the smoothest of harmonies"; Descendents "wrote almost surfy, Beach Boys–inspired songs about girls and food and being young(ish)".
They argued that by signing to major labels and appearing on MTV, punk bands like Green Day were buying into a system that punk was created to challenge.
Among those who frequented the shop were members of a band called the Strand, which McLaren had also been managing.
Crass, from Essex, merged a vehement, straight-ahead punk rock style with a committed anarchist mission, and played a major role in the emerging anarcho-punk movement.
Following the lead of Boston's Mighty Mighty Bosstones and two California bands, Anaheim's No Doubt and Long Beach's Sublime, ska punk and ska-core became widely popular in the mid-1990s.
Racist skinheads sometimes disrupted Oi!
Even as nostalgia was discarded, many in the scene adopted a nihilistic attitude summed up by the Sex Pistols slogan "No Future"; in the later words of one observer, amid the unemployment and social unrest in 1977, "punk's nihilistic swagger was the most thrilling thing in England."
According to Bushell, "Punk was meant to be of the voice of the dole queue, and in reality most of them were not.
In June 1972, the fanzine ''Flash'' included a "Punk Top Ten" of 1960s albums.
By 1983, St. Paul's Hüsker Dü, Willful Neglect, Chicago's Naked Raygun, Indianapolis's Zero Boys, and D.C.'s the Faith were taking the hardcore sound in experimental and ultimately more melodic directions.
This London scene's first fanzine appeared a week later.
Trend-setting songs such as the Clash's "Career Opportunities" and Chelsea's "Right to Work" deal with unemployment and the grim realities of urban life.
Parents moved their kids out of the cities to these horrible suburbs to save them from the 'reality' of the cities and what they ended up with was this new breed of monster".
One of the most influential American post-punk bands was Boston's Mission of Burma, who brought abrupt rhythmic shifts derived from hardcore into a highly experimental musical context.
"(I'm) Stranded" had limited impact at home, but the British music press recognized it as a groundbreaking record.
In eastern Canada, the Toronto protopunk band Dishes had laid the groundwork for another sizable scene, and a September 1976 concert by the touring Ramones had catalyzed the movement.
The band soon discovered that musicians were exploring similar paths in other parts of the world.
Combining punk rock with reggae, ska, R&B, and rockabilly, it went on to be acclaimed as one of the best rock records ever.
A New York hardcore scene grew, including the relocated Bad Brains, New Jersey's Misfits and Adrenalin O.D., and local acts such as the Nihilistics, the Mob, Reagan Youth, and Agnostic Front.
In June, Radio Birdman released the album ''Radios Appear'' on its own Trafalgar label.
In 1976—first in London, then in the United States—"New Wave" was introduced as a complementary label for the formative scenes and groups also known as "punk"; the two terms were essentially interchangeable.
