Image:PereDuchesneIllustre6 1 0.png|Polichinelle caricature, France
Miroslav Trejtnar is a master puppeteer and teacher of traditional Czech marionette-making skills.
Performances are traditionally accompanied by musical instruments from Kerala such as the ''chenda'', ''madhalam'' or ''ezhupara'' (a cylindrical drum made out of jackfruit wood and covered with calf-skin on both ends), ''ilathalam'' (cymbals), ''shankha'' (conch), ''chengila'' (gong), ''kurumkuzhal'' (a double reed wind instrument) and ''cherukuzhal''.
In the 19th century, the marionettes of Pietro Radillo became more complex and instead of just the rod and two strings, Radillo's marionettes were controlled by as many as eight strings, which increased control over the individual body parts of the marionettes.
Image:Tchantches.jpg|Traditional puppets from Liège, Belgium
Italy is considered by many to be the early home of the marionette due to the influence of Roman puppetry.
In the 1960s Peter Schumann's Bread and Puppet Theater developed the political and artistic possibilities of puppet theatre in a distinctive, powerful and immediately recognizable way.
The first noted Czech puppeteer was Jan Jiri Brat, who was born in 1724.
Don Austen, a British puppeteer, worked with Jim Henson's Creature Shop, and also worked on a number of feature films.
The last episode was on 9 July 1999.
The puppeteer uses movements of her hands, arms, or control devices such as rods or strings to move the body, head, limbs, and in some cases the mouth and eyes of the puppet.
Another development, starting at the beginning of the century, was the belief that puppet theatre, despite its popular and folk roots, could speak to adult audiences with an adult, and experimental voice, and reinvigorate the high art tradition of actors' theatre.
Puppetry developed throughout the 20th century in a variety of ways.
'''Puppetry''' is a form of theatre or performance that involves the manipulation of puppets—inanimate objects, often resembling some type of human or animal figure, that are animated or manipulated by a human called a puppeteer.
Image:Wayang Bali.jpg|Wayang puppet from Bali, Indonesia
This led to puppet societies becoming secretive and exclusive.
Many regional variants of Pulcinella were developed as the character spread across Europe.
It can be traced deep into the early part of the Middle Ages.
Puppets have been used extensively in animated films since 1946.
Today, puppetry continues as a popular form, often within a ceremonial context, and as part of a wide range of folk forms including dance, storytelling, and masked performance.
The aboriginal peoples of Australia have a long tradition of oral storytelling which goes back many thousands of years.
This rod was used to manipulate the doll from above, as it is done today in Sicilian puppetry.
In 1930, he set up the first modern professional puppet theatre.
Xenophon and Plutarch refer to them.
In the ancient Indian epic ''Mahabharata'' there are references to puppets.
His first shows featured Polichinelle, a character borrowed from the Italian commedia dell'arte.
From 1957-1969, Gerry Anderson produced many television series starring marionettes, starting with Roberta Leigh's ''The Adventures of Twizzle'' and ending with ''The Secret Service''.
In Lindau, the Lindau Marionette Opera was founded in 2000 by Bernard Leismueller and Ralf Hechelmann.
Certainly, secret societies in many African ethnic groups still use puppets (and masks) in ritual dramas as well as in their healing and hunting ceremonies.
Matej Kopecky was the most famous 19th-century Czech puppeteer, and was responsible for communicating the ideas of national awareness.
In other areas, the style of shadow puppetry known as ''khayal al-zill'', a metaphor translated as "shadows of the imagination" or "shadow of fancy", still survives.
Snuff Puppets has performed in over 15 countries, including tours to major festivals in Asia, South America and Europe.
The actions, gestures and spoken parts acted out by the puppets are typically used in storytelling.
In Korea, the tradition of puppetry is thought to have come from China.
In Iran, puppets are known to have existed much earlier than 1000 AD, but initially only glove and string puppets were popular .
The puppeteers, who dressed all in black, would become invisible when standing against a black background, while the torches illuminated only the carved, painted and costumed wooden puppets.
Maeterlinck, Shaw, Lorca and others wrote puppet plays, and artists such as Picasso, Jarry, and Léger began to work in theatre.
Other scholars claim that shadow theater came to Anatolia in the 16th century from Egypt.
A few of these dolls had strings in place of rods.
China has a history of puppetry dating back 3000 years, originally in "pi-yung xi", the "theatre of the lantern shadows", or, as it is more commonly known today, Chinese shadow theatre.
In the Netherlands it is ''Jan Klaassen'' (and Judy is ''Katrijn''); in Denmark ''Mester Jackel''; in Russia ''Petrushka''; and in Romania ''Vasilache''.
He is a past President of UNIMA Australia, former artistic director of the Marionette Theatre Company of Australia and is renowned for his shadow puppetry and writing in the field.
In Sicilian this is called "Opera dei pupi", or "Opera of the puppets".
These shows often take place alongside storytelling in traditional tea and coffee-houses (''Ghahve-Khaneh").
In Augsburg, the historic Augsburg Marionette Theatre was founded in 1943 by Walter Oehmichen.
Image:Teatro dei burattini.jpg|Puppet theater with Gioppino and Brighella, Bergamo Italy
Wayland Flowers also made a major contribution to adult puppetry with his satirical puppet, Madame.
There is evidence that they were used in Egypt as early as 2000 BC when string-operated figures of wood were manipulated to perform the action of kneading bread.
In Russia, the Central Puppet Theatre in Moscow and its branches in every part of the country enhanced the reputation of the puppeteer and puppetry in general.
The simplest puppets are finger puppets, which are tiny puppets that fit onto a single finger, and sock puppets, which are formed from a sock and operated by inserting one's hand inside the sock, with the opening and closing of the hand simulating the movement of the puppet's "mouth".
In Sicily, the sides of donkey carts are decorated with intricate, painted scenes from the Frankish romantic poems, such as ''The Song of Roland''.
A kkoktugakshi puppet play has eight scenes.
Directors and companies like Peter Schumann of Bread and Puppet Theatre, Bob Frith of Horse and Bamboo Theatre, and Sandy Speiler of In the Heart of the Beast Puppet and Mask Theatre have also combined mask and puppet theatre where the performer, puppets and objects are integrated within a largely visual theatre world that minimises the use of spoken language.
British puppetry now covers a wide range of styles and approaches.
The 18th century was a vital period in the development of all Italian theatre, including the marionette theatre.
David Hamilton, one of the last remaining marionette puppeteers in Australia, tours independently and under the auspices of the Queensland Arts Council.
Bil Baird worked on  revitalising marionette theatre and puppetry in the United States.
Puppetry is a very ancient form of theatre which was first recorded in the 5th century BC in Ancient Greece.
Marionette puppet theatre has had a very long history in entertainment in Prague, and elsewhere in the Czech Republic.
The "Opera dei pupi" and the Sicilian tradition of cantastorie, the word for storyteller, are rooted in the Provençal troubadour tradition, in Sicily during the reign of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the first half of the 13th century.
Image:B-Stockpuppen-Abt+WeißeSchlange+SchwarzeSchlange.JPG|Chinese stick puppets
The Rajasthani Puppet from India is notable and there are many Indian ventriloquists and puppeteers.
The appearance is created of the puppets moving over water.
Some scholars trace the origin of puppets to India 4000 years ago, where the main character in Sanskrit plays was known as "Sutradhara",  "the holder of strings".
Archaeologists have unearthed one terracotta doll with a detachable head capable of manipulation by a string dating to 2500 BC.
The Salzburg Marionette Theatre productions are aimed for adults although children are of course welcome.
Other characters, including Guignol's wife Madelon and the gendarme Flagéolet soon followed, but these are never much more than foils for the two heroes.
In the 18th century, operas were specifically composed for marionette puppets.
Their puppets are now held in the Moncrieff Library of the Performing Arts, Queensland Performing Arts Centre, Brisbane.
In Korean, the word for puppet is "Kkoktugakshi".
A recent example of puppetry in Iran is the touring opera ''Rostam and Sohrab''.
Puppets have been used since the earliest times to animate and communicate the ideas and needs of human societies.
Depending on the temple tradition, the performance may last 7, 14, 21, 41 or 71 days.
The oldest historical evidence of puppetry in Korea comes from a letter written in 982 A.D. from Choe Seung-roe to the King.
Marionette puppetry was combined with television as early as the 1940s, with Howdy Doody of the United States being a notable marionette in this field.
There are also a number of British theatre companies, including Horse and Bamboo Theatre, and Green Ginger, which integrate puppetry into highly visual productions.
Some very experienced puppeteers can manipulate their puppets to perform various stunts, for example, somersaults in the air.
As a ritualistic art form, Tholpavakoothu is performed at more than 100 temples in the Palakkad, Trichur and Mallapuram districts of Kerala from January through May on specially constructed stages called ''koothumadams''.
Japan has many forms of puppetry, including the bunraku.
Afghanistan has produced a form of puppetry known as buz-baz.
He is a manifestation of the Lord of Misrule and Trickster, figures of deep-rooted mythologies.
Tholpavakoothu puppet plays are based on selected verses from the Tamil epic ''Kamba Ramayana''.
At roughly the same time, Jim Henson was creating a type of soft, foam-rubber and cloth puppet which became known collectively as Muppets.
A "live-hand puppet" is similar to a hand puppet but is larger and requires two puppeteer for each puppet.
These dolls had articulated arms and legs, and in some cases an iron rod extending up from the tops of their heads.
Image:Sanbasopuppet.jpg|Sanbaso Bunraku Puppet, Tonda Puppet Troupe, Japan
An important puppet organisation is the National Marionette Theatre in Prague.
Much earlier in nearby Salzburg, Austria, the Salzburg Marionette Theatre was founded in 1913 by Professor Anton Aicher and is world famous.
There are numerous other companies, including Buchty a Loutky ("Cakes and Puppets"), founded by Marek Bečka.
The origin of this form of puppetry dates back seven hundred years when the rice fields would flood and the villagers would entertain each other, eventually resulting in puppet show competitions between villages.
A German dramatist, poet, painter and composer, Pocci wrote 40 puppet plays for his theatre.
Gluck, Haydn, de Falla and Respighi all composed adult operas for marionettes.
Image:Bread and puppet puppets glover vermont.jpg|Puppets in the Bread and Puppet Theater Museum in Glover, Vermont, USA
The puppeteer often speaks in the voice of the character of the puppet, and then synchronizes the movements of the puppet's mouth with this spoken part.
Puppetry was practiced in Ancient Greece and the oldest written records of puppetry can be found in the works of Herodotus and Xenophon, dating from the 5th century BC.
In ancient Greece and ancient Rome clay dolls, and a few of ivory, dated from around 500 BC, were found in children's tombs.
Other genres of puppetry emerged during the Qajar era (18th and 19th centuries) as influences from Turkey spread to the region.
In New Zealand, a similar history has taken place.
Other pioneers, including Edward Gordon Craig and Erwin Piscator were influenced by puppetry in their crusade to regalvanise the mainstream.
Masks were carved from wood and heavily decorated with paint and feathers.
Chikamatsu Monzaemon, considered by many to be Japan's greatest playwright, gave up writing Kabuki plays and focused exclusively on the puppet-only Bunraku plays.
Rod Hull also made a contribution with his puppet Emu.
Initially consisting of one puppeteer, by 1730 three puppeteers were used to operate each puppet in full view of the audience.
Albrecht Roser has made a considerable impact with his marionettes in Stuttgart.
In Australia in the 1960s, Peter Scriven founded the Marionette Theatre Company of Australia and had beautiful marionette productions such as The Tintookies, Little Fella Bindi.
There are links between as an early form of ritualistic human carnival puppetry.
The ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey'' were presented using puppetry.
Current British puppetry theatres include the Little Angel Theatre in Islington, London, Puppet Theatre Barge in London, Norwich Puppet Theatre, the Harlequin Puppet Theatre, Rhos-on-Sea, Wales, and the Biggar Puppet Theatre, Biggar, Lanarkshire, Scotland.
In 1920 and 1926 respectively, Josef Skupa created his most famous puppets: comical father Spejbl and his rascal son Hurvínek.
Puppetry is a very ancient art form, thought to have originated about 3000 years ago.
Works like the ''Natya Shastra'' and the ''Kamasutra'' elaborate on puppetry in some detail.
Thailand has Hun Krabok, a rod puppet theatre which is the most popular form of puppetry.
He and his wife, Cora Eisenberg had their own marionette theatre in New York.
They can be extremely complex or very simple in their construction.
He was the son of a local carpenter and created his own puppet theatre.
Marionettes first appeared around the time of the Thirty Years' War.
The puppets are built out of wood and the shows are performed in a waist high pool.
Snuff Puppets is one of Australia's modern puppet theatre troupes.
File:Bodleian Ms. Burm.
This is a shadow play with live music, "the accompaniment of drums, tambourines and flutes...also..."special effects" – smoke, fire, thunder, rattles, squeaks, thumps, and whatever else might elicit a laugh or a shudder from his audience"
Some researchers believe these ancient figures were simply toys and not puppets, due to their small size.
The Christian church used marionettes to perform morality plays.
Puppetry has also been influencing mainstream theatre, and several recent productions combine puppetry with live action, including ''Warhorse'', at the Royal National Theatre and ''Madam Butterfly'' at the English National Opera.
The shadow puppets are lit from behind by 21 oil lamps made of coconut halves, placed equidistantly on a wooden beam behind the screen, causing the puppets' shadows to fall on the screen.
Puppeteers responded by setting up stages outside cathedrals and became even more ribald and slapstick.
They are enjoyed by the general public as a popular entertainment while they are received as a religious offering by devotees.
At one time a post-graduate course existed at the Victorian College of the Arts, University of Melbourne.
The British Puppet and Model Theatre Guild in the early 20th century instigated a resurgence of puppetry.
In the world of theatre, puppetry continues to be influential, and despite its 'outsider' status acts as an invigorating and rejuvenating influence on its mainstream relative, and feeds through object and physical theatre many of the most exciting developments in contemporary theatre.
He developed characters closer to the daily lives of his Lyon audience, first Gnafron, a wine-loving cobbler, and in 1808 Guignol.
The art of Shadow Theater was brought to Anatolia by the Turkish people emigrating from Central Asia.
It continues to this day along with an adjoining puppet museum   under the grandsons of the founder, Klaus Marschall and Juergen Marschall.
His voice and manipulation was provided by Frank Oz.
Javanese rod puppets have a long history and are used to tell fables from Javanese history.
Although there are few remaining examples of puppets from ancient Greece, historical literature and archaeological findings shows the existence of puppetry.
Some historians claim that they pre-date actors in theatre.
These same tales are enacted in traditional puppet theatres featuring hand-made marionettes of wood.
Throughout rural Africa, puppetry still performs the function of transmitting cultural values and ideas that in large African cities is increasingly undertaken by formal education, books, cinema, and television.
Later, it was taken by the Mongols from the Chinese and passed to the Turkish peoples of Central Asia.
Such a performance is also known as a .
There is a long tradition of puppetry in Germany and Austria.
In 1855, Count Franz Pocci founded the Munich Marionette Theatre.
In many of the Pacific countries, there has been a heavy emphasis on ritual.
''Kheimeh Shab-Bazi'' is a traditional Persian puppet show which is performed in a small chamber by a musical performer and a storyteller called a ''morshed'' or ''naghal''.
It performs mainly operas such as ''Die Fledermaus'' and ''The Magic Flute'' and a small number of ballets such as ''The Nutcracker''.
There is an annual winter festival of puppets at the City of Melbourne's ArtPlay and at Federation Square in Melbourne.
Puppetry is used in almost all human societies both as entertainment – in performance – and ceremonially in rituals and celebrations such as carnivals.
His characters ''Clown Gustaf'' and ''Grandmother'' are well-known.
He saw shadow theatre performed during a party in his honour and he was said to be so impressed with it that he took the puppeteer back to his palace in Istanbul where his 21-year -old son, later Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent, developed an interest in the plays.
In Taiwan, budaixi puppet shows, somewhat similar to the Japanese Bunraku, occur with puppeteers working in the background or underground.
"Gagsi" means a "bride" or a "young woman", which was the most common form the dolls took.
Tholpavakoothu shadow puppets are typically made out of animal skin, and are held by a thin stick in one hand while the limbs are manipulated by a thinner stick held in the puppeteer's other hand.
The Explorers and The Water Babies.
The Javanese ''Wayang'' theater was influenced by Indian traditions.
In the 19th century, puppetry faced competition from other forms of theatre such as vaudeville and music hall, but it adapted to these challenges, for example: by developing stage acts and participating in the new forms of popular theatre, or reinventing itself in other ways and finding audiences at the newly fashionable seaside resorts.
The effects, and the artful and complex construction of the puppets, the puppet theatres, and the puppet narratives, were all popular, particularly in Venice.
Throughout this period, puppetry developed separately from the emerging mainstream of actor theatres, and the 'ragged' puppeteers performed outside of theatre buildings at fairs, markets etc.
Sergei Obraztsov explored the concept of ''kukolnost'' ('puppetness'), despite Joseph Stalin's insistence on realism.
''Grandmother'', while outwardly charming, is savagely humorous in her observations about all aspects of society and the absurdities of life.
Image:osonowiki.jpg|The character Osono from the play ''Hade Sugata Onna Maiginu'', in a performance by the Tonda Puppet Troupe of Nagahama, Shiga, Japan - an example of Japanese Bunraku puppetry.
The character of "Punch" derives from the character Pulcinella, which was Anglicized to ''Punchinello''.
The Greek word translated as "puppet" is "νευρόσπαστος" (''nevrospastos''), which literally means "drawn by strings, string-pulling", from "νεῦρον" (''nevron''), meaning either "sinew, tendon, muscle, string", or "wire", and "σπάω" (''spaō''), meaning "draw, pull".
File:Puppet Bleeckie and Leslie Fleming c.jpg|Leslie Madeline Fleming and Bleeckie, a character from a series of web videos.
Bilbar Puppet Theatre, established by Barbara Turnbull and her husband Bill Turnbull (puppeteer) toured Australia extensively under the auspices of the Queensland Arts Council in the 1970s and 1980s.
Performances start at about 10 p.m. and continue till daybreak.
With the arrival of European settlers, a different sort of puppetry took shape.
The dialogue takes place between the morshed and the puppets.
19th century watercolour
The epic ''Mahabharata'', Tamil literature from the Sangam Era, and various literary works dating from the late centuries BC to the early centuries AD, including Ashokan edicts, describe puppets.
Karagoz, the Turkish Shadow Theatre, has widely influenced puppetry in the region and it is thought to have passed from China by way of India.
Puppets also have been used in the ''Star Wars'' films, notably with the character of Yoda.
Supported by the parallel development of cinema, television and other filmed media it now reaches a larger audience than ever.
Two of the Guild's founders, H. W. Whanslaw and Waldo Lanchester, both worked to promote and develop puppetry with publications of books and literature, mainly focusing on the art of the marionette.
Image:Hanuman and Ravana in Tholu Bommalata, the shadow puppet tradition of Andhra Pradesh, India.JPG| Hanuman and Ravana in ''Togalu Gombeyaata'', shadow puppet tradition in southern part of India
Image:Mallory Lewis and Lamb Chop.jpg|Mallory Lewis and Lamb Chop
By the Song Dynasty (960-1279 AD), puppets played to all social classes including the courts, yet puppeteers, as in Europe, were considered to be from a lower social stratum.
5 fol 140.jpg|Burmese puppet theatre with musicians in foreground.
Image:EdgarBergenandCharlieMcCarthyStageDoorCanteen1.jpg|Edgar Bergen and his puppet Charlie McCarthy
Based in Melbourne, their work is full of wild black humour, political and sexual satire and a hand made visually aesthetic.
Edgar Bergen also made a major contribution.
Another figure is a terracotta monkey which could be manipulated up and down a stick, achieving minimum animation in both cases.
Marionettes are suspended and controlled by a number of strings, plus sometimes a central rod attached to a control bar held from above by the puppeteer.
Punch's wife was originally "Joan", but later became "Judy".
Image:B-Schattenpuppe-Zhongkui (Peking).JPG|Chinese shadow puppet (Beijing style)
A large rod under the water is used by the puppeteers to support and control the puppets.
Padhye, introduced this form of puppetry to India in the 1920s and his son, Ramdas Padhye, subsequently popularised ventriloquism and puppetry.
India has a long tradition of puppetry.
- continuing to be classified along with bandits and gypsies.
The traditional British ''Punch and Judy'' puppetry traces its roots to the 16th century to the Italian commedia dell'arte.
The advocates of this view claim that shadow theatre found its way into the Ottoman palaces when Yavuz Sultan Selim conquered Egypt in 1517.
Much of it derives from the 16th century tradition of the Italian commedia dell'arte.
Kantor influenced a new formalist generation of directors such as Richard Foreman and Robert Wilson who were concerned with the 'object' in theatrical terms "putting it on stage and finding different ways of looking at it" (Foreman).
There is slight evidence for puppetry in the Indus Valley Civilization.
Vietnam developed the art form of water puppetry, that is unique to that country.
Bunraku developed out of Shinto temple rites and gradually became a highly sophisticated form of puppetry.
Anderson returned to puppetry in 1983 with ''Terrahawks'' and the unaired pilot ''Space Police'' in 1987.
Its repertoire mainly features a marionette production of Mozart's famous Don Giovanni.
In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the familiar ''Punch and Judy'' puppet show which existed in Britain was performed in an easily transportable booth.
There is also a marionette theatre at Schoenbrunn Palace in Vienna.
In every episode he would create several pictures from "squiggles" sent in by children from around the country.
