Grapes, eggplants, pansies and other fruits, vegetables and flowers are purple because they contain natural pigments called anthocyanins.
File:Purple honey creeper (Cyanerpes caeruleus longirostris) male.jpg|The purple honeycreeper from South America does not appear to be purple at all.
Its chemical name is
In the traditional color wheel long used by painters, purple is usually placed between crimson and violet.
These pigments are found in the leaves, roots, stems, vegetables, fruits and flowers of all plants.
Violet is a spectral color – it occupies its own place at the end of the spectrum of light first identified by Newton in 1672, and it has its own wavelength (approximately 380–420&nbsp;nm) – whereas purple is a combination of two spectral colors, red and blue.
File:Camille Pissarro 033.jpg|''Portrait of Félix Pissarro'' (1881), by Camille Pissarro
This is ''April Love'' (1856).
Purple robes were particularly worn by students of divinity.
However, during the Roman Empire, purple was more and more associated exclusively with the emperors and their officers.
In the 18th century, chemists in England, France and Germany began to create the first synthetic dyes.
See purple boundary.
File:Haustellum brandaris 000.jpg|Tyrian purple was made from a sea snail called murex
Then the extract is acidified, the dissolved dye precipitates and is washed.
It can also be created by mixing just red and blue alone, but in that case the purple is less bright, with lower
Angels and the Virgin Mary were often portrayed wearing purple or violet robes.
The standard HTML color purple is created by red and blue light of equal intensity, at a brightness that is halfway between full power and darkness.
When combined with pink, it is associated with eroticism, femininity and seduction.
It was made of gold and Tyrian purple from Constantinople.
This means that when violet light strikes the eye, the S-cone should be stimulated strongly, and the L-cone stimulated weakly along with it.
This is rarely practiced today.
The greater the distance from the eye to mountains, the lighter and more blue they appear.
In color printing, it is a primary color, along with cyan and yellow.
Purple is the color most often associated with the artificial and the unconventional.
Cudbear was developed by Dr Cuthbert Gordon of Scotland: production began in 1758, The lichen is first boiled in a solution of ammonium carbonate.
Purple is also worn by priests during Lent.
File:CarolineRemy-Renoir.jpg|''Portrait of Caroline Remy de Guebhard'', by Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841–1919).
However, the system is capable of approximating it due to the fact that the L-cone (red cone) in the eye is uniquely sensitive to two different discontinuous regions in the visible spectrum – its primary region being the long wavelength light of the yellow-red region of the spectrum, and a secondary smaller region overlapping with the S-cone (blue cone) in the shortest wavelength, violet part.
The term used for purple in the 4th-century Latin Vulgate version of the Bible passage  is ''purpura'' or Tyrian purple.
File:Ghent Altarpiece D - Popes - Bishops.jpg|In the Ghent Altarpiece (1422) by Jan van Eyck, the popes and bishops are wearing purple robes.
File:Karl den store krons av leo III.jpg|A medieval depiction of the coronation of the Emperor Charlemagne in 800.
Purple is the color most associated with ambiguity.
Purple robes are also worn as part of the academic dress worn at graduation and university ceremonies by students of theology.
How it received its name is a mystery.
When the German chemist, Paul Friedander, tried to recreate Tyrian purple in 2008, he needed twelve thousand mollusks to create 1.4 ounces of dye, enough to color a handkerchief.
Violet, as it brightens, looks more and more blue.
It is the violet pigment most commonly used today by artists.
File:Color icon violet v2.svg|The color violet
Nero made it punishable by death for anyone else to wear the color.
French and German purple contains more red and less blue than American or British purple.
The actual color of Tyrian purple seems to have varied from a reddish to a bluish purple.
It was the first of a series of modern industrial dyes which completely transformed both the chemical industry and fashion.
File:Black Butte blackberry.jpg|Blackberries were sometimes used to make purple dye in the Middle Ages.
Some common confusion exists concerning the color names "purple" and "violet".
In the Odyssey, the blankets on the wedding bed of Odysseus are purple.
There is no such thing as the "wavelength of purple light"; it only exists as a combination.
The color purple plays a significant role in the traditions of engineering schools across Canada.
Thousands of the tiny snails had to be found, their shells cracked, the snail removed.
In western Polynesia, residents of the islands made a purple dye similar to Tyrian purple from the sea urchin.
File:Emperor Kōmyō.jpg| Emperor Komyo of Japan.
The most valued shades were said to be those closer to the color of dried blood, as seen in the mosaics of the robes of the Emperor Justinian in Ravenna.
It was not one of the colors of the rainbow identified by Isaac Newton, and it does not have its own wavelength of light.
In France, purple is defined as "a dark red, inclined toward violet."
In the Roman Catholic liturgy, purple symbolizes penitence; priests wear a purple garment when they hear confession.
Orcein began to achieve popularity again in the 19th century, when violet and purple became the color of demi-mourning, worn after a widow or widower had worn black for a certain time, before he or she returned to wearing ordinary colors.
Purple was one of the first colors used in prehistoric art.
Not all anthocyanins are purple;  they vary in color from red to purple to blue, green, or yellow, depending upon the level of their  pH.
Then the lichen is dried and ground to powder.
These works have been dated to between 16,000 and 25,000 BC.
According to surveys In Europe and the U.S., purple is the color most often associated with royalty, magic, mystery and piety.
As early as the 15th century BC the citizens of Sidon and Tyre, two cities on the coast of Ancient Phoenicia, (present day Lebanon), were producing purple dye from a sea snail called the spiny dye-murex.
Most purple fabric was made by the dyers who worked with red, and who used dye from madder or cochineal, so Medieval violet colors were inclined toward red.
Bishops and archbishops, of a lower status than cardinals, were assigned the color purple, but not the rich Tyrian purple.
In modern times, Tyrian purple has been recreated, at great expense.
From the Middle Ages onward, purple and violet dyes for the clothing of common people were often made from the blackberry or other red fruit of the genus rubus, or from the mulberry.
File:Auke Bay Alaska 2.jpg|Sunset at Auke Bay, Alaska.
The chemical composition of the dye from the murex is close to that of the dye from indigo, and indigo was sometimes used to make a counterfeit Tyrian purple, a crime which was severely punished.
The word for purple is ''murasaki'', which is also the name of the purple gromwell flower
Mountains of empty shells have been found at the ancient sites of Sidon and Tyre.
*In Chinese painting, the color purple represents the ''harmony of the universe'' because it is a combination of red and blue (yang and yin respectively).
Fuchsine was another synthetic dye made shortly after mauveine.
The bluish color is caused by an optical effect called Rayleigh scattering.
*In Japan, purple is the color of privilege and wealth, the color associated with the Japanese aristocracy.
Thanks to Rayleigh scattering, the mountains appear purple.
Orcein, or ''purple moss'', was another common purple dye.
While the two colors look similar, from the point of view of optics there are important differences.
At sunrise and sunset, the light is passing through the atmosphere at a lower angle, and traveling a greater distance through a larger volume of air.
File:Bandera de León (ciudad).svg|The flag of the Province of León in Spain features a purple lion, the symbol of the old Kingdom of León (910–1230).
File:Duochrome super macro eye shadow by m.a.c., ben nye, and coastal scents..jpg|Purple eye shadow is intended to create the illusion of depth and to attract attention to the eyes
The color known in antiquity as Tyrian purple ranged from crimson to a deep bluish-purple, depending upon how it was made.
A red purple symbolizes luck and fame.
They have strong resistance to sunlight and washing, and are widely used today in oil paints, water colors, and acrylics, as well as in automobile coatings and other industrial coatings.
At about the same time, Japanese painters began to use a pigment made from the same plant.
File:Rokotov ekaterina.jpg|Portrait of Empress Catherine the Great of Russia, by Fyodor Rokotov.
The bishops and cardinals wear purple, and the Pope wears white.
What seems to have mattered about Tyrian purple was not its color, but its luster, richness, its resistance to weather and light, and its high price.
The Chinese word for purple, ''zi'', is connected with the North Star, Polaris, or ''zi Wei'' in Chinese.
Purple was popular with the pre-Raphaelite painters in Britain, including Arthur Hughes, who loved bright colors and romantic scenes.
Purple was the color of the aristocracy in Japan and China.
Similarly in Japan, the color is traditionally associated with the Emperor and aristocracy.
The result is that the human eye perceives blue when looking toward parts of the sky other than the sun.
For this reason, it is called a ''non-spectral color''.
In the Middle Ages, those who dyed blue fabric and red fabric were members of different guilds, and were forbidden to dye any other colors than those of their own guild.
Perkin developed an industrial process, built a factory, and produced the dye by the ton, so almost anyone could wear mauve.
Their robes were modeled after those of the clergy, and they often wore square violet or purple caps and robes, or black robes with purple trim.
In the RGB color model, named for the colors red, green, and blue, used to create all the colors on a computer screen or television, the range of purples is created by mixing red and blue light of different intensities on a black screen.
Then it is dissolved in ammonia again, the solution is heated in air until it becomes purple, then it is precipitated with calcium chloride; the resulting dye was more solid and stable than other purples.
The artists of Pech Merle cave and other Neolithic sites in France used sticks of manganese and hematite powder to draw and paint animals and the outlines of their own hands on the walls of their caves.
In Central America, the inhabitants made a dye from a different sea snail, the purpura, found on the coasts of Costa Rica and Nicaragua.
The sunlit sky is blue because air scatters short-wavelength light more than longer wavelengths.
However, after the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453, the color lost its imperial  status.
Since the Vatican II Council (1962–65), priests may wear purple rather than black when officiating at funerals – it was decided that black, as the color of mourning, should not be a formal part of a religious service.
* In Chinese astrology the North Star was the home  of the Celestial  Emperor, the ruler of the heavens (As noted above, the area around the North Star is called the Purple Forbidden Enclosure in Chinese astronomy.).
In German, this color is sometimes called ''Purpurrot'' ("purple-red") to avoid confusion.
Purple occupies the space closer to red, between crimson and violet.
During the Empire, the ''toga picta'' was worn by magistrates giving public gladiatorial games, and by the consuls, as well as by the emperor on special occasions.
'''Cobalt violet''' is a synthetic pigment that was invented in the second half of the 19th century, and is made by a similar process as cobalt blue, cerulean blue  and cobalt green.
'''Mauveine''', also known as '''aniline purple''' and '''Perkin's mauve''', was the first synthetic organic chemical dye, discovered serendipitously in 1856.
The Roman custom of wearing purple togas may have come from the Etruscans; an Etruscan tomb painting from the 4th century BC shows a nobleman wearing a deep purple and embroidered toga.
In 950 BC, King Solomon was reported to have brought artisans from Tyre to provide purple fabrics to decorate the Temple of Jerusalem.
The process had to be stopped at exactly the right time to obtain the desired color, which could range from a bright crimson to a dark purple, the color of dried blood.
It is the major color that occurs the least frequently in nature, and was the first color to be synthesized.
File:Rafael - Ressurreição de Cristo (detalhe - anjo).jpg|A purple-clad angel from the ''Resurrection of Christ'' by Raphael (1483–1520)
The dye was made from the root of the alkanet plant (Anchusa officinalis), also known as murasaki in Japanese.
The deep, rich purple dye made from this snail became known as Tyrian purple.
This fascination with purple is commonly attributed to the story of the sinking of the Titanic, in which the purple-clad Marine Engineers remained on board to delay the ship's sinking.
The Emperor Caligula had the King of Mauritania murdered for wearing a purple mantle better than his own.
Purple is sometimes associated with the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community.
It is simply a combination, in various proportions, of two primary colors, red and blue.
It is a color which is used to attract attention.
In the west, purple or violet is the color most associated with piety and faith.
In flowers, the purple anthocyanins help attract insects who pollinate the flowers.
It is similar to violet, but unlike violet, which is a spectral color with its own wavelength on the visible spectrum of light, purple is a composite color made by combining red and blue.
saturation or intensity.
Purple is also associated with Saturday on the Thai solar calendar.
The snails were left to soak, then a tiny gland was removed and the juice extracted and put in a basin, which was placed in the sunlight.
The color magenta used in the CMYK printing process is near the center of the line of purples, but most people associate the term "purple" with a somewhat bluer tone, such as is displayed by the color "electric purple" (a color also directly on the line of purples), shown below.
*Purple  was a popular color introduced into Japanese dress during the Heian Period (794–1185).
The process of making the dye was long, difficult and expensive.
Clothing colored with the Tyrian dye was mentioned in both the Iliad of Homer and the Aeneid  of Virgil.
(between 1550 and 1450 BC)
In the year 1464, shortly after the fall of Constantinople, which stopped the supply of Tyrian purple to Europe, Pope Paul II changed the color worn by cardinals from purple to red, dyed with expensive cochineal.
In the 1950s, a new family of purple and violet synthetic organic pigments called quinacridone came onto the market.
File:Egyptian - Faience Bowl - Walters 48451 - Interior.jpg|An Egyptian bowl colored with Egyptian blue, with motifs painted in dark manganese purple.
File:Fig18j.JPG|Dye bath of Tyrian purple
It is common for engineers across schools in Canada to dye themselves (and their leather jackets, in the case of Queen's University engineers) purple using the medical dye Gentian Violet, especially during events such as Frosh Week.
On a chromaticity diagram, the straight line connecting the extreme spectral colors (red and violet) is known as the line of purples (or 'purple boundary'); it represents one limit of human color perception.
File:CIExy1931.png|The CIE xy chromaticity diagram
This is called atmospheric perspective or aerial perspective.
It exists in culture and art, but not, in the same way that violet does, in optics.
According to the Roman writer Vitruvius, (1st century BC), the murex coming from northern waters, probably murex brandaris, produced a more bluish color than those of the south, probably murex trunculus.
File:Heraldic Shield Purpure.svg|The French call the color on this shield "pourpre" (purple).
File:Katharine Jefferts Schori 2.jpg|Katharine Jefferts Schori, Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church of the United States.
While the scientific definitions of violet and purple are clear, the cultural definitions are more varied.
File:Dronning Margrethe II (crop).jpg|The Queen of Denmark (2010).
A less bright purple can also be created with light or paint by adding a certain quantity of the third primary color (green for light or yellow for pigment).
* In China, purple represents spiritual awareness, physical and mental healing, strength and abundance.
The purple color was chosen as a tribute to the Suffragette movement a half-century earlier.
File:Cardinals and bishops in Bruges escorted by police.jpg|In the Roman Catholic church, cardinals wear red and bishops wear purple
It was mentioned in the Old Testament;  In the Book of Exodus, God instructs Moses to have the Israelites bring him an offering including cloth "of blue, and purple, and scarlet.
File:Purplec.png|The purple colors of this cauliflower, grapes, fruits, vegetables and flowers comes from natural pigments called anthocyanins.
File:Mauv2.jpg|A sample of silk dyed with the original mauveine dye.
File:Eastern Han Luoyang Mural of Liubo players.jpg|Han purple and Han blue were synthetic colors made by artisans in China during the Han dynasty (206 BC to 220 AD) or even earlier.
In the poems of Sappho (6th century BC) she celebrates the skill of the dyers of the Greek kingdom of Lydia who made purple footwear, and in the play of Aeschylus (525–456 BC), Queen Clytemnestra welcomes back her husband Agamemnon by decorating the palace with purple carpets.
The manufacture details were carefully protected, with a ten-feet high wall being built around the manufacturing facility, and staff consisting of Highlanders sworn to secrecy.
File:Magenta flower.JPG|The color magenta is very similar to fuchsia.
Much of the green and blue is scattered away, and more red light comes to your eye, creating the colors of the sunrise and sunset and making the mountains look purple.
Two synthetic  purple dyes were invented at about the same time.
The color could vary from crimson to deep purple, depending upon the type of murex sea-snail and how it was made.
It is the symbolic color worn on  Spirit Day, a commemoration that began in 2010 to show support for young people who are bullied because of their sexual orientation.
'''Cudbear''' is a dye extracted from orchil lichens that can be used to dye wool and silk, without the use of mordant.
File:Color icon purple.svg|The color purple
The colors in the group range from deep red to bluish purple in color, and have the molecular formula C20H12N2O2.
In Britain, purple is sometimes associated with mourning.
For that reason the forbidden city in Beijing was also known as the purple forbidden city (''zi Jin cheng'').
The purple hand is another symbol sometimes used by the LGBT community during parades and demonstrations.
'''French purple''' was developed in France at about the same time.
File:Shroud of Charlemagne manufactured in Constantinople 814.jpg|A fragment of the shroud in which the Emperor Charlemagne was buried in 814.
While purple was worn less frequently by Medieval and Renaissance kings and princes, it was worn by the professors of many of Europe's new universities.
The great dye works of Constantinople were destroyed, and gradually scarlet, made with dye from the cochineal insect, became the royal color in Europe.
Monochromatic violet light cannot be produced by the red-green-blue (RGB) color system, the method used to create colors on a television screen or computer display (a fact that is, indeed, true of any monochromatic color of the spectrum besides the shades of red, green, and blue chosen for the primaries).
The more distant the mountains are, the less contrast the eye sees between the mountains and the sky.
The first recorded use of the word 'purple' in the English language was in the year 975 AD.
(State Hermitage Museum).
In the sunlight the juice turned white, then yellow-green, then green, then violet, then a red which turned darker and darker.
All of these dyes were more reddish than bluish, and faded easily with washing and exposure to sunlight.
Purple and violet also played an important part in the religious paintings of the Renaissance.
File:Jidai Matsuri 2009 161.jpg|A Japanese woman in the kimono style popular in the Heian Period (794–1185)
Purple is also often worn by senior pastors of Protestant churches and by bishops of the Anglican Communion.
There a remarkable transformation took place.
In a slightly different variation, on the color wheel, it is placed between magenta and violet.
3-amino-2,±9-dimethyl-5-phenyl-7-(p-tolylamino)phenazinium acetate.
'''Purple''' is a color intermediate between red and  blue.
Purple, unlike violet, is not one of the colors of the visible spectrum.
*In Thailand, widows in mourning wear the color purple.
In the year 2000, a gram of Tyrian purple made from ten thousand mollusks according to the original formula, cost two thousand euro.
On the CIE xy chromaticity diagram, violet is on the curved edge in the lower left, while purples are on the straight line connecting the extreme colors red and violet; this line is known as the line of purples, or the purple line.
certain categories of priests,  and a few other categories of citizens.
One curious psychophysical difference between purple and violet is their appearance with an increase in luminance (apparent brightness).
The spectral colors violet and indigo are not purples according to color theory, but they are purples according to common English usage since they are between red and blue.
In Europe and America, purple is the color most associated with vanity, extravagance, and individualism.
In color printing, purple is sometimes represented by the color magenta, or sometimes by mixing magenta with red or blue.
File:RGB illumination.jpg|On a computer or television screen, purple colors are created by mixing red and blue light.
In Victorian times,  close relatives wore black for the first year following a death ("deep mourning") , and then replaced it with purple or dark green trimmed with black.
File:Boutet 1708 color circles.jpg|In the traditional Boutet color circle (1708), purple is shown between crimson and violet.
File:Blood orange sliced.jpg|Anthocyanins produce the purple color in blood oranges.
The ''Toga picta'' was solid purple, embroidered with gold.
This effect, long recognized by Leonardo da Vinci and other painters, is called aerial perspective or atmospheric perspective.
The new color quickly became fashionable, particularly after Queen Victoria wore a silk gown dyed with mauveine to the Royal Exhibition of 1862.
It produced a brilliant fuchsia color.
