Pythagoras was the first person known to have taught the earth was spherical, with antipodes and that it revolved around the sun.
According to Sir William Smith (1870) (see book screenshot for full quote)
This attribution has stuck down the centuries up to modern times.
As an active and organised brotherhood the Pythagorean order was everywhere suppressed, and did not again revive.
The universe was controlled by the order, and even the sounds were functions of number and ratio.
Everything of the kind mentioned by Plato and Aristotle is attributed not to Pythagoras, but to the Pythagoreans.
It is probable that both were influenced by Orphism.
Critical ancient sources like Aristotle and Aristoxenus cast doubt on these writings.
Outside of Samos he adapted a cave where he studied and lived day and night, discoursing with a few of his associates.
Brewer (1894), wrote (page 2614):
The eternal essence of number is the most providential cause of the whole heaven, earth and the region in between.
Their whole discipline is represented as encouraging a lofty serenity and self-possession, of which, there were various anecdotes in antiquity.
Pythagoras was also said to have spread the seeds of political liberty to Crotona, Sybaris, Metapontum, Rhegium, Sicily, Tauromenium, Catana, Agrigentum and Himera.
:"This is the thing for the sake of which nature and the god engendered us.
Pythagoras is supposed to have claimed that he had been Euphorbus, the son of Panthus, in the Trojan war, as well as various other characters, a tradesman, a courtesan, etc.
Their enemies, headed by Cylon and Ninon, the former of whom is said to have been irritated by his exclusion from the brotherhood, roused the populace against them.
This was a precept of Pythagoras, meaning add not fuel to fire, or do not irritate an angry man by sharp words which will only increase his rage."
He went to the blacksmiths to learn how the sounds were produced by looking at their tools.
Brewer (1894), wrote (page 2292):
:For his disciples, Pythagoras used divinely contrived mixtures of diatonic, chromatic and enharmonic melodies, through which he easily transferred and circularly led the passions of the soul in a contrary direction, when they had recently and in an irrational and secret manner been formed; such as sorrow, rage and pity, absurd emulation and fear, all-various desires, angers and appetites, pride, supineness and vehemence.
Pythagoras's father was a gem-engraver or a merchant from Tyre.
In ''Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers'', Diogenes Laërtius (3rd century CE) cites the statement of Aristoxenus (4th century BCE) that the Delphic Themistoclea (also known as Aristoclea) taught Pythagoras his moral doctrines: "Aristoxenus says that Pythagoras got most of his moral doctrines from the Delphic priestess Themistoclea."
Respecting the fate of Pythagoras himself, the accounts varied.''
Brewer (1894) mentioned that "Pythagoras taught that the sun is a movable sphere in the centre of the universe, and that all the planets revolve round it."
According to Aristoxenus, he allowed the use of all kinds of animal food except the flesh of oxen used for ploughing, and rams.
Some accounts mention that the philosophy associated with Pythagoras was related to mathematics and that numbers were important.
It is only post-Aristolian sources that biographical and historical details regarding Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans are to be found."
Pythagoras called Deity a Tetrad or Tetractys, meaning the 'four sacred letters.'"
According to Iamblichus (ca.
There were even stories of secret symbols, by which members of the sect could recognise each other, even if they had never met before.
However, the Protrepticus possibly contains parts of ''On the Pythagoreans''.
In the absence of reliable information, however, a huge range of teachers were assigned to Pythagoras.
Heraclitus stated that he was a man of extensive learning; and Xenophanes claimed that he believed in the transmigration of souls.
It was based upon the religious teachings of Pythagoras and was very secretive.
Pythagoras set up an organisation which was in some ways a school, in some ways a brotherhood (and here it should be noted that sources indicate that as well as men there were many women among the adherents of Pythagoras), and in some ways a monastery.
Among the Pythagorean ''Sacred Discourses'' there is a dictum attributed to Arignote:
There is mentioning of an oath on the Tetractys.
By musical sounds alone unaccompanied with words they healed the passions of the soul and certain diseases, enchanting in reality, as they say.
The sculptor Polykleitos in his ''Canon'' wrote that beauty consists in the proportion not of the elements (materials), but of the parts, that is the interrelation of parts with one another and with the whole.
The latter are acknowledged to be Pythagoreans by the rest but the Mathematici do not admit that the Acusmatici derived their instructions from Pythagoras but from Hippasus.
Like his doctrines, the life of Pythagoras also becomes a mirror image of real controversies in the schools.
Maurice Bowra believes that these ideas influenced the theory of Pythagoras and his students who asserted that "all things are numbers".
:"There is not a single detail in the life of Pythagoras that stands uncontradicted.
Later in Crete, he went to the Cave of Ida with Epimenides; and entered Egyptian sanctuaries for the purpose to learn information concerning the secret lore of the different gods.
But it is possible, from a more or less critical selection of the data, to construct a plausible account."
The building was set on fire, and many of the assembled members perished; only the younger and more active escaping.
The numbers were extensively used in the Greek architectural orders.
These writers, late as they are, were among the best sources from whom Porphyry and Iamblichus drew, while still adding some legendary accounts and their own inventions to the mix.
Temperance of all kinds seems to have been strictly urged.
Hence, historians are often reduced to considering the statements based on their inherent probability, but even then, if all the credible stories concerning Pythagoras were supposed true, his range of activity would be impossibly vast.
It is mentioned that the people of Croton were supposed to have identified him with the Hyperborean Apollo, and he was said to have practised divination and prophecy.
He discovered that it was because the hammers were "simple ratios of each other, one was half the size of the first, another was 2/3 the size, and so on".
Around 530 BC, he moved to Croton, in Magna Graecia, and there established some kind of school or guild.
Thales was a philosopher, scientist, mathematician, and engineer, also known for the Thales' Theorem.
There is little direct evidence as to the kind and amount of knowledge which Pythagoras acquired, or as to his definite philosophical views.
The earliest known mention of Pythagoras's name in connection with the theorem occurred five centuries after his death, in the writings of Cicero and Plutarch.
:''The so-called Pythagoreans, who were the first to take up mathematics, not only advanced this subject, but saturated with it, they fancied that the principles of mathematics were the principles of all things.''
Most of the information about Pythagoras was written down centuries after he lived, so very little reliable information is known about him.
:''Pythagoras maintained that he distinctly recollected having occupied other human forms before his birth at Samos: (1) He was AEthalides, son of Mercury; (2) Euphorbos the Phrygian, son of Panthoos, in which form he ran Patroclos through with a lance, leaving Hector to dispatch the hateful friend of Achilles; (3) Hermotimos, the prophet of Clazomenae; and'(4) a fisherman.
As to the date of his birth, Aristoxenus stated that Pythagoras left Samos in the reign of Polycrates, at the age of 40, which would give a date of birth around 570 BC.
In the visits to various places in Greece – Delos, Sparta, Phlius, Crete, etc.
In 520 BC, he returned to Samos.
He was born on the island of Samos, and travelled, visiting Egypt and Greece, and maybe India.
His plan of operation was to write on a looking—glass in blood, and place it opposite the moon, when the inscription would appear photographed or reflected on the moon's disc."
Aristotle described Pythagoras as a wonder-worker and somewhat of a supernatural figure, attributing to him such aspects as a golden thigh, which he showed to Abaris, the Hyperborean priest, and exhibited in the Olympic games.
All these auditions were of three kinds; some signifying what a thing is; others what it especially is, others what ought or ought not to be done."
Aristotle had written a separate work ''On the Pythagoreans'', which is no longer extant.
The philosophy of the Acusmatici consisted in auditions unaccompanied with demonstrations and a reasoning process; because it merely ordered a thing to be done in a certain way and that they should endeavour to preserve such other things as were said by him, as divine dogmas.
Similar commotions ensued in the other cities of Magna Graecia in which Pythagorean clubs had been formed.
Pythagoras became the subject of elaborate legends surrounding his historic persona.
Ancient Pythagoreans usually quoted their master's doctrines with the phrase ''autos ephe'' ("he himself said") — emphasising the essentially oral nature of his teaching.
But he did not say that all things come to be from number; rather, in accordance with number - on the grounds that order in the primary sense is in number and it is by participation in order that a first and a second and the rest sequentially are assigned to things which are counted.
This can be observed in the construction of the first temples.
Iamblichus (apparently on the authority of Aristoxenus) gives a long description of the daily routine of the members, which suggests many similarities with Sparta.
245-325 AD, 1918 translation) in ''The life of Pythagoras'', translated by Thomas Taylor
'''Pythagoras of Samos''' (; ; , or simply ; Πυθαγόρης in Ionian Greek;  ) was an Ionian Greek philosopher, mathematician, and the putative founder of the movement called Pythagoreanism.
As all things in nature are harmoniously made, the different sounds must harmonise, and the combination he called the “harmony of the spheres.” Kepler has a treatise on the subject."
According to Muslim tradition, Pythagoras was said to have been initiated by Hermes (Egyptian Thoth).
Because of the secretive nature of his school and the custom of its students to attribute everything to their teacher, there is no evidence that Pythagoras himself worked on or proved this theorem.
In the architectural canons every element was calculated and constructed by mathematical relations.
which are ascribed to him, he usually appears either in his religious or priestly guise, or else as a lawgiver.
:"It appears, in fact, from this, as well as from the extant fragments, that the first book of the work contained a general account of the origin and arrangement of the universe.
Burkert (1972, p.&nbsp;109) states that Aristoxenus and Dicaearchus are the most important accounts.
Both Freemasonry and Rosicrucianism have claimed to have evolved out of the Pythagorean Brotherhood.
Conflict seems to have broken out between the towns of Sybaris and Croton.
According to some accounts, Pythagoras married Theano, a lady of Croton.
According to legend, the way Pythagoras discovered that musical notes could be translated into mathematical equations was when he passed blacksmiths at work one day and thought that the sounds emanating from their anvils were beautiful and harmonious and decided that whatever scientific law caused this to happen must be mathematical and could be applied to music.
Plutarch asserted in his book ''On Isis and Osiris'' that during his visit to Egypt, Pythagoras received instruction from the Egyptian priest Oenuphis of Heliopolis.
We find mentioned as his instructors Creophylus, Hermodamas of Samos, Bias, Thales, Anaximander (a pupil of Thales), and Pherecydes of Syros.
When the dimensions changed, the architects searched in mathematics some permanent principles behind the appearances of things.
:''At one point, the active and organised brotherhood the Pythagorean order was everywhere suppressed, and did not again revive, though it was probably a long time before it was put down in all the Italian cities Lysis; Philolaus.
Each of these he corrected through the rule of virtue, attempering them through appropriate melodies, as well as through certain salubrious (''health giving'') medicine."
Pythagorean mathematics are discussed in a chapter of Manly P. Hall's ''The Secret Teachings of All Ages'' entitled "Pythagorean Mathematics".
Possibly the tyranny of Polycrates in Samos made it difficult for him to achieve his schemes there.
It is probable that from hence this name epode, i. e., "enchantment," came to be generally used.
Herodotus, Isocrates, and other early writers agree that Pythagoras was the son of Mnesarchus, born on a Greek island in the eastern Aegean called Samos.
The Egyptians are said to have taught him geometry, the Phoenicians arithmetic, the Chaldeans astronomy, the Magians the principles of religion and practical maxims for the conduct of life.
The early Archaic sculpture represents life in simple forms, and it seems that it was influenced by the earliest Greek natural philosophies.
Heraclides Ponticus reports the story that Pythagoras claimed that he had lived four previous lives that he could remember in detail.
There is a similar discrepancy as to the prohibition of fish and beans.
:"Twenty-two years Pythagoras remained in Egypt, pursuing closely his investigations, visiting every place famous for its teachings, every person celebrated for wisdom.
Some represent Pythagoras as forbidding all animal food, advocating a plant-based diet, and prohibiting consumption of beans.
However, because legend and obfuscation cloud his work even more than that of the other pre-Socratic philosophers, one can give only a tentative account of his teachings, and some have questioned whether he contributed much to mathematics or natural philosophy.
In the arts the Greeks searched some reality behind the appearances of things.
To prove his Phrygian existence he was taken to the temple of Hera, in Argos, and asked to point out the shield of the son of Panthoos, which he did without hesitation.''
During the 6th century BC, there was an evolution in the arts from the natural philosophies to the metaphysical theory of Pythagoras.
Both Iamblichus and Porphyry give detailed accounts of the organisation of the school, although the primary interest of both writers is not historical accuracy, but rather to present Pythagoras as a divine figure, sent by the gods to benefit humankind.
Brewer (1894), wrote (page 2293):
Some attribute it as a carefully constructed myth by followers of Plato over two centuries after the death of Pythagoras, mainly to bolster the case for Platonic meta-physics, which resonate well with the ideas they attributed to Pythagoras.
There was a general Greek belief that nature expresses itself in ideal forms, and it was represented by a type (εἶδος), which was mathematically calculated.
:"Pythagoras maintained that the soul has three vehicles: (1) the ethereal, which is luminous and celestial, in which the soul resides in a state of bliss in the stars; (2) the luminous, which suffers the punishment of sin after death; and (3) the terrestrial, which is the vehicle it occupies on this earth."
Pythagoras, having ascertained that the pitch of notes depends on the rapidity of vibrations, and also that the planets move at different rates of motion, concluded that the sounds made by their motion must vary according to their different rates of motion.
Pythagoras, or in a broader sense, the Pythagoreans, allegedly exercised an important influence on the work of Plato.
It must, however, be stressed that the way in which the Babylonians handled Pythagorean numbers implies that they knew that the principle was generally applicable, and knew some kind of proof, which has not yet been found in the (still largely unpublished) cuneiform sources.
There were ascetic practices (many of which had, perhaps, a symbolic meaning).
On the one hand there is the controversy over the primacy of the theoretical or practical life.
After his travels, Pythagoras moved (around 530 BC) to Croton, in Italy (Magna Graecia).
Their children are variously stated to have included a son, Telauges, and three daughters, Damo, Arignote, and Myia (who married to a famous wrestler, Milo of Croton).
According to Clement of Alexandria, Pythagoras was a disciple of Soches, the Egyptian archprophet, and Plato of Sechnuphis of Heliopolis.
The ancient Jews never pronounced the word Jehovah composed of the four sacred letters JHVH.
Other ancient writers asserted his visit to Egypt.
They took place every fourth year, the second of each Olympiad."
One of his past lives, as reported by Aulus Gellius, was as a beautiful courtesan.
Another belief attributed to Pythagoras was that of the "harmony of the spheres".
Memory was the most valued faculty.
However, it may be that Pythagoras was indeed responsible for discovering the properties of string length.
Brewer (1894), wrote (page 2732):
Leonid Zhmud (2006), identified two camps with the early Pythagoreans, the scientific ''mathematici'' and the religious ''acusmatici'', who engaged in politics.
Porphyry (233 – 305 CE) calls her Aristoclea (''Aristokleia''), and wrote:"He (Pythagoras) taught much else, which he claimed to have learned from Aristoclea at Delphi."
For that matter, there is no evidence that he worked on any mathematical or meta-mathematical problems.
:"And the inventions were so admirable, and so divinised by those who understood them, that the members used them as forms of oath: 'By him who handed to our generation the ''tetractys'', source of the roots of ever-flowing nature.'"
:"There were also two forms of philosophy, for the two genera of those that pursued it: the Acusmatici and the Mathematici.
According to Xenophanes, Pythagoras heard the cry of his dead friend in the bark of a dog.
The stories which were created were eagerly sought by the Neoplatonist writers who provide most of the details about Pythagoras, but who were uncritical concerning anything which related to the gods or which was considered divine.
that her treatise ''On Virtue'' contained the doctrine of the golden mean.
Pythagoreanism may had an effect on Freemasonry and Rosicrucianism, both of which were groups dedicated to the study of mathematics/geometry and logical reasoning as opposed to religious dogma.
Arignote wrote a ''Bacchica'' concerning the mysteries of Demeter, and a work called ''The Rites of Dionysus''.
:"Pythagoras taught that the sun is a movable sphere in the centre of the universe, and that all the planets revolve round it.
According to Thesleff, Stobaeus and Heeren, in ''On Piety'', Theano wrote that:
But temperance of all kinds seems to have been urged.
The adherents were bound by a vow to Pythagoras and each other, for the purpose of pursuing the religious and ascetic observances, and of studying his religious and philosophical theories.
According to Walter Burkert (1972, p.&nbsp;109)
Pythagoras's later fate is unknown and inconsistent among ancient sources.
The club was in practice at once "a philosophical school, a religious brotherhood, and a political association".
According to Reidwig and Rendall (2005), who cite Antiphon reports, the school name was ''Semicircle'', a place to discuss common interest topics among Samians.
While the theorem that now bears his name was known and previously utilised by the Babylonians and Indians, he, or his students, are often said to have constructed the first proof.
The very assertion poses a difficulty: How can things which do not exist even be conceived to generate?
According to R. M. Hare, this influence consists of three points: (1) The platonic Republic might be related to the idea of "a tightly organised community of like-minded thinkers", like the one established by Pythagoras in Croton.
(See Iamblichus Protreptics, symbol ix.)
The forces of Croton were headed by the Pythagorean Milo, and it is likely that the members of the brotherhood took a prominent part.
Many of the accomplishments credited to Pythagoras may actually have been accomplishments of his colleagues and successors.
:"The best of all legislators came from the school of Pythagoras, Charondas, the Catanean, Zaleucus and Timaratus as well as many others, who established laws with great benevolence and political science."
:"Mesmerism was practised by Pythagoras, if we may credit Iamblichus, who tells us that he tamed a savage Daunian bear by “stroking it gently with his hand;” subdued an eagle by the same means; and held absolute dominion over beasts and birds by 'the power of his voice,' or 'influence of his touch.'"
After the decisive victory by Croton, a proposal for establishing a more democratic constitution, was unsuccessfully resisted by the Pythagoreans.
The second book appears to have been an exposition of the nature of numbers, which in the Pythagorean theory are the essence and source of all things."
One story tells of the wrestler saving the philosopher's life when a roof was about to collapse.
Theano was also a philosopher, and said to have first been Pythagoras' pupil.
Rhys Carpenter says that he ratio 2:1 was the generative ratio of the Doric order, and in Hellenistic times an ordinary Doric colonnade, beats out a rhythm of notes."
The Greek sculptors and architects, tried to find the mathematical relation (canon), which would lead to the aesthetic perfection.
In Samos he may have instructed the small athlete Eurymenes to eat a certain amount of meat every day.
According to Sir William Smith, with the exception of a few remarks by Xenophanes, Heraclitus, Herodotus, Plato, Aristotle, and Isocrates, we are mainly dependent on Diogenes Laërtius, Porphyry, and Iamblichus for biographical details.
The word means 'I am,' or 'I exist' (Exod.
Considerable importance seems to have been attached to music and gymnastics in the daily exercises of the disciples.
Thus, it would appear that Arignote's quote above is not entirely in alignment with his model of the universe, since it is limited to Earth orbit.
When Pythagoras was asked, he said, ‘to observe the heavens,’ and he used to claim that he himself was an observer of nature, and it was for the sake of this that he had passed over into life.
:"The four letters, meaning the four which compose the name of Deity.
Of the various claims regarding his Greek teachers, Pherecydes of Syros is mentioned most often.
Many mathematical and scientific discoveries were attributed to Pythagoras, including his famous theorem, as well as discoveries in the field of music, astronomy, and medicine.
:"The Pythian games were held by the Greeks at Pytho, in Phocis, subsequently called Delphi.
It is also stated that they had common meals, resembling the Spartan system, at which they met in companies of ten.
Aristotle claimed that the philosophy of Plato closely followed the teachings of the Pythagoreans, and Cicero repeats this claim: ''Platonem ferunt didicisse Pythagorea omnia'' ("They say Plato learned all things Pythagorean").
This legend has since proven to be false by virtue of the fact that these ratios are only relevant to string length (such as the string of a monochord), and not to hammer weight.
This may have been due to the doctrine of metempsychosis.
His later admirers claimed that Pythagoras was so overburdened with public duties in Samos, because of the high estimation in which he was held by his fellow-citizens, that he moved to Croton.
Thus many myths were created – such as that Apollo was his father; that Pythagoras gleamed with a supernatural brightness; that he had a golden thigh; that Abaris came flying to him on a golden arrow; that he was seen in different places at the same time.
Ancient authorities note the similarities between the religious and ascetic peculiarities of Pythagoras with the Orphic or Cretan mysteries, or the Delphic oracle.
Milo was said to be an associate of Pythagoras.
:"The whole Pythagoric school produced appropriate songs, which they called exartysis or adaptations; synarmoge or elegance of manners and apaphe or contact, usefully conducting the dispositions of the soul to passions contrary to those which it before possessed.
Some made his training almost entirely Greek, others exclusively Egyptian and Oriental.
It seems that he was influenced by the theories of Pythagoras.
An attack was made upon them while assembled either in the house of Milo, or in some other meeting-place.
After twelve years he returned to Samos, being then about fifty-six years of age."
Pythagoras's name led him to be associated with Pythian Apollo; Aristippus explained his name by saying, "He spoke (''agor-'') the truth no less than did the Pythian (''Pyth-'')", and Iamblichus tells the story that the Pythia prophesied that his pregnant mother would give birth to a man supremely beautiful, wise, and beneficial to humankind.
No texts by Pythagoras are known to have survived, although forgeries under his name — a few of which remain extant — did circulate in antiquity.
According to Diogenes Laërtius, his followers established a select brotherhood or club (see below school) for the purpose of pursuing the religious and ascetic practices which developed.
He is often revered as a great mathematician and scientist and is best known for the Pythagorean theorem which bears his name.
His disciples Dicaearchus, Aristoxenus, and Heraclides Ponticus had written on the same subject.
Carl B. Boyer (1968), mentioned that "the Pythagorean school of thought was politically conservative and with a strict code of conduct."
Enough of Egypt was known to attract the curiosity of an inquiring Greek, and contact between Samos and other parts of Greece with Egypt is mentioned.
:"The history of Pythagoreanism was already, at that time, the laborious reconstruction of something lost and gone.
Other authorities contradict the statement.
And they say that when somebody asked Anaxagoras for what reason anyone might choose to come to be and be alive, he replied to the question by saying, ‘To observe the heavens and the stars in it, as well as moon and sun,’ since everything else at any rate is worth nothing."
:"Most obvious is the contradiction between Aristoxenus and Dicaearchus, regarding the catastrophe that overwhelmed the Pythagorean society.
The original forms were considered divine, and the forms of the later marble or stone elements indicate that there was an original wooden prototype.
On his arrival in Croton, he quickly attained extensive influence, and many people began to follow him.
Thus the planets and stars moved according to mathematical equations, which corresponded to musical notes and thus produced a symphony.
According to ''Diogenes Laërtius'', what was done and taught among the members was kept a secret.
Likewise it is the root of the continued existence of the gods and daimones, as well as that of divine men."
Some say that he perished in the temple with his disciples, others that he fled first to Tarentum, and that, being driven from there, he escaped to Metapontum, and there according to ''Diogenes Laërtius'', starved himself to death.
Hicks (1972) Pythagoras not only visited Egypt and learnt the Egyptian language (Antiphon in the book ''On Men of Outstanding Merit''), but also "journeyed among the Chaldaeans and Magi."
