For two decades, Qatar has had the highest per-capita carbon dioxide emissions in the world, at 49.1&nbsp;metric tons per person in 2008.
Education City is also home to a fully accredited international Baccalaureate school, Qatar Academy.
It has been suggested that Qatar is the earliest known site of shellfish dye production, owing to a Kassite purple dye industry which existed on the coast.
Alcohol consumption is partially legal in Qatar; some five-star luxury hotels are allowed to sell alcohol to their non-Muslim customers.
It is observed in remembrance of Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani's succession to the throne and his subsequent unification of the country's various tribes.
Monasteries were constructed and further settlements were founded during this era.
It is also currently a major funder of weapons for rebel groups in the Syrian civil war.
In the 1950s, oil began replacing pearling and fishing as Qatar's main sources of revenue.
Projections released by Qatar Statistical Authority indicates that the total population of Qatar could reach 2.8 million by 2020.
Qatar is a hereditary monarchy and its head of state is Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.
In January 2013, the Qatar Statistics Authority estimated the country's population at 1,903,447, of which 1,405,164 were males and 498,283 females.
Doha holds the WTA Premier tournament Qatar Ladies Open annually.
None of its 2 million residents live below the poverty line and less than 1% are unemployed.
In 2008 Qatar spent US$2.355 billion on military expenditures, 2.3% of the gross domestic product.
This culminated in the three aforementioned countries withdrawing their ambassadors from Qatar in March 2014.
Other for-profit universities have also established campuses in the city.
Despite the disapproval of local tribes, Al Thani continued supporting Ottoman rule.
All these industries use gas for fuel.
The highest point in Qatar is Qurayn Abu al Bawl at  in the Jebel Dukhan to the west, a range of low limestone outcroppings running north-south from Zikrit through Umm Bab to the southern border.
The Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and extended their area of jurisdiction to Qatar.
However, a FIFA inquiry into the bidding process in November 2014 cleared Qatar of any wrongdoing.
Legislative elections are expected to be held in 2016.
The history of Qatar's alliances provides insight into the basis of their policy.
In 2010, Qatar won the rights to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup, making it the first country in the Middle East to be selected to host the tournament.
Qatar Holding is the international investment arm of QIA.
To control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programs over the past several years.
Qatar's first demographic records date back to 1892, and were conducted by Ottoman governors in the region.
In 2008, Qatar established the Qatar Science & Technology Park in Education City to link those universities with industry.
This was done under an agreement reached between the Ruler of Qatar and the Government of the United Kingdom.
Sharia law is applied to laws pertaining to family law, inheritance, and several criminal acts (including adultery, robbery and murder).
Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Bahrain were engaged in a political struggle with Qatar, while Oman and Kuwait represent a non-aligned bloc within the GCC.
New draft legislation announced in early 2015 mandates that companies that fail to pay workers' wages on time could temporarily lose their ability to hire more employees.
Corporate law mandates that Qatari nationals must hold 51% of any venture in the Emirate.
The 2010 census recorded the total population at 1,699,435.
Qatar University, founded in 1973, is the country's oldest and largest institution of higher education.
However, large natural gas reserves have been located off Qatar's northeast coast.
Qatar commissioned international law firm DLA Piper to produce a report investigating the immigrant labour system.
As a result of the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, Qatar became a British protectorate on 3 November 1916.
Blasphemy is punishable by up to seven years in prison and proselytizing can be punished by up to 10 years in prison.
Over 100 stone-built houses, two mosques, and an Abbasid fort were constructed in Murwab during this period.
Qatari officials have also indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in "fan zones" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
Qatar also does not maintain wage standards for its immigrant labourers.
It is unknown if the sentences were implemented.
The population has tripled in the decade to 2011, up from just over 600,000 people in 2001, leaving Qatari nationals as less than 15% of the total population.
The results of the negotiations left the nation with a new-found sense of political identity, although it did not gain an official standing as a protectorate until 1916.
The Qatar Armed Forces are the military forces of Qatar.
According to the ITUC, the visa sponsorship system allows the exaction of forced labour by making it difficult for a migrant worker to leave an abusive employer or travel overseas without permission.
In addition, the forum has featured the Middle East Economic Future conference since 2006.
In 2006, a Filipino woman was sentenced to 100 lashes for adultery.
Human habitation of Qatar dates back to 50,000 years ago.
European football associations have also objected to the 2022 World Cup being held in Qatar for a variety of reasons, from the impact of warm temperatures on players' fitness, to the disruption it might cause in European domestic league calendars should the event be rescheduled to take place during winter.
However, when the caliphate's prosperity declined in Iraq, so too did it in Qatar.
Qatari Sign Language is the language of the deaf community.
The Jebel Dukhan area also contains Qatar's main onshore oil deposits, while the natural gas fields lie offshore, to the northwest of the peninsula.
By the time of their arrival, the Bani Khalid exercised weak authority over the peninsula, not withholding that the largest village was ruled by a distant kin of the Bani Khalid.
Although Qatar had the legal status of a dependency, there was a popular sentiment of resentment against the Al Khalifa.
After the introduction of the Japanese cultured pearl onto the world market in the 1920s and 1930s, Qatar's pearling industry crashed.
There are currently seven newspapers in circulation in Qatar, with four being published in Arabic and three being published in English.
Citizens are required to attend government-provided education from kindergarten through high school.
The country is a member state of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), having joined the organisation in 1961.
Every February, riders are racing on the roads across Qatar's flat land for six days.
Sheikh Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani was the founder of the State of Qatar.
In January 2011, the Asian Football Confederation's fifteenth Asian Cup was held in Qatar.
The resulting recessionary local business climate caused many firms to lay off expatriate staff.
Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye.
In 2014, Qatar's relations with Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates came to a boiling point over Qatar's support for the Muslim Brotherhood and extremist groups in Syria.
Qatar is mentioned in 13th-century Muslim scholar Yaqut al-Hamawi's book, ''Mu'jam Al-Buldan'', which alludes to the Qataris' fine striped woven cloaks and their skills in improvement and finishing of spears.
The number of people in Qatar fluctuates considerably depending on the season, since the country relies heavily on migrant labour.
In 2014, a Cybercrime Prevention Law was passed.
Criticism of the government, Emir and ruling family in the media is illegal.
In December 2011, however, restaurants on the Pearl were told to stop selling alcohol.
In addition to censuring Bahrain for its breach of agreement, the British protectorate asked to negotiate with a representative from Qatar, a role which Mohammed bin Thani was selected to fulfill.
English is commonly used as a second language, and a rising lingua franca, especially in commerce, to the extent that steps are being taken to try to preserve Arabic from English's encroachment.
On 5 May 1935, Abdullah signed another treaty with the British government which granted Qatar protection against internal and external threats.
After they withdrew to Al Bidda fortress, Jassim's advancing column besieged the fortress, resulting in the Ottomans' concession of defeat and agreement to relinquish their captives in return for the safe passage of Mehmed Pasha's cavalry to Hofuf by land.
A century later, Ptolemy produced the first known map to depict the peninsula, referring to it as ''Catara''.
Most Qatari citizens belong to the Salafi Muslim movement  of Sunni Islam, with about 20% percent adhering to Shia Islam.
Judicial corporal punishment is common in Qatar due to the Hanbali interpretation of Sharia Law.
Between 1760 and 1971, Qatar sought formal protection from the high transitory powers of the Ottomans, British, the Al-Khalifa's from Bahrain, the Arabians, and the Wahhabis from Saudi Arabia.
Some of the more common labor rights violations include beatings, withholding of payment, charging workers for benefits for which the employer is responsible, restrictions on freedom of movement (such as the confiscation of passports, travel documents, or exit permits), arbitrary detention, threats of legal action, and sexual assault.
The supreme chancellor has the exclusive power to appoint and remove the prime minister and cabinet ministers who, together, constitute the Council of Ministers, which is the supreme executive authority in the country.
Said bin Sultan of Muscat capitalized on this opportunity and raided the Wahhabi garrisons on the eastern coast, setting fire to the fort in Zubarah.
However, the bid has been embroiled in much controversy, including allegations of bribery and interference in the investigation of the alleged bribery.
Despite hosting this strategic military installation, Qatar is not always a strong Western ally.
Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the US, are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates.
The country enfranchised women at the same time as men in connection with the 1999 elections for a Central Municipal Council.
According to the U.S. State Department, expatriate workers from nations throughout Asia and parts of Africa voluntarily migrate to Qatar as low-skilled laborers or domestic servants, but some subsequently face conditions indicative of involuntary servitude.
Association football is the most popular sport in Qatar, both in terms of players and spectators.
Qatar was an early member of OPEC and a founding member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
Following the swearing in of Saud ibn Abd al-Aziz as crown prince of the Wahhabi in 1788, he moved to expand his empire eastward towards the Persian Gulf and Qatar.
In addition, two Canadian institutions, the College of the North Atlantic (headquarters in Newfoundland and Labrador) and the University of Calgary, have inaugurated campuses in Doha.
Under military and political pressure from the governor of the Ottoman Vilayet of Baghdad, Midhat Pasha, the ruling Al Thani tribe submitted to Ottoman rule in 1871.
Islamic polygamy is allowed in the country.
In Standard Arabic, the name is pronounced , while in the local dialect it is .
The State of Qatar entered into a general maritime truce with the United Kingdom in 1868.
Report prepared by local governors of Ottoman Empire in 1892 states that total income from pearl hunting in 1892 is 2,450,000 kran.
But the country's population has soared to 1.83 million by the end of 2012, showing 7.5 percent growth over the previous year.
Qatar's defence expenditures accounted for approximately 4.2% of gross national product in 1993.
Article 88 of Qatar's criminal code declares the punishment for adultery is 100 lashes.
Though football is the most popular sport, other team sports have experienced considerable success at senior level.
Kassite Babylonian material dating back to the second millennium BC found in Al Khor Islands attests to trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassites in modern-day Bahrain.
There are also two Mormon wards.
The music of Qatar is based on Bedouin poetry, song and dance.
There are also newspapers from India, Nepal and Sri Lanka with editions printed from Qatar.
Relations between the countries improved after the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) announced Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE returned their diplomats to Qatar.
The unemployment rate in June 2013 was 0.1%.
In 2014, Qatar launched a modesty campaign to remind tourists of the modest dress code.
The Ottoman government imposed reformist (Tanzimat) measures concerning taxation and land registration to fully integrate these areas into the empire.
They were scheduled to be held in the second half of 2013, but were postponed in June 2013, and may be delayed until 2016.
In 1825, the House of Thani was established with Sheikh Mohammed bin Thani as the first leader.
Sheikha Mozah Al Missned, the World Innovation Summit for Education (WISE) was established with the aim of transforming education through innovation.
The illiteracy rate in Qatar was 3.1% for males and 4.2% for females in 2012, the lowest in the Arab-speaking world, but 86th in the world.
The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development.
Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned Qatar General Petroleum Corporation (QGPC).
When the ambassadors withdrew, the GCC was reportedly on the verge of a crisis linked to the emergence of distinct political blocs with conflicting interests.
On that day, the United Kingdom signed a treaty with Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani to bring Qatar under its Trucial System of Administration.
In 2013, Qatar's total population was 1.8 million, of which 278,000 were Qatari citizens (13 percent) and 1.5 million were expatriates.
Active churches include the Mar Thoma Church, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, the Roman Catholic Our Lady of the Rosary, the Anglican Church of the Epiphany.
The term 'Catara' (or, alternatively, ''Cataraei'') was exclusively used until the 18th century, after which 'Katara' emerged as the most commonly recognized spelling.
Apostasy is a crime punishable by the death penalty in Qatar.
Qatari special forces have been trained by France and other Western countries, and are believed to possess considerable skill.
Following a peace agreement, Qatar pledged $1 billion in humanitarian aid to Gaza.
On 2 December 2010, Qatar won their bid to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup, despite never previously qualifying for the FIFA World Cup Finals.
Notable among these include the Darfur Agreement.
Qatar participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was deposed in the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings.
In 2013, Qatar's total population was 1.8 million: 278,000 Qatari citizens and 1.5 million expatriates.
Qatar is either a constitutional or an absolute monarchy ruled by the Al Thani family.
Critics claim that the changes could fail to address some labour rights issues.
This, and several other Qatari museums, like the Arab Museum of Modern Art, falls under the Qatar Museums Authority (''QMA'') which is led by Sheikha Al-Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the sister of the ruling Emir of the State of Qatar, and the prominent collector and art patron Sheikh Hassan bin Mohammed Al Thani.
Qatar's proved reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 250 trillion cubic feet (7,000&nbsp;km³).
David Cohen, the Under Secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence at the U.S. Treasury, said that Qatar is a "permissive jurisdiction for terrorist financing."
Speculation about the reason includes the government's desire to project a more pious image in advance of the country's first election of a royal advisory body and rumours of a financial dispute between the government and the resort's developers.
In addition, the Ottomans supported the Ottoman subject Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab who attempted to supplant Al Thani as kaymakam of Qatar in 1888.
Under the provisions of Qatar's sponsorship law, sponsors have the unilateral power to cancel workers' residency permits, deny workers' ability to change employers, report a worker as "absconded" to police authorities, and deny permission to leave the country.
Al Da'asa, a settlement located on the northeast coast of Qatar, is the most important Ubaid site in the country and is believed to have accommodated a small seasonal encampment.
Among the findings were 3,000,000 crushed snail shells and Kassite potsherds.
Courting Islamists from the Muslim Brotherhood to Salafist groups has served as a power amplifier for the country, as it believes since the beginning of the Arab Spring that these groups represented the wave of the future.
Ships voyaging from Basra to India and China would make stops in Qatar's ports during this period.
, it has investments around the world in Valentino, Siemens, Printemps, Harrods, The Shard, Barclays Bank, Heathrow Airport, Paris Saint-Germain F.C., Volkswagen Group, Royal Dutch Shell, Bank of America, Tiffany, Agricultural Bank of China, Sainsbury's, BlackBerry, and Santander Brasil.
, the holdings were valued at $100 billion in assets.
Qataris are also some of the highest consumers of water per capita per day, using around 400&nbsp;litres.
Laws and decrees proposed by the Council of Ministers are referred to the Advisory Council (Majilis Al Shura) for discussion after which they are submitted to the Emir for ratification.
TV broadcasting in Qatar was started in 1970.
Additional changes to labour laws include a provision guaranteeing that all workers' salaries are paid directly into their bank accounts and new restrictions on working outdoors in the hottest hours during the summer.
''The Guardian'', a British national daily newspaper, produced a short documentary named "Abuse and exploitation of migrant workers preparing emirate for 2022".
In turn, the Qatari government's spending plans had to be cut to match lower income.
Sharia law is the main source of Qatari legislation according to Qatar's Constitution.
The presence of a large Qatari Air Base, operated by the United States and several other UN nations, provides a guaranteed source of defence and national security.
Following Ottoman rule, Qatar became a British protectorate in the early 20th century until gaining independence in 1971.
In more recent times, Qatar has hosted peace talks between rival factions across the globe.
Archaeological remains from the 9th century suggest that Qatar's inhabitants used greater wealth to construct higher quality homes and public buildings.
The sphere of influence of the British Empire started diminishing after World War&nbsp;II, particularly after the Independence of India and Pakistan in 1947.
The United Kingdom and the Ottoman Empire accorded their recognition to Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani and his successors' right to rule over the whole of the Qatari Peninsula.
Much of Eastern Arabia was controlled by the Usfurids in 1253, but control of the region was seized by the prince of Ormus in 1320.
In 2012, Qatar retained its title of richest country in the world (according to per capita income) for the third time in a row, having first overtaken Luxembourg in 2010.
Before the discovery of oil, the economy of the Qatari region focused on fishing and pearl hunting.
According to article 46 of the press law "The Emir of the state of Qatar shall not be criticized and no statement can be attributed to him unless under a written permission from the manager of his office."
On 3 September 1971, those "special treaty arrangements" that were "inconsistent with full international responsibility as a sovereign and independent state" were terminated.
Muslims are not allowed to consume alcohol in Qatar and Muslims caught consuming alcohol are liable to flogging or deportation.
As part of its national development strategy, Qatar has outlined a 10-year strategic plan to improve the level of education.
As a result, it is the richest state per-capita in the world.
Furthermore, the government has launched educational outreach programs, such as Al-Bairaq.
Upon being made aware of advancements by the Egyptians on the western frontier in 1811, the Wahhabi amir reduced his garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah in order to re-position his troops.
Female tourists are advised not to wear leggings, miniskirts, sleeveless dresses and short or tight clothing in public.
The program encompasses the STEM fields and languages.
Oil reserves were first discovered in 1939.
The Qatar national under-20 team finished runners-up to West Germany in the 1981 FIFA World Youth Championship after a 4–0 defeat in the final.
Since 2002, Qatar has hosted the annual Tour of Qatar, a cycling race in six stages.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI, found that in 2010–14 Qatar was the 46th largest arms importer in the world.
Qatar plays an active role in the collective defence efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council; the other five members are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, the UAE, and Oman.
Sheikh Tamim has prioritized improving the domestic welfare of citizens, which includes establishing advanced healthcare and education systems, and expanding the country's infrastructure in preparation for the hosting of the 2022 World Cup.
Since July 1, 2008, Hamad Bin Abdulaziz Al-Kawari has been the Minister for Culture, Arts and Heritage of Qatar.
To the southeast lies the ''Khor al&nbsp;Adaid'' ("Inland Sea"), an area of rolling sand dunes surrounding an inlet of the Persian Gulf.
Effendi's troops came under heavy gunfire by a sizable troop of Qatari infantry and cavalry shortly after arriving to Al Wajbah.
Qatar's total population hit a record high of 2.46 million in November 2015, an increase of 8.5% from the previous year, far exceeding official projections.
It was the second time Qatar had hosted the tournament, with the other instance being the 1988 edition.
It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which was received by the convention on 18 May 2005.
OPEC quotas on crude oil production, the lower price for oil, and the generally unpromising outlook on international markets reduced oil earnings.
The cable suggested that Qatar's security service was "hesitant to act against known terrorists out of concern for appearing to be aligned with the U.S. and provoking reprisals".
Al Jazeera initially launched in 1996 as an Arabic news and current affairs satellite TV channel of the same name, but has since expanded into a global network of several speciality TV&nbsp;channels known collectively as the Al Jazeera Media Network.
Qatar's culture is similar to other countries in Eastern Arabia, being significantly influenced by Islam.
The Emir announced Qatar's plans to hold its first national legislative elections in 2013.
The Qatari cultural sector is being developed to enable the country to reach world recognition to contribute to the development of a country that comes mainly from its resources from the gas industry.
Mesopotamian artifacts originating from the Ubaid period (ca.
A strait in the Persian Gulf separates Qatar from the nearby island country of Bahrain, as well as sharing maritime borders with the United Arab Emirates and Iran.
In 1550, the inhabitants of Al-Hasa voluntarily submitted to the rule of the Ottomans, preferring them to the Portuguese.
The Doha Declaration is the basis of the peace process in Darfur and it has achieved significant gains on the ground for the African region.
Traditional dances in Doha are performed on Friday afternoons; one such dance is the Ardah, a stylized martial dance performed by two rows of dancers who are accompanied by an array of percussion instruments, including al-ras (a large drum whose leather is heated by an open fire), tambourines and cymbals with small drums.
Mehmed's demand that Jassim disband his troops and pledge his loyalty to the Ottomans was met with refusal.
The Gulf Center for Human Rights has stated that the law is a threat to freedom of speech and has called for certain articles of the law to be revoked.
The Al Khalifa were effectively returned to power thereafter.
The country has the highest per capita income in the world.
Due to billions of dollars in surpluses from the oil and gas industry, the Qatari government has directed investments into United States, Europe, and Asia Pacific.
For its size, Qatar wields disproportionate influence in the world, and has been identified as a middle power.
Having retained a negligible military presence in the area, the Ottomans were expelled by the Bani Khalid tribe in 1670.
In 224 AD, the Sasanian Empire gained control over the territories surrounding the Persian Gulf.
Whether it should be regarded as a  constitutional or an absolute monarchy is a matter of opinion.
This resulted in the maritime Qatari–Bahraini War of 1867–1868, in which Bahraini and Abu Dhabi forces sacked and looted Doha and Al Wakrah.
Qatar's National Development Strategy (2011–16) had estimated that the country's population would reach 1.78m in 2013, 1.81m in 2014, 1.84m in 2015 and 1.86m in 2016 – the yearly growth rate being merely 2.1 percent.
The region was not limited to Qatar; it also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa.
