Merchant guilds proliferated in all of the growing Chinese cities and often acquired great social and even political influence.
Qinghai was also put under direct control of the Qing court.
:This board was responsible for all matters concerning court protocol.
The early Qing military was rooted in the Eight Banners first developed by Nurhaci to organize Jurchen society beyond petty clan affiliations.
In drama, Kong Shangren's Kunqu opera ''The Peach Blossom Fan'', completed in 1699, portrayed the tragic downfall of the Ming dynasty in romantic terms.
Also due to the mountainous terrain, Sichuan and southern Shaanxi were retaken by the Green Standard Army in 1680, with Manchus participating only in logistics and provisions.
There was also another government institution called Imperial Household Department which was unique to the Qing dynasty.
Qing law explicitly stated that the traditional four occupational groups of scholars, farmers, artisans and merchants were "good", or having a status of commoners.
He was succeeded by his third son Xuanye, who reigned as the Kangxi Emperor.
Shanhai Pass is a pivotal pass of the Great Wall, located fifty miles northeast of Beijing, and for years its defenses kept the Manchus from directly raiding the Ming capital.
#Manchuria (Northeast China, later became provinces)
Below the province were prefectures (, ''fu'') operating under a prefect (, ''zhīfǔ''), followed by subprefectures under a subprefect.
In 1683, Qing forces received the surrender of Formosa (Taiwan) from Zheng Keshuang, grandson of Koxinga, who had conquered Taiwan from the Dutch colonists as a base against the Qing.
Han Chinese Banners were made up of Han Chinese who defected to the Qing up to 1644 and joined the Eight Banners, giving them social and legal privileges in addition to being acculturated to Manchu culture.
The Manchus sent Han Bannermen to fight against Koxinga's Ming loyalists in Fujian.
By 1681, the Qing government had established control over a ravaged southern China which took several decades to recover.
For much of Qing history, the government's main source of revenue came from taxation on landownership supplemented by official monopolies on salt, which was an essential household item, and tea.
By 1636, his son Hong Taiji began driving Ming forces out of Liaodong and declared a new dynasty, the Qing.
Before the conquest, the Manchu banner had been a "citizen" army whose members were farmers and herders obligated to provide military service in times of war.
Wu Sangui's forces were crushed by the Green Standard Army, made out of defected Ming soldiers.
Sun Yat-sen and other revolutionaries competed with reformers such as Liang Qichao and monarchists such as Kang Youwei to transform the Qing empire into a modern nation.
Qianlong's son, the Jiaqing Emperor (r. 1796–1820), eventually forced Heshen to commit suicide.
As the Jurchens had traditionally "elected" their leader through a council of nobles, the Qing state did not have in place a clear succession system until the reign of the Kangxi Emperor.
The turnover by Qianlong most heavily impacted Han banner garrisons stationed in the provinces while it less impacted Han Bannermen in Beijing, leaving a larger proportion of remaining Han Bannermen in Beijing than the provinces.
The Qing court sent forces to defeat Yaqub Beg and Xinjiang was reconquered, and then the political system of China proper was formally applied onto Xinjiang.
The last Ming ruler, the Chongzhen Emperor, committed suicide when the city fell, marking the official end of the dynasty.
"clear" or "pure").
The department's original purpose was to manage the internal affairs of the imperial family and the activities of the inner palace (in which tasks it largely replaced eunuchs), but it also played an important role in Qing relations with Tibet and Mongolia, engaged in trading activities (jade, ginseng, salt, furs, etc.
The order triggered strong resistance to Qing rule in Jiangnan and massive killing of Han Chinese.
With Zaifeng gone, Yuan Shikai and his Beiyang commanders effectively dominated Qing politics.
The population rose to some 400 million, but taxes and government revenues were fixed at a low rate, virtually guaranteeing eventual fiscal crisis.
These units were collectively called the New Army.
China continued to export tea, silk and manufactures, creating a large, favorable trade balance with the West.
Dzungaria was fully opened to Han migration by the Qianlong Emperor from the beginning.
After the Kangxi Emperor's death in the winter of 1722, his fourth son, Prince Yong (雍親王), became the Yongzheng Emperor.
On December 31, 1650, Dorgon suddenly died during a hunting expedition, marking the official start of the Shunzhi Emperor's personal rule.
For the Han Chinese, however, it was a humiliating reminder of Qing authority that challenged traditional Confucian values.
The Qianlong Emperor sponsored the largest collection of writings in Chinese history, the ''Siku Quanshu,'' completed in 1782.
The most prestigious form became the so-called Peking opera, though local and folk opera were also widely popular.
#Other Mongolian leagues – Alshaa khoshuu (League-level khoshuu), Ejine khoshuu, Ili khoshuu (in Xinjiang), Köke Nuur league; directly ruled areas: Dariganga (Special region designated as Emperor's pasture), Guihua Tümed, Chakhar, Hulunbuir
Population growth was stagnant for the first half of the 17th century due to civil wars and epidemics, but prosperity and internal stability gradually reversed this trend.
* Additional provinces in the late Qing dynasty
From the early Qing, the central government was characterized by a system of dual appointments by which each position in the central government had a Manchu and a Han Chinese assigned to it.
There were eight banners in all, differentiated by color.
As the years went by, the three feudal lords and their extensive territories became increasingly autonomous.
Beneath outward prosperity and imperial confidence, the later years of Qianlong's reign saw rampant corruption and neglect.
In 1669 Kangxi, through trickery, disarmed and imprisoned Oboi — a significant victory for a fifteen-year-old emperor over a wily politician and experienced commander.
On the other hand, slaves or bondservants, entertainers (including prostitutes and actors), and those low-level employees of government officials were the "mean people".
Under the Ming dynasty, adult men did not cut their hair but instead wore it in the form of a top-knot.
Relocating his court from Jianzhou to Liaodong provided Nurhachi access to more resources; it also brought him in close contact with the Khorchin Mongol domains on the plains of Mongolia.
His attempts to discourage Chinese women from foot binding, however, were unsuccessful.
A team made up entirely of Manchus drew up the Treaty of Kyakhta (1727) to solidify the diplomatic understanding with Russia.
These restrictions on domestic resource exploration, as well as on foreign trade, are held by some scholars as a cause of the Great Divergence, by which the Western world overtook China economically.
Han Bannermen's status was decreased from that point on with Manchu Banners gaining higher status.
Similarly, Sun Yat-sen's government wanted a republican constitutional reform, both aiming for the benefit of China's economy and populace.
Nurhachi's son Hong Taiji expanded the system to include mirrored Mongol and Han Banners.
The emperors equated the lands of the Qing state (including present day Northeast China, Xinjiang, Mongolia, Tibet and other areas) as "China" in both the Chinese and Manchu languages, defining China as a multi-ethnic state, and rejecting the idea that "China" only meant Han areas.
Nevertheless, Qianlong used Literary Inquisition to silence opposition.
The only remaining part of the empire that had arable farmland was Manchuria, where the provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang had been walled off as a Manchu homeland.
Pu Songling brought the short story form to a new level in his ''Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio'', published in the mid-18th century, and Shen Fu demonstrated the charm of the informal memoir in ''Six Chapters of a Floating Life'', written in the early 19th century but published only in 1877.
Although by this time the once-united Mongol nation had long since fragmented into individual and hostile tribes, these tribes still presented a serious security threat to the Ming borders.
Emperors could (and did) overturn judgements of lower courts from time to time.
It emerged in the 1720s under the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor as a body charged with handling Qing military campaigns against the Mongols, but it soon took over other military and administrative duties and served to centralize authority under the crown.
In reaction, the two other generals decided to petition for their own retirements to test Kangxi's resolve, thinking that he would not risk offending them.
The emperor decreed for the first time that Han Chinese civilians were forbidden to settle.
Calligraphy and painting  remained a central interest to both court painters and scholar-gentry who considered the Four Arts part of their cultural identity and social standing.
The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a lively field of research, being studied (along with the poetry of the Ming dynasty) for its association with Chinese opera, developmental trends of Classical Chinese poetry, the transition to a greater role for vernacular language, and for poetry by women in Chinese culture.
Manchu rulers and Han Chinese scholar-official elites gradually came to terms with each other.
This brought an end to over 2,000 years of Imperial China and began an extended period of instability of warlord factionalism.
The first seven years of the Shunzhi Emperor's reign were dominated by the regent prince Dorgon.
The Qing divided the positions into civil and military positions, each having nine grades or ranks, each subdivided into a and b categories.
This led to a change from Han majority to a Manchu majority within the Banner system,  and previous Han Bannermen garrisons in southern China such as at Fuzhou, Zhenjiang, Guangzhou, were replaced by Manchu Bannermen in the purge, which started in 1754.
By the end of the 18th century the population had risen to 300 million from approximately 150 million during the late Ming dynasty.
These Han generals achieved victory over the rebels.
Together these military reforms enabled Hong Taiji to resoundingly defeat Ming forces in a series of battles from 1640 to 1642 for the territories of Songshan and Jinzhou.
It was also in charge of the "honours list".
Although this banquet was probably never common, it reflected an appreciation by Han Chinese for Manchu culinary customs.
To prevent a repeat of Dorgon's dictatorial monopolizing of power during the regency, the Shunzhi Emperor, on his deathbed, hastily appointed four senior cabinet ministers to govern on behalf of his young son.
Galdan was eventually killed in the Dzungar–Qing War.
Second, the Yongying corps were financed through provincial coffers and were led by regional commanders, weakening central government's grip on the whole country.
A system of monitoring grain prices eliminated severe shortages, and enabled the price of rice to rise slowly and smoothly through the 18th century.
These territories were also under supervision of a central government institution called Lifan Yuan.
The Kong's title of Duke was maintained by the Qing.
This was followed by the creation of the first two Han Banners in 1637 (increasing to eight in 1642).
Scholar-bureaucrats, including Lin Zexu and Wei Yuan, developed a school of practical statecraft which rooted bureaucratic reform and restructuring in classical philosophy.
Normally the Manchu Bannermen acted only as reserve forces or in the rear and were used predominantly for quick strikes with maximum impact, so as to minimize ethnic Manchu losses; instead, the Qing used defected Han Chinese troops to fight as the vanguard during the entire conquest of China.
Zheng Keshuang was awarded the title "Duke Haicheng" (海澄公) and was inducted into the Han Chinese Plain Red Banner of the Eight Banners when he moved to Beijing.
Together they formed the ruling council of the Manchu nation as well as high command of the army.
400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories besides 200,000 Bannermen.
The unorganized political and economic systems combined with a widespread criticism of Chinese culture led to questioning and doubt about the future.
), managed textile factories in the Jiangnan region, and even published books.
#Viceroy of Liangjiangin charge of Jiangsu, Jiangxi, and Anhui
Wary of the power of wealthy merchants, Qing rulers limited their trading licenses and usually refused them permission to open new mines, except in poor areas.
To the Manchus, this policy was a test of loyalty and an aid in distinguishing friend from foe.
The chief of these was Wu Sangui, who was given the provinces of Yunnan and Guizhou, while generals Shang Kexi and Geng Jingzhong were given Guangdong and Fujian provinces respectively.
The first was the bureaucratic institutions and the neo-Confucian culture which they adopted from earlier dynasties.
Qianlong allowed Han Chinese peasants suffering from drought to move into Manchuria despite him issuing edicts in favor of banning them from 1740–1776.
The vastness of China's territory meant that there were only enough banner troops to garrison key cities forming the backbone of a defense network that relied heavily on surrendered Ming soldiers.
The Manchus are sometimes mistaken for a nomadic people, which they were not.
Han Bannermen held high status and power in the early Qing period, especially immediately after the conquest during Shunzhi and Kangxi's reign where they dominated Governor-Generalships and Governorships across China at the expense of both Manchu Bannermen and Han civilians.
The accusation of individuals began with the emperor's own interpretation of the true meaning of the corresponding words.
A compromise candidate in the person of Hong Taiji's five-year-old son, Fulin, was installed as the Shunzhi Emperor, with Dorgon as regent and de facto leader of the Manchu nation.
Losing the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895 was a watershed.
China also began suffering from mounting overpopulation during this period.
This choice was due to the rocky terrain, which favoured infantry troops over cavalry, to the desire to keep Bannermen in reserve, and, again, to the belief that Han troops were better at fighting other Han people.
Because of his own political insecurity, Dorgon followed Hong Taiji's example by ruling in the name of the emperor at the expense of rival Manchu princes, many of whom he demoted or imprisoned under one pretext or another.
The Grand Councillors served as a sort of privy council to the emperor.
Poetry continued as a mark of the cultivated gentleman, but women wrote in larger and larger numbers and poets came from all walks of life.
The mass discharge was known as the .
They were commanded by hereditary Manchu princes descended from Nurhachi's immediate family, known informally as the "Iron cap princes".
Missionaries including Tomás Pereira, Martino Martini, Johann Adam Schall von Bell, Ferdinand Verbiest and Antoine Thomas held significant positions as military weapons experts, mathematicians, cartographers, astronomers and advisers to the emperor.
However Qing rule saw an massively increasing amount of Han Chinese both illegally and legally streaming into Manchuria and settling down to cultivate land as Manchu landlords desired Han Chinese peasants to rent on their land and grow grain, most Han Chinese migrants were not evicted as they went over the Great Wall and Willow Palisade, during the eighteenth century Han Chinese farmed 500,000 hectares of privately owned land in Manchuria and 203,583 hectares of lands which were part of coutrier stations, noble estates, and Banner lands, in garrisons and towns in Manchuria Han Chinese made up 80% of the population.
The resulting inflow of silver expanded the money supply, facilitating the growth of competitive and stable markets.
In 1723 he outlawed Christianity and expelled Christian missionaries, though some were allowed to remain in the capital.
To redress the technological and numerical disparity, Hong Taiji in 1634 created his own artillery corps, the ''ujen chooha'', Chinese:  from among his existing Han troops who cast their own cannons in the European design with the help of defector Chinese metallurgists.
Faced with the stripping of their powers, Wu Sangui, later joined by Geng Zhongming and by Shang Kexi's son Shang Zhixin, felt they had no choice but to revolt.
With a total of over 3,400 books, 79,000 chapters, and 36,304 volumes, the ''Siku Quanshu'' is the largest collection of books in Chinese history.
This institution was established to supervise the administration of Tibet and the Mongol lands.
By the end of the 17th century, China was at its greatest height of confidence and political control since the Ming dynasty.
To counter these inadequacies and keep the population in line, the Qing government maintained a very harsh penal code towards the Han populace, but it was no more severe than previous Chinese dynasties.
The Qing showed that the Manchus valued military skills in propaganda targeted towards the Ming military to get them to defect to the Qing, since the Ming civilian political system discriminated against the military.
Through these and other measures Hong Taiji was able to centralize power unto the office of the Khan, which in the long run prevented the Jurchen federation from fragmenting after his death.
:The literal translation of the Chinese word ''hu'' (户) is "household".
The ''Classic of Filial Piety'' (''Xiaojing'') held that "a person's body and hair, being gifts from one's parents, are not to be damaged."
The government broadened land ownership by returning land that had been sold to large landowners in the late Ming period by families unable to pay the land tax.
Finally, in 1673, Shang Kexi petitioned Kangxi for permission to retire to his hometown in Liaodong province and nominated his son as his successor.
Two months into Shunzhi's personal rule, however, Dorgon was not only stripped of his titles, but his corpse was disinterred and mutilated.
Kangxi's reign is also celebrated as the beginning of an era known as the "High Qing", during which the dynasty reached the zenith of its social, economic and military power.
Qianlong personally led military campaigns near Xinjiang and Mongolia, putting down revolts and uprisings in Sichuan and parts of southern China while expanding control over Tibet.
Kangxi accordingly assigned generals Sun Sike, Wang Jinbao, and Zhao Liangdong to crush the rebels, since he thought that Han Chinese were superior to Bannermen at battling other Han people .
Han Chinese Generals who defected to the Manchu were often given women from the Imperial Aisin Gioro family in marriage while the ordinary soldiers who defected were often given non-royal Manchu women as wives.
It was established before the fall of the Ming, but it became mature only after 1661, following the death of the Shunzhi Emperor and the accession of his son, the Kangxi Emperor.
Qianlong propagated the image of himself as Buddhist sage rulers, patrons of Tibetan Buddhism.
In exchange for territory and trading rights, the Qing would have a free hand dealing with the situation in Mongolia.
The provincial bureaucracy continued the Yuan and Ming practice of three parallel lines, civil, military, and censorate, or surveillance.
Soon all available farmland was used up, forcing peasants to work ever-smaller and more intensely worked plots.
Fairness of treatment was also an issue under the system of control practised by the Manchu government over the Han Chinese majority.
Corruption set in, rebels tested government legitimacy, and ruling elites did not change their mindsets in the face of changes in the world system.
In spite of these disasters, in the Tongzhi Restoration of the 1860s, Han Chinese elites rallied to the defense of the Confucian order and the Qing rulers.
They maintained their Ming era organization and were led by a mix of Banner and Green Standard officers.
The introduction of new crops from the Americas such as the potato and peanut allowed an improved food supply as well, so that the total population of China during the 18th century ballooned from 100 million to 300 million people.
Qianlong directed most of his ire at those Han Bannermen descended from defectors who joined the Qing after the Qing passed through the Great Wall at Shanhai Pass in 1644, deeming their ancestors as traitors to the Ming and therefore untrustworthy, while retaining Han Bannermen who were descended from defectors who joined the Qing before 1644 in Liaodong and marched through Shanhai pass, also known as those who "followed the Dragon through the pass" ().
The Manchu Han Imperial Feast originated at the court.
As the empire expanded, it took over administrative responsibility of all minority ethnic groups living in and around the empire, including early contacts with Russia — then seen as a tribute nation.
After taking the position of Prime Minister and creating his own cabinet, Yuan Shikai went as far as to ask for the removal of Zaifeng from the regency.
However the process of conquering the rest of China took another seventeen years of battling Ming loyalists, pretenders and rebels.
The relationship of trust was however lost in the later Chinese Rites controversy.
#Viceroy of Liangguangin charge of Guangdong and Guangxi
By the mid-18th century, the Qing had successfully put outer regions such as Inner and Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang under its control.
There were originally 18 provinces, all of which in China proper, but later this number was increased to 22, with Manchuria and Xinjiang being divided or turned into provinces.
Wu Sangui may have been influenced by Li Zicheng's mistreatment of his family and other wealthy and cultured officials; it was said that Li also took Wu's concubine Chen Yuanyuan for himself.
Two years later, Nurhachi announced the "Seven Grievances" and openly renounced the sovereignty of Ming overlordship in order to complete the unification of those Jurchen tribes still allied with the Ming emperor.
The dramatic rise in population was due to several reasons, including the long period of peace and stability in the 18th century and the import of new crops China received from the Americas, including peanuts, sweet potatoes and maize.
Khanate of Kokand  were forced to submit as protectorate and pay tribute to the Qing dynasty in China between 1774 and 1798.
The Shunzhi Emperor was invested as the "Son of Heaven" on October 30.
However, Qing policy changed with the establishment of Xinjiang province in 1884.
The Manchu name ''daicing'', which sounds like a phonetic rendering of ''Dà Qīng'' or ''Dai Ching'', may in fact have been derived from a Mongolian word that means "warrior".
Xinjiang, also known as Chinese Turkestan, was subdivided into the regions north and south of the Tian Shan mountains, also known today as Dzungaria and Tarim Basin respectively, but the post of Ili General was established in 1762 to exercise unified military and administrative jurisdiction over both regions.
The yellow, bordered yellow, and white banners were known as the "Upper Three Banners" and were under the direct command of the emperor.
Han defectors played a massive role in the Qing conquest of China.
The young emperor granted his retirement, but denied the heredity of his fief.
To extend and consolidate the dynasty's control in Central Asia, the Kangxi Emperor personally led a series of military campaigns against the Dzungars in Outer Mongolia.
After the invasion by the Soviet Union, Manchukuo collapsed in 1945.
The second major source of stability was the Central Asian aspect of their Manchu identity which allowed them to appeal to Mongol, Tibetan and Uighur constituents.
Military appointments ranged from being a field marshal or chamberlain of the imperial bodyguard to a third class sergeant, corporal or a first or second class private.
The remaining Banners were known as the "Lower Five Banners."
#Northern and southern circuits of Tian Shan (later became Xinjiang province) – sometimes the small semi-autonomous Kumul Khanate and Turfan Khanate are placed into an "Eastern Circuit"
:The Board of Punishments handled all legal matters, including the supervision of various law courts and prisons.
Li Chengdong, a Han Chinese general who had served the Ming but surrendered to the Qing, ordered his Han troops to carry out three separate massacres in the city of Jiading within a month, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths.
Nurhaci had treated Han in Liaodong differently according to how much grain they had, those with less than 5 to 7 sin were treated like chattel while those with more than that amount were rewarded with property.
The painting of the early years of the dynasty included such painters as the orthodox Four Wangs and the individualists Bada Shanren (1626–1705) and Shitao (1641–1707).
In the words of one recent historian, he was "severe, suspicious, and jealous, but extremely capable and resourceful," and in the words of another, turned out to be an "early modern state-maker of the first order."
Manchu Generals and Bannermen were initially put to shame by the better performance of the Han Chinese Green Standard Army.
The leading contenders for power at this time were Hong Taiji's oldest son Hooge and Hong Taiji' half brother Dorgon.
It was defected Ming Han Chinese armies which conquered southern China for the Qing.
At the peak of the rebels' fortunes, they extended their control as far north as the Yangtze River, nearly establishing a divided China.
This is a typical example of Nurhachi's initiatives that eventually became official Qing government policy.
Wasteland was reclaimed by Han Chinese squatters in addition to other Han who rented land from Manchu landlords.
The eighteen provinces are also known as "China proper".
The Japanese victory occurred a mere three decades after the Meiji Restoration set a feudal Japan on course to emulate the Western nations in their economic and technological achievements.
Some of Nurhaci's other important contributions include ordering the creation of a written Manchu script based on the Mongolian after the earlier Jurchen script was forgotten which had been derived from Khitan and Chinese and the creation of the civil and military administrative system which eventually evolved into the Eight Banners, the defining element of Manchu identity and the foundation for transforming the loosely knitted Jurchen tribes into a nation.
Even though Oboi's loyalty was never an issue, his personal arrogance and political conservatism led him into an escalating conflict with the young emperor.
After the re-opening of the southeast coast, which had been closed in the late 17th century, foreign trade was quickly re-established, and was expanding at 4% per annum throughout the latter part of the 18th century.
Even though the Board of Rites and Lifan Yuan performed some duties of a foreign office, they fell short of developing into a professional foreign service.
The lowest unit was the county, overseen by a county magistrate.
To promote ethnic harmony, a 1648 decree from Shunzhi allowed Han Chinese civilian men to marry Manchu women from the Banners with the permission of the Board of Revenue if they were registered daughters of officials or commoners or the permission of their banner company captain if they were unregistered commoners, it was only later in the dynasty that these policies allowing intermarriage were done away with.
In 1644, peasant rebels led by Li Zicheng conquered the Ming capital Beijing.
The water imagery of the new name may also have had Buddhist overtones of perspicacity and enlightenment and connections with the Bodhisattva Manjusri.
The administration of the Grand Canal was made more efficient, and transport opened to private merchants.
Being a classically educated official, he took his blueprint for the Xiang Army from the Ming general Qi Jiguang, who, because of the weakness of regular Ming troops, had decided to form his own "private" army to repel raiding Japanese pirates in the mid-16th century.
There were too few ethnic Manchus to conquer China, so they gained strength by defeating and absorbing Mongols, but more importantly, adding Han Chinese to the Eight Banners.
In addition, many surrounding countries, such as Korea (Joseon dynasty), Vietnam frequently paid tribute to China during much of this period.
Nurhachi's unbroken series of military successes came to an end in January 1626 when he was defeated by Yuan Chonghuan while laying siege to Ningyuan.
Literature grew to new heights in the Qing period.
Then, after capturing Beijing, instead of sacking the city as the rebels had done, Dorgon insisted, over the protests of other Manchu princes, on making it the dynastic capital and reappointing most Ming officials.
213 Han Chinese Banner companies, and 527 companies of Mongol and Manchu Banners were mobilized by the Qing during the revolt.
By the end of the nineteenth century, all elements of national artistic and cultural life had recognized and begun to come to terms with world culture as found in the West and Japan.
The population doubled during the 18th century.
The increased revenues were to be used for "money to nourish honesty" among local officials and for local irrigation, schools, roads, and charity.
In fact, his father had trusted him with delicate political issues and discussed state policy with him.
