At the rise of meeting, the witnesses, including the youngest children, are asked to sign the wedding certificate as a record.
Memorial meetings can last over an hour, particularly if many people attend.
The term ''First Day School'' is commonly used, for what is called by most churches ''Sunday School.''
An annual meeting each January, is hosted by a different Regional Meeting over a seven-year cycle, with a Standing Committee each July or August.
The three chief ones are Friends General Conference (FGC), Friends United Meeting (FUM), and Evangelical Friends Church International (EFCI).
Moses Brown broke away from his three brothers, became an abolitionist, and converted to Christian Quakerism.
She was one of the four executed Quakers known as the Boston martyrs.
If the couple seems ready, the marriage is recommended to the meeting.
The first organization for non-theist Friends was the ''Humanistic Society of Friends'', founded in Los Angeles in 1939.
However, the dominant discourse of Protestantism viewed the Quakers as a blasphemous challenge to social and political order, leading to official persecution in England and Wales under the Quaker Act 1662 and the Conventicle Act 1664.
In many Friends meetings, the couple meet with a clearness committee prior to the wedding.
After someone has spoken, it is generally considered good etiquette to allow a few minutes pass in silence before further vocal ministry is given.
Monthly meetings are often part of a regional group called a ''quarterly meeting'', which is usually part of an even larger group called a ''yearly meeting;'' with the adjectives "quarterly" and "yearly" referring specifically to the frequency of ''meetings for worship with a concern for business''.
Friends gather together in "expectant waiting upon God" to experience his still small voice leading them from within.
Also particularly within the relatively prosperous Quaker communities of the eastern United States, the focus on the child and "holy conversation" gave women unusual community power, although they were largely excluded from the market economy.
During World War I and World War II, Friends' opposition to war was put to the test.
They have 1,591 members in 28 meetings across the Republic of Ireland, and in Northern Ireland.
In some business meetings, Friends wait for the clerk to acknowledge them before speaking.
Memorial services give everyone a chance to remember the lost individual in their own way, comforting those present, and re-affirming the love of the people in the wider community.
Evangelical Friends regard the Bible as the infallible and self-authenticating Word of God.
Early Quakerism tolerated boisterous behavior that challenged conventional etiquette, but by 1700, they continued to encourage spontaneity of expression but they no longer supported disruptive and unruly behavior.
The highest concentration of Quakers is in Africa.
The Friends' School is found in Hobart.
The movement arose from the Legatine-Arians and other dissenting Protestant groups, breaking away from the established Church of England.
This religious practice continues among ''Conservative'' Friends and ''Liberal Friends'' (e.g.
Today, while there are some Friends who hold holiness beliefs within most yearly meetings, it is the predominant theological view of Central Yearly Meeting of Friends, (founded in 1926 specifically to promote holiness theology), and the Holiness Mission of the Bolivian Evangelical Friends Church (founded by missionaries from that meeting in 1919, the largest group of Friends in Bolivia).
London Yearly Meeting of Friends abolished the acknowledging and recording of Recorded Ministers in 1924.
They were referred to by their opponents as ''Hicksites'' and by others, and sometimes themselves, as ''orthodox''.
This religious witness is rooted in their immediate experience of God and verified by the Bible, especially in Jesus Christ's life and teachings.
Linton had worshipped God with the Delhi Worship Group in India (an independent meeting not affiliated to any yearly meeting or wider Quaker group) with Christians, Muslims and Hindus worshipping together.
Conservative Friends (also known as "Wilburites" after their founder, John Wilbur), share some of the beliefs of George Fox and the Early Friends.
As in a ''meeting for worship'', each member is expected to listen to God, and, if led by Him, stand up and contribute.
They include those with evangelical, holiness, liberal, and traditional Quaker understandings of Christianity.
In programmed traditions, local congregations are often referred to as "Friends Churches."
Friends meet in Rwanda and Burundi, as well as new work beginning in North Africa.
They emphasized a personal and direct religious experience of Christ, acquired through both direct religious experience and the reading and studying of the Bible.
He published a book titled ''A Beacon to the Society of Friends'' in 1835, which strongly argued that the inward light could not exist alongside a religious belief in salvation by the atonement of Christ.
In the U.S., Conservative Friends are part of three small Quaker Yearly Meetings in Ohio, North Carolina and Iowa; Ohio Yearly Meeting (Conservative) is generally considered to be the most Bible-centred of the three Conservative Friends Yearly Meetings, retaining Christian Quakers who use the plain language, who continue to wear plain dress, and who live in small villages or rural areas; more than the Conservative Friends from the other two Conservative Friends Yearly Meetings.
Evangelical Friends regard Jesus Christ as their personal Lord and Saviour, and have similar religious beliefs to other evangelical Christians.
Birmingham, UK had a strong Quaker community during the war (see Conscientious Objectors in Birmingham in WW1).
Around 11% of Friends practice ''waiting worship'', or ''unprogrammed worship'' (more commonly known today as ''Meeting for Worship''), where the order of service is not planned in advance, is predominantly silent, and may include unprepared vocal ministry from those present.
Other countries with over 1,000 Quakers are Burundi, Bolivia, Cambodia, Canada, Guatemala, Ireland, Indonesia, Jamaica, Rwanda, Taiwan, Tanzania, Uganda, United Kingdom, and the United States.
Most Liberal Quaker Yearly Meetings publish a Faith and Practice, a book with a range of religious experiences of what it means to be a Friend in that Yearly Meeting.
The Meetinghouse, which had served as a place of worship for the Friends in Ramallah could no longer be used as such and the Annex could no longer be used for community outreach.
After several years, the schism became largely resolved, testifying to the resistance of some within the Quaker community, and to the radical spiritual role of women that George Fox and Margaret Fell had encouraged.
When this happens, Quakers believe that the spirit of God is speaking through the speaker.
Despite the label, Quaker "Universalists" are not necessarily Christian Universalists, embracing the doctrine of universal reconciliation.
Holiness Friends are heavily influenced by the Holiness movement, in particular John Wesley's doctrine of Christian perfection, also called "entire sanctification."
In all three groups, most member organizations, though not necessarily members are from the United States.
Most groups of Quakers meet for regular worship.
This style of worship is the norm in Great Britain, Ireland, the continent of Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Southern Africa, Canada, and parts of the United States (particularly yearly meetings associated with Friends General Conference and Beanite Quakerism)—constituting about 11% of Quakers.
In 2007, total membership of these Yearly Meetings was around 1642, making them around 0.4% of the world family of Quakers.
Some yearly meetings belong to larger organizations to help maintain order and communication within the Society.
Many Quaker Yearly Meetings, are also members of Friends World Committee for Consultation, an international fellowship of Yearly Meetings from different Quaker religious traditions.
Within some Friends Churches in the Evangelical Friends Church, in particular in Rwanda, Burundi, and parts of the U.S., an adult believer's baptism by immersion in water, is optional.
Ireland Yearly Meeting is unprogrammed and is more conservative than Britain Yearly Meeting.
When a participant feels led to speak, he or she will stand and share a spoken message of ("vocal ministry") in front of others.
These Friends were led by John Wilbur who was expelled from his yearly meeting in 1842.
Most US states expect the marriage document to be signed by a single officiant (a priest, rabbi, minister, Justice of the Peace, etc.).
''Orthodox'' Friends became more evangelical during the 19th century and were influenced by the Second Great Awakening.
Friends often focus on trying to hear God.
Some ''orthodox'' Quakers in America disliked the move towards evangelical Christianity and saw it as a dilution of Friends' traditional orthodox Christian belief in being inwardly led by the Holy Spirit.
Others active in proselytizing included Mary Penington, Mary Mollineux and Barbara Blaugdone.
They often adopt non-propositional Biblical hermeneutics, such as believing that the Bible is an anthology of human authors' beliefs and feelings about God, rather than Holy Writ, and that multiple interpretations of the Scriptures are acceptable.
Quakers also described themselves using terms such as true Christianity, Saints, Children of the Light, and Friends of the Truth, reflecting terms used in the New Testament by members of the early Christian church.
The Australia Yearly Meeting published This We Can Say: Australian Quaker Life, Faith and Thought, in 2003.
A local congregation in the unprogrammed tradition is called a ''meeting'', or a ''monthly meeting'' (e.g., ''Smalltown Meeting'' or ''Smalltown Monthly Meeting'').
Quakers routinely modify the document to allow three or four Friends to sign as the officiant.
Friends United Meeting was originally known as "Five Years Meeting."
Today Kenya is, by far, the country with the most Quakers.
Philadelphia Yearly Meeting Hicksites tended to be agrarian and poorer than the more urban, wealthier, Orthodox Quakers.
Some of these Quakers joined the Plymouth Brethren Church.
Friends meet every Sunday morning at 10:30&nbsp;a.m. for unprogrammed Meeting for Worship.
However, some young Friends such as John Wilhelm Rowntree and Edward Grubb supported Darwin's theories adopting a doctrine of progressive revelation with evolutionary ideas.
During and after the English Civil War (1642–1651) many dissenting Christian groups emerged, including the Seekers and others.
Following a move to Great Britain, he founded the Quaker Universalist Fellowship in 1978.
The first missionaries were sent to Benares (Varanasi), in India in 1866.
Many meetings where Liberal Friends predominate abolished this religious practice.
These practices are often referred to as the ''testimony against times and seasons.''
Isaac Crewdson was a Recorded Minister in Manchester, UK.
The formal name "Religious Society of Friends" dates from this period and was probably derived from the appellations "Friends of the Light" and "Friends of the Truth".
The Bible remains central to most Liberal Friends' worship, and almost all meetings make it available in the meeting house, (often on a table in the centre of the room), which attendees may read privately or publicly during worship.
Some Friends also hold "Semi-Programmed" Worship, which brings programmed elements such as hymns and readings into an otherwise unprogrammed worship service.
Quakerism gained a considerable following in England and Wales, and the numbers increased to a peak of 60,000 in England and Wales by 1680 (1.15% of the population of England and Wales).
In 1947, the Association of Evangelical Friends was formed, with triennial meetings until 1970.
The Yearly Meeting published Quaker Faith and Practice in Aotearoa New Zealand, in 2003.
The Quaker Yearly Meetings supporting the religious beliefs of Joseph John Gurney were known as ''Gurneyite'' yearly meetings.
In Rhode Island, 36 governors in the first 100 years were Quakers.
Following this he travelled around England, the Netherlands, and Barbados preaching and teaching with the aim of converting new adherents to his faith.
Friends meetings in Africa and Latin America were generally started by Orthodox Friends from programmed elements of the Society, therefore most African and Latin American Friends worship in a programmed style.
Beginning in the 1880s, some Friends began using outward sacraments in their Sunday services, first in Evangelical Friends Church—Eastern Region (then known as Ohio Yearly Meeting Damascus).
Anyone present may speak if they feel led to do so.
With the restructuring of the family and household came new roles for women; Fox and Fell viewed the Quaker mother as essential to developing "holy conversation" in her children and husband.
The plain calendar emerged in the 17th century in England in the Puritan movement, but became closely identified with Friends by the end of the 1650s, and was commonly employed into the 20th century.
In 1661, King Charles II forbade Massachusetts from executing anyone for professing Quakerism.
Many Wilburites see themselves as the Quakers whose beliefs are most true to original Quaker doctrine, arguing that the majority of Friends "broke away" from the Wilburite Quakers in the 19th and 20th centuries (rather than the Wilburites being the "breakaway" sect).
For example, George Fox wrote a number of open letters to Jews and Muslims, in which he encouraged them to turn to Jesus Christ as the only path to salvation (e.g.
They were considered heretics because of their insistence on individual obedience to the Inner Light.
However, prior to the American Revolution, it was fairly common for Friends in British America to own slaves.
He had a revelation that ''there is one, even, Christ Jesus, who can speak to thy condition'', and became convinced that it was possible to have a direct experience of Christ without the aid of an ordained clergy.
A small minority of Gurneyite Friends practice entirely unprogrammed worship.
Most "monthly meetings" meet for worship at least once a week; some meetings have several worship meetings during the week.
They formed a separate body of Friends called Fritchley General Meeting, which remained distinct and separate from London Yearly Meeting until 1968.
In Great Britain, Quakers keep a separate record of the union and notify the General Register Office.
Thus, after a while, the Richmond Declaration of faith was adopted by nearly all of the Gurneyite yearly meetings.
They make up 49% of the total number of Quakers worldwide.
Many British Quakers were conscripted into the Non-Combatant Corps during both world wars.
Christian Quakerism spread within Kenya and to Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi, and Rwanda.
Traditionally, Recorded Ministers were recognised for their particular gift in vocal ministry.
Elias Hicks' religious views were claimed to be universalist and to contradict Quakers' historical orthodox Christian beliefs and practices.
FUM is the largest.
The Five Years Meeting of Friends reaffirmed their loyalty to the Richmond Declaration of faith in 1912, but specifically stated that it was not to constitute a Christian creed.
There are two main types of worship worldwide: programmed worship and waiting worship.
Later his views spread to the US where the Quaker Universalist Fellowship was founded in 1983.
In 2012, there were 196,800 adult Quakers in Africa.
This does not use names of calendar units derived from the names of pagan deities.
This Quaker Renaissance movement was particularly influenced by John Wilhelm Rowntree, Edward Grubb, and Rufus Jones.
This group was founded in the late 1970s by John Linton.
While Liberal Friends recognize the potential of these outward forms for awakening experiences of the Inward Light of Christ, they are not part of their worship, and are believed unnecessary to authentic Christian spirituality.
A paid pastor may be responsible for pastoral care.
West Jersey and Pennsylvania were established by affluent Quaker William Penn in 1676 and 1682 respectively, with Pennsylvania as an American commonwealth run under Quaker principles.
Many Friends became conscientious objectors and some formed the Friends Ambulance Unit with the aim of ''co-operating with others to build up a new world rather than fighting to destroy the old'', and the American Friends Service Committee.
In places where Evangelical Friends are engaged in missionary work, such as in Africa, Latin America, and Asia, adult baptism by immersion in water, is carried out.
Friends gather for worship and offer remembrances about the deceased.
In 1948 the buildings and grounds became the home to many Palestinian refugees.
Although Quakers share how they relate to God and the world, mirroring Christian ethical codes, for example the Sermon on the Mount or the Sermon on the Plain, Friends argue that they feel personally moved by God rather than following an ethical code.
'''Quakers''' (or '''Friends''') are members of a historically  Christian group of religious movements generally known as the '''Religious Society of Friends'''.
They seek to understand God's will for the religious community, via the actions of the Holy Spirit within the meeting.
In the same survey 86.9% said that they believed in God.
This peace endured almost a century, until the Penn's Creek Massacre of 1755.
In the United States, Joseph Moore taught the theory of evolution at the Quaker Earlham College as early as 1861 and was probably one of the first teachers in the Midwest to do so.
Britain Yearly Meeting is a member of Churches Together in Britain and Ireland, and Friends General Conference is a member of the World Council of Churches.
Modern meetings are often limited to an hour, ending when two people (usually the elders) exchange the sign of peace by handshake.
They were imprisoned in terrible conditions, then deported.
So serious was the deterioration of the meetinghouse that by the middle 1990s it was impossible to use the building at all.
In Australia, the  Friends' School, Hobart was founded in 1887 and has grown to become the largest Quaker school in the world.
Everyone is welcome to attend.
Some of these early Quaker ministers were women.
Holiness Friends argue that early Friends, including George Fox's message of ''perfection'', is the same as holiness.
Other programmed and unprogrammed worship groups are not affiliated with any yearly meeting.
The views of the Universalists provoked controversy between themselves and Christian Quakers within Britain Yearly Meeting, and within Friends General Conference, during the 1980s.
Numbers dwindled, dropping to 19,800 in England and Wales by 1800 (0.21% of population), and 13,859 by 1860 (0.07% of population).
One example of a reversal in sentiment about slavery  took place in the life of Moses Brown, one of four Rhode Island brothers who, in 1764, organized and funded the tragic and fateful voyage of the slave ship named ''Sally''.
By the time of the American Revolution few Friends owned slaves.
These Friends have views similar to other post-Christian non-theists in other churches such as the Sea of Faith within the Anglican church.
It is thought that George Fox was referring to  or .
Traditional Quaker memorial services are held as a form of worship and are known as memorial meetings.
Usually, a separate document containing their vows and the signatures of all present is kept by the couple, and often displayed prominently in their home.
Children are often welcomed into the meeting at their first attendance.
Within Britain Yearly Meeting, membership is acquired through a process of peer review, where a potential member is visited by several members who present a report to the other members of the monthly meeting before a decision is reached.
Some parents apply for membership on behalf of their children, while others allow the child to decide whether to become a member when they are ready, and older in age.
Evangelical Friends Central Europe Yearly Meeting has 4,306 members across six nations, including Albania, Hungary and Romania.
Early colonial Quakers also established communities and meeting houses in North Carolina and Maryland, after fleeing persecution by the Anglician  Church in Virginia.
This doctrine states that loving God and humanity totally, as exemplified by Christ, enables believers to rid themselves of voluntary sin.
Christian Friends held Revival meetings in America and became involved in the Holiness movement of churches.
, EFCI claims to represent more than 140,000 Friends, equalling roughly 39% of the total number of Friends worldwide.
Later in America they founded Wilmington Friends School (1748), Haverford College (1833), Guilford College (1837), Pickering College (1842), Earlham College (1847), Swarthmore College (1864), Wilmington College (Ohio) (1870), Penn College (Iowa) (1873), Bryn Mawr College (1885), Friends Pacific Academy (now George Fox University) (1885), Cleveland Bible College (now Malone University) (1892), Friends University (1898), Training School for Christian Workers (now Azusa Pacific University) (1899) Whittier College (1901), and Friends Bible College (now Barclay College) (1917).
This was relaxed after the Declaration of Indulgence (1687–1688) and stopped under the Act of Toleration 1689.
The Quakers, especially the ones known as the Valiant Sixty, attempted to convert others to their understanding of Christianity, travelling both throughout Great Britain and overseas, preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.
The majority of other Christian groups recognize Friends among their fellow-Christians.
Another study of British Quakers, found that of the 727 members of the Religious Society of Friends who completed the survey, 75.1% said that they consider themselves to be Christian; 17.6% did not consider themselves Christian; and 7.3% of the members either did not answer or circled both answers.
They were imprisoned and banished by the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
They believe this is the gathering of believers who ''wait upon the Lord'' to discover God's will, believing that they are not making their own decisions.
During the 19th Century, Quakers such as Levi Coffin played a major role in helping enslaved people escape through the  Underground Railroad.
Around 79% of Quakers worldwide belong to the "evangelical" and "programmed" branches of Quakerism – these Quakers worship in services with singing and a prepared message from the Bible, coordinated by a pastor.
The North American branch of Evangelical Friends Church International is a member church of the National Association of Evangelicals.
Some theologians classify Friends' religious witness into categories—known by some Friends as ''testimonies.''
Worship of this kind is celebrated by about 89% of Friends worldwide.
British Friends became involved with the Higher Life movement, with Robert Wilson from Cockermouth meeting founding the Keswick Convention.
In some Quaker religious traditions, the coffin or ashes are not present.
Small groups of Conservative Friends meet in Ripley and Greenwich in England, and Arbroath in Scotland, who follow Ohio Yearly Meeting's Book of Discipline.
Although the total number of Quakers is around 360,000 worldwide, Quaker influence is concentrated in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kaimosi, Kenya; Newberg, Oregon; Greenleaf, Idaho; Whittier, California; Richmond, Indiana; Friendswood, Texas; Birmingham, England; Ramallah, Palestine, and Greensboro, North Carolina.
Gurneyite Friends place more emphasis on the authority of the Bible as the direct Word of God than on personal and direct experience of God in their lives.
Quakerism started in England and Wales, and quickly spread to Ireland, the Netherlands, Barbados and North America.
Quakers today are organized into independent and regional, national bodies called Yearly Meetings, which have often split from one another because of Christian doctrinal differences.
Small unprogrammed meetings exist also in Botswana, Ghana, Lesotho, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
The religious event is sometimes called a Quaker meeting for worship or sometimes called a Friends church service.
A ''meeting for worship for the solemnisation of marriage'' in an unprogrammed Friends meeting is similar to any other unprogrammed Meeting for Worship.
Through the women's meeting, women oversaw domestic and community life, including marriage.
One modern view of Quakerism at this time was that the relationship with Christ was encouraged through spiritualization of human relations, and "the redefinition of the Quakers as a holy tribe, 'the family and household of God'".
Due in part to the emphasis on the immediate guidance of the Holy Spirit, Quaker doctrines have only sometimes been codified as statements of faith, confessions or theological texts; those that do exist include the ''Letter to the Governor of Barbados'' (Fox, 1671), ''An Apology for the True Christian Divinity'' (Barclay, 1678), ''A Catechism and Confession of Faith'' (Barclay, 1690), ''The Testimony of the Society of Friends on the Continent of America'' (adopted jointly by all orthodox yearly meetings in U.S., 1830), the ''Richmond Declaration of Faith'' (adopted by Five Years Meeting, 1887), and ''Essential Truths'' (Jones and Wood, adopted by Five Years Meeting, 1922).
From the beginning, Quaker women, most notably Margaret Fell, played an important role in defining Quakerism.
Small groups of Friends in Belgium, Luxembourg, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Palestine, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland, attend meetings for worship there.
In common with other Christian denominations derived from the 16th century Puritanism, many Friends do not observe religious festivals (e.g.
Gurneyite Friends (aka Friends United Meeting Friends), are the modern-day followers of the Evangelical Quaker theology which was first proclaimed by Joseph John Gurney, a 19th-century British Friend.
The Hicksite–Orthodox split arose out of both ideological and socio-economic tensions.
Friends United Meeting (the international organization of Gurneyite yearly meetings) is a member of the National Council of Churches and the World Council of Churches, which are pan-Christian organizations, which include Protestant, Orthodox, and Anglican churches.
They believe that the purpose of the Evangelical Friends Church is to evangelise the unsaved people of the world, to spiritually transform them through God's love, and through social service to others.
Rocky Mountain Yearly Meeting Friends put their faith in action through living their lives by the following principles: prayer, personal integrity, stewardship (which includes giving away minimum of 10% income and refraining from lotteries), marriage and family (lifelong commitment), regard for mind and body (refraining from certain amusements, propriety and modesty of dress, abstinence from alcohol, tobacco and drugs), peace and non-violence (including refusing to participate in war), abortion (opposition to abortion, practical ministry to women with unwanted pregnancy and promotion of adoption), human sexuality, the Christian and state (look to God for authority, not the government), capital punishment (find alternatives), human equality, women in ministry (recognising women and men have an equal part to play in ministry).
Together with Margaret Fell, the wife of Thomas Fell, who was the vice-chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and a pre-eminent judge, Fox developed new conceptions of family and community that emphasized "holy conversation": speech and behavior that reflected piety, faith, and love.
This practice differs from most other Quaker branches of the Religious Society of Friends.
As in the wider society, there is a wide diversity of views on the issue of same-sex marriage, and Friends have varying views on the topic.
There may be hymns, a sermon, Bible readings, joint prayers and a period of silent worship.
This religious tradition arose among Friends in the United States, in the 19th century, and in response to the many converts to Christian Quakerism during the national spiritual revival of the time.
In 1870, Richard Price Hallowell argued that the logical extension of Christian Quakerism is a universal Church, which ''demands a religion which embraces Jew, Pagan and Christian, and which cannot be limited by the dogmas of one or the other''.
Evangelical Friends who are members of Evangelical Friends International, are mainly located in the U.S., Central America, and Asia.
A further blow to the Friends and the wider Palestinian community was the high level of emigration brought on by the economic situation and the hardships arising from the continuing Israeli military occupation.
Both children and adults participate in ongoing religious education which emphasises orthodox Christian teaching from the Bible, and in relationship to both orthodox Christian Quaker history and Quaker testimonies.
Quakers such as Hannah Whitall Smith and Robert Pearsall Smith became speakers in the religious movement and introduced Quaker phrases and practices to it.
Many eventually collectively became the Five Years Meeting and then Friends United Meeting, although London Yearly Meeting, which had been strongly ''Gurneyite'' in the nineteenth century, did not join either of these groups.
