The foundations of quantum mechanics were established during the first half of the 20th century by Max Planck, Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Louis de Broglie, Arthur Compton, Albert Einstein, Erwin Schrödinger, Max Born, John von Neumann, Paul Dirac, Enrico Fermi, Wolfgang Pauli, Max von Laue, Freeman Dyson, David Hilbert, Wilhelm Wien, Satyendra Nath Bose, Arnold Sommerfeld, and others.
Albert Einstein, himself one of the founders of quantum theory, did not accept some of the more philosophical or metaphysical interpretations of quantum mechanics, such as rejection of determinism and of causality.
The first complete quantum field theory, quantum electrodynamics, provides a fully quantum description of the electromagnetic interaction.
He also held that underlying quantum mechanics there should be a theory that thoroughly and directly expresses the rule against action at a distance; in other words, he insisted on the principle of locality.
For example, consider a free particle.
Entanglement, as demonstrated in Bell-type experiments, does not, however, violate causality, since no transfer of information happens.
In 1838, Michael Faraday discovered cathode rays.
This also has the effect of turning a position eigenstate (which can be thought of as an infinitely sharp wave packet) into a broadened wave packet that no longer represents a (definite, certain) position eigenstate.
Examples of observables include energy, position, momentum, and angular momentum.
The granularity is a direct consequence of the quantization.
On the other hand, if the particle is in an eigenstate of momentum, then its position is completely unknown.
* principle of uncertainty
He considered that quantum mechanics was a currently valid but not a permanently definitive theory for quantum phenomena.
If the operator's spectrum is discrete, the observable can attain only those discrete eigenvalues.
Quantum field theories for the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force have also been developed.
* wave–particle duality
These networks of loops are called spin networks.
Furthermore, most of the calculations performed in modern computational chemistry rely on quantum mechanics.
He won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for this work.
A more distant goal is the development of quantum computers, which are expected to perform certain computational tasks exponentially faster than classical computers.
Classical kinematics also allows the description of a process analogous to the initial and final condition description used by quantum mechanics.
For instance, the well-known model of the quantum harmonic oscillator uses an explicitly non-relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of the oscillator, and is thus a quantum version of the classical harmonic oscillator.
It has also given insight into the workings of many different biological systems, including smell receptors and protein structures.
Many systems that are treated dynamically in classical mechanics are described by such "static" wave functions.
The Schrödinger equation, applied to the aforementioned example of the free particle, predicts that the center of a wave packet will move through space at a constant velocity (like a classical particle with no forces acting on it).
The weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force were unified, in their quantized forms, into a single quantum field theory (known as electroweak theory), by the physicists Abdus Salam, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg.
In the decades after the formulation of quantum mechanics, the question of what constitutes a "measurement" has been extensively studied.
Quantum theory also provides accurate descriptions for many previously unexplained phenomena, such as black-body radiation and the stability of the orbitals of electrons in atoms.
LQG is an attempt to merge and adapt standard quantum mechanics and standard general relativity.
Einstein further developed this idea to show that an electromagnetic wave such as light could also be described as a particle (later called the photon), with a discrete quantum of energy that was dependent on its frequency.
However, in 1905 Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quantum hypothesis realistically and used it to explain the photoelectric effect, in which shining light on certain materials can eject electrons from the material.
As it turns out, analytic solutions of the Schrödinger equation are available for only a very small number of relatively simple model Hamiltonians, of which the quantum harmonic oscillator, the particle in a box, the dihydrogen cation, and the hydrogen atom are the most important representatives.
In the important method known as perturbation theory, one uses the analytic result for a simple quantum mechanical model to generate a result for a more complicated model that is related to the simpler model by (for one example) the addition of a weak potential energy.
This abstract mathematical object allows for the calculation of probabilities of outcomes of concrete experiments.
The time evolution of wave functions is deterministic in the sense that - given a wave function at an ''initial'' time - it makes a definite prediction of what the wave function will be at any ''later'' time.
The Copenhagen interpretation — due largely to Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg — remains most widely accepted amongst physicists, some 75 years after its enunciation.
Usually, a system will not be in an eigenstate of the observable (particle) we are interested in.
In many aspects modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant.
Alain Aspect's initial experiments in 1982, and many subsequent experiments since, have definitively verified quantum entanglement.
In the formalism of quantum mechanics, the state of a system at a given time is described by a complex wave function, also referred to as state vector in a complex vector space.
Thus there are two kinds of processes in quantum mechanics: stationary and transitional.
In Niels Bohr's mature view, quantum mechanical phenomena are required to be experiments, with complete descriptions of all the devices for the system, preparative, intermediary, and finally measuring.
A simpler approach, one that has been employed since the inception of quantum mechanics, is to treat charged particles as quantum mechanical objects being acted on by a classical electromagnetic field.
Many prominent physicists, including Stephen Hawking, have labored for many years in the attempt to discover a theory underlying ''everything''.
Quantum mechanics does not admit a completely precise description, in terms of both position and momentum, of an initial condition or "state" (in the classical sense of the word) that would support a precisely deterministic and causal prediction of a final condition.
The descriptions are in macroscopic terms, expressed in ordinary language, supplemented with the concepts of classical mechanics.
One of those searching for a coherent TOE is Edward Witten, a theoretical physicist who formulated the M-theory, which is an attempt at describing the supersymmetrical based string theory.
The main output of the theory is a physical picture of space where space is granular.
He is famously quoted as saying, in response to this aspect, "God does not play with dice".
An alternative formulation of quantum mechanics is Feynman's path integral formulation, in which a quantum-mechanical amplitude is considered as a sum over all possible classical and non-classical paths between the initial and final states.
Ludwig Boltzmann independently arrived at this result by considerations of Maxwell's equations.
Scientific inquiry into the wave nature of light began in the 17th and 18th centuries, when scientists such as Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens and Leonhard Euler proposed a wave theory of light based on experimental observations.
The full apparatus of quantum field theory is often unnecessary for describing electrodynamic systems.
Naturally, these probabilities will depend on the quantum state at the "instant" of the measurement.
Therefore, LQG predicts that not just matter, but also space itself, has an atomic structure.
The probability distribution of an observable in a given state can be found by computing the spectral decomposition of the corresponding operator.
In the everyday world, it is natural and intuitive to think of everything (every observable) as being in an eigenstate.
Instead, it makes a prediction using a probability distribution; that is, it describes the probability of obtaining the possible outcomes from measuring an observable.
approaching absolute zero) at which quantum behavior may manifest itself macroscopically.
whereas a single particle exhibits a degree of randomness, in systems incorporating millions of particles averaging takes over and, at the high energy limit, the statistical probability of random behaviour approaches zero.
Flash memory chips found in USB drives use quantum tunneling to erase their memory cells.
In order to prove that the wave function did not collapse, one would have to bring ''all'' these particles back and measure them again, together with the system that was originally measured.
In quantum mechanics, it refers to a discrete unit assigned to certain physical quantities such as the energy of an atom at rest (see Figure 1).
Its negative resistance behavior can only be understood with quantum mechanics: As the confined state moves close to Fermi level, tunnel current increases.
Newer interpretations of quantum mechanics have been formulated that do away with the concept of "wave function collapse" (see, for example, the relative state interpretation).
Especially since Werner Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932 for the creation of quantum mechanics, the role of Max Born in the development of QM was overlooked until the 1954 Nobel award.
It allows completely precise description of an instantaneous state by a value in phase space, the Cartesian product of configuration and momentum spaces.
These are known as eigenstates of the observable ("eigen" can be translated from German as meaning "inherent" or "characteristic").
This experiment played a major role in the general acceptance of the wave theory of light.
* quantum entanglement
In the matrix formulation, the instantaneous state of a quantum system encodes the probabilities of its measurable properties, or "observables".
This TOE would combine not only the different models of subatomic physics, but also derive the four fundamental forces of nature - the strong force, electromagnetism, the weak force, and gravity - from a single force or phenomenon.
Some wave functions produce probability distributions that are constant, or independent of time—such as when in a stationary state of constant energy, time vanishes in the absolute square of the wave function.
It has the same nature of the granularity of the photons in the quantum theory of electromagnetism or the discrete levels of the energy of the atoms.
Another popular theory is Loop quantum gravity (LQG), a theory first proposed by Carlo Rovelli that describes the quantum properties of gravity.
The quantum field theory of the strong nuclear force is called quantum chromodynamics, and describes the interactions of subnuclear particles such as quarks and gluons.
Not only is this completely impractical, but even if one ''could'' theoretically do this, it would have to destroy any evidence that the original measurement took place (including the physicist's memory).
Probability clouds are approximate (but better than the Bohr model) whereby electron location is given by a probability function, the wave function eigenvalue, such that the probability is the squared modulus of the complex amplitude, or quantum state nuclear attraction.
A time-evolution simulation can be seen here.
This is called an eigenstate of position—or, stated in mathematical terms, a ''generalized position eigenstate (eigendistribution)''.
In the summer of 1925, Bohr and Heisenberg published results that closed the old quantum theory.
More precisely, space can be viewed as an extremely fine fabric or network "woven" of finite loops.
According to Steven Weinberg, "There is now in my opinion no entirely satisfactory interpretation of quantum mechanics."
Hamiltonian dynamics can be used for this.
This gives rise to the "wave-like" behavior of quantum states.
This is one of the most difficult aspects of quantum systems to understand.
This framework was unable to explain the stability of atoms.
In this sense, advocated by Bohr in his mature writings, a quantum phenomenon is a process, a passage from initial to final condition, not an instantaneous "state" in the classical sense of that word.
It is also a theory of quantum space and quantum time, because in general relativity the geometry of spacetime is a manifestation of gravity.
Many modern electronic devices are designed using quantum mechanics.
The rules of quantum mechanics are fundamental.
The Copenhagen interpretation of Niels Bohr became widely accepted.
In every case for which a quantum kinematic description is needed, there is always a compelling reason for this restriction of kinematic precision.
Planck's hypothesis that energy is radiated and absorbed in discrete "quanta" (or energy elements) precisely matched the observed patterns of black-body radiation.
Quantum  mechanics is vital to understanding and designing such electronic devices.
As it moves away, current decreases.
In short, the quantum-mechanical atomic model has succeeded spectacularly in the realm where classical mechanics and electromagnetism falter.
While quantum mechanics was constructed to describe the world of the very small, it is also needed to explain some macroscopic phenomena such as superconductors,  and superfluids.
It even exists in the simple light switch.
The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is known as quantum chemistry.
Everett's interpretation is perfectly consistent with John Bell's experiments and makes them intuitively understandable.
Quantum tunneling is central to physical phenomena involved in superlattices.
Many electronic devices operate under effect of Quantum tunneling.
For example, it allows one to compute the probability of finding an electron in a particular region around the nucleus at a particular time.
So is the closely related phenomenon of superconductivity, the frictionless flow of an electron gas in a conducting material (an electric current) at sufficiently low temperatures.
In some cases it appears that there are potentially several spatially distinct pathways or trajectories by which a particle might pass from initial to final condition.
By 1930, quantum mechanics had been further unified and formalized by the work of David Hilbert, Paul Dirac and John von Neumann with greater emphasis on measurement, the statistical nature of our knowledge of reality, and philosophical speculation about the 'observer'.
It has proven difficult to construct quantum models of gravity, the remaining fundamental force.
where ''h'' is Planck's constant.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is represented by the statement that the operators corresponding to certain observables do not commute.
Wave functions change as time progresses.
In other words, classical mechanics is simply a quantum mechanics of large systems.
Following Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem (reported 1859), Albert Einstein offered a quantum-based theory to explain the photoelectric effect (1905, reported 1887).
This is the quantum-mechanical counterpart of the action principle in classical mechanics.
There exist several techniques for generating approximate solutions, however.
Quantum interference involves adding together ''probability amplitudes'', whereas classical "waves" infer that there is an adding together of ''intensities''.
Planck cautiously insisted that this was simply an aspect of the ''processes'' of absorption and emission of radiation and had nothing to do with the ''physical reality'' of the radiation itself.
For instance, electrons may be considered (to a certain probability) to be located somewhere within a given region of space, but with their exact positions unknown.
Since classical formulas are much simpler and easier to compute than quantum formulas, classical approximations are used and preferred when the system is large enough to render the effects of quantum mechanics insignificant.
The particle in a one-dimensional potential energy box is the most mathematically simple example where restraints lead to the quantization of energy levels.
Even the helium atom—which contains just one more electron than does the hydrogen atom—has defied all attempts at a fully analytic treatment.
However, one ''can'' measure the position (alone) of a moving free particle, creating an eigenstate of position with a wave function that is very large (a Dirac delta) at a particular position ''x'', and zero everywhere else.
An example of such a reason is that for a particle to be experimentally found in a definite position, it must be held motionless; for it to be experimentally found to have a definite momentum, it must have free motion; these two are logically incompatible.
Another application is the light emitting diode which is a high-efficiency source of light.
The infinite potential walls of the box determine the values of ''C'', ''D'', and ''k'' at  and  where  must be zero.
* While the seemingly "exotic" behavior of matter posited by quantum mechanics and relativity theory become more apparent when dealing with particles of extremely small size or velocities approaching the speed of light, the laws of classical, often considered "Newtonian", physics remain accurate in predicting the behavior of the vast majority of "large" objects (on the order of the size of large molecules or bigger) at velocities much smaller than the velocity of light.
In arguing for his views, he produced a series of objections, the most famous of which has become known as the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox.
If the physical nature of an atom were solely described by classical mechanics, electrons would not ''orbit'' the nucleus, since orbiting electrons emit radiation (due to circular motion) and would eventually collide with the nucleus due to this loss of energy.
For example, the stability of bulk matter (consisting of atoms and molecules which would quickly collapse under electric forces alone), the rigidity of solids, and the mechanical, thermal, chemical, optical and magnetic properties of matter are all results of the interaction of electric charges under the rules of quantum mechanics.
M-theory posits that our apparent 4-dimensional spacetime is, in reality, actually an 11-dimensional spacetime containing 10 spatial dimensions and 1 time dimension, although 7 of the spatial dimensions are - at lower energies - completely "compactified" (or infinitely curved) and not readily amenable to measurement or probing.
Observables can be either continuous (e.g., the position of a particle) or discrete (e.g., the energy of an electron bound to a hydrogen atom).
With the differential operator defined by
Each observable is represented by a maximally Hermitian (precisely: by a self-adjoint) linear operator acting on the state space.
The Uncertainty Principle states that both the position and the momentum cannot simultaneously be measured with complete precision.
The possible results of a measurement are the eigenvalues of the operator representing the observable—which explains the choice of ''Hermitian'' operators, for which all the eigenvalues are real.
Only the initial and final conditions are definite, and, as stated in the foregoing paragraph, they are defined only as precisely as allowed by the configuration space description or its equivalent.
Early attempts to merge quantum mechanics with special relativity involved the replacement of the Schrödinger equation with a covariant equation such as the Klein–Gordon equation or the Dirac equation.
in which ''C'' cannot be zero as this would conflict with the Born interpretation.
The laws of classical mechanics thus follow from the laws of quantum mechanics as a statistical average at the limit of large systems or large quantum numbers.
''All'' of the possible consistent states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus (including the observer) are present in a ''real'' physical - not just formally mathematical, as in other interpretations - quantum superposition.
Current predictions state that at around 1014 GeV the three aforementioned forces are fused into a single unified field.
In quantum mechanics, there is wave–particle duality, so the properties of the particle can be described as the properties of a wave.
Consequently, resolving the inconsistencies between both theories has been a major goal of 20th and 21st century physics.
This approach is particularly important in the field of quantum chaos.
Gravity is negligible in many areas of particle physics, so that unification between general relativity and quantum mechanics is not an urgent issue in those particular applications.
Quantum entanglement forms the basis of quantum cryptography, which is proposed for use in high-security commercial applications in banking and government.
Instead of using classical bits, quantum computers use qubits, which can be in superpositions of states.
It is probable, but not certain, that it will be near ''x''0, where the amplitude of the wave function is large.
Quantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features of our universe.
Instead, electrons remain in an uncertain, non-deterministic, ''smeared'', probabilistic wave–particle orbital about the nucleus, defying the traditional assumptions of classical mechanics and electromagnetism.
In other words, the possible states are points in the projective space of a Hilbert space, usually called the complex projective space.
For microscopic bodies, the extension of the system is much smaller than the coherence length, which gives rise to long-range entanglement and other nonlocal phenomena characteristic of quantum systems.
Some fundamental aspects of the theory are still actively studied.
Out of deference to their particle-like behavior in certain processes and measurements, light quanta came to be called photons (1926).
For a transition, they are different.
Thus, the entire field of quantum physics emerged, leading to its wider acceptance at the Fifth Solvay Conference in 1927.
John Bell showed that this "EPR" paradox led to experimentally testable differences between quantum mechanics and theories that rely on added hidden variables.
The inaccessibility can be understood as follows: once a measurement is done, the measured system becomes entangled with ''both'' the physicist who measured it ''and'' a huge number of other particles, some of which are photons flying away at the speed of light towards the other end of the universe.
Planck scale energy).
For many experiments, it is possible to think of the initial and final conditions of the system as being a particle.
Therefore, since , ''kL'' must be an integer multiple of π,
In 1803, Thomas Young, an English polymath, performed the famous double-slit experiment that he later described in a paper titled ''On the nature of light and colours''.
If the particle is in an eigenstate of position, then its momentum is completely unknown.
The Schrödinger equation acts on the ''entire'' probability amplitude, not merely its absolute value.
There are, however, certain states that are associated with a definite value of a particular observable.
After the measurement is performed, having obtained some result ''x'', the wave function collapses into a position eigenstate centered at ''x''.
These three men shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1979 for this work.
This is not accomplished by introducing some "new axiom" to quantum mechanics, but on the contrary, by ''removing'' the axiom of the collapse of the wave packet.
In that view, he is supported by the currently accepted definition of a quantum state, which remains invariant under arbitrary choice of configuration space for its representation, that is to say, manner of observation.
In fact, he considered his quantum hypothesis a mathematical trick to get the right answer rather than a sizable discovery.
Even so, classical physics can often provide good approximations to results otherwise obtained by quantum physics, typically in circumstances with large numbers of particles or large quantum numbers.
1) (note, however, that only the lowest angular momentum states, labeled ''s'', are spherically symmetric).
While these theories were successful in explaining many experimental results, they had certain unsatisfactory qualities stemming from their neglect of the relativistic creation and annihilation of particles.
Heisenberg himself acknowledges having learned matrices from Born, as published in a 1940 ''festschrift'' honoring Max Planck.
In 1913, Peter Debye extended Niels Bohr's theory of atomic structure, introducing elliptical orbits, a concept also introduced by Arnold Sommerfeld.
The word ''quantum'' derives from the Latin, meaning "how great" or "how much".
However, according to the theory of quantum decoherence, these "parallel universes" will never be accessible to us.
According to the correspondence principle between classical and quantum mechanics, all objects obey the laws of quantum mechanics, and classical mechanics is just an approximation for large systems of objects (or a statistical quantum mechanics of a large collection of particles).
with state  in this case having energy  coincident with the kinetic energy of the particle.
The finite potential well problem is mathematically more complicated than the infinite particle-in-a-box problem as the wave function is not pinned to zero at the walls of the well.
Quantum mechanics is often the only tool available that can reveal the individual behaviors of the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, and others).
Another method is the "semi-classical equation of motion" approach, which applies to systems for which quantum mechanics produces only weak (small) deviations from classical behavior.
However, chaotic systems do not have good quantum numbers, and quantum chaos studies the relationship between classical and quantum descriptions in these systems.
Some negative differential resistance devices also utilizes quantum tunneling effect, such as resonant tunneling diode.
Often these results are skewed by many causes, such as dense probability clouds.
According to Planck, each energy element (''E'')'' ''is proportional to its frequency (''ν''):
For a stationary process, the initial and final condition are the same.
When quantum mechanics was originally formulated, it was applied to models whose
Quantum mechanics is essential to understanding the behavior of systems at atomic length scales and smaller.
It has since permeated many disciplines including quantum chemistry, quantum electronics, quantum optics, and quantum information science.
He rejected the concept that the state of a physical system depends on the experimental arrangement for its measurement.
Classical mechanics has also been extended into the complex domain, with complex classical mechanics exhibiting behaviors similar to quantum mechanics.
Recent work on photosynthesis has provided evidence that quantum correlations play an essential role in this fundamental process of plants and many other organisms.
The Bohr-Einstein debates provide a vibrant critique of the Copenhagen Interpretation from an epistemological point of view.
Important applications of quantum theory include superconducting magnets, light-emitting diodes, and the laser, the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor, medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy, and explanations for many biological and physical phenomena.
A fully relativistic quantum theory required the development of quantum field theory, which applies quantization to a field (rather than a fixed set of particles).
The position and momentum of the particle are observables.
These deviations can then be computed based on the classical motion.
The switch would not work if electrons could not quantum tunnel through the layer of oxidation on the metal contact surfaces.
Quantum mechanics can also provide quantitative insight into ionic and covalent bonding processes by explicitly showing which molecules are energetically favorable to which others and the magnitudes of the energies involved.
