The former Province of Canada was divided into its two previous parts as the provinces of Ontario (Upper Canada) and Quebec (Lower Canada).
Many Quebecers fought against the axis power between 1939 to 1945 with the involvement of many francophone regiments such as Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal, le Régiment de la Chaudière and many more.
File:25 ans des FrancoFolies - 077.JPG| Loco Locass during the FrancoFolies de Montréal, a large annual music  and performance festival held in Montreal featuring over 1,000 French-language performers from all over the world.
The flag in its present form with its 4 white "fleur-de-lis" lilies on a blue background with a white cross replaced the Union Jack on Quebec's Parliament Building on January 21, 1948.
In 1898, the Canadian Parliament passed the first Quebec Boundary Extension Act that expanded the provincial boundaries northward to include the lands of the local aboriginal peoples.
Also, the winter of 2010 was the warmest and driest recorded in more than 60 years.
At 1.69 children per woman, Quebec's 2011 fertility rate is above the Canada-wide rate of 1.61, and is higher than it was at the turn of the 21st century.
The Loyalists were thus given land grants of  per person.
The State corporation Télé-Québec, the federal Crown corporation CBC, general and specialized private channels, networks, independent and community radio stations broadcast the various Quebec téléromans, the national and regional news, interactive and spoken programmations, etc.
Agri-food industry plays an important role in the economy of Quebec.
As part of the ongoing negotiations of their exit from the Anglo-French War, in 1632 the English king Charles agreed to return the lands in exchange for Louis XIII paying his wife's dowry.
Les Rendez-vous du cinéma québécois is a festival surrounding the ceremony of the Jutra Awards Night that rewards work and personalities of Quebec cinema.
Among the birds commonly seen in the southern inhabited part of Quebec, there are the American robin, the house sparrow, the red-winged blackbird, the mallard, the common grackle, the blue jay, the American crow, the black-capped chickadee, some warblers and swallows, the starling and the rock pigeon, the latter two having been introduced in Quebec and are found mainly in urban areas.
The party failed to win control of Quebec's National Assembly both times – though its share of the vote increased from 23 percent to 30 percent – and Lévesque was defeated both times in the riding he contested.
File:Emile Nelligan 1.jpg|Émile Nelligan, Quebec poet, famous for his poem ''Winter evening''
While low and medium altitude peak from western Quebec to the far north, high altitudes mountains emerge in the Capitale-Nationale region to the extreme east, along its longitude.
+Mother tongue language (2011)
In that year, the Legislative Council was abolished and the Legislative Assembly was renamed the National Assembly.
From La Bolduc in the 1920s–1930s to the contemporary artists, the music in Quebec has announced multiple songwriters and performers, pop singers and crooners, music groups and many more.
The ''Film Festival of the 3 Americas'', Quebec City, the ''Festival of International Short Film'', Saguenay, the World Film Festival and the Festival of New Cinema, Montreal, are other annual events surrounding the film industry in Quebec.
They are then differentiated according to the insolation, temperature and precipitation of snow and rain.
By some measures Quebec is the highest taxed province; a 2012 study indicated that "Quebec companies pay 26 per cent more in taxes than the Canadian average".
It also stands for the exploitation of its forest resources.
English was also used in the legislature, government commissions and courts.
These sites were designated as being of national historic significance.
Specifically, there was no possibility of restoring the previous political balance – there were simply too many English people unwilling to reach a compromise with the 145,000 Canadiens or their colonial governor.
The name "Québec", which comes from the Algonquin word ''kébec'' meaning "where the river narrows", originally referred to the area around Quebec City where the Saint Lawrence River narrows to a cliff-lined gap.
The research and development expenditures will be more than 3% of the province's GDP in 2013.
However, the accented forms are increasingly evident in some publications.
The third most northern forest area is characterized by deciduous forests.
In addition, Quebec has almost 12,000 bridges, tunnels, retaining walls, culverts and other structures such as the Quebec Bridge, the Laviolette Bridge and the Louis-Hippolyte Lafontaine Bridge-Tunnel.
The conservative government of Maurice Duplessis and his Union Nationale dominated Quebec politics from 1944 to 1959 with the support of the Catholic Church.
In contrast, in the rest of Canada, in 2006 only about 10.2 percent (2,430,990) of the population had a knowledge of both of the country's official languages.
From New France, Quebec literature was first developed in the travel accounts of explorers such as Jacques Cartier, Jean de Brébeuf, the Baron de La Hontan and Nicolas Perrot, describing their relations with indigenous peoples.
By 1758 at the Battle of Carillon, the Flag of Carillon would become the basis of Quebec's desire to have its own flag.
Several sites, houses and historical works reflect the cultural heritage of Quebec, such as the Village Québécois d'Antan, the historical village of Val-Jalbert, the Fort Chambly, the national home of the Patriots, the Chicoutimi pulp mill (Pulperie de Chicoutimi), the Lachine Canal and the Victoria Bridge.
The large land wildlife is mainly composed of the white-tailed deer, the moose, the muskox, the Caribou, the American black bear and the polar bear.
The Saint Lawrence River with its estuary forms the basis of Quebec's development through the centuries.
Livestock production also includes the pig breeds Landrace, Duroc and Yorkshire and many breeds of sheep and cattle.
Basically, this approach was designed with the intent of keeping French and English as far apart as possible.
The ecozone mixed forest covers 11.5% of the area of Quebec and is characteristic of the Laurentians, the Appalachians and the eastern lowlands forests.
Well-known English-language writers from Quebec include Leonard Cohen, Mordecai Richler, and Neil Bissoondath.
Several movie theatres across Quebec ensure the dissemination of Quebec cinema.
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia joined Ontario and Quebec in the new Dominion of Canada.
This law has been the subject of periodic controversy since its inception.
The Montreal School of Fine Arts forms the painters, printmakers and sculptors of Quebec.
Some livestock have the title of "Québec heritage breed", namely the Canadian horse, the Chantecler chicken and the Canadian cow.
An additional 5.8 percent of the population said they had no religious affiliation (including 5.6 percent who stated that they had no religion at all).
Various tales and stories are told through oral tradition, such as, among many more, the legends of the ''Bogeyman'', the ''Chasse-galerie'', the ''Black Horse of Trois-Pistoles'', the ''Complainte de Cadieux'', the ''Corriveau'', the ''dancing devil of Saint-Ambroise'', the ''Giant Beaupré'', the ''monsters of the lakes Pohénégamook'' and ''Memphremagog'', of ''Quebec Bridge'' (called the Devil's Bridge), the ''Rocher Percé'' and of ''Rose Latulipe'', for example.
The festivities occur on June 23 and 24 and are celebrated all over Quebec.
''Percentages are calculated as a proportion of the total number of respondents (7,125,580)''
Mixed forests provide most of Canada's springtime maple syrup crop.
First Nations traded their furs for many French goods such as metal objects, guns, alcohol, and clothing.
About 6,000 volunteers from Quebec participated on the European front.
In the manner of touring companies of the Renaissance, the clowns, street performers, minstrels, or troubadours travel from city to city to play their comedies.
Forests cover more than half of Quebec's territory, for a total area of nearly .
Further south lie the subarctic taiga of the Eastern Canadian Shield taiga ecoregion and the boreal forest of the Central Canadian Shield forests, where spruce, fir, and poplar trees provide raw materials for Quebec's pulp and paper and lumber industries.
The government of Quebec has announced it will reduce the provincial debt by 25% by 2025.
This led to the formation of the sovereigntist Bloc Québécois party in Ottawa under the leadership of Lucien Bouchard, who had resigned from the federal cabinet.
Although the Quebec Act was unrelated to the events in Boston of 1773, and was not regarded as one of the Coercive Acts, the timing of its passage led British colonists to the south to believe that it was part of the program to punish them.
While the Association of producers and directors of Quebec (APDQ) represents the business of filmmaking and television, the Association of Community Radio Broadcasters of Quebec (ARCQ)(French acronym) represents the independent radio stations.
The Quartier Latin (English: Latin Quarter) of Montreal, and Vieux-Québec (English: Old Quebec) in Quebec City, are two hubs of activity for today's artists.
In 1608, he returned as head of an exploration party and founded Quebec City with the intention of making the area part of the French colonial empire.
They made a Declaration of Rights with equality for all citizens without discrimination and a Declaration of Independence of Lower-Canada in 1838.
Other major sports include Canadian Football with the Montreal Alouettes, soccer with the Montreal Impact, the Grand Prix du Canada Formula 1 racing with drivers such as Gilles Villeneuve and Jacques Villeneuve, and professional baseball with the former Montreal Expos.
With a land area of , it had a population density of  in 2011.
After the Constitutional Act of 1791, the territory was divided between Lower Canada (present day Quebec) and Upper Canada (present day Ontario), with each being granted an elected legislative assembly.
Approximately half of Quebec residents live in the Greater Montreal Area, including the Island of Montreal.
It extends northeastward from the southwestern portion of the province along the shores of the Saint Lawrence River to the Quebec City region, limited to the North by the Laurentian Mountains and to the South by the Appalachians.
Early variations in the spelling of the name included ''Québecq'' (Levasseur, 1601) and ''Kébec'' (Lescarbot, 1609).
It should be noted however, that there is a significant undercount, as many of the biggest Indian bands regularly refuse to participate in Canadian censuses for political reasons regarding the question of aboriginal sovereignty.
More than a million lakes and rivers cover Quebec, occupying 21% of the total area of its territory.
However, there is considerable debate and uncertainty over what this means.
In addition to the network of cultural centres in Quebec, the venues include the Monument-National and the ''Rideau Vert'' (green curtain) Theatre in Montreal, the ''Trident'' Theatre in Quebec City, etc.
It also shares maritime borders with Nunavut, Prince Edward Island, and Nova Scotia.
Many metallic minerals are exploited, the principals are gold, iron, copper and zinc.
Pauline Marois has recently unveiled a two billion dollar budget for the period between 2013 to 2017 to create about 115,000 new jobs in knowledge and innovation sectors.
It is rich in the forestry, mineral and hydro-electric resources that are a mainstay of the Quebec economy.
Historically June 24 was a holiday honouring French Canada's patron saint, St. John the Baptist, which is why it is commonly known as ''La Saint-Jean-Baptiste'' (often shortened to ''La St-Jean'').
It came at a time when no declaration of war had been issued by either country.
This was followed by the addition of the District of Ungava through the Quebec Boundaries Extension Act of 1912 that added the northernmost lands of the Inuit to create the modern Province of Quebec.
Although Quebec is home to only 24% of the population of Canada, the number of international adoptions in Quebec is the highest of all provinces of Canada.
Located in the eastern part of Canada, and (from a historical and political perspective) part of Central Canada, Quebec occupies a territory nearly three times the size of France or Texas, most of which is very sparsely populated.
Today there are nearly a hundred breweries and companies, including Unibroue, Molson Coors, Labatt and many others.
The situation called for a more creative approach to problem solving.
This result caused a split in the Quebec Liberal Party that led to the formation of the new Action démocratique (Democratic Action) party led by Mario Dumont and Jean Allaire.
In 1927, the border between Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador was established by the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
Quebec officially disputes this boundary.
To encourage population growth and to redress the severe imbalance between single men and women, King Louis XIV sponsored the passage of approximately 800 young French women (known as ''les filles du roi'') to the colony.
The total forest area of Quebec is estimated at .
Many literary works reproduce the daily lives of the past, following the social and cultural traditions of Quebec television series reproducing the old days such as the trilogy of Pierre Gauvreau (''Le Temps d'une paix'', ''Cormoran'' and ''Le Volcan tranquille''), ''La Famille Plouffe'', ''Les Belles Histoires des Pays-d'en-Haut'', ''La Petite Patrie'', ''Entre chien et loup'', '' Les Filles de Caleb'', ''Blanche'', ''Au nom du père et du fils'', ''Marguerite Volant'', ''Nos Étés'' or ''Musée Éden'', among others.
Quebec has had over 9,469 scientific publications in the sector of medicine, biomedical research and engineering since the year 2000.
Montreal is ranked 4th in North America for the number of jobs in the pharmaceutical sector.
French fishing fleets, however, continued to sail to the Atlantic coast and into the St. Lawrence River, making alliances with First Nations that would become important once France began to occupy the land.
These people traded fur and food and sometimes warred with each other.
Authorities in New France became more aggressive in their efforts to expel British traders and colonists from the Ohio Valley.
In 2011, the most common mother tongue languages in the province were as follows:
Quebec has more than 450 biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies which together employ more than 25,000 people and 10,000 highly qualified researchers.
File:Schwartz smoked meat montreal.JPG|Montreal-style smoked meat from Schwartz's in Montreal
At the same time, many affluent rivers testify to the exploration of land, among them Ashuapmushuan, Chaudière, Gatineau, Manicouagan, Ottawa, Richelieu, Rupert, Saguenay, Saint-François, and Saint-Maurice.
The 2006 census counted a total aboriginal population of 108,425 (1.5 percent) including 65,085 North American Indians (0.9 percent), 27,985 Métis (0.4 percent), and 10,950 Inuit (0.15 percent).
It was at this moment that the monks of La Trappe of Oka began to produce the famous Oka cheese.
The pulp and paper industries generate annual shipments valued at more than $14 billion.
In the 2011 census, Quebec had a population of 7,903,001 living in 3,395,343 of its 3,685,926 total dwellings, a 4.7% change from its 2006 population of 7,546,131.
On November 15, 1976, Lévesque and the Parti Québécois won control of the provincial government for the first time.
The forest industry has slowed in recent years because of the softwood lumber dispute.
The most recent layers of sedimentary rock were formed as the seabed of the ancient Champlain Sea at the end of the last ice age about 14,000 years ago.
HR 8799 is the first direct observation of an exoplanet in history.
Legitimate exceptions are '''Montreal''' and '''Quebec'''.
(''Figures shown are for single-language responses only''.)
After 1627, King Louis XIII of France allowed the Company of New France to introduced the seigneurial system and forbade settlement in New France by anyone other than Roman Catholics.
In their published Manifesto, the militants  stated: "In the coming year Bourassa will have to face reality; 100,000 revolutionary workers, armed and organized."
The Canadian boreal forest is the northernmost and most abundant of the three forest areas in Quebec that straddle the Canadian Shield and the upper lowlands of the province.
In 1668, Jean Talon founded a brewery in Quebec City, but it closed a decade later.
There are currently approximately 115 telecommunications companies established in the province, such as Motorola and Ericsson .
Quebec also produces wine, ice wine and ice cider.
Mindful of the same nutritional needs as settlers from Acadia, it has many similarities with Acadian cuisine.
Quebec is the fourth largest producer of hydroelectricity in the world after China, Brazil and the United States and relies almost exclusively (96% in 2008) on this source of renewable energy for its electricity needs.
Most of the French were farmers ("Canadiens" or "Habitants"), and the rate of population growth among the settlers themselves was very high.
In 2013, Statistics Canada estimated the province's population to be 8,155,334.
The army withdrew to Ticonderoga.
During World War II, the participation of Quebec was more important but led to the Conscription Crisis of 1944 and opposition.
The main climatic influences are from western and northern Canada and move eastward, and from the southern and central United States that move northward.
By virtue of its transient nature, this area contains a diversity of habitats resulting in large numbers of plant (1000) and vertebrates (350) species, despite relatively cool temperatures.
The two colonies remained distinct in administration, election, and law.
Moreover, in addition to food certified as "organic", Charlevoix lamb is the first local Quebec product whose geographical indication is protected.
In a similar way, the Association of Film and Television in Quebec (APFTQ) promotes independent production in film and television.
The Nord-du-Québec region, occupying the northern half of the province, is sparsely populated and inhabited primarily by Aboriginal peoples.
Quebec has one of the world's largest reserves of fresh water, occupying 12% of its surface.
In April 2012, plans were unveiled for the construction of an  railway running north from Sept-Îles, to support mining and other resource extraction in the Labrador Trough.
The government of Quebec awards an order of merit called the National Order of Quebec.
Various other transport networks crisscross the province of Quebec, including hiking trails, snowmobile trails and bike paths; the Green Road being the largest with nearly  in length.
It supports creation, innovation, production, and international exhibits for all cultural fields of Quebec.
The ''réseau routier québécois'' (Quebec road network) is managed by the Société de l'assurance automobile du Québec (SAAQ) (Quebec Automobile Insurance Corporation) and consists of about  of highways and national, regional, local, collector and forest roads.
Most of Quebec's population lives in this area of vegetation, almost entirely along the banks of the St. Lawrence.
There are also many successful plays from this literary category, such as ''Les Belles-sœurs'' and ''Broue (Brew)''.
The other provinces then joined the Confederation, one after the other: Manitoba and the Northwest Territories in 1870, British Columbia in 1871, Prince Edward Island in 1873, Yukon in 1898, Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1905, Newfoundland in 1949 and finally Nunavut in 1999.
Being a modern cosmopolitan society, today, all types of music can be found in Quebec.
The British Royal Proclamation of 1763 renamed Canada (part of New France) as the Province of Quebec.
Firmly grounded in the knowledge economy, Quebec has one of the highest growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) in Canada.
The R&D expenditure in Quebec is higher than the average G7 and OECD countries.
Since 1959, the Saint Lawrence Seaway has provided a navigable link between the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes.
As a result of those deliberations, in 1867 the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the British North America Acts, providing for the Confederation of most of these provinces.
This is a lower percentage than that of British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta, and Manitoba but higher than that of the other five provinces.
This territory was redivided into the Provinces of Quebec and Ontario at Confederation in 1867.
Although some help was given to the Americans by the locals, Governor Carleton punished American sympathizers and public support of the American cause came to an end.
Approximately 12 900 people working in over 110 companies such as IBM, CMC, and Matrox.
They appear to have been later supplanted by the Mohawk nation.
Algonquians organized into seven political entities lived nomadic lives based on hunting, gathering, and fishing in the rugged terrain of the Canadian Shield: (James Bay Cree, Innu, Algonquins) and Appalachian Mountains (Mi'kmaq, Abenaki).
Coureurs des bois, voyageurs  and Catholic missionaries used river canoes to explore the interior of the North American continent.
At that time, French-speaking Canadians formed the vast majority of the population of the province of Quebec (more than 99%) and British immigration was not going well.
The Quiet Revolution was a period of dramatic social and political change that saw the decline of Anglo supremacy in the Quebec economy, the decline of the Roman Catholic Church's influence, the formation of hydroelectric companies under Hydro-Québec and the emergence of a pro-sovereignty movement under former Liberal minister René Lévesque.
The provincial GDP in 2010 was C$319,348 billion, which makes Quebec the second largest economy in Canada.
The southern portion of the shield extends to the Laurentians, a mountain range just north of the Saint Lawrence Lowland, that attracts local and international tourists to ski hills and lakeside resorts.
The French language subsequently regained legal status in the Legislature.
Many feared the establishment of Catholicism in Quebec, and that the French Canadians were being courted to help oppress British Americans.
It is inspired in part by the French Legion of Honour.
At Quebec City, the length of the daily sunshine varies from 8:37 hrs in December to 15:50 hrs in June; the annual variation is much greater (from 4:54 to 19:29 hrs) at the northern tip of the province.
The Quebec Act offended a variety of interest groups in the British colonies.
Its landscape is low-lying and flat, except for isolated igneous outcrops near Montreal called the Monteregian Hills, formerly covered by the waters of Lake Champlain.
File:La Banquise Poutine.jpg|A classic poutine from La Banquise in Montreal.
It is generally a quite flat and exposed mountainous terrain interspersed with higher points such as the Laurentian Mountains in southern Quebec, the Otish Mountains in central Quebec and the Torngat Mountains near Ungava Bay.
Precipitation is also somewhat less than farther south, except at some of the higher elevations.
File:Unibroue - La fin du monde.jpg|''La fin du monde'' by Unibroue won the World Beer Awards 2011 for the best Blonde Ale in the North America.
In particular, the largest Mohawk Iroquois reserves (Kahnawake, Akwesasne and Kanesatake) were not counted.
The Province of Quebec was founded in the Royal Proclamation of 1763 after the Treaty of Paris formally transferred the French colony of Canada to Britain after the Seven Years' War.
The taiga covers about 20% of the total area of Quebec.
This industry employs 68,000 people in several regions of Quebec.
In ten years, Quebec had undergone a dramatic change.
''Percentages are calculated as a proportion of the total number of respondents (7,435,905).Only groups with more than 0.5 percent of respondents are shown.''
The expression ''La belle province'' is still used mostly in tourism as a nickname for the province.
When Great Britain declared war on August 4, 1914, Canada was automatically involved as a dominion.
The first was the Meech Lake Accord of 1987, which was finally abandoned in 1990 when the province of Manitoba did not pass it within the established deadline.
In 1837, residents of Lower Canada – led by Louis-Joseph Papineau and Robert Nelson – formed an armed resistance group to seek an end to the unilateral control of the British governors.
To restore stability to his largest remaining North American colony, King George III sent Carleton back to Quebec to remedy the situation.
The energy balance of Quebec has undergone a large shift over the past 30 years.
Knowledge of French is widespread even among those who do not speak it natively; in 2011, about 94.4 percent of the total population reported being able to speak French, alone or in combination with other languages, while 47.3% reported being able to speak English.
Quebec's culture blends its historic roots with its aboriginal heritage and the contributions of recent immigrants, as well as receiving a strong influence from English-speaking North America.
Strongly influenced by the presence of the Catholic Church, the development of the religious history of Quebec is provided by organizations like the Council of the religious heritage of Quebec.
The spending on research and development reached some 7.824 billion dollars in 2007, roughly the equivalent of 2.63% of Quebec's GDP.
Parti Québécois governments held referendums on sovereignty in 1980 and 1995; both were voted down by voters, the latter defeated by a very narrow margin.
The percentage spent on research and technology (R&D) is the highest in Canada and higher than the averages for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the G7 countries.
The Jewish community of Montreal has contributed Montreal-style bagels and smoked meat which is similar to pastrami.
Sixty percent of the Quebec electorate voted against the proposition for sovereignty-association.
Today there are over 300 different cheeses in Quebec.
The forest products industry ranks second in exports, with shipments valued at almost $11 billion.
An unprepared British Army had to raise militia force; the rebel forces scored a victory in Saint-Denis but were soon defeated.
Since the 1970s, languages other than French on commercial signs have been permitted only if French is given marked prominence.
The rural part of the landscape is divided into narrow rectangular tracts of land that extend from the river and date back to settlement patterns in 17th century New France.
Canadian (Canadiens)
Quebec nationalism has been one expression of this perspective.
Among the theatre troupes are the Compagnie Jean-Duceppe, the ''Théâtre La Rubrique'' at the Pierrette-Gaudreault venue of the Institut of arts in Saguenay, the Théâtre Le Grenier, etc.
Quebec is considered as one of world leaders in fundamental scientific research, having produced ten Nobel laureates in either physics, chemistry, or medicine.
Development and security of land transportation in Canada are provided by the ministère des Transports du Québec.
The Oka hills also rise from the plain.
Around 1522–1523, the Italian navigator Giovanni da Verrazzano persuaded King Francis I of France to commission an expedition to find a western route to Cathay (China).
Concerning rail transport, Quebec has  of railways integrated in the large North American network.
The Société de développement des entreprises culturelles (SODEC) works to promote and fund individuals working in the cultural industry.
From temperate zones to the northern territories of the Far North, the brightness varies with latitude, as well as the Northern Lights and midnight sun.
The government promises to provide about 3% of Quebec's GDP in research and development (R&D).
