Cairns is renowned as the "Gateway to the Barrier Reef" and the heritage listed Daintree Rainforests.
Often referred to as the "Sunshine State", Queensland is home to 10 of Australia's 30 largest cities and is the nation's third largest economy.
Secondary industries are mostly further processing of the above-mentioned primary produce.
File:Mangrove in Queensland, Australia.jpg|Mangrove swampland in Cape Tribulation
Queensland is less centralised than most other Australian states, with 50% of the population living outside the state capital, and 25% living outside the South East Queensland urban agglomeration.
On 27 October 1857, aborigines of Martha Fraser's Hornet Bank station on the Dawson River killed eleven Europeans.
The Australian Labor Party has its origin as a formal organisation in Queensland and the town of Barcaldine is the symbolic birthplace of the party.
Sugar is another major export, with facilities at Lucinda and Mackay.
Interests in Crown land  in Queensland are primarily regulated by the Land Act 1994.
Each area has a council which is responsible for providing a range of public services and utilities, and derives its income from both rates and charges on resident ratepayers, and grants and subsidies from the State and Commonwealth governments.
Penal transportation ceased in 1839 and free settlement was allowed from 1842.
Regional bus and long-distance rail services are also provided throughout the State.
For decades, Queensland has consistently been the fastest growing state in Australia, while Western Australia has grown faster in the 2010s.
In 1911, The first alternative treatments for polio were pioneered in Queensland and remain in use across the world today.
Temperatures below  are, however, generally uncommon over the majority of populated Queensland.
The 6th of June is now celebrated annually statewide as Queensland Day.
In 1989, the Queensland University of Technology was opened (previously the Queensland Institute of Technology) in the Brisbane central business district at Gardens Point.
The current governor is His Excellency, The Hon.
Queensland's contribution to the Australian GDP increased by 10.4% in that period, one of only three states to do so.
To the west, Queensland is bordered by the Northern Territory, at the 138°E longitude, and to the southwest by the northeastern corner of South Australia.
The most northerly recorded snow in Australia occurred near Mackay; however, this was exceptional.
Brisbane Airport is the main international and domestic gateway serving the state.
June 2009 marked the 150th anniversary of its creation as a separate colony from New South Wales.
* Gold Coast 600 (motorsport; since 1994)
'''Queensland''' (abbreviated as '''QLD''') is the second-largest and third-most-populous state in the Commonwealth of Australia.
The main tourist destinations of Queensland include, Brisbane, Cairns, Port Douglas and the Daintree Rainforest, Gold Coast, the Great Barrier Reef, Hervey Bay and nearby Fraser Island, Townsville, Magnetic Island, North Stradbroke Island and South Stradbroke Island, Sunshine Coast, Hamilton Island, Daydream Island and the Whitsundays known for Airlie Beach and Whitehaven Beach.
The current Premier is Annastacia Palaszczuk of the Labor Party.
About 1,500 European settlers and their allies (consisting of Chinese, Aboriginal and Melanesian assistants), were killed in frontier skirmishes during the nineteenth century.
While still significant, they were on a much smaller scale than the gold rushes of Victoria and New South Wales.
* NRL All Stars Game (rugby league; since 2010)
On 6 June 1859, Queen Victoria signed Letters Patent to form the separate colony of what is now Queensland.
The state of Queensland is represented in all of Australia's national sporting competitions and is also host to a number of domestic and international sporting events.
The coastal far north of the state is the wettest place in Australia, with Mount Bellenden Ker, south of Cairns, holding many Australian rainfall records with its annual average rainfall of over 8 metres.
Queensland also became the first Australian colony to establish its own parliament rather than spending time as a Crown Colony.
This was the largest massacre of Australian colonists by aborigines.
Queensland has the highest average maximums of any Australian state, and Toowoomba, Stanthorpe, Hervey Bay, Mackay, Atherton, Weipa and Thursday Island are the only large population centres not to have recorded a temperature above .
The new constitution took effect on 6 June 2002, the anniversary of the formation of the colony of Queensland by the signing of Letters patent by Queen Victoria in 1859.
West of the peninsula's tip, northern Queensland is bordered by the Gulf of Carpentaria, while the Coral Sea, an arm of the Pacific Ocean, borders Queensland to the east.
The other two NRL teams in Queensland are the North Queensland Cowboys and Gold Coast Titans.
As a result, Bowen became the first Governor of Queensland.
* warm humid summer, mild dry winter (coastal elevated areas and coastal south-east): Brisbane, Bundaberg, Rockhampton
There are five predominant climatic zones in Queensland, based on temperature and humidity:
Local bus services are also available in most regional centres.
The strongest tornado ever recorded in Australia occurred in Queensland near Bundaberg.
:All other religions or inadequately described: 25.3%
The 2008–09 saw the expansion slow to just 0.8%, the state's worst performance in 18 years.
On the Gold Coast there is Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary at Currumbin and David Fleay Wildlife Park at Burleigh Heads.
Queensland was explored in subsequent decades until the establishment of a penal colony at Brisbane in 1824 by John Oxley.
are the next most prominent airports, all with scheduled international flights.
The colony of New South Wales was founded in 1788 by Governor Arthur Phillip at Sydney; New South Wales at that time included all of what is now Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania.
A sizeable influx of interstate and overseas migrants, large amounts of federal government investment, increased mining of vast mineral deposits and an expanding aerospace sector have contributed to the state's economic growth.
One of the deadliest and most damaging floods in the history of the state occurred in early 2011.
In 1997 the National Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA) was established and in 2010 Southern Cross University opened a new campus at the southern part of the Gold Coast.
The first European to land in Queensland (and Australia) was Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon in 1606, who explored the west coast of the Cape York Peninsula near present-day Weipa.
The humid climate—regulated by the availability of air conditioning—saw Queensland become a more accommodating place to work and live for Australian migrants.
Queensland achieved statehood with the Federation of Australia on 1 January 1901.
Gold Coast Airport, Cairns International Airport and Townsville Airport
In 1962, the first commercial production of oil in Queensland and Australia began at Moonie.
Between 1992 and 2002, the growth in the Gross State Product of Queensland outperformed that of all the other states and territories.
Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary at Fig Tree Pocket and Brisbane Forest Park at The Gap are located in Brisbane.
Major tertiary industries are the retail trade and tourism.
To the east, Queensland is bordered by the Coral Sea and Pacific Ocean.
On the Sunshine Coast there is UnderWater World at Mooloolaba and Australia Zoo near Beerwah/Glass House Mountains, home of Steve Irwin until his death in 2006.
* Gold Coast Marathon (athletics; since 1979)
The Brisbane Broncos are the state's most successful team of any sport, having won 3 premierships in the NRL rugby league era and 6 in total during their 23-year existence.
* Quicksilver Pro and Roxy Pro (surfing)
In 1770, Lieutenant James Cook claimed the east coast of Australia for the Kingdom of Great Britain.
He returned in 1824 and established a settlement at what is now Redcliffe.
The TransLink network operates a fare system which allows a single ticket to be used across all modes for the same price irrespective of the number of transfers made on the trip.
* hot dry summer, mild dry winter (central west and north-west): Mt Isa, Emerald, Longreach
A public meeting was held in 1851 to consider the proposed separation of Queensland from New South Wales.
Brisbane was subsequently proclaimed a city in 1902.
North of Brisbane is Alma Park Zoo which is relocating to Logan City and Kumbartcho Wildlife Sanctuary which was originally called Bunya Park Wildlife Sanctuary.
The Frontier War was notable for being the most bloody in Australia, perhaps due to Queensland's larger pre-contact indigenous population when compared to the other Australian colonies.
Brisbane was appointed as the capital city.
In 1935, cane toads were deliberately introduced to Queensland from Hawaii in a poorly-thought-out and unsuccessful attempt to reduce the number of French's cane and greyback cane beetles that were destroying the roots of sugar cane plants, which are integral to Queensland's economy.
Accommodation in Queensland caters for nearly 22% of the total expenditure, followed by restaurants/meals (15%), airfares (11%), fuel (11%) and shopping/gifts (11%).
Snow is rare in Queensland, although it does fall with some regularity along the far southern border with New South Wales, predominantly in the Stanthorpe district although on rare occasions further north and west.
Queensland's economy has enjoyed a boom in the tourism and mining industries over the past 20 years.
During this time, Queensland had a population of half a million people.
In the south, there are three sections that constitute its border: the watershed from Point Danger to the Dumaresq River; the river section involving the Dumaresq, the Macintyre and the Barwon; and 29°S latitude (including some minor historical encroachments below the 29th parallel) over to the South Australian border.
Queensland is home to many regional cities, the most populous being the Gold Coast, the Sunshine Coast, Townsville, Cairns, Toowoomba, Mackay, Rockhampton and Bundaberg.
In 1865, the first rail line in the state opened between Ipswich and Grandchester.
In the 1880s and 1890s, sea ports were established on the coast, adjacent to the mouth of the Fitzroy River.
Flooding from rain-bearing systems can also be severe and can occur anywhere in Queensland.
File:Noosa Main Beach.jpg|Noosa Main Beach
* Australian PGA Championship (golf; since 2000)
The Queensland Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, is unicameral.
In 1839 transportation of convicts was ceased, culminating in the closure of the Brisbane penal settlement.
The Parliament is housed in the 19th century Parliament House and 20th century Parliamentary Annexe in Brisbane.
The Queensland government and other Queensland organisations commemorated the occasion with many events and publications, including the announcement of the top 150 icons of Queensland by the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, and the creation of monuments at significant survey points in Queensland's history to honour the many early explorer/surveyors who mapped the state.
A war, sometimes called a "war of extermination", erupted between Aborigines and settlers in colonial Queensland.
This temperature was the hottest value worldwide measured by MODIS in 2003.
These are Dreamworld, Movie World, Sea World, Wet 'n' Wild and WhiteWater World.
During the last ice age Queensland's landscape became more arid and largely desolate, making food and other supplies scarce.
Railways were subsequently constructed to carry goods to the wharves at these locations, the railway to Broadmount opening on 1 January 1898 and the line to Port Alma opened on 16 October 1911.
In 1905, women voted in state elections for the first time, and the University of Queensland was established in 1909.
The following month, the wharf caught fire and the line was effectively closed in July 1930.
The state's first university, The University of Queensland, was established in 1909.
The region was also explored by French and Spaniards explorers (commanded by Louis Antoine de Bougainville and Luís Vaez de Torres, respectively) prior to the arrival of Lieutenant James Cook in 1770.
The north-eastern Australian region was explored by Dutch, Spaniards and French navigators before being encountered by Lieutenant James Cook in 1770.
Tourism in the state, fuelled largely by its warm tropical climate, is a major industry.
During the period from the 1860s till the early 20th century, many labourers, known at the time as Kanakas, were brought to Queensland from neighbouring Pacific Island nations to work in the state's sugar cane fields.
The line to Port Alma closed on 15 October 1986.
A bicameral system existed until 1922, when the Legislative Council was abolished by the Labor members' "suicide squad", so called because they were appointed for the purpose of voting to abolish their own offices.
Other regional airports, with scheduled domestic flights, include Great Barrier Reef Airport, Hervey Bay Airport, Mackay Airport, Mount Isa Airport, Proserpine / Whitsunday Coast Airport, Rockhampton Airport, and Sunshine Coast Airport.
The Aboriginal population declined significantly after a smallpox epidemic during the late 18th century.
The judicial system of Queensland consists of the Supreme Court and the District Court, established by the Constitution of Queensland, and various other courts and tribunals established by ordinary Acts of the Queensland Parliament.
Broadmount was on the northern side and Port Alma on the south.
The head of government is the Premier, who is appointed by the Governor but must have the support of the Legislative Assembly.
There is circumstantial evidence that Macassan mariners visiting Arnhem Land introduced smallpox to Australia. )
The most popular winter and summer team sports are Rugby league, Rugby union and cricket, respectively.
During the Australian federation of 1901, the White Australia policy came into effect, which saw all foreign workers in Australia deported under the Pacific Island Labourers Act of 1901, which saw the Pacific Islander population of the state decrease rapidly.
South East Queensland has an integrated public transport system operated by TransLink, which provides services bus, rail, light rail and ferry services through contracted bus, ferry and light rail operators and Queensland Rail.
World War I had a major impact on Queensland.
The lowest minimum temperature is  at Stanthorpe on 23 June 1961 and at The Hermitage (near Warwick) on 12 July 1965.
It is the only Australian state with a unicameral legislature.
Casualties among the Aboriginal people may have exceeded 30,000.
This led to the world's first seed-grinding technology.
The state's politics are traditionally regarded as being conservative relative to other states.
It is considered one of the greatest Grand Finals in NRL history.
Some of these people had been kidnapped under a process known as blackbirding or press ganging, and their employment conditions amounted to indentured labour or even slavery.
In 1847, the Port of Maryborough was opened as a wool port.
Other ministers, forming the Executive Council, are appointed by the governor from among the members of the Legislative Assembly on the Premier's recommendation.
A rare record of early settler life in north Queensland can be seen in a set of ten photographic glass plates taken in the 1860s by Richard Daintree, in the collection of the National Museum of Australia.
In 1857, Queensland's first lighthouse was built at Cape Moreton.
In 2001 Queensland adopted a new codified constitution, repealing most of the assorted Acts of Parliament that had previously made up the constitution.
Elevated areas in the south-east inland can experience temperatures well below freezing in mid-winter.
Low rainfall and hot humid summers are typical for the inland and west, a monsoonal "wet" season in the far north, and warm, temperate conditions along the coastal strip.
Paul de Jersey, AC.
On 1 January 1901, Australia was federated following a proclamation by Queen Victoria.
The "Native Police Force", employed by the Queensland government, was key in the oppression of the indigenous people.
One author estimates 24,000 Aboriginal men, women and children died at the hands of the Native Police in colonial Queensland between 1859 and 1897 alone.
Just four years after being branded "the joke of rugby union", the Queensland Reds won its first Super Rugby title in July 2011.
* hot dry summer, cool dry winter (southern inland): Roma, Charleville, Goondiwindi
The settlement, initially known as Edenglassie, was then transferred to the current location of the Brisbane city centre.
The first free immigrant ship to arrive in Moreton Bay was the ''Artemisia'', in 1848.
In that period Queensland's GSP grew 5.0% each year, while growth in Australia's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose on average 3.9% each year.
For example, bauxite is shipped by sea from Weipa and converted to alumina at Gladstone.
Griffith University was established in the Brisbane suburb of Nathan in 1971.
File:Mossman River during the wet season.jpg|Mossman River during the wet season
In 2009, Queensland celebrated ''Q150'', its 150th anniversary as an independent colony and state.
The Gold Coast of Queensland is also sometimes referred to as "Australia's Theme Park Capital", with five major amusement parks.
Bond University was established in 1989 as a private not-for-profit university, the first of its type in Queensland and is located at Robina on the Gold Coast.
However, most of the Queensland populace experience two weather seasons: a "winter" period of rather warm temperatures and minimal rainfall, and a sultry summer period of hot, sticky temperatures and higher levels of rainfall.
The highest official maximum temperature recorded in the state was  at Birdsville Police Station on 24 December 1972, although the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on NASA's Aqua satellite measured a ground surface temperature of .
Queensland borders the Torres Strait to the north, with Boigu Island off the coast of New Guinea representing the absolute northern extreme of its territory.
The annual mean statistics for some Queensland centres are shown below:
Queensland has many areas of natural beauty, including the Sunshine Coast and the Gold Coast, home to some of the state's most popular beaches; the Bunya Mountains and the Great Dividing Range, with numerous lookouts, waterfalls and picnic areas; Carnarvon Gorge; Whitsunday Islands; and Hinchinbrook Island.
* Townsville 400 (motorsport; since 2009)
In late 2005 Brisbane was the third most expensive capital for housing after Sydney and Canberra and just ahead of Melbourne by $15,000.
Primary industries include: bananas, pineapples, peanuts, a wide variety of other tropical and temperate fruit and vegetables, grain crops, wineries, cattle raising, cotton, sugar cane, wool and a mining industry including bauxite, coal, silver, lead, zinc, gold, and copper.
In February 1606, Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon landed near the site of what is now Weipa, on the western shore of Cape York.
File:Glasshouse Mountains QLD.jpg|Glasshouse Mountains
Edmund Lockyer discovered outcrops of coal along the banks of the upper Brisbane River in 1825.
Tourism is Queensland's leading tertiary industry with millions of interstate and overseas visitors flocking to the Sunshine State each year.
On 10 December 1859, a proclamation was read by British author George Bowen, whereby Queensland was formally separated from the state of New South Wales.
Swimming is also a popular sport in Queensland, with a majority of Australian team members and international medalists hailing from the state.
Major seaports include the Port of Brisbane and subsidiary ports at Gladstone, Townsville and Bundaberg.
Over 58,000 Queenslanders fought in World War I and over 10,000 of them died.
The history of Queensland spans thousands of years, encompassing both a lengthy indigenous presence, as well as the eventful times of post-European settlement.
The University of Queensland ranks amongst the top 100 universities in several global rankings.
It is not uncommon for locations in this area to receive more rain in 24 hours during the wet season than the majority of Queensland receives in a year.
In 1922, Queensland abolished the Upper House, becoming the only state parliament in Australia to have one house.
The industry generates $4.0&nbsp;billion annually, accounting for 4.5% of Queensland's GSP.
Queensland was first inhabited by Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders.
The climate of the coastal strip is influenced by warm ocean waters, keeping the region free from extremes of temperature and providing moisture for rainfall.
* Ipswich Super Sprint (motorsport; since 2003)
The Brisbane Broncos participated in the 2015 NRL Grand Final losing to the North Queensland Cowboys 17–16 in extra time, claiming their first premiership in its history.
Other smaller geographical regions of note include the Atherton Tablelands, the Granite Belt, and the Channel Country in the far southwest.
Rugby league's annual State of Origin series is a major event in the Queensland sporting calendar, with the Queensland Maroons in 2013 winning a record eighth series in a row.
* hot humid summer, warm dry winter (far north and coastal): Cairns, Townsville, Gladstone
The triangular Cape York Peninsula, which points toward New Guinea, is the northernmost part of the state's mainland.
(There has been controversy regarding the origins of smallpox in Australia; while many sources have claimed that it originated with British settlers, this theory has been contradicted by scientific evidence.
Queensland's dominance is not restricted to rugby league.
This was the first recorded landing of a European in Australia, and it also marked the first reported contact between European and Aboriginal Australian people.
There are numerous wildlife parks in Queensland.
Executive authority is vested in the Governor, who represents and is appointed by Elizabeth II, Queen of Australia, Queen's Counsel on the advice of the Premier.
The Australian Catholic University also operates a campus in Brisbane.
There are large coal export facilities at Hay Point / Dalrymple Bay, Gladstone and Abbot Point.
There is also copper refining and the refining of sugar cane to sugar at a number of mills along the eastern coastline.
The capital and largest city in the state is Brisbane, Australia's third largest city.
James Cook University was set up in 1970 to become the first tertiary education institution in North Queensland.
The state was named in honour of Queen Victoria, who on 6 June 1859 signed Letters Patent separating the colony from New South Wales.
Australia's first major airline, Qantas, was founded in 1920 to serve outback Queensland.
At Moreton Bay, he found the Brisbane River.
In netball the Queensland Firebirds went undefeated in the 2011 season as they went on to win the Grand Final.
These  Universities all have more than one campus, and all are recognised as leading Australian universities.
Natural disasters are often a threat in Queensland; severe tropical cyclones can impact the coast and cause severe damage, with recent examples including Larry, Yasi and Ita.
At its peak growth in 2007, it was estimated that over 1,500 people moved to the state per week including 1,000 to the southern part of the state alone.
In 1842 free settlement was permitted.
Queensland has a population of 4,750,500, concentrated along the coast and particularly in the state's South East.
The state contains six World Heritage-listed preservation areas: Australian Fossil Mammal Sites at Riversleigh in the Gulf Country, Gondwana Rainforests of Australia, Fraser Island, Great Barrier Reef, Lamington National Park and the Wet Tropics of Queensland.
Cook claimed the east coast under instruction from King George III of the United Kingdom on 22 August 1770 at Possession Island, naming Eastern Australia, including Queensland, 'New South Wales'.
Queensland's economy expanded rapidly in 1867 after James Nash discovered gold on the Mary River near the town of Gympie, sparking a gold rush.
The state capital is Brisbane, located on the coast 100 kilometres (60&nbsp;mi) by road north of the New South Wales border.
Queen Victoria, who went on to become Britain and Australia's second longest reigning monarch, chose an eponymous name for the colony over ''Cooksland'', which had been suggested by the influential local Presbyterian minister John Dunmore Lang in honour of navigator James Cook.
Severe springtime thunderstorms generally affect the south-east and inland of the state and can bring damaging winds, torrential rain, large hail and even tornadoes.
The early part of this century saw the AFL's Brisbane Lions claim a hat-trick of premierships between 2001 and 2003 inclusive, whilst in soccer, Brisbane Roar FC won back to back A-League titles in the 2010/11 and 2011/12 season, and also set an Australian sporting record of 36 consecutive games unbeaten.
It was moved to St Lucia in 1945, where it remains today.
