Victoria found Gladstone's demeanour far less appealing; he spoke to her, she is thought to have complained, as though she were "a public meeting rather than a woman".
Bean was sentenced to 18 months in jail.
Victoria's self-imposed isolation from the public diminished the popularity of the monarchy, and encouraged the growth of the republican movement.
My poor darling Affie gone too", she wrote in her journal.
Instead, the Queen went to Ireland for the first time since 1861, in part to acknowledge the contribution of Irish regiments to the South African war.
With the phrase "we authors, Ma'am", he complimented her.
On the death of her uncle George IV in 1830, Victoria became heir presumptive to her next surviving uncle, William IV.
Peel refused to govern under the restrictions imposed by the Queen, and consequently resigned his commission, allowing Melbourne to return to office.
At birth, Victoria was fifth in the line of succession after her father and his three older brothers: the Prince Regent, the Duke of York, and the Duke of Clarence (later William IV).
He had been "killed by that dreadful business", she said.
Victoria Day is a Canadian statutory holiday and a local public holiday in parts of Scotland celebrated on the last Monday before or on 24 May (Queen Victoria's birthday).
Her uncle Leopold wrote to her advising her to appear in public.
Victoria dismissed their complaints as racial prejudice.
In the immediate aftermath of the attack, Victoria's popularity soared, mitigating residual discontent over the Hastings affair and the bedchamber crisis.
Derby's ministry did not last long, and in June 1859 Victoria recalled Palmerston to office.
In November, Albert was made aware of gossip that his son had slept with an actress in Ireland.
Peel became prime minister, and the ladies of the bedchamber most associated with the Whigs were replaced.
King William distrusted the Duchess's capacity to be regent, and in 1836 declared in her presence that he wanted to live until Victoria's 18th birthday, so that a regency could be avoided.
In the ensuing election, Gladstone's party lost to Salisbury's and the government switched hands again.
She was dressed in a white dress and her wedding veil.
Internationally, Victoria took a keen interest in the improvement of relations between France and Britain.
In August and September 1871, she was seriously ill with an abscess in her arm, which Joseph Lister successfully lanced and treated with his new antiseptic carbolic acid spray.
At the end of her reign, the Queen's full style and title were: "Her Majesty Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, Empress of India."
At the height of a revolutionary scare in the United Kingdom in April 1848, Victoria and her family left London for the greater safety of Osborne House, a private estate on the Isle of Wight that they had purchased in 1845 and redeveloped.
Abdul Karim remained in her service until he returned to India with a pension on her death.
In March 1864, a protester stuck a notice on the railings of Buckingham Palace that announced "these commanding premises to be let or sold in consequence of the late occupant's declining business".
She did undertake her official government duties, yet chose to remain secluded in her royal residences—Windsor Castle, Osborne House, and the private estate in Scotland that she and Albert had acquired in 1847, Balmoral Castle.
On her return Victoria wrote to Derby reprimanding him for the poor state of the Royal Navy in comparison to the French one.
The Regency Act 1830 made special provision for the Duchess of Kent to act as regent in case William died while Victoria was still a minor.
On the last day of February 1872, two days after the thanksgiving service, 17-year-old Arthur O'Connor (great-nephew of Irish MP Feargus O'Connor) waved an unloaded pistol at Victoria's open carriage just after she had arrived at Buckingham Palace.
It was a period of industrial, cultural, political, scientific, and military change within the United Kingdom, and was marked by a great expansion of the British Empire.
Married 1885, Prince Henry of Battenberg (1858–1896);  3 sons, 1 daughter (including Victoria Eugenie, Queen of Spain)
Between April 1877 and February 1878, she threatened five times to abdicate while pressuring Disraeli to act against Russia during the Russo-Turkish War, but her threats had no impact on the events or their conclusion with the Congress of Berlin.
Places named after her include the capital of the Seychelles, Africa's largest lake, Victoria Falls, the capital of Gozo and a line of fortifications in Malta, the capitals of British Columbia (Victoria) and Saskatchewan (Regina), and two Australian states (Victoria and Queensland).
On 17 March 1883, she fell down some stairs at Windsor, which left her lame until July; she never fully recovered and was plagued with rheumatism thereafter.
By this time, Victoria was once again extremely popular.
An array of mementos commemorating her extended family, friends and servants were laid in the coffin with her, at her request, by her doctor and dressers.
The United Kingdom was already an established constitutional monarchy, in which the sovereign held relatively little direct political power.
At public appearances, Victoria was hissed and jeered as "Mrs. Melbourne".
Albert and Victoria felt mutual affection and the Queen proposed to him on 15 October 1839, just five days after he had arrived at Windsor.
Russell's ministry, though Whig, was not favoured by the Queen.
In May 1879, she became a great-grandmother (on the birth of Princess Feodora of Saxe-Meiningen) and passed her "poor old 60th birthday".
In 1839, Melbourne resigned after Radicals and Tories (both of whom Victoria detested) voted against a bill to suspend the constitution of Jamaica.
Albert, however, thought Lehzen was incompetent, and that her mismanagement threatened his daughter's health.
Part of Victoria's extensive correspondence has been published in volumes edited by A. C. Benson, Hector Bolitho, George Earle Buckle, Lord Esher, Roger Fulford, and Richard Hough among others.
Gladstone was replaced by Lord Salisbury.
He is so sensible, so kind, and so good, and so amiable too.
Her coronation took place on 28 June 1838 at Westminster Abbey.
In addition to Beatrice's edited copy, Lord Esher transcribed the volumes from 1832 to 1861 before Beatrice destroyed them.
Official documents prepared on the first day of her reign described her as Alexandrina Victoria, but the first name was withdrawn at her own wish and not used again.
He was her heir presumptive until she married and had a child.
Victoria was physically unprepossessing—she was stout, dowdy and no more than five feet tall—but she succeeded in projecting a grand image.
Victoria disliked the trips; the constant round of public appearances made her tired and ill, and there was little time for her to rest.
Beatrice transcribed and edited the diaries covering Victoria's accession onwards, and burned the originals in the process.
Equerry Frederick Ponsonby (the son of Sir Henry) discovered that the Munshi had lied about his parentage, and reported to Lord Elgin, Viceroy of India, "the Munshi occupies very much the same position as John Brown used to do."
At her behest, a reference threatening the "undermining of native religions and customs" was replaced by a passage guaranteeing religious freedom.
Eleven days after Orsini's assassination attempt in France, Victoria's eldest daughter married Prince Frederick William of Prussia in London.
As the tenth anniversary of her husband's death approached, her son's condition grew no better, and Victoria's distress continued.
Nevertheless, over the following seventeen years, she and Albert had a further eight children: Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (b.
Following a custom she maintained throughout her widowhood, Victoria spent the Christmas of 1900 at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight.
Victoria was pleased when Gladstone resigned in 1885 after his budget was defeated.
In 1894, Gladstone retired and, without consulting the outgoing prime minister, Victoria appointed Lord Rosebery as prime minister.
She became the first sovereign to take up residence at Buckingham Palace and inherited the revenues of the duchies of Lancaster and Cornwall as well as being granted a civil list allowance of £385,000 per year.
On the day after the first anniversary of Brown's death, Victoria was informed by telegram that her youngest son, Leopold, had died in Cannes.
Victoria marked the fiftieth anniversary of her accession on 20 June with a banquet to which 50 kings and princes were invited.
Royal arms (in Scotland)
When Victoria complained to Melbourne that her mother's close proximity promised "torment for many years", Melbourne sympathised but said it could be avoided by marriage, which Victoria called a "schocking  alternative".
By 1846, Peel's ministry faced a crisis involving the repeal of the Corn Laws.
Appalled, Albert travelled to Cambridge, where his son was studying, to confront him.
The presence of the disease in Victoria's descendants, but not in her ancestors, led to modern speculation that her true father was not the Duke of Kent but a haemophiliac.
In 1843 and 1845, she and Albert stayed with King Louis Philippe I at château d'Eu in Normandy; she was the first British or English monarch to visit a French one since the meeting of Henry VIII of England and Francis I of France on the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520.
In Scotland, the first and fourth quarters are occupied by the Scottish lion, and the second by the English lions.
In 1853, Victoria gave birth to her eighth child, Leopold, with the aid of the new anaesthetic, chloroform.
At the time, it was customary for the prime minister to appoint members of the Royal Household, who were usually his political allies and their spouses.
After Victoria's death, her youngest daughter, Princess Beatrice, was appointed her literary executor.
Victoria later described her childhood as "rather melancholy".
She felt "aged" by "the loss of my beloved child".
Spontaneous mutations account for about a third of cases.
Financially prudent, she paid off her father's debts.
Victoria's links with Europe's royal families earned her the nickname "the grandmother of Europe".
As Victoria was riding in a carriage, Pate struck her with his cane, crushing her bonnet and bruising her forehead.
Victoria's first visit to Ireland in 1849 was a public relations success, but it had no lasting impact or effect on the growth of Irish nationalism.
Mother and son attended a public parade through London and a grand service of thanksgiving in St Paul's Cathedral on 27 February 1872, and republican feeling subsided.
On 14 January 1858, an Italian refugee from Britain called Orsini attempted to assassinate Napoleon III with a bomb made in England.
The crests, mottoes, and supporters also differ in and outside Scotland.
Victoria and Albert had 42 grandchildren, of whom 34 survived to adulthood.
Lord Conyngham then acquainted me that my poor Uncle, the King, was no more, and had expired at 12 minutes past 2 this morning, and consequently that ''I'' am ''Queen''."
"Everyone likes flattery," he said, "and when you come to royalty you should lay it on with a trowel."
Privately, Victoria attempted to influence government policy and ministerial appointments; publicly, she became a national icon who was identified with strict standards of personal morality.
His government was weak, and the following year Lord Salisbury replaced him.
Her lessons included French, German, Italian, and Latin, but she spoke only English at home.
In 1889, during a stay in Biarritz, she became the first reigning monarch from Britain to set foot in Spain when she crossed the border for a brief visit.
On 14 December 1878, the anniversary of Albert's death, Victoria's second daughter Alice, who had married Louis of Hesse, died of diphtheria in Darmstadt.
The story of their relationship was the subject of the 1997 movie ''Mrs.
When Disraeli died the following year, she was blinded by "fast falling tears", and erected a memorial tablet "placed by his grateful Sovereign and Friend, Victoria R.I."
She objected on the grounds of the King's disapproval, but her mother dismissed his complaints as motivated by jealousy, and forced Victoria to continue the tours.
By April 1900, the Boer War was so unpopular in mainland Europe that her annual trip to France seemed inadvisable.
The following year she supported the passing of the Reform Act 1867 which doubled the electorate by extending the franchise to many urban working men, though she was not in favour of votes for women.
Her mother was consigned to a remote apartment in Buckingham Palace, and Victoria often refused to see her.
In 1830, the Duchess of Kent and Conroy took Victoria across the centre of England to visit the Malvern Hills, stopping at towns and great country houses along the way.
From July 1832 until just before her death, she kept a detailed journal, which eventually encompassed 122 volumes.
Until 1817, Edward's niece, Princess Charlotte of Wales, was the only legitimate grandchild of George III.
Items of jewellery placed on Victoria included the wedding ring of John Brown's mother, given to her by Brown in 1883.
Despite this destruction, much of the diaries still exist.
While Victoria inherited all the British dominions, Hanover passed instead to her father's younger brother, her unpopular uncle the Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale, who became King Ernest Augustus I of Hanover.
Similar journeys to other parts of England and Wales were taken in 1832, 1833, 1834 and 1835.
Victoria was christened privately by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Manners-Sutton, on 24 June 1819 in the Cupola Room at Kensington Palace.
Additional names proposed by her parents—Georgina (or Georgiana), Charlotte, and Augusta—were dropped on the instructions of the Duke's elder brother, the Prince Regent (later George IV).
She died on Tuesday, 22 January 1901, at half past six in the evening, at the age of 81.
Through Victoria's reign, the gradual establishment of a modern constitutional monarchy in Britain continued.
She spent the evening after their wedding lying down with a headache, but wrote ecstatically in her diary:
Peel resigned in 1846, after the repeal narrowly passed, and was replaced by Lord John Russell.
In Ireland, Victoria was labelled "The Famine Queen".
Leopold, Victoria's mother, and Albert's father (Ernest I, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha) were siblings.
He also pushed the Royal Titles Act 1876 through Parliament, so that Victoria took the title "Empress of India" from 1 May 1876.
Derby was reinstated as prime minister.
Through the 1860s, Victoria relied increasingly on a manservant from Scotland, John Brown.
Though queen, as an unmarried young woman Victoria was required by social convention to live with her mother, despite their differences over the Kensington System and her mother's continued reliance on Conroy.
After a year, she was won around to the marriage by Henry and Beatrice's promise to remain living with and attending her.
One of Albert's dressing gowns was placed by her side, with a plaster cast of his hand, while a lock of John Brown's hair, along with a picture of him, was placed in her left hand concealed from the view of the family by a carefully positioned bunch of flowers.
By the beginning of December, Albert was very unwell.
She made and hosted several visits between the British royal family and the House of Orleans, who were related by marriage through the Coburgs.
Biographies of Victoria written before much of the primary material became available, such as Lytton Strachey's ''Queen Victoria'' of 1921, are now considered out of date.
Reforms of the voting system increased the power of the House of Commons at the expense of the House of Lords and the monarch.
The system prevented the princess from meeting people whom her mother and Conroy deemed undesirable (including most of her father's family), and was designed to render her weak and dependent upon them.
Victoria's grandfather and father died in 1820, within a week of each other, and the Duke of York died in 1827.
The Queen requested that any special celebrations be delayed until 1897, to coincide with her Diamond Jubilee, which was made a festival of the British Empire at the suggestion of Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain.
Victoria complained to Russell that Palmerston sent official dispatches to foreign leaders without her knowledge, but Palmerston was retained in office and continued to act on his own initiative, despite her repeated remonstrances.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent's only child, Victoria was born at 4.15&nbsp;a.m. on 24 May 1819 at Kensington Palace in London.
Victoria turned 18 on 24 May 1837, and a regency was avoided.
There is no documentary evidence of a haemophiliac in connection with Victoria's mother, and as male carriers always suffer the disease, even if such a man had existed he would have been seriously ill.
Victoria felt "sick at heart" to see her daughter leave England for Germany; "It really makes me shudder", she wrote to Princess Victoria in one of her frequent letters, "when I look round to all your sweet, happy, unconscious sisters, and think I must give them up too – one by one."
After the visit she wrote, "Albert is extremely handsome; his hair is about the same colour as mine; his eyes are large and blue, and he has a beautiful nose and a very sweet mouth with fine teeth; but the charm of his countenance is his expression, which is most delightful."
"If ''we'' are to ''maintain'' our position as a ''first-rate'' Power", she wrote, "we must&nbsp;... be ''Prepared'' for ''attacks'' and ''wars'', ''somewhere'' or ''other'', CONTINUALLY."
Almost exactly a year later, Princess Victoria gave birth to the Queen's first grandchild, Wilhelm, who would become the last German Kaiser.
As she could not succeed to the throne of Hanover, her arms did not carry the Hanoverian symbols that were used by her immediate predecessors.
William compared the journeys to royal progresses and was concerned that they portrayed Victoria as his rival rather than his heir presumptive.
Victoria's eldest daughter became Empress consort of Germany in 1888, but she was widowed within the year, and Victoria's grandchild Wilhelm became German Emperor as Wilhelm II.
Victoria was the daughter of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, the fourth son of King George III.
The Queen had a relatively balanced view of the conflict, and condemned atrocities on both sides.
Victoria was outraged when he was found not guilty by reason of insanity, but was so pleased by the many expressions of loyalty after the attack that she said it was "worth being shot at—to see how much one is loved".
Gladstone attempted to pass a bill granting Ireland home rule, but to Victoria's glee it was defeated.
Derby resigned in 1868, to be replaced by Benjamin Disraeli, who charmed Victoria.
While Victoria was ill, Conroy and the Duchess unsuccessfully badgered her to make Conroy her private secretary.
Victoria was devastated.
The bill removed political power from plantation owners who were resisting measures associated with the abolition of slavery.
In 1818 he married Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, a widowed German princess with two children—Carl (1804–1856) and Feodora (1807–1872)—by her first marriage to the Prince of Leiningen.
As Victoria's monarchy became more symbolic than political, it placed a strong emphasis on morality and family values, in contrast to the sexual, financial and personal scandals that had been associated with previous members of the House of Hanover and which had discredited the monarchy.
Salisbury's government only lasted a few months, however, and Victoria was forced to recall Gladstone, whom she referred to as a "half crazy & really in many ways ridiculous old man".
In early 1855, the government of Lord Aberdeen, who had replaced Derby, fell amidst recriminations over the poor management of British troops in the Crimean War.
The Queen commissioned a Tory, Sir Robert Peel, to form a new ministry.
Brown died 10 days after her accident, and to the consternation of her private secretary, Sir Henry Ponsonby, Victoria began work on a eulogistic biography of Brown.
Around the world, places and memorials are dedicated to her, especially in the Commonwealth nations.
Edward Oxford felt that the attempts were encouraged by his acquittal in 1840.
He was diagnosed with typhoid fever by William Jenner, and died on 14 December 1861.
Through Albert's mediation, relations between mother and daughter slowly improved.
Victoria may have suffered from postnatal depression after many of her pregnancies.
Alexander, on the other hand, was "very plain".
Napoleon III, since the Crimean War Britain's closest ally, visited London in April 1855, and from 17 to 28 August the same year Victoria and Albert returned the visit.
Before her accession, she received no grant of arms.
Her son and successor Edward VII belonged to her husband's House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
The biographies written by Elizabeth Longford and Cecil Woodham-Smith, in 1964 and 1972 respectively, are still widely admired.
To relieve his wife during her intense and deep grief, Albert took on most of her duties, despite being ill himself with chronic stomach trouble.
Her Golden and Diamond Jubilees were times of public celebration.
She agreed to visit the gardens of the Royal Horticultural Society at Kensington and take a drive through London in an open carriage.
He has besides the most pleasing and delightful exterior and appearance you can possibly see."
Conroy, the Hastings family and the opposition Tories organised a press campaign implicating the Queen in the spreading of false rumours about Lady Flora.
Her family and retainers were appalled, and accused Abdul Karim of spying for the Muslim Patriotic League, and biasing the Queen against the Hindus.
The following year, President Bonaparte was declared Emperor Napoleon III, by which time Russell's administration had been replaced by a short-lived minority government led by Lord Derby.
She preferred short, simple services, and personally considered herself more aligned with the presbyterian Church of Scotland than the episcopal Church of England.
Her mother was extremely protective, and Victoria was raised largely isolated from other children under the so-called "Kensington System", an elaborate set of rules and protocols devised by the Duchess and her ambitious and domineering comptroller, Sir John Conroy, who was rumoured to be the Duchess's lover.
At Ramsgate in October 1835, Victoria contracted a severe fever, which Conroy initially dismissed as a childish pretence.
The following day, she participated in a procession and attended a thanksgiving service in Westminster Abbey.
Victoria's household was largely run by her childhood governess, Baroness Louise Lehzen from Hanover.
The Victoria Cross was introduced in 1856 to reward acts of valour during the Crimean War, and it remains the highest British, Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand award for bravery.
Albert became an important political adviser as well as the Queen's companion, replacing Lord Melbourne as the dominant, influential figure in the first half of her life.
In the 1874 general election, Disraeli was returned to power.
On 20 June 1837, William IV died at the age of 71, and Victoria became Queen of the United Kingdom.
In a similar attack in 1849, unemployed Irishman William Hamilton fired a powder-filled pistol at Victoria's carriage as it passed along Constitution Hill, London.
Brown, who was attending the Queen, grabbed him and O'Connor was later sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.
Her favourite pet Pomeranian, Turi, was laid upon her deathbed as a last request.
On 29 May 1842, Victoria was riding in a carriage along The Mall, London, when John Francis aimed a pistol at her but the gun did not fire; he escaped.
Their descendants include Elizabeth II, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, Harald V of Norway, Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden, Margrethe II of Denmark, and Felipe VI of Spain.
After a furious row between Victoria and Albert over the issue, Lehzen was pensioned off, and Victoria's close relationship with her ended.
Royal arms (outside Scotland)
Her seclusion earned her the nickname "widow of Windsor".
After the death of Princess Augusta in 1840, Victoria's mother was given both Clarence and Frogmore Houses.
It is more likely that the mutation arose spontaneously because Victoria's father was over 50 at the time of her conception and haemophilia arises more frequently in the children of older fathers.
Her brother Leopold was Princess Charlotte's widower.
It was only in 1851 that Palmerston was removed after he announced the British government's approval of President Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte's coup in France without consulting the Prime Minister.
Under Wilhelm, Victoria and Albert's hopes of a liberal Germany were not fulfilled.
In 1897, Victoria had written instructions for her funeral, which was to be military as befitting a soldier's daughter and the head of the army, and white instead of black.
She experienced unpopularity during the first years of her widowhood, but was well liked during the 1880s and 1890s, when she embodied the empire as a benevolent matriarchal figure.
They visited the Exposition Universelle (a successor to Albert's 1851 brainchild the Great Exhibition) and Napoleon I's tomb at Les Invalides (to which his remains had only been returned in 1840), and were guests of honour at a 1,200-guest ball at the Palace of Versailles.
The following month, Victoria's youngest child, Beatrice, met and fell in love with Prince Henry of Battenberg at the wedding of Victoria's granddaughter Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine to Henry's brother Prince Louis of Battenberg.
The prime ministers of all the self-governing dominions were invited to London for the festivities.
Palmerston died in 1865, and after a brief ministry led by Russell, Derby returned to power.
In the next four years over a million Irish people died and another million emigrated in what became known as the Great Famine.
At the start of her reign Victoria was popular, but her reputation suffered in an 1839 court intrigue when one of her mother's ladies-in-waiting, Lady Flora Hastings, developed an abdominal growth that was widely rumoured to be an out-of-wedlock pregnancy by Sir John Conroy.
Victoria thought he had "little heart or ''Zartgefühl'' tact – and&nbsp;... his conscience & intelligence have been completely wharped ".
