Queens played a minor role in the American Revolution, as compared to Brooklyn, where the Battle of Long Island was largely fought.
Streets at the easternmost end, however, are nearly all named.
A lesser bridge connects Grand Avenue in Queens to Grand Street in Brooklyn.
* Maspeth and Ridgewood are home to many Eastern European immigrants such as Romanian, Polish, Albanian, and other Slavic populations.
Four United States Postal Service postal zones serve Queens, based roughly on those serving the towns in existence at the consolidation of the five boroughs into New York City: Long Island City (ZIP codes starting with 111), Jamaica (114), Flushing (113), and Far Rockaway (116).
The Topographical Bureau, Borough of Queens, worked out the details.
Queens County is also the second-most populous county in the U.S. state of New York, behind the neighboring borough of Brooklyn, which is coterminous with Kings County.
Another deviation from the norm is Broad Channel; it maintains the north-south numbering progression but uses only the suffix "Road," as well as the prefixes "West" and "East," depending on location relative to Cross Bay Boulevard, the neighborhood's major through street.
On its eastern end at the Queens/Nassau border, it splits into the Southern State Parkway which continues east, and the Cross Island Parkway which turns north.
* Queens has the largest Ecuadorian population in the city, accounting for 62.2% of the city's total Ecuadorian population, for a total of 101,339.
Long Island City, the towns of Newtown, Flushing, and Jamaica, and the Rockaway Peninsula portion of the Town of Hempstead were merged to form the new borough, dissolving all former municipal governments (Long Island City, the county government, all towns, and all villages) within the new borough.
Queens's cultural institutions include, but are not limited to:
Queens is the fourth-most densely populated county among New York City's boroughs, as well as in the United States.
In total, 56.16% (1,160,483) of Queens's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.
In 2002, Queens voted against incumbent Republican Governor of New York George Pataki in favor of his Democratic opponent, Carl McCall by a slim margin.
The streets of Queens are laid out in a semi-grid system, with a numerical system of street names (similar to Manhattan and the Bronx).
In addition, 51.2% of the population was born in the United States.
* Corona and Corona Heights, once considered the "Little Italy" of Queens, was a predominantly Italian community with a strong African American community in the northern portion of Corona and adjacent East Elmhurst.
'''72.9%''' ''372,925
The diversification in Queens' economy is reflected in the large amount of employment in the export-oriented portions of its economy—such as transportation, manufacturing, and business services—that serve customers outside the region.
However, these towns were mostly inhabited by English settlers from New England via eastern Long Island (Suffolk County) subject to Dutch law.
'''79.1%''' ''470,732
Musicians who have lived in the borough include singer Nadia Ali, Tony Bennett, rappers LL Cool J, Nas, Ja Rule, 50 Cent, Run–D.M.C., Nicki Minaj, Rich The Kid, Simon & Garfunkel and Johnny Ramone.
In addition, incongruous alignments of street grids, unusual street paths due to geography, or other circumstances often lead to the skipping of numbers (for instance, on Ditmars Boulevard, 70th Street is followed by Hazen Street which is followed by 49th Street).
In the 1940s, Queens was an important center of jazz; such jazz luminaries as Louis Armstrong, Charlie Parker, and Ella Fitzgerald took up residence in Queens, seeking refuge from the segregation they found elsewhere in New York.
'''74.9%''' ''447,906
If each New York City borough were an independent city, Queens would also be the nation's fourth most populous city, after Los Angeles, Chicago, and Brooklyn.
The travel magazine ''Lonely Planet'' also named Queens the top destination in the country for 2015 for its cultural and culinary diversity.
Queens has the largest Asian American population by county outside the Western United States; according to the 2006 American Community Survey, Queens ranks fifth among US counties with 477,772 (21.18%) Asian Americans, behind Los Angeles County, California, Honolulu County, Hawaii, Santa Clara County, California, and Orange County, California.
* Queens has the largest Peruvian population in the city, accounting for 69.9% of the city's total Peruvian population, for a total of 30,825.
There were 817,250 housing units at an average density of 7,481.6 per square mile (2,888.5/km²).
According to a 2001 Claritas study, Queens is the most diverse county in the United States among counties of 100,000+ population.
* Flushing Town Hall
Nassau County is east of Queens on Long Island.
Queens Borough Hall is the seat of government and is located in Kew Gardens.
* Korean: 64,107; 66.4% of the city's total Korean population.
The borough's administrative and court buildings are presently located in Kew Gardens and downtown Jamaica respectively, two neighborhoods that were villages of the former Town of Jamaica.
* Jamaica is home to large African American and Caribbean populations.
Queens has the most diversified economy of the five boroughs of New York City and is home to JFK International Airport and LaGuardia Airport.
Under the Quartering Act, British soldiers used, as barracks, the public inns and uninhabited buildings belonging to Queens residents.
Many of the village street grids of Queens had only worded names, some were numbered according to local numbering schemes, and some had a mix of words and numbers.
The Rockaway Peninsula does not follow the same system as the rest of the borough and has its own numbering system.
The Hispanic or Latino population increased by 61% to 597,773 between 1990 and 2006 and now accounts for 26.5% of the borough's population.
Nearly all roadways oriented north-south are "Streets", while east-west roadways are "Avenues", beginning with the number 1 in the west for Streets and in the north for Avenues.
In August 2013, a stop was added at Brooklyn Army Terminal.
Broad Channel's streets were a continuation of the mainland Queens grid in the 1950s; formerly the highest numbered avenue in Queens was 208th Avenue rather today's 165th Avenue in Howard Beach & Hamilton Beach.
Even though many local people were against unannounced quartering, sentiment throughout the county remained in favor of the British crown.
The borough's largest employment sector—trade, transportation, and utilities—accounted for nearly 30% of all jobs in 2004.
For every 100 females there were 92.9 males.
Since 1990 the Borough President has acted as an advocate for the borough at the mayoral agencies, the City Council, the New York state government, and corporations.
File:Aerial View of the Throgs Neck Bridge.jpg|Throgs Neck Bridge
Republicans such as former Mayors Rudolph Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg won majorities in Queens.
When the city government announced its budget in late June 2014 for the upcoming fiscal year beginning July 1, the ferry only received a $2 million further appropriation, enough to temporarily extend it again through October, but did not receive the approximately $8 million appropriation needed to keep the service running for the full fiscal year.
Autumn is similar to spring, while snowfall generally begins in December.
Therefore, mass transit is also used.
'''71.7%''' ''433,835
Queens has recently experienced a real estate boom making most of its neighborhoods very desirable for people who want to reside near Manhattan in a less urban setting.
New York Water Taxi operates service across the East River from Hunters Point in Long Island City to Manhattan at 34th Street and south to Pier 11 at Wall Street.
Among the five boroughs, Queens has the largest population of Chinese, Indian, Korean, Filipino, Bangladeshi and Pakistani Americans.
* Afrikan Poetry Theatre
* Queens Botanical Garden
A streetcar line connecting Queens with Brooklyn was proposed by the city in February 2016, with the planned timeline calling for service to begin around 2024.
Each of these main post offices have neighborhood stations with individual ZIP codes, and unlike the other boroughs, these station names are often used in addressing letters.
Several large companies have their headquarters in Queens, including watchmaker Bulova, based in East Elmhurst; internationally renowned piano manufacturer Steinway & Sons in Astoria; Glacéau, the makers of Vitamin Water, headquartered in Whitestone; and JetBlue Airways, an airline based in Long Island City.
* Queens has the largest Salvadoran population in the city, accounting for 50.7% of the city's for a total population of 25,235.
In 2010, Queens held a disproportionate share of several Asian communities within New York City, relative to its overall population, as follows:
To the west and north is the East River, across which is Manhattan to the west and The Bronx to the north.
Coterminous with '''Queens County''' since 1899, the borough of Queens is the second-largest in population (after Brooklyn), with a census-estimated 2,339,150 residents in 2015, approximately 48% of them foreign-born.
Nearby Long Island City is a major commercial center and the home to Queensbridge, the largest housing project in North America.
The US Open tennis tournament has been played since 1978 at the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, located just south of Citi Field.
Queens is home to 49.6% of the city's Asian population.
Ridgewood also has a large Hispanic population.
Queens gained North Brother Island, South Brother Island, and Huletts Island (today known as Rikers Island).
Residents of Queens often closely identify with their neighborhood rather than with the borough or city.
Among the Hispanic population, Puerto Ricans make up the largest ethnic group at 4.6%, next to Mexicans, who make up 4.2% of the population, and Dominicans at 3.9%.
in South Ozone Park is the home of Aqueduct Racetrack, which is operated by the New York Racing Association and offers Thoroughbred horse-racing from late October/early November through April.
In Queens, the black population earns more than whites on average.
In Queens, approximately 48.5% of the population was foreign-born as of 2010.
Most private schools are affiliated to or identify themselves with the Roman Catholic or Jewish religious communities.
Originally intended as just a stopgap alternative transportation measure until subway service was restored to the Rockaways, the ferry proved to be popular with both commuters and tourists and was extended several times, as city officials evaluated the ridership numbers to determine whether to establish the service on a permanent basis.
* Chinese: 200,205; 39.8% of the city's total Chinese population.
The quartering of soldiers in private homes, except in times of war, was banned by the Third Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In some parts of the borough, several consecutive streets may share numbers (for instance, 72nd Street followed by 72nd Place and 72nd Lane, or 52nd Avenue followed by 52nd Road, 52nd Drive, and 52nd Court), often causing confusion for non-residents.
First settlements occurred in 1635 followed by early colonizations at Maspeth in 1642, and Vlissingen (now Flushing) in 1643.
Queens is traversed by three trunk east-west highways.
The Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge, built in 1939, traverses Jamaica Bay to connect the Rockaway Peninsula to Broad Channel an the rest of Queens.
The Flushing Remonstrance signed by colonists in 1657 is considered a precursor to the United States Constitution's provision on freedom of religion in the Bill of Rights.
'''66.3%''' ''541,418
The Belt Parkway begins at the Gowanus Expressway in Brooklyn, and extends east into Queens, past Aqueduct Racetrack and JFK Airport.
* Woodside is home to a large Filipino American community and has a "Little Manila" as well a large Irish American population.
Concerns were raised about the condition and distance of the old courthouse, and several sites were in contention for the construction of a new one.
Comprising almost 17% of the jobs in Queens is the information, financial activities, and business and professional services sectors.
The per capita income for the county was $19,222.
The borough is also home to one of the highest concentrations of Indian Americans in the nation, with an estimated population of 144,896 in 2014 (6.24% of the 2014 borough population), as well as Pakistani Americans, who number at 15,604.
Streets in Bayswater, which is on Jamaica Bay, has its numbered streets prefixed with the word "Bay" rather than "Beach".
* Rockaway Beach has a large Irish American population.
Queens Borough was established on January 1, 1898.
The migration of European Americans from parts of Queens has been long ongoing with departures from Ozone Park, Woodhaven, Bellerose, Floral Park, and Flushing, etc.
Since the 1996 presidential election, Democratic presidential candidates have received over 70% of the popular vote in Queens.
Trains on the M service go through Queens twice in the same trip; both of its full-length termini, in Middle Village and Forest Hills, are in Queens.
South Americans constitute 9.6% of Queens's population, mainly of Ecuadorian (4.4%) and Colombian descent (3.2%).
Jackson Heights is known for its prominent Indian cuisine and also many Latin American eateries.
On December 3, 1768, Queens gained other islands in Long Island Sound that were not already assigned to a county but that did not abut on Westchester County (today's Bronx County).
* Jackson Heights, Elmhurst, and East Elmhurst make up an conglomeration of Hispanic, Asian, Tibetan, and South Asian communities.
Corona today has the highest concentration of Latinos of any Queens neighborhood, with an increasing Chinese American population, located between Elmhurst and Flushing.
In the early 1920s a "Philadelphia Plan" was instituted to overlay one numbered system upon the whole borough.
Staten Island is southwest of Brooklyn, and shares only a 3-mile-long water border (in the Outer Bay) with Queens.
LaGuardia Airport, in northern Queens, opened in 1939.
They promised to continue efforts to have the service restored.
Winters are relatively mild compared to other areas of New York State, though snow is common and blizzards occur about every 4–6 years.
Another 13.5% speak an Asian language at home.
The cuisine available in Queens reflects its vast cultural diversity.
There were 782,664 households out of which 31.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.9% were married couples living together, 16.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.3% were non-families.
Donald Trump, a real estate billionaire, socialite, and 2016 U.S. presidential nominee for the Republican Party, was born in Queens and raised in Jamaica Estates.
'''56.3%''' ''426,015
Republican political candidates who do well in Queens usually win citywide or statewide elections.
With a capacity of 23,771, Arthur Ashe Stadium is the biggest tennis-specific stadium in the world.
The Long Island Expressway (Interstate 495) runs from the Queens Midtown Tunnel on the west through the borough to Nassau County on the east.
Both crossings were built and continue to be operated by what is now known as MTA Bridges and Tunnels.
On May 8, 1884, Rikers Island was transferred to New York County.
In 1885, Lloyd Neck, which was part of the Town of Oyster Bay and was earlier known as Queens Village, seceded from Queens and became part of the Town of Huntington in Suffolk County.
Transportation to and from Manhattan, previously by ferry or via bridges in Brooklyn, opened up with the Queensboro Bridge finished in 1909, and with railway tunnels under the East River in 1910.
About 100 local bus routes operate within Queens, and another 15 express routes shuttle commuters between Queens and Manhattan, under the MTA New York City Bus and MTA Bus brands.
'''Queens''' is the easternmost and largest in area of the five boroughs of New York City.
On June 8, 1881, North Brother Island was transferred to New York County.
Public schools in the borough are managed by the New York City Department of Education, the largest public school system in the United States.
'''62.9%''' ''349,520
In 2007, limited weekday service was begun between Breezy Point, the westernmost point in the Rockaways, to Pier 11 via the Brooklyn Army Terminal.
Flushing Bay and the Flushing River are in the north, connecting to the East River.
It is geographically adjacent to the borough of Brooklyn at the southwestern end of Long Island, and to Nassau County further east on Long Island; in addition, Queens shares water borders with the boroughs of Manhattan and the Bronx.
The midsection of Queens is crossed by the Long Island straddling terminal moraine created by the Wisconsin Glacier.
A fair number of streets that were country roads in the 18th and 19th centuries (especially major thoroughfares such as Northern Boulevard, Queens Boulevard, Hillside Avenue, and Jamaica Avenue) carry names rather than numbers, typically though not uniformly called "Boulevards" or "Parkways".
Approximately 44.2% of the population over 5 years of age speak English at home; 23.8% speak Spanish at home.
Queens' Borough President is Melinda Katz, elected in November 2013 as a Democrat with 80.3% of the vote .
All streets on the grid have names.
Many of these African Americans live in quiet, middle class suburban neighborhoods near the Nassau County border, such as Laurelton and Cambria Heights which have large black populations whose family income is higher than average.
* Indian: 117,550; 64% Asian Indian population.
The borough has diverse housing, ranging from high-rise apartment buildings in the urban areas of western and central Queens, such as Jackson Heights, Flushing, Astoria, and Long Island City, to suburban neighborhoods in the eastern part of the borough such as Little Neck, Douglaston, and Bayside.
Various public figures have grown up or lived in Queens.
This airline industry is particularly important to the economy of Queens, providing almost one quarter of the sector's employment and more than 30% of the sector's wages.
The Pulaski Bridge connects McGuinness Boulevard in Greenpoint to 11th Street, Jackson Avenue, and Hunters Point Avenue in Long Island City.
Republican State Senator Serphin Maltese represented a district in central and southern Queens for twenty years until his defeat in 2008 by Democratic City Councilman Joseph Addabbo.
Areas with high proportions of immigrants and undocumented aliens are traditionally undercounted for a variety of reasons, often based on a mistrust of government officials or an unwillingness to be identified.
Around 1874, the seat of county government was moved to Long Island City from Mineola.
+ '''Presidential election results'''
On October 7, 1691, all counties in the Colony of New York were redefined.
Monthly and annual statistics for the three main climatology stations in New York City
People of South Asian descent make up 7.8% of Queens' population: Indians (5.3%), Bangladeshi (1.5%), Pakistanis (0.7%), and Nepali (0.2%).
* Queens has the largest Colombian population in the city, accounting for 76.6% of the city's total Colombian population, for a total of 80,116.
* Jamaica Estates, Jamaica Hills, Hillcrest, Fresh Meadows, and Hollis Hills are also populated with many people of Jewish background.
In addition, the Floral Park post office (110), based in Nassau County, serves a small part of northeastern Queens.
On April 6, 1784, a sixth town, the Town of North Hempstead, was formed through secession by the northern portions of the Town of Hempstead.
* Queens Museum of Art
The manufacturing and construction industries in Queens are the largest of the City and account for nearly 17% of the borough's private sector jobs.
Physician Joshua Prager was born in Whitestone.
From 1905 to 1908 the Long Island Rail Road in Queens became electrified.
On April 16, 1964, South Brother Island was transferred to Bronx County.
(most of the outgoing population has been replaced with Asian Americans).
Subway stations were only partly renamed, and some, including those along the IRT Flushing Line (), now share dual names after the original street names.
Elementary and secondary school education in Queens is provided by a vast number of public and private institutions.
As of 2010, 43.84% (905,890) of Queens residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 23.88% (493,462) spoke Spanish, 8.06% (166,570) Chinese, 3.44% (71,054) various Indic languages, 2.74% (56,701) Korean, 1.67% (34,596) Russian, 1.56% (32,268) Italian, 1.54% (31,922) Tagalog, 1.53% (31,651) Greek, 1.32% (27,345) French Creole, 1.17% (24,118) Polish, 0.96% (19,868) Hindi, 0.93% (19,262) Urdu, 0.92% (18,931) other Asian languages, 0.80% (16,435) other Indo-European languages, 0.71% (14,685) French, 0.61% (12,505) Arabic, 0.48% (10,008) Serbo-Croatian, and Hebrew was spoken as a main language by 0.46% (9,410) of the population over the age of five.
On March 1, 1860, the eastern border between Queens County (later Nassau County) and Suffolk County was redefined with no discernible change.
There is also a large presence of Filipino Americans in Queens Village and in Hollis.
Sixty-three percent of registered Queens voters are Democrats.
Stating that Queens is "quickly becoming its hippest" but that "most travelers haven’t clued in… yet," the ''Lonely Planet'' stated that "nowhere is the image of New York as the global melting pot truer than Queens."
'''59.9%''' ''471,223
It was an original county of New York State, one of twelve created on November 1, 1683.
Jamaica station is a hub station where all the lines in the system but one (the Port Washington Branch) converge.
* The Mexican population in Queens has increased 45.7% to 71,283, the second highest in the city, after Brooklyn.
At this point, the boundaries of Queens County and the Borough of Queens became coterminous.
* Richmond Hill, in the south, is often thought of as ''Little Guyana'' for its large Guyanese community.
Queens has the most diversified economy of the five boroughs, with occupations spread relatively evenly across the health care, retail trade, manufacturing, construction, transportation, and film and television production sectors, such that no single sector is overwhelmingly dominant.
It is divided into 14 community districts, each served by a local Community Board.
The East River opens into Long Island Sound.
Summers are hot, humid, and wet.
The , , , and  routes connect Queens to Brooklyn without going through Manhattan first.
The 1850 census was the first in which the population of the three western towns exceeded that of the three eastern towns that are now part of Nassau County.
It became a borough of New York City in 1898, and from 1683 until 1899, the County of Queens included what is now Nassau County.
File:Air Train JFK Van Wyck jeh.jpg|Air Train JFK path above the Van Wyck Expressway
Greenpoint Avenue Bridge) connects the sections of Greenpoint Avenue in Greenpoint and Long Island City.
* Museum of the Moving Image
Of that, 49.5% were born in Latin America, 33.5% in Asia, 14.8% in Europe, 1.8% in Africa, and 0.4% in North America.
The other exception is the neighborhood of Ridgewood, which for the most part shares a grid and house numbering system with the Brooklyn neighborhood of Bushwick.
* Astoria, in the northwest, is traditionally home to one of the largest Greek populations outside Greece, it also has large Spanish American and Italian American communities, and is also home to a growing population of Arabs, South Asians, and young professionals from Manhattan.
For example, Queens College is situated at 65–30 Kissena Boulevard, and is so named because the cross-street closest to the entrance is 65th Avenue.
Although Queens is heavily Democratic, it is considered a swing county in New York politics.
Queens has the second-largest economy of New York City's five boroughs, following Manhattan.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy on October 29, 2012, massive infrastructure damage to the IND Rockaway Line () south of the Howard Beach – JFK Airport station severed all direct subway connections between the Rockaway Peninsula and Broad Channel, Queens and the Queens mainland for many months.
Originally, Queens County included the adjacent area now comprising Nassau County.
* Hindu Temple Society of North America
After the capture of the colony by the English and its renaming as New York in 1664, the area (and all of Long Island) became known as Yorkshire.
* Ozone Park and South Ozone Park have large Italian, Hispanic, and Guyanese populations.
A 2011 UJA/Federation of New York study found that Queens was home to 198,000 Jewish Americans, up from 186,000 in 2002.
From the 1920s through the 1960s, Corona remained a close-knit neighborhood.
'''53.6%''' ''410,546
Nathan Hale was captured by the British on the shore of Flushing Bay in Queens before being executed by hanging in Manhattan for gathering intelligence.
Despite last-minute efforts by local transportation advocates, civic leaders and elected officials, ferry service ended on October 31, 2014.
The centralized New York City government is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, and welfare services in Queens.
Ferry operator SeaStreak began running a city-subsidized ferry service between a makeshift ferry slip at Beach 108th Street and Beach Channel Drive in Rockaway Park, Queens, and Pier 11/Wall Street, then continuing on to the East 34th Street Ferry Landing.
Flushing is a major commercial hub for Chinese American and Korean American businesses, while Jamaica is the major civic and transportation hub for the borough.
