Two of the most well-known are the University of the Philippines Diliman and the Ateneo de Manila University, both comprehensive research universities consistently ranked among the best in the country.
The city can be divided into a number of areas.
It consists of several office and residential skyscrapers, including many local IT and consumer electronic firms.
This caused the territorial division of Caloocan into two non-contiguous parts, the South section being the more urbanized part, and the North half being sub-rural.
Amoranto Avenue (Retiro) and A. Bonifacio Avenue.
The Quezon City Fire District is a division of the Bureau of Fire Protection National Capital Region which provides fire and emergency services to the city.
Other professional schools include the University of the Philippines College of Law and the New Era University College of Law, both located in Diliman.
Quezon City is made up of 142 barangays (the smallest local government units) which handle governance in a much smaller area.
A large portion of Tandang Sora district is Barangay Bahay Toro, where a historic site of the Philippine Revolution known as ''Pugad Lawin'' is located.
The Eastwood City Business Center is situated here.
The plan was approved by the Philippine authorities in 1941.
The MRT-7 project will commence at North Avenue, connecting the MRT-3 at its northern terminus.
The main thoroughfares of this area are Banawe, D. Tuazon, Mayon, N.S.
He was made the first Marquis of Novaliches, a title bestowed with Grandeza de Espana (Grandee of Spain--- first class rank among the nobility), in the 1840s.
Department stores and retail centers can also be found here, such as Gateway Mall, Plaza Fair, Rustan's, Shopwise Supercenter, SM Cubao, Ali Mall, and Farmer's Plaza.
On October 1, 1975, Quezon City was the actual site of the "Thrilla in Manila" boxing fight between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier.
Other Catholic schools operated by laypersons include Miriam College (formerly of the Maryknoll Sisters), St. Bridget School, Colegio de San Lorenzo, Flos Carmeli Institution, PAREF-Northfield School, PAREF-Rosehill School, Mater Carmeli School, School of Saint Anthony, and Sacred Heart Academy of Novaliches, while parochial schools include the Immaculate Conception Cathedral School in Cubao and the Good Shepherd Cathedral School in Fairview.
San Francisco del Monte is also referred to as ''S.F.D.M.''.
The southern portion of the city is divided into a number of districts including Diliman, Commonwealth, the Project areas, Cubao, Kamias, Kamuning, New Manila, San Francisco del Monte, and Santa Mesa Heights.
District Headquarters are located inside the Quezon City Hall Complex.
President Manuel L. Quezon acted as mayor from October 12 to November 4, 1939, pending the resignation from another position of his intended appointee, Tomas B. Morato.
New Manila is located on west central portion of the city.
Military advisers, however, did not anticipate aerial bombardment.
The Quezon City Hall, one of the tallest city halls in the country, is located along the Circle.
This is primarily a residential area home to many subdivisions (residential associations), among these are Don Antonio Royale, Don Antonio Heights, BF Homes QC, Ferndale Homes, Vista Real, Filinvest 1 and 2, New Capitol Estates and others.
Quezon City, being a part of the Metro Manila region, has its mayor in the Metro Manila Council headed by the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA).
Novaliches is Quezon City's northernmost district and is primarily residential.
The 105th Technical & Administrative Services Group (Reserve), specifically the 1st Technical & Administrative Services Unit (Ready Reserve) of the AFP Reserve Command provide technical assistance to these maneuver units.
Women's colleges such as Miriam College, Immaculate Heart of Mary College, and Saint Pedro Poveda College are located within city limits, with the last straddling the border of Quezon City and Pasig.
The National Assembly of the Philippine Commonwealth passed Commonwealth Act 502 known as the Charter of Quezon City originally proposed as "Balintawak City", Assemblymen Narciso Ramos and Ramon Mitra, Sr. successfully lobbied the assembly to name the city after the incumbent president.
Manila was getting crowded, and his military advisors (reportedly) told him that Manila, being by the bay, was an easy target for bombing by naval guns in case of attack–a real possibility in the late 1930s.
Loyola Heights also has numerous commercial study centers such as The Loyola Heights–Xavierville Kumon Center, Newton Study Center, LHSC, and others which offer after-school tutorial services.
Loyola Heights, to the southeast of Diliman is Marikina City's gateway to Quezon City.
Further west are Camp Aguinaldo and Camp Crame.
The Church So Blessed, also a Christian church, is located in Commonwealth Avenue.
Unfortunately he died later that year, leaving his partner Harry Frost to take over.
On June 16, 1950, the Quezon City Charter was revised by Republic Act No.
He ruthlessly crushed the rebellion started by José Cuesta of Cavite, a Spanish mestizo who rounded ''carbineros'' and natives to fight the Spanish military government, one of the many uprisings where even half-Spanish Filipinos began revolting.
Angelicum College, Lourdes School of Quezon City, and St. Theresa's College of Quezon City are three prestigious private Catholic schools to be found here.
New Life NorthMetro, A satellite church of ANLCC (Alabang Newlife Christian Center) is located in Cinema 6, 4th level of Trinoma Mall.
The government center in Quezon City was originally planned to be at what is now the present location of the Quezon Memorial Circle, but it was then moved further north to where Batasan hills is now.
Today, it is a heavily-populated district with a mix of residential, industrial, and commercial areas.
However, in the succeeding plebiscite on October 23, 1999, an overwhelming majority of Quezon City residents rejected the secession of Novaliches.
At the center of Diliman lies the Quezon Memorial Circle, where the late President Manuel L. Quezon is interred.
It is the second of SM Supermall and the seventh SM branch developed and operated by SM Prime Holdings owned by Henry Sy Sr..
On February 23, 1998, Republic Act.
During the Second World War, Imperial Japanese forces occupied Quezon City in 1942.
President Quezon allowed the bill to lapse into law without his signature on October 12, 1939, thus establishing Quezon City.
Located in the Galas area is the elementary school named after Manuel L. Quezon's wife, Aurora A. Quezon.
The area was first settled after the Second World War by affluent families who wished to escape the stress of living in the capital.
An elevated Automated Guideway Transit system is currently under construction in UP Diliman.
The Technological Institute of the Philippines specializes in engineering and vocational education.
Also located in Loyola Heights is the Katipunan Station of the Manila LRT Line 2 (LRT-2), which runs in an east-west direction, providing rapid access to the cities of Manila, Quezon City, Marikina and Pasig, and San Juan.
It is also a home to call centers like APAC, Telus, and Stellar.
Trinity University of Asia, St. Joseph's College of Quezon City, the Christ the King Mission Seminary, and St. Luke's Medical Center are all located along Eulogio Rodriguez Avenue, as are the Quezon Institute and the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office.
South Triangle (the area bounded by Quezon Avenue (R-7), Timog Avenue (South Avenue) and EDSA) is the location of main studios of ABS-CBN (including the radio stations DZMM Radyo Patrol 630 and MOR 101.9) and GMA Network (including the radio stations Super Radyo DZBB 594 and Barangay LS 97.1).
The cathedral of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cubao is located along Lantana Street, near Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr. Avenue.
He contacted William E. Parsons, American architect and planner, who had been the consulting architect for the islands early in the American colonial period.
At its heart is the Araneta Center along EDSA (C-4) and Aurora Boulevard (R-6).
The AFP Joint Task Force NCR is also housed inside Camp Aguinaldo.
However, it is erroneous to view him as the first mayor, as a president holding a concurrent position is not listed in the roster of incumbents for those offices.
Accessed through La Vista is Loyola Grand Villas, another upscale gated community.
The QCPD Police sectors are divided to twelve (12) stations.
Novaliches is also home to the oldest church of the Diocese of Novaliches and the town itself, the Parish and Shrine of Our Lady of Mercy or the Nuestra Senora de las Mercedes.
Some villages in this portion of Diliman are Teachers Village, U.P.
; Broadway Centrum was also given to TV5 for its TV shows until it is moved out in the site to TV5 Media Center at Mandaluyong City.
Quezon railroaded the idea of a new city at least  away from Manila Bay (beyond the reach of naval guns).
Other private religious schools include New Era University (Iglesia Ni Cristo), Grace Christian College (evangelical Christian), Jubilee Christian Academy (evangelical Christian), and Trinity University of Asia (Episcopalian).
The headquarters of the UCKG HelpCenter (Universal Church of the Kingdom of God) is located at the former Quezon Theater building.
This was to contain a large capitol building to house the Philippine Legislature and ancillary structures for the offices of representatives.
Like other cities in the Philippines, Quezon City is governed by a mayor and vice mayor elected to three-year terms.
*North Avenue-''' (Connected to MRT-3)'''
Television companies such as ABS-CBN, RPN, GMA Network, INC TV, UNTV, Net 25, PTV, and IBC all have their headquarters in Quezon City.
TV5 also had its headquarters in Quezon City since 1992, but it moved out to Mandaluyong City in 2013.
Around the monument is the two-kilometer Quezon Memorial Circle, also known as the Elliptical Road (R-7/C-5).
Parts of these are often being demolished just to be re-occupied by informal settlers soon after.
Cubao is also the home of the Cubao Cathedral the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cubao.
It is also an intersection point for two of city's commuter train lines (the MRT-3 and the LRT-2).
The city government operates the Quezon City Polytechnic University, which has campuses in Novaliches, Batasan Hills, and Barangay Sto.
537, changing the city's boundaries to an area of .
Located at the southeastern corner of Quezon City, Bagumbayan is one of the newly developed commercial areas in Quezon City.
In 1938, President Quezon made a decision to push for a new capital city.
Near the scouting memorial is the location of the former Ozone disco, site of the worst fire in Philippine history.
A branch of Jesus Is Lord Church which known as JIL, a Christian megachurch.
The northern half of the city is often called Novaliches and contains the areas of Fairview and Lagro.
At the plebiscite's end, votes that were against the separation heavily outnumbered those that were in favor.
In its place, a 22 kilometer rail system will be built.
The most prominent educational institutions located in the area are Siena College of Quezon City, Angelicum College, and PMI Colleges, while Fisher Mall is the largest commercial establishment.
The original land area of the old town of San Francisco del Monte was approximately and covered parts of what is currently known as Project 7 and 8 and Timog Avenue.
Business and management schools located in the city include Entrepreneurs School of Asia located in Libis and National College of Business and Arts (NCBA) with campuses in Fairview and Cubao.
A number of religious orders have set up convents and seminaries in the city.
Since a president can, under Philippine law, hold multiple portfolios inferior to his office, Quezon took the position of mayor in a concurrent capacity.
Santa Mesa Heights is said to be where many middle-class and upper-middle-class families reside.
Many of which are open-air restaurants and coffee shops reminiscent of Paris boulevards, but with a modern architecture.
Research institutes in the city include the Philippine Heart Center, National Kidney and Transplant Institute, the Lung Center of the Philippines, the Philippine Nuclear Research Institute, and the Philippine Institute for Pure and Applied Chemistry.
Among the notable other landmarks in the area are the United Doctors Medical Center Hospital and College in Mabuhay Rotonda, the Our Lady of the Sacred School in Plaridel cor.
The Armed Forces of the Philippines' General Headquarters is in Camp Emilio Aguinaldo in Murphy, Quezon City.
Gilmore crosses Ortigas Avenue, giving it access to Mandaluyong, Pasig, and San Juan, Metro Manila.
However, its transmitter in Novaliches is still being used and operated by the network.
Saint Pedro Poveda College sit beside Robinsons Galleria along EDSA.
The parish was founded on September 24, 1856 by Padre Andres Martin, O.S.A.
*Araneta Center-Cubao-''' (Connected to MRT-3)'''
Meanwhile, the Smart Araneta Coliseum is a venue for concerts as well as sports events.
As a result, it's often been dubbed the "Filipino Hollywood".
8535 was signed by President Fidel V. Ramos.
Rivera, and Andres Bonifacio Avenue.
Camp Aguinaldo is the general headquarters of the Armed Forces of the Philippines while Camp Crame is the headquarters of the Philippine National Police.
Quezon City was named after Manuel L. Quezon, second President of the Philippines, who founded the city and developed it to replace the City of Manila as the national capital for 28 years from 1948 to 1976.
The BJMP National Headquarters is located along Mindanao Avenue in Project 8.
Schools within the Commonwealth area include the School of the Holy Spirit, Our Lady of Mercy School, Diliman Preparatory School, The Seed Montessori, Mary the Queen College, Capitol Hills Christian School, and the Asian Institute of Computer Studies.
Most of the rest of the area is residential.
La Vista Subdivision, north of Miriam College, is an upscale gated community where some of the country's top politicians own residences, including former President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, as well as many of the country's moneyed elite.
Near and even within these subdivisions, and right beside La Vista, are some squatters' settlements, making the Loyola Heights area a place of mixed socio-economic classes.
While it is located in Pasig, the Ateneo School of Medicine and Public Health lies close to its border with Quezon City.
Quezon City is home to the Philippines' major broadcasting networks.
Both G. Araneta and Banawe streets boast of the widest selection of stores for automotive related needs in Quezon City, as both areas are mere tricycle ride away from Galas-Santol area.
Quezon City also hosts the University of the Philippines Diliman–the national university–and Ateneo de Manila University.
Quezon City became one of Metro Manila's 17 cities and municipalities.
The eastern edge of the Diliman area is roughly bound by Katipunan Avenue which passes in front of Ateneo and Miriam and runs behind the U.P.
Police structure within Quezon City is centralized and its command center found inside Camp Karingal, Kamuning, Quezon City.
It is Surrounded by Condos like The Sentinel Residences, Robinsons Escalades, Regalia Park, Amaia Skies Cubao, and Portovita.
Notable secondary public schools include the Quezon City Science High School, Commonwealth High School, Ernesto Rondon High School, Don Alejandro Roces Sr. Science-Technology High School, Batasan Hills National High School, the University of the Philippines Integrated School, and Philippine Science High School Main Campus.
Mesa is located in the Galas-Santos District.
The biggest concentration of the Jesus Miracle Crusade of Evang.
Mesa Heights area near Mabuhay (previously Welcome) Rotonda.
While the Islamic faith has its largest concentrations in the south of the Philippines, there is a significant population in Quezon City.
The district is famed as the birthplace of many popular Filipino culinary figures and establishments, especially devoted to the lechon.
On one corner of the proposed Diliman Quadrangle was delineated a 25-hectare elliptical site.
Araneta Center is also home to the Consulate of the Republic of Colombia.
The proposed creation of "Novaliches City" would have resulted in the secession of 15 barangays from Quezon City.
Many educational centers are also within the area.
The Catholic K-12 schools operated by religious orders include Angelicum College (Dominican), Ateneo Grade School and High School (Jesuit), School of the Holy Spirit (Missionaries Sisters Servants of the Holy Spirit), Siena College of Quezon City (Dominicans), St. Joseph's College of Quezon City (Franciscan), Lourdes School of Quezon City (Franciscan Capuchin), St. Mary's College of Quezon City (Religious of the Virgin Mary), St. Theresa's College of Quezon City (Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary), and Stella Maris College (Dominican).
At the center is Smart Araneta Coliseum, often called the Big Dome.
Quezon City is the first local government in the Philippines with a computerized real estate assessment and payment system.
The La Mesa Ecopark in Novaliches is the last forest of its size in the metropolis, the La Mesa Dam is an earth dam whose reservoir can hold up to 50.5 million cubic meters and occupying an area of , it is also part of the Angat–Ipo–La Mesa water system which supplies most of the water supply of Metro Manila.
The tallest building in the city is a 40-storey Eastwood Parkview located in Eastwood City.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has the Manila Philippines Temple and the Missionary Training Center located at Temple Drive Greenmeadows Subdivision of the city.
It was also the site of the rowing and dragon boat events for the 2005 Southeast Asian Games.
Ironically, this is also an area of sheer contrasts and a display of the acute economic differences in Metro Manila, with kilometers of shanty houses aligning the avenue on both sides.
Cellular networking in the Philippines, particularly the metropolitan areas, is increasing rapidly together with the low cost of calls and text messaging.
The mayor is the executive head and leads the city's departments in executing the city ordinances and improving public services.
Quezon City is bordered by Manila to the southwest, by Caloocan and Valenzuela City to the west and northwest.
The district is bisected by its two major thoroughfares, Roosevelt Avenue and Del Monte Avenue.
The studios and transmitter of RPN/CNN Philippines are located along Panay Avenue, in Barangay South Triangle.
Novaliches or "New Liches" came from an old district of Granada, Spain also known as "Liches" where Manuel and his ancestors, the Pavías, originate.
, a large portion of the compound have ceased to form part of the hospital which remained operational up until now facing E. Rodriguez Avenue between Banawe and G. Araneta Avenue.
Collectively, these units function similar to that of the US National Guard.
Fiesta Carnival was an enclosed amusement park cum carnival located in the heart of the Cubao Commercial Center, later replaced by a branch of Shopwise, a local supermarket chain.
Diliman is home to several educational institutions such as the University of the Philippines Diliman, Quezon City Polytechnic University at Sto.
*North Avenue-''' (Connected to LRT-1)'''
This is also a location of Philippine Orthopedic Center located along Banawe Avenue corner Maria Clara Street.
The park is an ellipse bounded by the Elliptical Road.
Quezon City's communication system is powered by the PLDT, Globe Telecom, BayanTel, and others.
This council formulates development plans that seeks to solve the problems and improve the conditions in the metropolis.
Curiously, also located along Araneta Avenue is Sanctuarium, a multi-storey columbarium and funeral home.
The commercial center of the city is in Cubao where many shopping malls and the Aurora Tower can be found.
Philippine Rehabilitation Institute and Capitol Medical Center Colleges are also located here.
Connecting with East Avenue is Victoriano Luna Avenue where the Armed Forces of the Philippines Medical Center is located.
Barangays in this area include Batasan Hills, Barangay Commonwealth, Holy Spirit and Old Balara.
Aurora Boulevard is the site of Broadway Centrum, where the first GMA Network entertainment shows were shot, now given by GMA to TAPE Inc. for Eat Bulaga!
With this, Bagumbayan is fast becoming one of the hippest areas for night entertainment, similar to the Malate and Ermita districts of Manila.
La Loma is located on the southwest area of Quezon City.
Other colleges include FEU-Diliman (extension of Far Eastern University), Kalayaan College, the Central Colleges of the Philippines, Philippine Rehabilitation Institute, the main branch of the AMA Computer University, and numerous campuses of information technology colleges such as Asia School of Arts & Sciences (ASAS), Informatics International College, and STI College.
Frost collaborated with Juan Arellano, engineer A.D. Williams, and landscape architect and planner Louis Croft to craft a grand master plan for the new capital.
These barangays are grouped into the aforementioned legislative districts.
Robinsons Galleria and the Crowne Plaza Manila can be found along Ortigas avenue near the EDSA Shrine.
The main thoroughfares are Aurora Boulevard, Gilmore Avenue, and Eulogio Rodriguez Sr. Avenue.
St. Paul University of Quezon City stands at the corner of Aurora Boulevard and Gilmore Avenue, across a row of shops specializing in computer equipment, and a branch of SYKES Asia.
It is composed of five barangays along the vicinity of its main streets, N.S.
These councilors represent the six (6) legislative districts of the city.
Exactly six years after on June 16, 1956, more revisions to the city's land area were made by Republic Act No.
On February 22, 1986, the Quezon City portion of the Epifanio de los Santos Avenue (between Camp Crame and Camp Aguinaldo) became the venue of the bloodless People Power Revolution that overthrew Marcos.
It featured a hilly topography with lush vegetation and mineral springs, in the midst of which the old Santuario de San Pedro Bautista was built as a retreat and monastery for Franciscan monks.
The Polytechnic University of the Philippines operates an extension campus in Barangay Commonwealth.
Passengers can transfer to the Manila LRT Line 1 at Recto station in Manila, or to the Manila Metro Rail Transit System (MRT-3) at Araneta Center–Cubao station.
The area is primarily residential with Projects 6 and 8 located here, as are other subdivisions, like Town & Country Gardenville, San Pedro Subdivisions, National Power Corporation or NPC Village, National Irrigation Administration or NIA Village, Reymar Subdivision, Philand Subdivision, Villa Corrina, San Miguel Village, Gloria Subdivisions, Jem Subdivisions, Corazonville subdivision, Villa Concepcion, Villa Lourdes and many more.
It will then go through Commonwealth Avenue, then through Regalado, Quirino Highway, ending in San Jose del Monte, Bulacan.
To the south lie San Juan and Mandaluyong, while Marikina and Pasig border the city to the southeast.
The main road traversing the area is Santol Road which stretch from the Ramon Magsaysay Boulevard near Stop and Shop and V. Mapa in Manila up to the back gate of the Q.I.
Carlos L. Albert High School is named after a former vice mayor of the city.
Diliman is also home to the headquarters of most of the country's national television networks, most notably ABS-CBN, the first and largest television network in the country.
These include Our Lady of Fátima University, FEU Nicanor Reyes Medical Foundation (medical school of the Far Eastern University), St. Luke's College of Medicine, Capitol Medical Center Colleges,  New Era University College of Medicine, and the UERMMMC College of Medicine.
Digitel has its main headquarters along Eulogio Rodriguez, Jr. Avenue (C-5) in Bagumbayan.
It is one of the cities that make up Metro Manila, the National Capital Region of the Philippines.
Most Filipino entertainment shows and movies are produced here, and it is also home to many Filipino celebrities.
Balete Drive, between Aurora Boulevard and Eulogio Rodriguez Sr. Avenue, is also the setting for many urban legends.
Stellar (Stellar Philippines Inc.) recently moved out of its Cubao site and moved to Eastwood City in 2010.
Bagumbayan also covers a sliver of Ortigas Center business district at the southeast corner of EDSA and Ortigas Avenue, where Robinsons Galleria, the EDSA Shrine, and Cyberpod Corinthian are located.
The headquarters of GMA Network, which is also one of the largest television networks in the country, is also located in Diliman.
Parsons came over in the summer of 1939 and helped select the Diliman (Tuason) estate as the site for the new city.
Currently, it is composed of Barangay San Antonio, Paraiso, Paltok, Mariblo, Masambong, Damayan, Del Monte, and Talayan.
The La Mesa Dam Watershed occupies the eastern portion.
The main campus of New Era University, higher education institution run by the Iglesia ni Cristo, is also located in Quezon City, as is the Catholic St. Paul University of Quezon City and the Episcopalian Trinity University of Asia.
SM Hypermarket is located just outside the Araneta Center, along EDSA.
The last two are operated independently of the Division of City Schools, with UPIS being managed by the UP College of Education and PSHS being run by the Department of Science and Technology.
Located along these two avenues are numerous fine-dining restaurants and bars.
Tomas Morato and Timog Avenues are the heart of a restaurant and entertainment row with a wide array of prices, cultures, and flavors while Banawe Avenue is dubbed as the "Autoparts Capital of the Philippines"  and home to clusters of authentic Chinese restaurants aside from Binondo.
'''LRT-2 (with 5 Stations):'''
The Act provided for the creation of the City of Novaliches comprising the 15 northernmost barangays of Quezon city.
The offices and studios of MOWELFUND are located a few blocks from the cathedral.
