''Lexique des règles typographiques en usage à l'Imprimerie nationale'', presses de l'Imprimerie nationale, Paris, 2002), though, does not use different quotation marks for nesting:
:: “But I am speaking to you!” cried the young man, exasperated by this combination of insolence and good manners, of protocol and disdain.
U+201C (8220), U+201D (8221)
But there are still applications which still use the older character sets, or output data using them, and thus problems still occur.
An en-dash is sometimes used in place of the em-dash, especially so in newspaper texts.
They were different from English quotes because they were standing (like today's guillemets) ''on'' the baseline (like lowercase letters), and not above it (like apostrophes and English quotation marks) or hanging down from it (like commas).
Many systems, such as the personal computers of the 1980s and early 1990s, actually drew these quotes like curved closing quotes on-screen and in printouts, so text would appear like this (approximately):
Sometimes, especially in books, the angle quotation marks (see below) are used in Germany and Austria, albeit in reversed order: »A«.
::The blacksmith shrugged.
:"It's me, postman Pechkin," was the reply.
Although not generally common in Dutch any more, double angle quotation marks are still sometimes used in Belgium.
:: He answered: “It's only a ‘gizmo’."
Nothing similar was available for the double quote, so many people resorted to using two single quotes for double quotes, which would look like the following:
“Where is the tailcoat?”
The French news site ''L'Humanité'' uses straight quotation marks.
Korean (South Korea), Simplified Chinese,  Traditional Chinese (acceptable but less common, happened in Hong Kong mainly as a result of influence from mainland China)
U+2039 (8249), U+203A (8250)
* In Japan, corner brackets are used.
Double angle quotes  Korean: 겹화살괄호 (''gyeop'hwasalgwaro'')  Simplified Chinese:  (''shū míng hào'')Traditional Chinese: 書名號
During the seventeenth century this treatment became specific to quoted material, and it grew common, especially in Britain, to print quotation marks (now in the modern opening and closing forms) at beginning and end of the quotation as well as in the margin; the French usage (see under Specific language features below) is a survival of this.
This style of quoting is also used in Bulgarian, Czech, Estonian, Georgian, Icelandic, Russian, Serbocroatian, Slovak, Slovene and in Ukrainian.
* ''You Shall Know Our Velocity'' by Dave Eggers, in which spoken dialogues are written with the typical English quotation marks, but dialogues imagined by the main character (which feature prominently) are written with quotation dashes
: — Frakki, älähti Huikari.
(For other languages employing dashes, see section Quotation dash below.)
That is, to represent the double curly quotes use &amp;#8220; and &amp;#8221;, and to represent single curly quotes use &amp;#8216; and &amp;#8217;.
This style is particularly common in Bulgarian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Vietnamese.
This parallels normal usage in other languages, e.g.
Double-angle quotation marks without spaces are the standard for German printed texts in Switzerland:
U+2018 (8216), U+2019 (8217)
:: “Oh dear!” exclaimed Levin.
Since curved quotes are the typographically correct ones, word processors have traditionally offered curved quotes to users.
HTML includes a set of entities for curved quotes: &amp;lsquo; (left single), &amp;rsquo; (right single), &amp;sbquo; (low 9 single), &amp;ldquo; (left double), &amp;rdquo; (right double), and &amp;bdquo; (low 9 double).
Some examples include:
However, these three characters have quite different purposes.
The double quotation mark is similar to—and often used to represent—the ditto mark and the double prime symbol.
This gives a proper appearance at the cost of semantic correctness.
he asked his guests.
Catalan, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, or in German, French and Italian as written in Switzerland:
Em-dash, an alternative to the quotation dash
The main difference between them is that at least some software will insert a line break after an em dash, but not after a quotation dash.
Miss Kennedy protested.
U+201E (8222), U+201C (8220)
They must be used with non-breaking spaces (preferably narrow, if available, i.e.
Quotation marks have a variety of forms in different languages and in different media.
* In South Korea and Mainland China, English-style quotes are used.
U+300C (12300), U+300D (12301)
I haven’t thought about it.”
* The Ægypt Sequence by John Crowley, in which events occurring in the Renaissance are indicated by quotation dashes, and events in the present by ordinary quotation marks
* ''Trainspotting'' by Irvine Welsh
Initially, the French guillemet characters were not angle shaped but also used the comma (6/9) shape.
In Italian, Catalan, Portuguese, Spanish, Ukrainian, Russian, Polish, Bulgarian, Georgian, Romanian, Lithuanian and Hungarian the reporting clause in the middle of a quotation is separated with two additional dashes (also note that the initial quotation dash is followed by a single whitespace character as well as the fact that the additional quotation dashes for the middle main clause after the initial quotation dash are all with a single whitespace character on both of their sides):
The typesetting application TeX uses this convention for input files.
::“你看过《三国演义》吗？”他问我。
Permissible, when it is technically impossible to use different quotation marks:
Charles Frazier used this style for his novel ''Cold Mountain'' as well.
Further, the "smart quotes" feature converts opening apostrophes (such as in 'tis, 'em, 'til, and '89) into opening single quotation marks—essentially upside-down apostrophes.
If the encoding of the document supports direct representation of the characters, they can be used, but doing so can cause difficulties if the document needs to be edited by someone who is using an editor that cannot support the encoding.
James Joyce always insisted on this style, although his publishers did not always respect his preference.
:: “I am not speaking to you, sir”, he said.
Korean (book titles), Chinese (used for titles of books, documents, musical pieces, cinema films, TV programmes, newspapers, magazines, laws, etc. )
&amp;laquo; &amp;raquo;
The dashes may be used entirely without quotation marks as well.
* ''The Book of Dave'' by Will Self, which alternates between standard English chapters, with standard quotation marks, and dialect chapters, with quotation dashes
It is common to use quotation dashes for dialogue, as well as within quotations for the reporting clause.
Single quotesKorean: 작은따옴표 (''jageunttaompyo''),  Simplified Chinese: 单引号 (''dān yǐn hào'')
:: “His ‘explanation’ is just a lie”, the deputy protested.
: “Good morning, Dave,” said HAL.
It derives from a marginal notation used in fifteenth-century manuscript annotations to indicate a passage of particular importance (not necessarily a quotation); the notation was placed in the outside margin of the page and was repeated alongside each line of the passage.
Double quotesKorean: 큰따옴표 (''keunttaompyo''),  Simplified Chinese: 双引号 (''shuāng yǐn hào'')
Corner bracketsTraditional Chinese:  (''dān yǐn hào'')Simplified Chinese: 单引号Japanese:  (''kagikakko'') (''natpyo'')
For example: "Didn't she say 'I like red best' when I asked her wine preferences?"
XML does not define these by default, but specifications based on it can do so, and XHTML does.
Angle quotation marks are also often used in German publications from Germany and Austria, especially in novels, but then exactly reversed and without spacing:
Typographically, there are two types of quotation marks:
Different varieties of English have different rules regarding whether neighboring punctuation should be written inside or outside the quotation marks.
U+3008 (12296), U+3009 (12297)
non-French double angle quotes (left and right) without space (not recommended)
White corner bracketsTraditional Chinese: 雙引號 (''shuāng yǐn hào'')Simplified Chinese: 双引号Japanese:  (''nijū kagikakko'')Korean: 겹낫표 (''gyeopnatpyo'')
Kowal wzruszył ramionami.
:: Andreas asked me: ‘Have you read the “EU Expansion” article?’
Different typefaces, character encodings and computer languages use various encodings and glyphs for quotation marks.
China, South Korea, and Japan all use corner brackets when writing vertically.
Miss Douce said, sighed above her jumping rose.
:: “This is a quote.”
Dashes are also used in many modern English novels, especially those written in non-standard dialects.
"Ambidextrous" quotation marks were introduced on typewriters to reduce the number of keys on the keyboard, and were inherited by computer keyboards and character sets.
But the most frequent convention used in printed books for nested quotations is to style them in italics (single quotation marks are much more rarely used, and multiple levels of quotations using the same marks is often considered confusing for readers):
Curved quotation marks are usually used in manuscript and typeset text.
:(Terry Pratchett, ''Equal Rites'')
Some computer systems designed in the past had character sets with proper opening and closing quotes.
By the middle sixteenth century, printers (notably in Basel, Switzerland) had developed a typographic form of this notation, resembling the modern closing or right-hand double quotation mark.
In this case, when there should be two adjacent opening or closing marks, only one is written:
&amp;bdquo; &amp;ldquo;
If quote marks are used inside another pair of quote marks, then single quotes are used as the "secondary" style.
Alternative denotation at the beginning of quoted speech
Ale chciałbym porozmawiać z tobą, kowalu, o twoim synu.
:— Ta nazwa ma pewnie swoją historię — stwierdził w końcu.
Most large newspapers have kept these „low-high” quotation marks, but otherwise the alternative form with single or double “English-style” quotes is now often the only form seen in printed matter.
The Unicode slanted/curved quotes described below are shown here for comparison:
::“At the tailor's”, said Joonas calmly.
Hispanic Americans often use them, owing to influence from the United States.
"I've brought news about your boy."
— zapytał przybysz.
For vertical writing:Japanese,Korean,Simplified Chinese,Traditional Chinese
In Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian and Latvian, angled quotation marks are used without spaces.
Korean (South Korea),  Simplified Chinese (for quote-within-quote segments)
The closing single quotation mark is identical or similar in form (depending on the font) to the apostrophe and similar to the prime symbol.
:  ''(Andreas asked me: 'Have you read the "EU-Expansion" article?')''
: ``Good morning, Dave,&#39;&#39; said HAL.
U+201A (8218), U+2018 (8216)
English quotes are also used sometimes for nested quotations:
“And you call me a Nihilist!
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, this shape evolved to look like ((&nbsp;small parentheses&nbsp;)).
An example of this error appears in the advertisements for the television show '''Til Death''.
The single quotation mark emerged around 1800 as a means of indicating a secondary level of quotation.
The standard form in the preceding table is taught in schools and used in handwriting.
* '…' and "…",  are known as neutral, vertical, straight, typewriter, "dumb or ASCII" quotation marks.
:: “His ‘explanation’ is just a lie”, the deputy protested.
With some exceptions, this usage overlaps italics in English:
: ‘Good morning, Dave,’ said HAL.
However, many people now use the non-breaking space, because the difference between a non-breaking space and a four-per-em is virtually imperceptible (but also because the Unicode quarter-em space is breakable), and the quarter-em is virtually always omitted in non-Unicode fonts.
In many printed books, when quotations are spanning multiple lines of text (including multiple paragraphs), an additional closing quotation sign is traditionally used at the ''beginning'' of each line continuing a quotation; any right-pointing guillemet at the beginning of a line does '''not''' close the current quotation; this convention has been consistently used since the beginning of the 19th century by most book printers (and is still in use today).
:  (Dumas, Les trois mousquetaires)
While using numeric references can make a page more compatible with outdated browsers, using named references are safer for systems that handle multiple character encodings (i.e.
* ''A Scanner Darkly'' by Philip K. Dick (not written in dialect)
The dash is often combined with ordinary quotation marks.
In case of quoted material inside a quotation, rules and most noted style manuals prescribe the use of different kinds of quotation marks.
These same systems often drew the grave accent (`, U+0060) as an open quote glyph (actually a high-reversed-9 glyph, to preserve some usability as a grave).
French single angle quotes (left and right), alternate form for embedded quotations, used on the web with normal non-breaking spaces.
The symbol used as the “left quote” in English is used as the right quote in Germany and Austria, and a different “low 9 quote” is used for the left instead.
In general it is the same length as an em-dash, and so this is often used instead.
&amp;lsaquo; &amp;rsaquo;
::The wizard bowed.
However, usages differ when writing horizontally:
Thus, to represent curly quotes in XML and SGML, it is safest to use the decimal numeric character references.
::"Have you read ''Romance of the Three Kingdoms''?
* ''The Van'' by Roddy Doyle
But I would like to speak to you, smith, about your son.”
Double quotes are standard for denoting speech in German.
The French Imprimerie nationale (cf.
Before Unicode was widely accepted and supported, this meant representing the curved quotes in whatever 8-bit encoding the software and underlying operating system was using.
Japanese,Korean,Traditional Chinese
If the user does not use a proper means of specifying the kind of quotes to typeset, the result can poor, as shown below.
&amp;sbquo; &amp;lsquo;
::“A name with a story behind it,” he said at last, “which were circumstances otherwise I would be pleased to hear.
* ''M/F'' by Anthony Burgess
I wished I hadn't laughed so much.
In addition, while the HTML 4, XHTML and XML specifications allow specifying numeric character references in either hexadecimal or decimal, SGML and older versions of HTML (and many old implementations) only support decimal references.
::“Bad Ass,” he said.
For example, in French, a guillemet may be used to initiate running speech, with each change in speaker indicated by a dash, and a closing guillemet to mark the end of the quotation.
The ending marks are commas raised to the top of the line.
French language uses angle quotation marks (''guillemets'', or ''duck-foot quotes''), adding a quarter-em space (officially) () within the quotes.
The double-quote style is also used in the Netherlands, but is now out of fashion — nowadays the 'English-style' quotation marks are preferred—it is still frequently found on older shop sign and is used by most large newspapers.
::“Tailcoat”, yelped Huikari.
Alan Paton used this style in ''Cry, the Beloved Country'' (and no quotation marks at all in some of his later work).
As in French, the use of English quotation marks is increasing in Spanish, and the ''El País'' style guide, which is widely followed in Spain, recommends them.
Even more commonly, people just put a normal (breaking) space between the quotation marks because the non-breaking space is often not easily accessible from the keyboard.
U+00AB (171), U+00BB (187)
Also there was not necessarily any distinction of shape between the opening and closing guillemets, with both types pointing to the right (like today's French closing guillemets).
Unicode support has since become the norm for operating systems.
: ’Good morning, Dave,’ said HAL.
In Bulgarian, Icelandic, Russian and Ukrainian, single quotation marks are not used.
Unlike English, French does not set off unquoted material within a quotation mark by using a second set of quotes.
:— Et sinä ole paljon minkään näköinen, sanoi Korkala melkein surullisesti, — mutta ei auta.
The quotation marks end at the last spoken text, however, not extending to the end of paragraphs when the final part is not spoken.
However, some of them allow to use the same quotation marks for quoted material inside a quotation, and if inner and outer quotation marks fall together, then one of them should be omitted.
Unicode currently does not provide alternate codes for these 6/9 guillemets on the baseline, which are still considered as form variants implemented in older French typography (such as the Didot font design).
Compounding the problem is the "smart quotes" feature mentioned above, which some word processors (including Microsoft Word and OpenOffice.org) use by default.
But it won’t do, you know; you must confess and receive the sacrament.”
— W innych okolicznościach chętnie bym jej wysłuchał.
RSS aggregators and search results).
For more details, see the Russian Wikipedia article on this topic.
The Unicode standard introduced a separate character  to be used as a quotation dash.
: (Pushkin wrote to Delvig: “Waiting for ‘Gypsies’, and publish at once.")
Details for individual languages are given above.
Verdana, were designed not bearing in mind the automatic use of the English left quote as the German right quote and are therefore typographically incompatible with German.
German single quotes (left and right)
French single angle quotes (left and right), alternate form for embedded quotations, preferably used by typographers with ''narrow'' non-breaking spaces.
In general, quotation marks are extended to encompass as much speech as possible, including not just non-spoken text such as "he said" (as previously noted), but also as long as the conversion extends.
Note that such insertion of continuation quotation marks will also occur if there's a word hyphenation break.
However, the ASCII character set, which has been used on a wide variety of computers since the 1960s, only contains a straight single quote () and double quote ().
: `Good morning, Dave,' said HAL.
The character sets for Windows and Macintosh used two different pairs of values for curved quotes, and ISO 8859-1 (historically the default character set for the Unixes and older Linux systems) has ''no'' curved quotes, making cross-platform compatibility difficult to implement.
Korean (book sub-titles), Chinese (used for titles of books, documents, musical pieces, cinema films, TV programmes, newspapers, magazines, laws, etc. )
The left and right marks are identical.
: ‛‛Good morning, Dave,’’ said HAL.
Corner brackets are well-suited for Chinese, Japanese, and Korean languages which are written in both vertical and horizontal orientations.
* In Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau, where Traditional Chinese is used, corner brackets are prevalent, although English-style quotes are also used.
Because typewriter and computer keyboards lack keys to directly enter typographic quotation marks, much typed writing has vertical quotation marks.
White corner brackets are used to mark quote-within-quote segments.
:— Jak się nazywa ta wieś, panie?
Quotation dash, also known as horizontal bar
In most other languages, including English, the marginal marks dropped out of use in the last years of the eighteenth century.
::: from Leo Tolstoy’s ''Anna Karenina'' (Louise and Aylmer Maude translation)
The double quotation mark is older than the single.
: (“My ‘Gypsies’ are not selling at all”, Pushkin complained.)
U+300E (12302), U+300F (12303)
* In North Korea, angle quotes are used.
::The wizard considered this.
Further, running speech does not use quotation marks beyond the first sentence, as changes in speaker are indicated by a dash, as opposed to the English use of closing and re-opening the quotation.
