Sells also addresses the much-discussed repetitiveness of the Quran, seeing this, too, as a literary device.
Many works are written in Persian such as the works of Maybudi (d. 1135) ''kash al-asrar'' ("the unveiling of the secrets").
The Quran has been noted to have certain narratives similarities to the Diatessaron, Protoevangelium of James, Infancy Gospel of Thomas, Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew and the Arabic Infancy Gospel.
It summarizes some, dwells at length on others and, in some cases, presents alternative accounts and interpretations of events.
Acceptable ''ta'wil'' refers to the meaning of a verse beyond its literal meaning; rather the implicit meaning, which ultimately is known only to God and can't be comprehended directly through human thought alone.
This comes out in Quran , in which it is stated: "It is not for any mortal that God should speak to them, except by revelation, or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger to reveal by his permission whatsoever He will."
This is admirably suited to classical Kufic calligraphy, which became common under the early Abbasid caliphs.
The meaning of revelation (''tanzil''), as opposed to ''ta'wil'', is clear in its accordance to the obvious meaning of the words as they were revealed.
He writes: "The Qur'an draws attention to the danger of conjecturing without evidence (''And follow not that of which you have not the (certain) knowledge of...'' 17:36) and in several different verses asks Muslims to require proofs (''Say: Bring your proof if you are truthful'' 2:111), both in matters of theological belief and in natural science."
The present form of the Quran text is accepted by Muslim scholars to be the original version compiled by Abu Bakr.
Corbin considers the Quran to play a part in Islamic philosophy, because gnosiology itself goes hand in hand with prophetology.
Muslims regard the Quran as the most important miracle of Muhammad, a proof of his prophethood, and the culmination of a series of divine messages that started with the messages revealed to Adam and ended with Muhammad.
Although most variant readings of the text of the Quran have ceased to be transmitted, some still are.
From the 11th century onwards several other works appear, including commentaries by Qushayri (d. 1074), Daylami (d. 1193), Shirazi (d. 1209) and Suhrawardi (d. 1234).
One scholar has suggested that the Diatessaron, as a gospel harmony, may have led to the conception that the Christian Gospel is one text.
The first complete Quran printed with movable type was produced in Venice in 1537/1538 for the Ottoman market by Paganino Paganini and Alessandro Paganini.
The process by which the divine message comes to the heart of a messenger of God is ''tanzil'' (to send down) or ''nuzūl'' (to come down).
There is a spiritual reality—which is the main objective of ordaining a law, or the basic aim in describing a divine attribute—and then there is an actual significance that a Quranic story refers to.
Suras are classified as Meccan or Medinan, depending on whether the verses were revealed before or after the migration of Muhammad to the city of Medina.
Verses pertaining to natural phenomena have been interpreted by Muslims as an indication of the authenticity of the Quranic message.
According to the traditional narrative, several companions of Muhammad served as scribes and were responsible for writing down the revelations.
Sufi philosophers view the question as artificial or wrongly framed.
The feature is more evident in early Meccan suras.
The first translator of the Quran was Salman the Persian, who translated surat ''al-Fatiha'' into Persian during the seventh century.
Most suras were in use amongst early Muslims since they are mentioned in numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shia sources, relating Muhammad's use of the Quran as a call to Islam, the making of prayer and the manner of recitation.
The Hour comes suddenly.
The agent of revelation is mentioned as the "one mighty in power", the one who "grew clear to view when he was on the uppermost horizon.
The textual arrangement is sometimes considered to exhibit lack of continuity, absence of any chronological or thematic order and repetitiousness.
"), or in the frequent appearance of the "Say" tags, when Muhammad is commanded to speak (e.g., "Say: 'God's guidance is the true guidance' ", "Say: 'Would you then dispute with us concerning God?'
His work ''ruh al-Bayan'' (the Spirit of Elucidation) is a voluminous exegesis.
The Quranic verses contain general exhortations regarding right and wrong and historical events are related to outline general moral lessons.
The first edition printed in Iran appeared in Tehran (1828) and the first Ottoman edition was finally printed in 1877, during the First Constitutional Era.
Frequently a change of rhyme from one set of verses to another signals a change in the subject of discussion.
It is heralded by a shout, by a thunderclap, or by the blast of a trumpet.
Today, the most popular readings are those transmitted by Ḥafṣ (d.796) and Warsh (d. 812) which are according to two of Ibn Mujahid's reciters, Aasim ibn Abi al-Najud (Kufa, d. 745) and Nafi‘ al-Madani (Medina, d. 785), respectively.
The mountain crumbles and Moses faints at the sight of God's manifestation upon the mountain.
God is depicted as living, eternal, omniscient and omnipotent (see, e.g., Quran , , ).
Studies using radiocarbon dating indicate that the parchments are dated to the period before 671 AD with a 99 percent probability.
It is a verbal noun ('''') of the Arabic verb '''' (), meaning "he read" or "he recited".
In addition to and independent of the division into suras, there are various ways of dividing the Quran into parts of approximately equal length for convenience in reading.
The Quran is one of the fundamental sources of Islamic law (''sharia'').
Another term is '''' (The Book), though it is also used in the Arabic language for other scriptures, such as the Torah and the Gospels.
Someone who has memorized the entire Quran is called a ''hafiz''.
The total number of verses in the Quran is 6,236, however, the number varies if the ''bismillahs'' are counted separately.
These works include material from Sulami's books plus the author's contributions.
Muslims consider the Quran to be a guide, a sign of the prophethood of Muhammad and the truth of the religion.
Suras are arranged roughly in order of decreasing size.
Less frequently it is 'the Day of Distinction' (when the good are separated from the evil), 'the Day of the Gathering' (of men to the presence of God) or 'the Day of the Meeting' (of men with God).
Other scholars, however, maintain that no abrogation has taken place in the Quran.
The mountains dissolve into dust, the seas boil up, the sun is darkened, the stars fall and the sky is rolled up.
The influential standard Quran of Cairo (1924) uses an elaborate system of modified vowel-signs and a set of additional symbols for minute details and is based on ʻAsim's recitation, the 8th-century recitation of Kufa.
Therefore, so far as this verse is concerned, the knowledge of the Quran's interpretation is reserved for God.
According to ''hadith'' and Muslim history, after Muhammad immigrated to Medina and formed an independent Muslim community, he ordered many of his companions to recite the Quran and to learn and teach the laws, which were revealed daily.
According to this view, it has also become evident that the inner meaning of the Quran does not eradicate or invalidate its outward meaning.
He reconciled notions of God's manifestation through and in the physical world with the sentiments of Sunni Islam.
According to Shia beliefs, those who are firmly rooted in knowledge like Muhammad and the imams know the secrets of the Quran.
For example, according to Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, if Muhammad had mastered writing and reading he possibly would have been suspected of having studied the books of the ancestors.
It also affirms family life by legislating on matters of marriage, divorce, and inheritance.
God has dressed them with words to bring them a bit nearer to our minds; in this respect they are like proverbs that are used to create a picture in the mind, and thus help the hearer to clearly grasp the intended idea.
For them, it is an essential idea that the Quran also has inward aspects.
In other verses, the word refers to "an individual passage recited by Muhammad".
It is estimated that approximately one-third of the Quran is eschatological, dealing with the afterlife in the next world and with the day of judgment at the end of time.
Many argue that the Quranic text cannot be reproduced in another language or form.
Sura titles are derived from a name or quality discussed in the text, or from the first letters or words of the sura.
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has published translations of the Quran in 50 different languages besides a five-volume English commentary and an English translation of the Quran.
The Quran also inspired Islamic arts and specifically the so-called Quranic arts of calligraphy and illumination.
So it goes on for seven esoteric meanings (seven depths of hidden depth).
Saudi scholar Saud al-Sarhan has expressed doubt over the age of the fragments as they contain dots and chapter separators that are believed to have originated later.
File:Koran by Megerlein 1772.jpg|Title page of the first German translation (1772) of the Quran.
Lastly, both assertions and rejections require a proof, according to verse 4:174.
Islamic verses appear in many other media, on buildings and on objects of all sizes, such as mosque lamps, metal work, pottery and single pages of calligraphy for muraqqas or albums.
Reappropriation is the name of the hermeneutical style of some ex-Muslims who have converted to Christianity.
The Syriac equivalent is () '''', which refers to "scripture reading" or "lesson".
The central theme of the Quran is monotheism.
The revelation does not come directly from God to the prophets.
Other early exegetes included a few Companions of Muhammad, like ʻAli ibn Abi Talib, ʻAbdullah ibn Abbas, ʻAbdullah ibn Umar and Ubayy ibn Kaʻb.
The physicist Abdus Salam, in his Nobel Prize banquet address, quoted a well known verse from the Quran (67:3–4) and then stated: "This in effect is the faith of all physicists: the deeper we seek, the more is our wonder excited, the more is the dazzlement of our gaze".
Rather, it is concerned with certain truths and realities that transcend the comprehension of the common run of men; yet it is from these truths and realities that the principles of doctrine and the practical injunctions of the Quran issue forth.
This esoteric meaning in turn conceals an esoteric meaning (this depth possesses a depth, after the image of the celestial Spheres, which are enclosed within each other).
The manuscript according to Zayd remained with Abu Bakr until he died.
Based on tradition and a literal interpretation of Quran  ("none shall touch but those who are clean"), some Muslims believe that they must perform a ritual cleansing with water before touching a copy of the Quran, although this view is not universal.
In Tabatabaei's view, what has been rightly called ''ta'wil'', or hermeneutic interpretation of the Quran, is not concerned simply with the denotation of words.
Others argue that the Quran contains noble ideas, has inner meanings, maintained its freshness through the ages and has caused great transformations in individual level and in the history.
The term for charity, ''zakat'', literally means purification.
The Quran recounts stories of many of the people and events recounted in Jewish and Christian sacred books (Tanakh, Bible) and devotional literature (Apocrypha, Midrash), although it differs in many details.
The Quran frequently asserts in its text that it is divinely ordained.
Medieval Muslim scholars including al-Jurjani (d. 1078) and al-Baqillani (d. 1013) have written treatises on the subject, discussed its various aspects, and used linguistic approaches to study the Quran.
Islamic tradition also holds that translations were made for Emperor Negus of Abyssinia and Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, as both received letters by Muhammad containing verses from the Quran.
Vocalization markers indicating specific vowel sounds were introduced into the Arabic language by the end of the 9th century.
The sura arrangement is thus not connected to the sequence of revelation.
Muslims believe the common elements or resemblances between the Bible and other Jewish and Christian writings and Islamic dispensations is due to their common divine source, and that the original Christian or Jewish texts were authentic divine revelations given to prophets.
Alexander Ross offered the first English version in 1649, from the French translation of ''L'Alcoran de Mahomet'' (1647) by Andre du Ryer.
Belief is a fundamental aspect of morality in the Quran, and scholars have tried to determine the semantic contents of "belief" and "believer" in the Quran.
The ''Hijazi'' style manuscripts nevertheless confirm that transmission of the Quran in writing began at an early stage.
The variation in readings of the text permitted by the nature of the defective vocalization led to an increase in the number of readings during the 10th century.
These codices had differences that motivated the Caliph Uthman to establish a standard version now known as Uthman's codex, which is generally considered the archetype of the Quran known today.
This sura, which consists of seven verses, is the most often recited sura of the Quran:
The term also has closely related synonyms that are employed throughout the Quran.
The reason for discontinuation in the use of the earlier style was that it took too long to produce and the demand for copies was increasing.
File:Qur%27anic_Manuscript_-_Maghribi_script.jpg|''maghribi'' script, 13th-14th centuries.
The Quranic content is concerned with basic Islamic beliefs including the existence of God and the resurrection.
The earthquake of the Hour is a mighty thing."
Narratives of the early prophets, ethical and legal subjects, historical events of Muhammad's time, charity and prayer also appear in the Quran.
File:Mausolées du groupe nord (Shah-i-Zinda, Samarcande) (6016470147).jpg|Quranic verses, Shahizinda mausoleum, Samarkand, Uzbekistan.
File:Mosque lamp Met 91.1.1534.jpg|Typical glass and enamel mosque lamp with the ''Ayat an-Nur'' or "Verse of Light" (24:35).
Revelation in Islamic and Quranic contexts means the act of God addressing an individual, conveying a message for a greater number of recipients.
It sometimes offers detailed accounts of specific historical events, and it often emphasizes the moral significance of an event over its narrative sequence.
Salam was also careful to differentiate between metaphysics and physics, and advised against empirically probing certain matters on which "physics is silent and will remain so," such as the doctrine of "creation from nothing" which in Salam's view is outside the limits of science and thus "gives way" to religious considerations.
In order to avoid incorrect pronunciation, reciters who are not native speakers of Arabic language try to follow a program of training in countries such as Egypt or Saudi Arabia.
According to Welch, these seizures would have been seen by those around him as convincing evidence for the superhuman origin of Muhammad's inspirations.
Commentators with an esoteric slant believe that the ultimate meaning of the Quran is known only to God.
Copyists would therefore choose simpler writing styles.
They argue it is not possible for a human to produce a book like the Quran, as the Quran itself maintains.
Moses, in 7:143, comes the way of those who are in love, he asks for a vision but his desire is denied, he is made to suffer by being commanded to look at other than the Beloved while the mountain is able to see God.
If the verse was about a historical event, then sometimes a few traditions (''hadith'') of Muhammad were narrated to make its meaning clear.
The issue of whether the Quran is eternal or created became a theological debate (Quran's createdness) in the ninth century.
Islamic tradition relates that Muhammad received his first revelation in the Cave of Hira during one of his isolated retreats to the mountains.
A Syrian manuscript from the 8th century is shown to have been written according to the reading of Ibn Amir ad-Dimashqi.
Nevertheless, the Quran has been translated into most African, Asian, and European languages.
In fact, Moses is mentioned more in the Quran than any other individual.
During prayers, the Quran is recited only in Arabic.
Welch additionally states that it remains uncertain whether these experiences occurred before or after Muhammad's initial claim of prophethood.
The Islamic studies scholar Welch states in the ''Encyclopaedia of Islam'' that he believes the graphic descriptions of Muhammad's condition at these moments may be regarded as genuine, because he was severely disturbed after these revelations.
However, a sura classified as Medinan may contain Meccan verses in it and vice versa.
The language of the Quran has been described as "rhymed prose" as it partakes of both poetry and prose; however, this description runs the risk of failing to convey the rhythmic quality of Quranic language, which is more poetic in some parts and more prose-like in others.
There is agreement among scholars that Muhammad himself did not write down the revelation.
Human beings of all ages, restored to life, join the throng.
Other personal copies of the Quran might have existed including Ibn Mas'ud's and Ubay ibn Ka'b's codex, none of which exist today.
There are, however, still 114 occurrences of the ''Bismillah'' in the Quran, due to its presence in Quran  as the opening of Solomon's letter to the Queen of Sheba.
The Sana'a manuscripts contain palimpsests, a manuscript page from which the text has been washed off to make the parchment reusable again—a practice which was common in ancient times due to scarcity of writing material.
Such terms include '''' (book); '''' (sign); and '''' (scripture).
The word '''' appears about 70 times in the Quran itself, assuming various meanings.
After Abu Bakr, Hafsa bint Umar, Muhammad's widow, was entrusted with the manuscript.
In early centuries, the permissibility of translations was not an issue, but whether one could use translations in prayer.
In 1972, in a mosque in the city of Sana'a, Yemen, manuscripts were discovered that were later proved to be the most ancient Quranic text known to exist at the time.
... After the creation of this standardized canonical text, earlier authoritative texts were suppressed, and all extant manuscripts—despite their numerous variants—seem to date to a time after this standard consonantal text was established."
Medieval commentators such as Al-Tabari maintained that the term induced two meanings: first, the inability to read or write in general; second, the inexperience or ignorance of the previous books or scriptures (but they gave priority to the first meaning).
Very few books, and no religious texts, were printed in the Ottoman Empire for another century.
Prophets, or 'Messengers of God', received revelations and delivered them to humanity.
Thus, a group of scribes, most importantly Zayd, collected the verses and produced a hand-written manuscript of the complete book.
The earliest manuscripts were written in ''Ḥijāzī''-type script.
File:Muhammad ibn Mustafa Izmiri - Right Side of an Illuminated Double-page Incipit - Walters W5771B - Full Page.jpg|Quran page decoration art, Ottoman period.
Sufism moves beyond the apparent (''zahir'') point of the verses and instead relates Quranic verses to the inner or esoteric (''batin'') and metaphysical dimensions of consciousness and existence.
Unitarian Universalists may also seek inspiration from the Quran.
Robert of Ketton's 1143 translation of the Quran for Peter the Venerable, ''Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete'', was the first into a Western language (Latin).
The manuscript is written in Hijazi script, an early form of written Arabic.
Based on earlier transmitted reports, in the year 632, after the demise of Muhammad a number of his companions who knew the Quran by heart were killed in a battle by Musaylimah, the first caliph Abu Bakr (d. 634) decided to collect the book in one volume so that it could be preserved.
Beginning in the 11th century, the styles of writing employed were primarily the ''naskh'', ''muhaqqaq'', ''rayḥānī'' and, on rarer occasions, the ''thuluth'' script.
Translating the Quran has always been problematic and difficult.
File:Muhaqqaq_script.gif|''muhaqaq'' script, 14th-15th centuries.
File:Brooklyn Museum - Calligraphy - 3.jpg|Calligraphy, 18th century.
A cosmic upheaval then takes place.
He studied various readings and their trustworthiness and chose seven 8th-century readers from the cities of Mecca, Medina, Kufa, Basra and Damascus.
Its liturgical context is seen in a number of passages, for example: ''"So when '''' is recited, listen to it and keep silent."''
Some scholars such as Watt prefer the second meaning of ''"ummi"'' – they take it to indicate unfamiliarity with earlier sacred texts.
The term ''mus'haf'' ('written work') is often used to refer to particular Quranic manuscripts but is also used in the Quran to identify earlier revealed books.
An important meaning of the word is the "act of reciting", as reflected in an early Quranic passage: "It is for Us to collect it and to recite it ()."
One of the notable authors of esoteric interpretation prior to the 12th century is Sulami (d. 1021) without whose work the majority of very early Sufi commentaries would not have been preserved.
Tafsir (exegesis) has interpreted them as abbreviations for either names or qualities of God or for the names or content of the respective surahs.
Worn-out copies of the Quran are wrapped in a cloth and stored indefinitely in a safe place, buried in a mosque or a Muslim cemetery, or burned and the ashes buried or scattered over water.
Henry Corbin narrates a ''hadith'' that goes back to Muhammad:
"Nothing is said to you that was not said to the messengers before you, that your lord has at his Command forgiveness as well as a most Grievous Penalty."
Thus a group of Muslims gradually became literate.
During the month of Ramadan, Muslims typically complete the recitation of the whole Quran during ''tarawih'' prayers.
This was in response to widespread demand, unpopularity of printing methods and for aesthetic reasons.
Angels acting as God's messengers deliver the divine revelation to them.
The ''Muqattaʿat'' ( ''ḥurūf muqaṭṭaʿāt'' "disjoined letters" or "disconnected letters"; also "mysterious letters") are  combinations of between one and five Arabic letters figuring at the beginning of 29 out of the 114 surahs (chapters) of the Quran just after the basmala.
File:Shikastah script.jpg|''shikasta nastaliq'' script, 18th-19th centuries.
Southeast Asia is well known for world-class recitation, evidenced in the popularity of the woman reciters such as Maria Ulfah of Jakarta.
Zayd ibn Thabit (d. 655) was the person to collect the Quran since "he used to write the Divine Inspiration for Allah's Apostle".
In order to preserve the sanctity of the text, he ordered a committee headed by Zayd to use Abu Bakr's copy and prepare a standard copy of the Quran.
The Quran most likely existed in scattered written form during Muhammad's lifetime.
The 30 ''juz''' (plural ''ajzāʼ'') can be used to read through the entire Quran in a month.
There is a reference to the afterlife on most pages of the Quran and belief in the afterlife is often referred to in conjunction with belief in God as in the common expression: "Believe in God and the last day".
Its language was similar to the Syriac language.
Muhammad's first revelation, according to the Quran, was accompanied with a vision.
Commentaries dealing with the ''zahir'' (outward aspects) of the text are called ''tafsir'', and hermeneutic and esoteric commentaries dealing with the ''batin'' are called ''ta'wil'' ("interpretation" or "explanation"), which involves taking the text back to its beginning.
In the large majority of contexts, usually with a definite article (''al-''), the word is referred to as the "revelation" (''waḥy''), that which has been "sent down" (''tanzīl'') at intervals.
Written in Arabic, it combines the author's own ideas with those of his predecessors (notably Ibn Arabi and Ghazali), all woven together in ''Hafiz'', a Persian poetry form.
Gustav Flügel published an edition of the Quran in 1834 in Leipzig, which remained authoritative for close to a century, until Cairo's Al-Azhar University published an edition of the Quran in 1924.
It is related that some of the Quraysh who were taken prisoners at the battle of Badr regained their freedom after they had taught some of the Muslims the simple writing of the time.
While some Western scholars consider the word to be derived from the Syriac, the majority of Muslim authorities hold the origin of the word is '''' itself.
A large number of Quranic passages can be found in ''Mathnawi'', which some consider a kind of Sufi interpretation of the Quran.
The manuscripts of all three books have survived and have been published several times.
Rhyme, while found throughout the Quran, is conspicuous in many of the earlier Meccan suras, in which relatively short verses throw the rhyming words into prominence.
The '''Quran''' ( ;  '''', literally meaning "the recitation"; also romanized '''Qur'an''' or '''Koran''') is the central religious text of Islam, which Muslims believe to be a revelation from God (, ''Allah'').
:"The climax of history, when the present world comes to an end, is referred to in various ways.
However, the faint washed-off underlying text (''scriptio inferior'') is still barely visible and believed to be "pre-Uthmanic" Quranic content, while the text written on top (''scriptio superior'') is believed to belong to Uthmanic time.
The Quran possesses an external appearance and a hidden depth, an exoteric meaning and an esoteric meaning.
This edition has become the standard for modern printings of the Quran.
It is 'the Day of Judgment,' 'the Last Day,' 'the Day of Resurrection,' or simply 'the Hour.'
In that state of annihilation from himself, Moses was granted the unveiling of the realities.
Adam, Enoch, Noah, Eber, Shelah, Abraham, Lot, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Jethro, David, Solomon, Elijah, Elisha, Jonah, Aaron, Moses, Zechariah, John the Baptist and Jesus are mentioned in the Quran as prophets of God (see Prophets of Islam).
Later sections also preserve this form but the style is more expository.
Although this unacceptable ''ta'wil'' has gained considerable acceptance, it is incorrect and cannot be applied to the Quranic verses.
In North Africa and Spain, the ''Maghribī'' style was popular.
Other related words are: '''' (remembrance), used to refer to the Quran in the sense of a reminder and warning, and '''' (wisdom), sometimes referring to the revelation or part of it.
However, the Quran did not exist in book form at the time of Muhammad's death in 632.
In about 650, the third Caliph Uthman ibn Affan (d. 656) began noticing slight differences in pronunciation of the Quran as Islam expanded beyond the Arabian Peninsula into Persia, the Levant, and North Africa.
An individual verse may be just a few letters or several lines.
