Mandatory vaccination of animals is less effective in rural areas.
It then travels along the afferent nerves toward the central nervous system.
A number of countries, including Australia, Canada, Japan, and the United States, and Western Europe, do not have rabies among dogs.
'''Rabies''' is a viral disease that causes acute inflammation of the brain in humans and other mammals.
Intramuscular vaccination should be given into the deltoid, not the gluteal area, which has been associated with vaccination failure due to injection into fat rather than muscle.
Despite Australia's official rabies-free status, Australian bat lyssavirus (ABLV), discovered in 1996, is a strain of rabies prevalent in native bat populations.
The virus has also adapted to grow in cells of poikilothermic ("cold-blooded") vertebrates.
In people who have been exposed to rabies, the rabies vaccine and sometimes rabies immunoglobulin are effective in preventing the disease if the person receives the treatment before the start of rabies symptoms.
Almost all human cases of rabies were fatal until a vaccine was developed in 1885 by Louis Pasteur and Émile Roux.
In Ontario, a dramatic drop in rabies was recorded when an aerial bait-vaccination campaign was launched.
During this phase, the virus cannot be easily detected within the host, and vaccination may still confer cell-mediated immunity to prevent symptomatic rabies.
In Asia and in parts of the Americas and Africa, dogs remain the principal host.
Rabies was considered a scourge for its prevalence in the 19th century.
Oral vaccines can be safely distributed in baits, a practice that has successfully reduced rabies in rural areas of Canada, France, and the United States.
Likewise, well-known viruses may be introduced into new locales, as is illustrated by the outbreak of encephalitis due to West Nile virus in the eastern United States.
Once symptoms appear, the result is nearly always death.
The cellular membrane pinches in a procession known as pinocytosis and allows entry of the virus into the cell by way of an endosome.
A recombinant vaccine called V-RG has been used in Belgium, France, Germany, and the United States to prevent outbreaks of rabies in undomesticated animals.
* If bitten by an animal, washing the wound with soap and water for 10 to 15 minutes and contacting a healthcare provider to determine if post-exposure prophylaxis is required
The route of infection is usually, but not always, by a bite.
Death is usually caused by respiratory arrest.
More than 95% of human deaths caused by rabies occur in Africa and Asia.
The Virginia opossum is resistant but not immune to rabies.
Casual contact, such as touching a person with rabies or contact with non-infectious fluid or tissue (urine, blood, feces) does not constitute an exposure and does not require post-exposure prophylaxis.
Effective control and treatment of rabies in India is also hindered by a form of mass hysteria known as puppy pregnancy syndrome (PPS).
It has to be regarded as the first step in diagnostic procedures for all laboratories.
Survival is rare once symptoms have presented, even with the administration of proper and intensive care.
The kits were made by companies in China, Germany, India, South Korea and the United States, and cost $3 to $11.
Evidence indicates artificially increasing the permeability of the blood–brain barrier, which normally does not allow most immune cells across, promotes viral clearance.
The physician Scribonius Largus prescribed a poultice of cloth and hyena skin; Antaeus recommended a preparation made from the skull of a hanged man.
The first dose of rabies vaccine is given as soon as possible after exposure, with additional doses on days three, seven and 14 after the first.
Rabies appears to have originated in the Old World, the first epizootic in the New World occurring in Boston in 1768.The first major epizootic in North America was reported in 1768, continuing until 1771 when foxes and dogs carried the disease to swine and domestic animals.
Washing bites and scratches for 15 minutes with soap and water, povidone iodine, or detergent may reduce the number of viral particles and may be somewhat effective at preventing transmission.
India has the highest rate of human rabies in the world, primarily because of stray dogs, whose number has greatly increased since a 2001 law forbade the killing of dogs.
* Vaccinating dogs, cats, and ferrets against rabies
The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services Communicable Disease Surveillance 2007 Annual Report states the following can help reduce the risk of contracting rabies:
Povidone-iodine or alcohol is then recommended to reduce the virus further.
Almost all domestically acquired cases are attributed to bat bites.
The L protein then transcribes five mRNA strands and a positive strand of RNA all from the original negative strand RNA using free nucleotides in the cytoplasm.
Italy, after being declared rabies-free from 1997 to 2008, has witnessed a reemergence of the disease in wild animals in the Triveneto regions (Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, Veneto and Friuli-Venezia Giulia), due to the spreading of an epidemic in the Balkans that hit Austria too.
The disease can only be diagnosed after the start of symptoms.
Rabies is present in more than 150 countries and on all continents but Antarctica.
An estimated 20,000 people die every year from rabies in India — more than a third of the global toll.
The high-risk group includes people who work with bats or who spend prolonged periods in areas of the world where rabies is common.
This stage is often known as "furious rabies" for the tendency of the affected animal to be hyper-reactive to external stimuli and bite at anything near.
Animal control and vaccination programs have decreased the risk of rabies from dogs in a number of regions of the world.
There have been three human cases of ABLV in Australia, all of them fatal.
As rabies progresses and causes inflammation of the brain and/or meninges, signs and symptoms can include slight or partial paralysis, anxiety, insomnia, confusion, agitation, abnormal behavior, paranoia, terror, and hallucinations, progressing to delirium, and coma.
Vaccination after exposure, PEP, is highly successful in preventing the disease if administered promptly, in general within 6 days of infection.
An intention-to-treat analysis has since found this protocol has a survival rate of about 8%.
Incubation periods as short as four days and longer than six years have been documented, depending on the location and severity of the contaminated wound and the amount of virus introduced.
Ineffective folk remedies abounded in the medical literature of the ancient world.
An extensive wild animals vaccination campaign eliminated the virus from Italy again, and it regained the rabies-free country status in 2013, the last reported case of rabies being reported in a red fox in early 2011.
The pain and side effects of modern cell-based vaccines are similar to flu shots.
* Not handling wild animals or strays
The RT PCR assays proved to be a sensitive and specific tool for routine diagnostic purposes, particularly in decomposed samples or archival specimens.
The diagnosis can also be made from saliva, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid samples, but this is not as sensitive and reliable as brain samples.
Once the patient becomes symptomatic, treatment is almost never effective and mortality is over 99%.
Many small island nations do not have rabies at all.
The rabies virus survives in widespread, varied, rural animal reservoirs.
The remaining 20% may experience a paralytic form of rabies that is marked by muscle weakness, loss of sensation, and paralysis; this form of rabies does not usually cause fear of water.
Rabies is common among wild animals in the US.
Immunizing people before they are exposed is recommended for those who are at high risk.
Their original vaccine was harvested from infected rabbits, from which the virus in the nerve tissue was weakened by allowing it to dry for five to ten days.
Awakening to find a bat in the room, or finding a bat in the room of a previously unattended child or mentally disabled or intoxicated person, is regarded as an indication for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP).
The RNA genome of the virus encodes five genes whose order is highly conserved: nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), glycoprotein (G), and the viral RNA polymerase (L).
Rabies is spread when an infected animal scratches or bites another animal or human.
Lagomorphs, such as hares and rabbits, and small rodents such as chipmunks, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rats, and squirrels, are almost never found to be infected with rabies and are not known to transmit rabies to humans.
Birds were first artificially infected with rabies in 1884; however, infected birds are largely if not wholly asymptomatic, and recover.
This is an example of a viral pathogen modifying the behavior of its host to facilitate its transmission to other hosts.
The trimeric spikes on the exterior of the membrane of the virus interact with a specific cell receptor, the most likely one being the acetylcholine receptor.
Once enough virus has been replicated, they begin to bind to acetyl choline receptors (p75NR) at the neuromuscular junction.
Only five people have survived a rabies infection after showing symptoms, and this was with extensive treatment known as the Milwaukee protocol.
Similar nerve tissue-derived vaccines are still used in some countries, as they are much cheaper than modern cell culture vaccines.
The malady was so unusual that it was reported as a new disease It spread from there, over the next few years, to various other states, as well as to the French West Indies, eventually becoming common all across North America.
The rabies virus travels to the brain by following the peripheral nerves.
Early symptoms can include fever and tingling at the site of exposure.
Once within a muscle or nerve cell, the virus undergoes replication.
A few cases have been recorded through transplant surgery.
Patients who have previously received pre-exposure vaccination do not receive the immunoglobulin, only the postexposure vaccinations on days 0 and 3.
The number of recorded human deaths from rabies in the United States has dropped from 100 or more annually in the early 20th century to one or two per year due to widespread vaccination of domestic dogs and cats and the development of human vaccines and immunoglobulin treatments.
HRIG is expensive and constitutes most of the cost of postexposure treatment, ranging as high as several thousand dollars.
Rabies may also spread through exposure to infected bears, domestic farm animals, groundhogs, weasels, and other wild carnivorans.
Microscopic analysis of samples is the only direct method that allows for the identification of rabies virus-specific antigen in a short time and at a reduced cost, irrespective of geographical origin and status of the host.
Infected bats, monkeys, raccoons, foxes, skunks, cattle, wolves, coyotes, dogs, mongooses (normally yellow mongoose) and cats present the greatest risk to humans.
Five of the first 43 patients (12%) treated with the Milwaukee protocol survived, and those receiving treatment survived longer than those not receiving the treatment.
These virions are enveloped and have a single-stranded RNA genome with negative sense.
The foxes of Switzerland, proven to be the main source of rabies in the country, ate the chicken heads and immunized themselves.
Transmission between humans is extremely rare.
In Switzerland, the disease has been virtually eliminated after scientists placed chicken heads laced with live attenuated vaccine in the Swiss Alps.
* Contacting an animal control officer upon observing a wild animal or a stray, especially if the animal is acting strangely
The second is the excitative stage, which lasts three to four days.
On a podcast of NPR's ''Radiolab'', Giese recounted: "I had to learn how to stand and then to walk, turn around, move my toes.
More than 3 billion people live in regions of the world where rabies occurs.
Rabies can be difficult to diagnose, because, in the early stages, it is easily confused with other diseases or with aggressiveness.
Autolysed samples can, however, reduce the sensitivity and specificity of the FAT.
This, in turn, may be related to the Sanskrit ''rabhas'', "to do violence".
Cerebral inclusion bodies called Negri bodies are 100% diagnostic for rabies infection but are found in only about 80% of cases.
Additionally, as the virus is present in sperm or vaginal secretions, spread through sex may be possible.
Bites from mice, rats, or squirrels rarely require rabies prevention because these rodents are typically killed by any encounter with a larger, rabid animal, and would, therefore, not be carriers.
Other bird species have been known to develop rabies antibodies, a sign of infection, after feeding on rabies-infected mammals.
Some proteins require post-translative modifications.
Incoordination is seen, owing to rear limb paralysis, and drooling and difficulty swallowing is caused by paralysis of facial and throat muscles.
The virus then travels through the nerve cell axon via retrograde transport, as its P protein interacts with dynein, a protein present in the cytoplasm of nerve cells.
Stuff like balance, and I can't run normally."
The genetic information is packed as a ribonucleoprotein complex in which RNA is tightly bound by the viral nucleoprotein.
Most deaths now result from bat bites, which may go unnoticed by the victim and hence untreated.
The virus then buds from the cell.
These five mRNA strands are then translated into their corresponding proteins (P, L, N, G and M proteins) at free ribosomes in the cytoplasm.
* Keeping pets under supervision
She survived with all higher level brain functions, but an inability to walk and balance.
Less expensive purified chicken embryo cell vaccine and purified vero cell rabies vaccine are now available.
Immunization before exposure has been used in both human and nonhuman populations, where, as in many jurisdictions, domesticated animals are required to be vaccinated.
Cheaper rabies diagnosis will become possible for low-income settings: accurate rabies diagnosis can be done at a tenth of the cost of traditional testing using basic light microscopy techniques.
In the case of significant delay in administering PEP, the treatment still has a chance of success.
The Greeks derived the word ''lyssa'', from ''lud'' or "violent"; this root is used in the name of the genus of rabies ''Lyssavirus''.
This gave Louis Pasteur ample opportunity to test postexposure treatments from 1885.
In Germany as of July 2016, rabies test strips, made by 6 companies, had high false-negative, suggesting that some manufacturers had poor quality control.
As much as possible of this dose should be injected around the bites, with the remainder being given by deep intramuscular injection at a site distant from the vaccination site.
The person may also have hydrophobia.
Begun with little or no delay, PEP is 100% effective against rabies.
Saliva production is greatly increased, and attempts to drink, or even the intention or suggestion of drinking, may cause excruciatingly painful spasms of the muscles in the throat and larynx.
Jeanna Giese, who in 2004 was the first patient treated with the Milwaukee protocol, became the first person ever recorded to have survived rabies without receiving successful post-exposure prophylaxis.
This can be attributed to the fact that the virus multiplies and assimilates in the salivary glands of the infected animal for the purpose of further transmission through biting.
After the brain is infected, the virus travels centrifugally to the peripheral and autonomic nervous systems, eventually migrating to the salivary glands, where it is ready to be transmitted to the next host.
She was placed into an induced coma upon onset of symptoms and given ketamine, midazolam, ribavirin, and amantadine.
When the virus reaches the brain, it rapidly causes encephalitis, the prodromal phase, which is the beginning of the symptoms.
For example, the G protein travels through the rough endoplasmic reticulum, where it undergoes further folding, and is then transported to the Golgi apparatus, where a sugar group is added to it (glycosylation).
After 31 days of isolation and 76 days of hospitalization, Giese was released from the hospital.
Due to a high public awareness of the virus, efforts at vaccination of domestic animals and curtailment of feral populations, and availability of postexposure prophylaxis, incidents of rabies in humans are very rare.
The rabies virus is the type species of the ''Lyssavirus'' genus, in the family'' Rhabdoviridae'', order ''Mononegavirales''.
The human diploid cell rabies vaccine was started in 1967.
These symptoms are followed by one or more of the following symptoms: violent movements, uncontrolled excitement, fear of water, an inability to move parts of the body, confusion, and loss of consciousness.
The third is the paralytic stage and is caused by damage to motor neurons.
In the Americas, bat bites are the most common source of rabies infections in humans, and less than 5% of cases are from dogs.
The  reference method for diagnosing rabies is the fluorescent antibody test (FAT),  an immunohistochemistry procedure, which is recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO).
Giese's treatment regimen became known as the Milwaukee protocol, which has since undergone revision with the second version omitting the use of ribavirin.
In Montréal, Quebec, Canada, baits are successfully used on raccoons in the Mont-Royal Park area.
In France and Belgium, where Saint Hubert was venerated, the "St Hubert's Key" was heated and applied to cauterize the wound.
More than 99% of rabies cases in countries where dogs commonly have the disease are caused by dog bites.
Hydrophobia is commonly associated with furious rabies, which affects 80% of the infected people.
In infants, the lateral thigh is recommended.
If possible, the animal from which the bite was received should also be examined for rabies.
Bats, raccoons, skunks and foxes account for almost all reported cases (98% in 2009).
The time is dependent on the distance the virus must travel to reach the central nervous system.
It was not uncommon for a person bitten by a dog but merely suspected of being rabid, to commit suicide or to be killed by others.
On June 12, 2011, Precious Reynolds, an eight-year-old girl from Humboldt County, California, became the third reported person in the United States to have recovered from rabies without receiving PEP.
Saliva from an infected animal can also transmit rabies if the saliva comes into contact with the eyes, mouth, or nose.
Vaccination campaigns may be expensive, and cost-benefit analysis suggests baits may be a cost-effective method of control.
I had to relearn that all...mentally I knew how to do stuff but my body wouldn't cooperate with what I wanted it to do.
Rabies is infectious to mammals; three stages are recognized.
Epidemiologic factors, such as season, geographic location, and the patient's age, travel history, and possible exposure to bites, rodents, and ticks, may help direct the diagnosis.
In the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends people receive one dose of human rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) and four doses of rabies vaccine over a 14-day period.
Thoroughly washing the wound as soon as possible with soap and water for approximately five minutes is effective in reducing the number of viral particles.
All warm-blooded species, including humans, may become infected with the rabies virus and develop symptoms.
Especially in developing countries, pets may not be privately kept and their destruction may be unacceptable.
The diagnosis can be reliably made from brain samples taken after death.
Initial signs and symptoms of rabies are often nonspecific  such as fever and headache.
Rabies causes about 24,000 to 60,000 deaths worldwide per year.
Rabies is caused by ''lyssaviruses'' including: rabies virus and Australian bat lyssavirus.
A further 10 patients have been treated under the revised protocol, with a further two survivors.
The G protein then coils around the N-P-L-M complex of proteins taking some of the host cell membrane with it, which will form the new outer envelope of the virus particle.
In ancient times, the attachment of the tongue (the lingual frenulum, a mucous membrane) was cut and removed as this is where rabies was thought to originate.
In modern times, the fear of rabies has not diminished, and the disease and its symptoms, particularly agitation has served as an inspiration for several works of zombie or similarly-themed fiction, often portraying rabies as having mutated into a stronger virus which fills humans with murderous rage or uncurable illness, bringing about a devastating, widespread pandemic.
Treatment after exposure can prevent the disease if administered promptly, generally within 10 days of infection.
The FAT relies on the ability of a detector molecule (usually fluorescein isothiocyanate) coupled with a rabies-specific antibody, forming a conjugate, to bind to and allow the visualisation of rabies antigen using fluorescent microscopy techniques.
In 2004, American teenager Jeanna Giese survived an infection of rabies unvaccinated.
The only well-documented cases of rabies caused by human-to-human transmission occurred among eight recipients of transplanted corneas and among three recipients of solid organs.
The immunoglobulin dose should not exceed 20 units per kilogram body weight.
Rabid bats are found in all 48 contiguous states.
The time period between contracting the disease and the start of symptoms is usually one to three months; however, this time period can vary from less than one week to more than one year.
Rabies may also inflame the spinal cord, producing transverse myelitis.
It refers to a set of symptoms in the later stages of an infection in which the person has difficulty swallowing, shows panic when presented with liquids to drink, and cannot quench his or her thirst.
Two of 25 patients survived when treated under the first protocol.
The majority of the deaths occurred in Asia and Africa.
The first written record of rabies is in the Mesopotamian Codex of Eshnunna (circa 1930 BC), which dictates that the owner of a dog showing symptoms of rabies should take preventive measure against bites.
I'm not completely back.
Dog bite victims with PPS (both male and female) become convinced that puppies are growing inside them, and often seek help from faith healers rather than from conventional medical services.
Lyssavirions have helical symmetry, with a length of about 180&nbsp;nm and a cross-section of about 75&nbsp;nm.
The virus then uses the acidic environment, which is necessary, of that endosome and binds to its membrane simultaneously, releasing its five proteins and single strand RNA into the cytoplasm.
Once the virus reaches the cell body it travels rapidly to the Central Nervous System (CNS), replicating in motor neurons and eventually reaching the brain.
Rabies has been known since around 2000 B.C.
By an application of magical thinking, dogs were branded with the key in hopes of protecting them from rabies.
The old nerve-tissue-based vaccinations that require multiple painful injections into the abdomen with a large needle are inexpensive, but are being phased out and replaced by affordable World Health Organization intradermal-vaccination regimens.
The first stage is a one- to three-day period characterized by behavioral changes and is known as the prodromal stage.
In the case in which there has been a significant delay in administering PEP, the treatment should be administered regardless, as it may still be effective.
You know I'm still recovering.
The term is derived from the Latin ''rabies'', "madness".
After a typical human infection by bite, the virus enters the peripheral nervous system.
In 2010, an estimated 26,000 people died from rabies, down from 54,000 in 1990.
The virus is usually present in the nerves and saliva of a symptomatic rabid animal.
Death usually occurs 2 to 10 days after first symptoms.
The recommendation for the precautionary use of PEP in occult bat encounters where no contact is recognized has been questioned in the medical literature, based on a cost-benefit analysis.
Most animals can be infected by the virus and can transmit the disease to humans.
Hydrophobia ("fear of water") is the historic name for rabies.
Other reservoirs are more limited geographically; for example, the raccoon rabies virus variant is only found in a relatively narrow band along the East Coast.
The fear of rabies was almost irrational, due to the insignificant number of vectors (mostly rabid dogs) and the absence of any efficacious treatment.
This practice ceased with the discovery of the actual cause of rabies.
The period between infection and the first symptoms (incubation period) is typically 1–3 months in humans.
However, a 2002 study has supported the protocol of precautionary administering of PEP where a child or mentally compromised individual has been alone with a bat, especially in sleep areas, where a bite or exposure may occur without the victim being aware.
