Others were uplifting: ''Shesher Kobita''—translated twice as ''Last Poem'' and ''Farewell Song''—is his most lyrical novel, with poems and rhythmic passages written by a poet protagonist.
Tagore wrote of it: "I have always regretted the ending".
Tagore's poetry has been set to music by composers: Arthur Shepherd's triptych for soprano and string quartet, Alexander Zemlinsky's famous Lyric Symphony, Josef Bohuslav Foerster's cycle of love songs, Leoš Janáček's famous chorus "Potulný šílenec" ("The Wandering Madman") for soprano, tenor, baritone, and male chorus—JW 4/43—inspired by Tagore's 1922 lecture in Czechoslovakia which Janáček attended, and Garry Schyman's "Praan", an adaptation of Tagore's poem "Stream of Life" from ''Gitanjali''.
She had risen in an observant and sheltered traditional home, as had all her female relations.
Tagore's three-volume ''Galpaguchchha'' comprises eighty-four stories that reflect upon the author's surroundings, on modern and fashionable ideas, and on mind puzzles.
Author of ''Gitanjali'' and its "profoundly sensitive, fresh and beautiful verse", he became the first non-European to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913.
To the end Tagore scrutinised orthodoxy—and in 1934, he struck.
Her abrupt suicide in 1884, soon after he married, left him for years profoundly distraught.
Poetry from these valetudinary years is among his finest.
A period of prolonged agony ended with Tagore's death on 7 August 1941, aged eighty; he was in an upstairs room of the Jorasanko mansion he was raised in.
Tagore's remit expanded to science in his last years, as hinted in ''Visva-Parichay'', a 1937 collection of essays.
Tagore released his ''Manasi'' poems (1890), among his best-known work.
There Tagore read biographies, studied history, astronomy, modern science, and Sanskrit, and examined the classical poetry of Kālidāsa.
Tagore opposed imperialism and supported Indian nationalists, and these views were first revealed in ''Manast'', which was mostly composed in his twenties.
Graham Greene doubted that "anyone but Mr. Yeats can still take his poems very seriously."
He was influenced by the atavistic mysticism of Vyasa and other ''rishi''-authors of the Upanishads, the Bhakti-Sufi mystic Kabir, and Ramprasad Sen. Tagore's most innovative and mature poetry embodies his exposure to Bengali rural folk music, which included mystic Baul ballads such as those of the bard Lalon.
At the age of sixteen, he released his first substantial poems under the pseudonym ''Bhānusiṃha'' ("Sun Lion"), which were seized upon by literary authorities as long-lost classics.
In the Nazi-besieged Warsaw Ghetto, Polish doctor-educator Janusz Korczak had orphans in his care stage ''The Post Office'' in July 1942.
Another brother, Satyendranath, was the first Indian appointed to the elite and formerly all-European Indian Civil Service.
He denounced nationalism.
Tagore sought "the play of feeling and not of action".
After his ''upanayan'' (coming-of-age) rite at age eleven, Tagore and his father left Calcutta in February 1873 to tour India for several months, visiting his father's Santiniketan estate and Amritsar before reaching the Himalayan hill station of Dalhousie.
এই বেদনা ক্ষমা করো, ক্ষমা করো, ক্ষমা করো প্রভু॥
Tagore loathed formal education—his scholarly travails at the local Presidency College spanned a single day.
The naive maiden-heroine Nandini rallies her subject-compatriots to defeat the greed of the realm's ''sardar'' class—with the morally roused king's belated help.
Its ironic and grave tales examined the voluptuous poverty of an idealised rural Bengal.
সেই ম্লানতা ক্ষমা করো, ক্ষমা করো, ক্ষমা করো প্রভু॥
Through it Tagore explores a wide range of dramatic styles and emotions, including usage of revamped ''kirtans'' and adaptation of traditional English and Irish folk melodies as drinking songs.
''Gora'' raises controversial questions regarding the Indian identity.
In his other travels, Tagore interacted with Henri Bergson, Albert Einstein, Robert Frost, Thomas Mann, George Bernard Shaw, H.G.
Lively English, Irish, and Scottish folk tunes impressed Tagore, whose own tradition of Nidhubabu-authored ''kirtans'' and ''tappas'' and Brahmo hymnody was subdued.
Regional experts accepted them as the lost works of Bhānusiṃha.
''Klanti amar khôma kôro probhu,''
In youth Tagore likely agreed with him.
The novel ends in Hindu-Muslim violence and Nikhil's—likely mortal—wounding.
''Tomar kôtha đhake je tar mukhôro jhôngkar.''
In 1880 he returned to Bengal degree-less, resolving to reconcile European novelty with Brahmo traditions, taking the best from each.
Tagore was influenced by scrimshaw from northern New Ireland, Haida carvings from British Columbia, and woodcuts by Max Pechstein.
Some of Tagore's lyrics corresponded in a synesthetic sense with particular paintings.
These include ''Africa'' and ''Camalia'', among the better known of his latter poems.
The SNLTR hosts the 1415 BE edition of Tagore's complete Bengali works.
He met Gagan Harkara, through whom he became familiar with Baul Lalon Shah, whose folk songs greatly influenced Tagore.
A. H. Fox Strangways of ''The Observer'' introduced non-Bengalis to ''rabindrasangit'' in ''The Music of Hindostan'', calling it a "vehicle of a personality ... that go behind this or that system of music to that beauty of sound which all systems put out their hands to seize."
Each government pledged 100,000 to his school to commemorate the visits.
These yarns are celebrated fare in Bengali fiction and are commonly used as plot fodder by Bengali film and theatre.
''Gitanjali'' () is Tagore's best-known collection internationally, earning him his Nobel.
The period 1891–1895, Tagore's ''Sadhana'' period, named after one of his magazines, was his most productive; in these years he wrote more than half the stories of the three-volume, 84-story ''Galpaguchchha''.
He staffed the school, he contributed his Nobel Prize monies, and his duties as steward-mentor at Santiniketan kept him busy: mornings he taught classes; afternoons and evenings he wrote the students' textbooks.
In 1890 Tagore began managing his vast ancestral estates in Shelaidaha (today a region of Bangladesh); he was joined by his wife and children in 1898.
''Haimanti'' assails Hindu arranged marriage and spotlights their often dismal domesticity, the hypocrisies plaguing the Indian middle classes, and how Haimanti, a young woman, because of her insufferable sensitivity and free spirit, foredid herself.
He lectured against these, he penned Dalit heroes for his poems and his dramas, and he campaigned—successfully—to open Guruvayoor Temple to Dalits.
Tagore worked to popularise Lalon's songs.
''Strir Patra'' (''The Wife's Letter'') is an early treatise in female emancipation.
Translations are found at Project Gutenberg and Wikisource.
Some controversies involving Tagore, possibly fictive, trashed his popularity and sales in Japan and North America after the late 1920s, concluding with his "near total eclipse" outside Bengal.
পথে যদি পিছিয়ে পড়ি কভু॥
Dhan Gopal Mukerji has said that these songs transcend the mundane to the aesthetic and express all ranges and categories of human emotion.
Bengali culture is fraught with this legacy: from language and arts to history and politics.
He wrote his Oxford Hibbert Lectures and spoke at the annual London Quaker meet.
Experimentation continued in his prose-songs and dance-dramas— ''Chitra'' (1914), ''Shyama'' (1939), and ''Chandalika'' (1938)— and in his novels— ''Dui Bon'' (1933), ''Malancha'' (1934), and ''Char Adhyay'' (1934).
Gandhi hailed it as seismic ''karma'', as divine retribution avenging the oppression of Dalits.
They visited Bali, Java, Kuala Lumpur, Malacca, Penang, Siam, and Singapore.
এই দীনতা ক্ষমা করো প্রভু,
A "fire-bath" of fascism was to have educed "the immortal soul of Italy ... clothed in quenchless light".
His travelogues, essays, and lectures were compiled into several volumes, including ''Europe Jatrir Patro'' (''Letters from Europe'') and ''Manusher Dhormo'' (''The Religion of Man'').
"A forthright denunciation of a meaningless and cruel superstitious rites", the Bengali originals feature intricate subplots and prolonged monologues that give play to historical events in seventeenth-century Udaipur.
Such views enraged many.
During a May 1932 visit to a Bedouin encampment in the Iraqi desert, the tribal chief told him that "Our prophet has said that a true Muslim is he by whose words and deeds not the least of his brother-men may ever come to any harm ..." Tagore confided in his diary: "I was startled into recognizing in his words the voice of essential humanity."
From May 1916 until April 1917, he lectured in Japan and the United States.
Every year, many events pay tribute to Tagore: ''Kabipranam'', his birth anniversary, is celebrated by groups scattered across the globe; the annual Tagore Festival held in Urbana, Illinois (USA); ''Rabindra Path Parikrama'' walking pilgrimages from Kolkata to Santiniketan; and recitals of his poetry, which are held on important anniversaries.
The school, which he named Visva-Bharati, had its foundation stone laid on 24 December 1918 and was inaugurated precisely three years later.
On the occasion of Tagore's 150th birthday an anthology (titled ''Kalanukromik Rabindra Rachanabali'') of the total body of his works is currently being published in Bengali in chronological order.
Jyotirindranath's wife Kadambari, slightly older than Tagore, was a dear friend and powerful influence.
He occasionally wrote poems using ''Shadhu Bhasha'', a Sanskritised dialect of Bengali; he later adopted a more popular dialect known as ''Cholti Bhasha''.
''Pôthe jodi pichhie poŗi kobhu.''
The first selection was shown at Museum of Asian Art, Berlin, Asia Society, New York, National Museum of Korea, Seoul, Victoria and Albert Museum, London, The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Petit Palais, Paris, Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome, National Visual Arts Gallery, Kuala Lumpur, McMichael Canadian Art Collection, Ontario, National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi
A story with borderless appeal—gleaning rave reviews in Europe—''Dak Ghar'' dealt with death as, in Tagore's words, "spiritual freedom" from "the world of hoarded wealth and certified creeds".
His songs are known as ''rabindrasangit'' ("Tagore Song"), which merges fluidly into his literature, most of which—poems or parts of novels, stories, or plays alike—were lyricised.
As a joke, he claimed that these were the lost works of (what he claimed was) a newly discovered 17th-century Vaiṣṇava poet Bhānusiṃha.
Within the 150th birth anniversary year it was conceived as three separate but similar exhibitions,and travelled simultaneously in three circuits.
The Tagore family was at the forefront of the Bengal renaissance.
On 14 July 1927 Tagore and two companions began a four-month tour of Southeast Asia.
Tagore reacted to the halfhearted uptake of modernist and realist techniques in Bengali literature by writing matching experimental works in the 1930s.
Even illiterate villagers sing his songs".
He learned drawing, anatomy, geography and history, literature, mathematics, Sanskrit, and English—his least favourite subject.
His novels, stories, songs, dance-dramas, and essays spoke to topics political and personal.
It consisted of 208 paintings drawn from the collections of Visva Bharati and the NGMA and presented Tagore's art in a very comprehensive way.
He fundraised widely for the school in Europe and the United States between 1919 and 1921.
Evidence produced during the Hindu–German Conspiracy Trial and latter accounts affirm his awareness of the Ghadarites, and stated that he sought the support of Japanese Prime Minister Terauchi Masatake and former Premier Ōkuma Shigenobu.
In "The Fruitseller from Kabul", Tagore speaks in first person as a town dweller and novelist imputing exotic perquisites to an Afghan seller.
Their warm rapport ended when Tagore pronounced upon ''Il Duce'''s fascist finesse.
She details the pettiness of a life spent entreating his viraginous virility; she ultimately gives up married life, proclaiming, ''Amio bachbo.
His sister Swarnakumari became a novelist.
"There were autumn mornings, the time of year when kings of old went forth to conquest; and I, never stirring from my little corner in Calcutta, would let my mind wander over the whole world.
It was first sung in 1911 at a Calcutta session of the Indian National Congress and was adopted in 1950 by the Constituent Assembly of the Republic of India as its national anthem.
It is said that his songs are the outcome of five centuries of Bengali literary churning and communal yearning.
''Tomar kachhe rakhe ni ar shajer ôhongkar''
Tagore employed a ''brahmacharya'' system: ''gurus'' gave pupils personal guidance—emotional, intellectual, and spiritual.
A. K. Sen, brother of the first chief election commissioner, received dictation from Tagore on 30 July 1941, a day prior to a scheduled operation: his last poem.
In May 1926 Tagore reached Naples; the next day he met Mussolini in Rome.
Vice-President of India M. Hamid Ansari has said that Rabindranath Tagore heralded the cultural rapprochement between communities, societies and nations much before it became the liberal norm of conduct.
He escaped assassination—and only narrowly—by Indian expatriates during his stay in a San Francisco hotel in late 1916; the plot failed when his would-be assassins fell into argument.
His father died in 1905.
By way of translations, Tagore influenced Chileans Pablo Neruda and Gabriela Mistral; Mexican writer Octavio Paz; and Spaniards José Ortega y Gasset, Zenobia Camprubí, and Juan Ramón Jiménez.
Tagore was a man ahead of his time.
The Ray film ''Charulata'' echoed the controversial Tagore novella ''Nastanirh'' (''The Broken Nest'').
''Chitrangada'', ''Chandalika'', and ''Shyama'' are other key plays that have dance-drama adaptations, which together are known as ''Rabindra Nritya Natya''.
In ''The King of Children'', biographer Betty Jean Lifton suspected that Korczak, agonising over whether one should determine when and how to die, was easing the children into accepting death.
His last five years were marked by chronic pain and two long periods of illness.
পিছন-পানে তাকাই যদি কভু।
At the very name of another country, my heart would go out to it&nbsp;...
Tagore flaunts his feminist leanings; ''pathos'' depicts the plight and ultimate demise of women trapped by pregnancy, duty, and family honour; he simultaneously trucks with Bengal's putrescent landed gentry.
He falls for a Brahmo girl, compelling his worried foster father to reveal his lost past and cease his nativist zeal.
In ''Atithi'', which was made into another film, the little Brahmin boy Tarapada shares a boat ride with a village ''zamindar''.
There is such a massive vigour in that head that it reminds one of Michael Angelo's chisel."
In November 1912 Tagore began touring the United States and the United Kingdom, staying in Butterton, Staffordshire with Andrews's clergymen friends.
Tagore's oldest brother Dwijendranath was a philosopher and poet.
''Môhakobi, tomar paee dite chai je dhôra.''
''Ei bedona khôma kôro khôma kôro probhu.''
As ''Zamindar Babu'', Tagore criss-crossed the riverine holdings in command of the ''Padma'', the luxurious family barge.
It contains elements of satire and postmodernism and has stock characters who gleefully attack the reputation of an old, outmoded, oppressively renowned poet who, incidentally, goes by a familiar name: "Rabindranath Tagore".
Between 1878 and 1932, Tagore set foot in more than thirty countries on five continents.
Tagore wrote eight novels and four novellas, among them ''Chaturanga'', ''Shesher Kobita'', ''Char Odhay'', and ''Noukadubi''.
The story revolves around the underlying rivalry between two families—the Chatterjees, aristocrats now on the decline (Biprodas) and the Ghosals (Madhusudan), representing new money and new arrogance.
Tagore Web also hosts an edition of Tagore's works, including annotated songs.
''Sonar Tori'''s most famous poem, dealing with the fleeting endurance of life and achievement, goes by the same name; hauntingly it ends: ''Shunno nodir tire rohinu poŗi / Jaha chhilo loe gêlo shonar tori''—"all I had achieved was carried off on the golden boat—only I was left behind."
'''Rabindranath Tagore''' FRAS (; ), also written '''Ravīndranātha Thākura''' (7 May 1861&nbsp;– 7 August 1941), sobriquet '''Gurudev''', was a Bengali polymath who reshaped Bengali literature and music, as well as Indian art with Contextual Modernism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Tagore's poetic style, which proceeds from a lineage established by 15th- and 16th-century Vaishnava poets, ranges from classical formalism to the comic, visionary, and ecstatic.
Tagore modernised Bengali art by spurning rigid classical forms and resisting linguistic strictures.
His essay "Nationalism in India" was scorned and praised; it was admired by Romain Rolland and other pacifists.
Ignorant of his foreign origins, he chastises Hindu religious backsliders out of love for the indigenous Indians and solidarity with them against his hegemon-compatriots.
In 1901 Tagore moved to Santiniketan to found an ashram with a marble-floored prayer hall—''The Mandir''—an experimental school, groves of trees, gardens, a library.
He saw him as "kind of counter-cultural", bearing "a new kind of classicism" that would heal the "collapsed romantic confusion and chaos of the 20th century."
Upon returning to Britain—and as his paintings were exhibited in Paris and London—he lodged at a Birmingham Quaker settlement.
It was written—ironically—to protest the 1905 Partition of Bengal along communal lines: lopping Muslim-majority East Bengal from Hindu-dominated West Bengal was to avert a regional bloodbath.
Mrinal is wife to a Bengali middle class man: prissy, preening, and patriarchal.
''The Last Harvest: Paintings of Rabindranath Tagore'' was an exhibition of Rabindranath Tagore's paintings to mark the 150th birth anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore.
He wove the ''process'' of science, the narratives of scientists, into stories in ''Se'' (1937), ''Tin Sangi'' (1940), and ''Galpasalpa'' (1941).
Wells, and Romain Rolland.
''Ghare Baire'' (''The Home and the World'')—through the lens of the idealistic ''zamindar'' protagonist Nikhil—excoriates rising Indian nationalism, terrorism, and religious zeal in the ''Swadeshi'' movement; a frank expression of Tagore's conflicted sentiments, it emerged from a 1914 bout of depression.
''Tomar kachhe khaţe na mor kobir gôrbo kôra,''
Tagore's free-verse translation:
His latter dramas were more philosophical and allegorical in nature; these included ''Dak Ghar''.
দিনের তাপে রৌদ্রজ্বালায়   শুকায় মালা পূজার থালায়,
In ''Raktakarabi'' ("Red" or "Blood Oleanders"), a kleptocrat rules over the residents of ''Yaksha puri''.
He mourned the perennial poverty of Calcutta and the socioeconomic decline of Bengal, and detailed these newly plebeian aesthetics in an unrhymed hundred-line poem whose technique of searing double-vision foreshadowed Satyajit Ray's film ''Apur Sansar''.
He co-founded Dartington Hall School, a progressive coeducational institution; in Japan, he influenced such figures as Nobel laureate Yasunari Kawabata.
It is an adaptation of ''Rajarshi'', an earlier novella of his.
He maintained that, even for those at the extremes of poverty, "there can be no question of blind revolution"; preferable to it was a "steady and purposeful education".
''Jana Gana Mana'' was written in ''shadhu-bhasha'', a Sanskritised register of Bengali, and is the first of five stanzas of a Brahmo hymn that Tagore composed.
His songs are widely popular and undergird the Bengali ethos to an extent perhaps rivalling Shakespeare's impact on the English-speaking world.
Because Debendranath wanted his son to become a barrister, Tagore enrolled at a public school in Brighton, East Sussex, England in 1878.
Ei bachlum'': "And I shall live.
He stayed for several months at a house that the Tagore family owned near Brighton and Hove, in Medina Villas; in 1877 his nephew and niece—Suren and Indira Devi, the children of Tagore's brother Satyendranath—were sent together with their mother, Tagore's sister-in-law, to live with him.
Scholars have attempted to gauge the emotive force and range of Hindustani ''ragas'':
''Ei dinota khôma kôro probhu,''
He wrote autobiographies.
Tagore was renowned throughout much of Europe, North America, and East Asia.
Song VII of ''Gitanjali'':
This includes all versions of each work and fills about eighty volumes.
Several prominent Western admirers—including Pound and, to a lesser extent, even Yeats—criticised Tagore's work.
Fifteen new volumes appeared, among them prose-poem works ''Punashcha'' (1932), ''Shes Saptak'' (1935), and ''Patraput'' (1936).
Tagore largely avoided classroom schooling and preferred to roam the manor or nearby Bolpur and Panihati, idylls which the family visited.
Skirting the "good-vs-evil" trope, the work pits a vital and joyous lèse majesté against the monotonous fealty of the king's varletry, giving rise to an allegorical struggle akin to that found in ''Animal Farm'' or ''Gulliver's Travels''.
In 1921, Tagore and agricultural economist Leonard Elmhirst set up the "Institute for Rural Reconstruction", later renamed Shriniketan or "Abode of Welfare", in Surul, a village near the ''ashram''.
He was awarded a knighthood by King George V in the 1915 Birthday Honours, but renounced it after the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre.
Yeats, unimpressed with his English translations, railed against that "Damn Tagore&nbsp;... We got out three good books, Sturge Moore and I, and then, because he thought it more important to know English than to be a great poet, he brought out sentimental rubbish and wrecked his reputation.
In these years, Jiménez developed "naked poetry".
The poor Ganges boatman and the rich landlord air their emotions in them.
That year, an earthquake hit Bihar and killed thousands.
Tagore was a prolific composer, with 2,230 songs to his credit.
Tagore influenced ''sitar'' maestro Vilayat Khan and ''sarodiyas'' Buddhadev Dasgupta and Amjad Ali Khan.
As a humanist, universalist internationalist, and ardent anti-nationalist, he denounced the British Raj and advocated independence from Britain.
Kumudini, Biprodas' sister, is caught between the two as she is married off to Madhusudan.
In 1917 his words were translated adeptly and set to music by Anglo-Dutch composer Richard Hageman to produce a highly regarded art song: "Do Not Go, My Love".
At sixteen, Tagore led his brother Jyotirindranath's adaptation of Molière's ''Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme''.
He had earlier enthused: "without any doubt he is a great personality.
In November 1913, Tagore learned he had won that year's Nobel Prize in Literature: the Swedish Academy appreciated the idealistic—and for Westerners—accessible nature of a small body of his translated material focussed on the 1912 ''Gitanjali: Song Offerings''.
Yet a latent reverence of Tagore was discovered by an astonished Salman Rushdie during a trip to Nicaragua.
The boy relates his flight from home and his subsequent wanderings.
In the period 1914–1922, the Jiménez-Camprubí pair produced twenty-two Spanish translations of Tagore's English corpus; they heavily revised ''The Crescent Moon'' and other key titles.
He was likely red-green colour blind, resulting in works that exhibited strange colour schemes and off-beat aesthetics.
On 25 March 2004, Tagore's Nobel Prize was stolen from the safety vault of the Visva-Bharati University, along with several other of his belongings.
Tagore, visiting Santa Barbara in 1917, conceived a new type of university: he sought to "make Santiniketan the connecting thread between India and the world and a world center for the study of humanity somewhere beyond the limits of nation and geography."
These began when Tagore lost consciousness in late 1937; he remained comatose and near death for a time.
Sometimes referred to as "the Bard of Bengal", Tagore's poetry was viewed as spiritual and mercurial; however, his "elegant prose and magical poetry" remain largely unknown outside Bengal.
His works are frequently noted for their rhythmic, optimistic, and lyrical nature.
The translated Tagore was "almost nonsensical", and subpar English offerings reduced his trans-national appeal:
Teaching was often done under trees.
The poet gave voice to all—big or small, rich or poor.
He travelled to Mexico.
In the repudiation letter to the Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, he wrote
In ''Jogajog'' (''Relationships''), the heroine Kumudini—bound by the ideals of ''Śiva-Sati'', exemplified by Dākshāyani—is torn between her pity for the sinking fortunes of her progressive and compassionate elder brother and his foil: her roue of a husband.
Such tools saw use in his Bhānusiṃha poems chronicling the Radha-Krishna romance, which were repeatedly revised over the course of seventy years.
The night before his wedding, Tarapada runs off—again.
At twenty he wrote his first drama-opera: ''Valmiki Pratibha'' (''The Genius of Valmiki'').
During his Shelaidaha years, his poems took on a lyrical voice of the ''moner manush'', the Bāuls' "man within the heart" and Tagore's "life force of his deep recesses", or meditating upon the ''jeevan devata''—the demiurge or the "living God within".
He received monthly payments as part of his inheritance and income from the Maharaja of Tripura, sales of his family's jewellery, his seaside bungalow in Puri, and a derisory 2,000 rupees in book royalties.
Two of Tagore's more politically charged compositions, "Chitto Jetha Bhayshunyo" ("Where the Mind is Without Fear") and "Ekla Chalo Re" ("If They Answer Not to Thy Call, Walk Alone"), gained mass appeal, with the latter favoured by Gandhi.
He debuted in the short-story genre in Bengali with "Bhikharini" ("The Beggar Woman").
