Upper Mississippi and Missouri River drainage areas from the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains east to Lake Michigan, and from southern Manitoba and probably southwestern Ontario and southeastern Alberta south to southern Oklahoma and Arkansas.
These are the Bahaman raccoon and Guadeloupe raccoon, which are very similar to each other; the Tres Marias raccoon, which is larger than average and has an angular skull; and the extinct Barbados raccoon.
Young raccoons are vulnerable to losing their mother and to starvation, particularly in long and cold winters.
Irrespective of whether the home ranges of adjacent groups overlap, they are most likely not actively defended outside the mating season if food supplies are sufficient.
Stanislas Dehaene reports in his book ''The Number Sense'' raccoons can distinguish boxes containing two or four grapes from those containing three.
In addition to being useful for orientation in the dark, their sense of smell is important for intraspecific communication.
Keys of the Ten Thousand Islands Group, and adjoining mainland of southwestern Florida from Cape Sable north through the Everglades to Lake Okeechobee.
Samuel I. Zeveloff, professor of zoology at Weber State University and author of the book ''Raccoons: A Natural History'', is more cautious in his interpretation and concludes at least the females are solitary most of the time and, according to Erik K. Fritzell's study in North Dakota in 1978, males in areas with low population densities are solitary as well.
A small subspecies with very pale fur (the palest of Florida raccoons).
'''María Madre Island raccoon'''''P.
Experts have cast doubt on the veracity of observations of wild raccoons dousing food.
Raccoons usually mate in a period triggered by increasing daylight between late January and mid-March.
In areas with heavy vehicular traffic and extensive hunting, these factors can account for up to 90% of all deaths of adult raccoons.
Their ear canals open after around 18 to 23&nbsp;days, a few days before their eyes open for the first time.
Panama and the Canal Zone from Porto Bello west to Boqueron, Chiriqui, though the limits of its range are unknown.
The average litter size varies widely with habitat, ranging from 2.5 in Alabama to 4.8 in North Dakota.
Neutering them at around five or six months of age decreases the chances of aggressive behavior developing.
While not endemic, the ''Trichinella'' worm does infect raccoons, and undercooked raccoon meat has caused trichinosis in humans.
Organizations like the U.S. Forest Service encourage people to stay away from animals with unusual behavior or appearance, and to notify the proper authorities, such as an animal control officer from the local health department.
All introductions into the Russian Far East failed; melanistic raccoons were released on Petrov Island near Vladivostok and some areas of southern Primorsky Krai, but died.
This disease is the most frequent natural cause of death in the North American raccoon population and affects individuals of all age groups.
Several prior attempts to introduce raccoons in Germany were not successful.
Nova Scotia, southern New Brunswick, southern Quebec, and southern Ontario south through the eastern United States to North Carolina, and from the Atlantic coast west to Lake Michigan, Indiana, southern Illinois, western Kentucky, and probably eastern Tennessee.
The shoulder height is between .
In Florida, they have been reported to fall victim to larger carnivores like American black bear and cougars and these species may also be a threat on occasion in other areas.
Historically, Native American tribes not only used the fur for winter clothing, but also used the tails for ornament.
Similar tooth and skull structures suggest procyonids and weasels share a common ancestor, but molecular analysis indicates a closer relationship between raccoons and bears.
With their broad auditory range, they can perceive tones up to 50–85&nbsp;kHz as well as quiet noises, like those produced by earthworms underground.
Two of these introductions were successful — one in the south of Belarus between 1954 and 1958, and another in Azerbaijan between 1941 and 1957.
While overturned waste containers and raided fruit trees are just a nuisance to homeowners, it can cost several thousand dollars to repair damage caused by the use of attic space as dens.
Among all fruits and crops cultivated in agricultural areas, sweet corn in its milk stage is particularly popular among raccoons.
Coastal strip and islands of Georgia.
These methods usually only solve problems with particularly wild or aggressive individuals, since adequate dens are either known to several raccoons or will quickly be rediscovered.
The famous Sioux leader Spotted Tail took his name from a raccoon skin hat with the tail attached he acquired from a fur trader.
The population of raccoons in Japan grew from 17 prefectures in 2000 to all 47 prefectures in  2008.
The raccoon also appears in Native American art across a wide geographic range.
In Germany—where the raccoon is called the ''Waschbär'' (literally, "wash-bear" or "washing bear") due to its habit of "dousing" food in water—two pairs of pet raccoons were released into the German countryside at the Edersee reservoir in the north of Hesse in April 1934 by a forester upon request of their owner, a poultry farmer.
As raccoons have short legs compared to their compact torso, they are usually not able either to run quickly or jump great distances.
l. excelsus'', but with a deeper lower jaw and a more robust dentition.
Related females often live in a so-called "fission-fusion society", that is, they share a common area and occasionally meet at feeding or resting grounds.
Some of the most important bacterial diseases which affect raccoons are leptospirosis, listeriosis, tetanus, and tularemia.
The population on Hispaniola was exterminated as early as 1513 by Spanish colonists who hunted them for their meat.
Raccoons have a dual cooling system to regulate their temperature; that is, they are able to both sweat and pant for heat dissipation.
The colloquial abbreviation ''coon'' is used in words like ''coonskin'' for fur clothing and in phrases like ''old coon'' as a self-designation of trappers.
l. lotor''Nominate subspecies
A small, dark-furred subspecies with a lightly built skull.
Seven of the thirteen identified vocal calls are used in communication between the mother and her kits, one of these being the birdlike twittering of newborns.
A large and stable raccoon population (yielding 1000–1500 catches a year) was established in Azerbaijan after an introduction to the area in 1937.
In the wild, raccoons often dabble for underwater food near the shore-line.
The kits (also called "cubs") are blind and deaf at birth, but their mask is already visible against their light fur.
The best-known is Sterling North's ''Rascal'', which recounts how he raised a kit during World War I.
The widely accepted theory is that dousing in captive raccoons is a fixed action pattern from the dabbling behavior performed when foraging at shores for aquatic foods.
Raccoons are noted for their intelligence, with studies showing that they are able to remember the solution to tasks for up to three years.
California, except extreme northwest coastal strip, the northeastern corner and southeastern desert region, ranging south through northwestern Baja California to San Quintin; extreme westcentral Nevada.
When they were still considered separate species, the Bahamas raccoon, Guadeloupe raccoon and Tres Marias raccoon were classified as endangered by the IUCN in 1996.
The smallest specimens are found in southern Florida, while those near the northern limits of the raccoon's range tend to be the largest (see Bergmann's rule).
A true-to-detail figurine made of quartz, the ''Ohio Mound Builders' Stone Pipe'', was found near the Scioto River.
The most characteristic physical feature of the raccoon is the area of black fur around the eyes, which contrasts sharply with the surrounding white face coloring.
A very small subspecies with heavy dentition.
The raccoon was a protected species in Germany, but has been declared a game animal in 14 states since 1954.
The fur of raccoons is used for clothing, especially for coats and coonskin caps.
Raccoons are common throughout North America from Canada to Panama, where the subspecies ''Procyon lotor pumilus'' coexists with the crab-eating raccoon (''Procyon cancrivorus'').
Home range sizes of urban raccoons are only 3 to 40&nbsp;hectares (7.5 to 100&nbsp;acres) for females and 8 to 80&nbsp;hectares (20 to 200&nbsp;acres) for males.
l. crassidens'' in color, but has a shorter, broader and flatter skull.
However, it is uncertain whether they readapt well to life in the wild.
Raccoons are thought to be color blind or at least poorly able to distinguish color, though their eyes are well-adapted for sensing green light.
At the beginning of winter, a raccoon can weigh twice as much as in spring because of fat storage.
On other parts of the body, the long and stiff guard hairs, which shed moisture, are usually colored in shades of gray and, to a lesser extent, brown.
While the size of home ranges in the inhospitable habitat of North Dakota's prairies lie between  for males and between  for females, the average size in a marsh at Lake Erie was .
Loud noises, flashing lights and unpleasant odors have proven particularly effective in driving away a mother and her kits before they would normally leave the nesting place (when the kits are about eight weeks old).
A small and slightly dark subspecies with a lightly built skull and dentition.
'''Snake River Valley raccoon'''''P.
After this point, their mother suckles them with decreasing frequency; they are usually weaned by 16&nbsp;weeks.
Although the idea of eating raccoons seems repulsive to most mainstream consumers since they see them as endearing, cute, and/or vermin, several thousand raccoons are still eaten each year in the United States.
Though previously thought to be solitary, there is now evidence that raccoons engage in gender-specific social behavior.
Their top speed over short distances is .
Known only from New Providence Island, Bahamas.
A large, dark grayish subspecies.
The estimated number of raccoons was 285 animals in the Hessian region in 1956, over 20,000 animals in the Hessian region in 1970 and between 200,000 and 400,000&nbsp;animals in the whole of Germany in 2008.
'''Texas raccoon'''''P.
It is also possible that Storr had its nocturnal lifestyle in mind and chose the star Procyon as eponym for the species.
The increasing number of raccoons in urban areas has resulted in diverse reactions in humans, ranging from outrage at their presence to deliberate feeding.
Peninsular Florida, except southwestern part inhabited by ''P.
l. elucus'', being of medium size and having dark fur.
The body weight of an adult raccoon varies considerably with habitat, making the raccoon one of the most variably sized mammals.
Home range sizes vary anywhere from  for females in cities to  for males in prairies.
Only a few studies have been undertaken to determine the mental abilities of raccoons, most of them based on the animal's sense of touch.
In Germany, the first eight cases of distemper were reported in 2007.
A large and moderately dark subspecies with a broad, rather flat skull.
Since the 1960s, Kassel has hosted Europe's first and densest population in a large urban area, with about 50 to 150&nbsp;animals per square kilometer (130 to 390&nbsp;animals per square mile), a figure comparable to those of urban habitats in North America.
New habitats which have recently been occupied by raccoons (aside from urban areas) include mountain ranges, such as the Western Rocky Mountains, prairies and coastal marshes.
l. marinus'', north to extreme southern Georgia; grading into ''P.
Since amphibians, crustaceans, and other animals found around the shore of lakes and rivers are an important part of the raccoon's diet, lowland deciduous or mixed forests abundant with water and marshes sustain the highest population densities.
Southern Baja California from the Cape region north at least to San Ignacio.
In rare cases of overlap, they may fall victim from carnivores ranging from species averaging smaller than themselves such as fishers to those as large and formidable as jaguars in Mexico.
Nelson and Goldman, 1930
One aspect of raccoon behavior is so well known that it gives the animal part of its scientific name, ''Procyon lotor''; "lotor" is neo-Latin for "washer".
In a study in southern Texas during the mating seasons from 1990 to 1992, about one third of all females mated with more than one male.
l. pacificus'', but smaller.
Such a group does not usually consist of more than four individuals.
American slaves occasionally ate raccoon at Christmas, but it was not necessarily a dish of the poor or rural.
Trinomial authority
Key Vaca and doubtless closely adjoining keys of the Key Vaca Group, a central section of the main chain off the southern coast of Florida.
Like other predators, raccoons searching for food can break into poultry houses to feed on chickens, ducks, their eggs, or feed.
This number rose quickly when automobile coats became popular after the turn of the 20th century.
Among others, the Dakota Sioux believe the raccoon has natural spirit powers, since its mask resembled the facial paintings, two-fingered swashes of black and white, used during rituals to connect to spirit beings.
Cleaning dirty food does not seem to be a reason for "washing".
Soon after that it became an ethnic slur, especially in use between 1880 and 1920 (see ''coon song''), and the term is still considered offensive.
In the 19th century, when coonskins occasionally even served as means of payment, several thousand raccoons were killed each year in the United States.
In the first decades after its discovery by the members of the expedition of Christopher Columbus, who was the first person to leave a written record about the species, taxonomists thought the raccoon was related to many different species, including dogs, cats, badgers and particularly bears.
l. varius'' in northwest Florida.
They then often pick up the food item with their front paws to examine it and rub the item, sometimes to remove unwanted parts.
Its spread began in Florida and Georgia in the 1950s and was facilitated by the introduction of infected individuals to Virginia and North Dakota in the late 1970s.
Sightings have occurred in all the countries bordering Germany, which hosts the largest population outside of North America.
In the 1830s, the U.S. Whig Party used the raccoon as an emblem, causing them to be pejoratively known as 'coons' by their political opponents, who saw them as too sympathetic to African-Americans.
Among the main symptoms for rabies in raccoons are a generally sickly appearance, impaired mobility, abnormal vocalization, and aggressiveness.
Raccoons with a very dark coat are more common in the German population because individuals with such coloring were among those initially released to the wild.
The "hyper sensitive" front paws are protected by a thin horny layer which becomes pliable when wet.
In a study in the Solling range of hills in Germany, more than 60% of all sleeping places were used only once, but those used at least ten times accounted for about 70% of all uses.
It was recorded on Captain John Smith's list of Powhatan words as ''aroughcun'', and on that of William Strachey as ''arathkone''.
Although they have thrived in sparsely wooded areas in the last decades, raccoons depend on vertical structures to climb when they feel threatened.
For example, 94 of 145 raccoons died during an outbreak in Clifton, Ohio, in 1968.
'''Eastern raccoon'''''P.
When orphaned, it is possible for kits to be rehabilitated and reintroduced to the wild.
In other tales, the raccoon played the role of the trickster which outsmarts other animals, like coyotes and wolves.
Since some males show aggressive behavior towards unrelated kits, mothers will isolate themselves from other raccoons until their kits are big enough to defend themselves.
'''Isthmian raccoon'''''P.
When fed with cat food over a long time period, raccoons can develop gout.
In a two-year study by Purdue University researchers, published in 2004, raccoons were responsible for 87% of the damage to corn plants.
'''Colorado Desert raccoon'''''P.
This is considered an instinctive behavior, preventing inbreeding.
Similarly, Spanish colonists adopted the Spanish word  from the Nahuatl ''mapachitli'' of the Aztecs, meaning "the one who takes everything in its hands".
Another stable population exists in northern France, where several pet raccoons were released by members of the U.S. Air Force near the Laon-Couvron Air Base in 1966.
About 1,240 animals were released in nine regions of the former Soviet Union between 1936 and 1958 for the purpose of establishing a population to be hunted for their fur.
'''Matecumbe Key raccoon'''''P.
The dense underfur, which accounts for almost 90% of the coat, insulates against cold weather and is composed of  long hairs.
In the northern parts of their range, raccoons go into a winter rest, reducing their activity drastically as long as a permanent snow cover makes searching for food impossible.
Once the kits weigh about , they begin to explore outside the den, consuming solid food for the first time after six to nine&nbsp;weeks.
Unrelated males often form loose male social groups to maintain their position against foreign males during the mating season—or against other potential invaders.
Due to a broad range of range overlap with these predators, the most important natural predators of the raccoon are bobcats, coyotes, and great horned owls, the latter mainly preying on young raccoons but capable of killing adults in some cases.
The broadcast of three television episodes about the frontiersman Davy Crockett and the film ''Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier'' in 1954 and 1955 led to a high demand for coonskin caps in the United States, although it is unlikely either Crockett or the actor who played him, Fess Parker, actually wore a cap made from raccoon fur.
Nelson and Goldman, 1930
While male yearlings usually reach their sexual maturity only after the main mating season, female yearlings can compensate for high mortality rates and may be responsible for about 50% of all young born in a year.
Other experts challenge such arguments and give advice on feeding raccoons and other wildlife in their books.
Since the 1950s, raccoons have expanded their range from Vancouver Island—formerly the northernmost limit of their range—far into the northern portions of the four south-central Canadian provinces.
Attempts to breed raccoons in fur farms in the 1920s and 1930s in North America and Europe turned out not to be profitable, and farming was abandoned after prices for long-haired pelts dropped in the 1940s.
Two of the raccoon's most distinctive features are its extremely dexterous front paws and its facial mask, which are themes in the mythology of several Native American ethnic groups.
Raccoons apparently survived an introduction near Terek, along the Sulak River into the Dagestani lowlands.
Most of the other 15 subspecies differ only slightly from each other in coat color, size and other physical characteristics.
Relocating or killing raccoons without a permit is forbidden in many urban areas on grounds of animal welfare.
After a gestation period of about 65 days, two to five young, known as "kits", are born in spring.
As a result of escapes and deliberate introductions in the mid-20th century, raccoons are now also distributed across mainland Europe, Caucasia, and Japan.
Concerning the general behavior patterns of raccoons, Gehrt points out that "typically you'll find 10 to 15 percent that will do the opposite" of what is expected.
As raccoons were not mentioned in earlier reports of pioneers exploring the central and north-central parts of the United States, their initial spread may have begun a few decades before the 20th century.
There is evidence that in pre-Columbian times raccoons were numerous only along rivers and in the woodlands of the Southeastern United States.
The birth weight of the about -long kits is between .
'''Bahaman raccoon'''''P.
The two populations are parasitologically distinguishable: 70% of the raccoons of the Hessian population are infected with the roundworm ''Baylisascaris procyonis'', but none of the Brandenburgian population has the parasite.
A dark-furred subspecies, similar to ''P.
Since the late 18th century, various types of scent hounds, called "coonhounds", which are able to tree animals have been bred in the United States.
By January 1, 1963, 700 individuals were recorded in the country.
In 1780, Gottlieb Conrad Christian Storr placed the raccoon in its own genus ''Procyon'', which can be translated as either "before the dog" or "doglike".
In small towns and suburbs, many raccoons sleep in a nearby forest after foraging in the settlement area.
Experiments in acclimatising raccoons into the USSR began in 1936, and were repeated a further 25 times until 1962.
Both share a comparatively dark coat with long hairs, but the Upper Mississippi Valley raccoon is larger than the eastern raccoon.
Trematode ''Metorchis conjunctus'' can also infect raccoons.
Based on fossil evidence from France and Germany, the first known members of the family ''Procyonidae'' lived in Europe in the late Oligocene about 25 million years ago.
Raccoons were also exterminated in Cuba and Jamaica, where the last sightings were reported in 1687.
The meaning and significance of the ''Raccoon Priests Gorget'', which features a stylized carving of a raccoon and was found at the Spiro Mounds, Oklahoma, remains unknown.
After this point, the annual mortality rate drops to between 10% and 30%.
The facial length of the skull is less than the cranial, and their nasal bones are short and quite broad.
The raccoon's paws lack an opposable thumb; thus, it does not have the agility of the hands of primates.
Attempts to settle raccoons on the Kuban River's left tributary and Kabardino-Balkaria were unsuccessful.
Raccoons without a fear of humans are a concern to those who attribute this trait to rabies, but scientists point out this behavior is much more likely to be a behavioral adjustment to living in habitats with regular contact to humans for many generations.
If such dens are unavailable or accessing them is inconvenient, raccoons use burrows dug by other mammals, dense undergrowth or tree crotches.
The weaker members of a ''male social group'' also are assumed to get the opportunity to mate, since the stronger ones cannot mate with all available females.
In their introduced range in the former Soviet Union, their main predators are wolves, lynxes and eagle owls.
In the 1920s, wearing a raccoon coat was regarded as status symbol among college students.
Known only from the Island of Barbados.
In a study by the ethologist H. B. Davis in 1908, raccoons were able to open 11 of 13 complex locks in fewer than 10 tries and had no problems repeating the action when the locks were rearranged or turned upside down.
Also in the southeast, they are among the favored prey for adult American alligators.
Raccoons are sometimes kept as pets, which is discouraged by many experts because the raccoon is not a domesticated species.
Juvenile males are distinguished from mature males by the shape and extrusibility of their penis bones.
In 2013 the city authorized "the capture and death of any specimen" found.
Texas, except extreme northern and western parts, southern Arkansas, Louisiana, except delta region of Mississippi, and south into northeastern Mexico, including Coahuila and Nuevo León, to southern Tamaulipas.
Since the 1950s, raccoons have been present in metropolitan areas like Washington, DC, Chicago, and Toronto.
Therefore, they avoid open terrain and areas with high concentrations of beech trees, as beech bark is too smooth to climb.
He released them two weeks before receiving permission from the Prussian hunting office to "enrich the fauna."
The tactile sensitivity of raccoons' paws is increased if this rubbing action is performed underwater, since the water softens the hard layer covering the paws.
Four of these subspecies found only on small Central American and Caribbean islands were often regarded as distinct species after their discovery.
Odor marks on prominent spots are assumed to establish home ranges and identify individuals.
Although internal parasites weaken their immune systems, well-fed individuals can carry a great many roundworms in their digestive tracts without showing symptoms.
Of the 6,940&nbsp;documented rabies cases reported in the United States in 2006, 2,615 (37.7%) were in raccoons.
Males are usually 15 to 20% heavier than females.
This gives the appearance of the raccoon "washing" the food.
When food is plentiful, raccoons can develop strong individual preferences for specific foods.
One of the palest subspecies, around the same size as ''P.
The kits are subsequently raised by their mother until dispersal in late fall.
For climbing down a tree headfirst—an unusual ability for a mammal of its size—a raccoon rotates its hind feet so they are pointing backwards.
Their propensity for unruly behavior exceeds that of captive skunks, and are even less trustworthy when allowed to roam freely.
