In addition to the letters in ''Always Rachel'', in 1998 a volume of Carson's previously unpublished work was published as ''Lost Woods: The Discovered Writing of Rachel Carson'', edited by Linda Lear.
A 2012 review article in Nature by Rob Dunn commemorating the 50th anniversary of ''Silent Spring'' prompted a response in a letter written by Anthony Trewavas and co-signed by 10 others, including Christopher Leaver, Bruce Ames, Richard Tren and Peter Lachmann, who quote estimates of 60 to 80 million deaths "as a result of misguided fears based on poorly understood evidence."
Most of the book's scientific chapters were reviewed by scientists with relevant expertise, among whom Carson found strong support.
By late 1957, Carson was closely following federal proposals for widespread pesticide spraying; the USDA planned to eradicate fire ants, and other spraying programs involving chlorinated hydrocarbons and organophosphates were on the rise.
Carson's main argument is that pesticides have detrimental effects on the environment; they are more properly termed ''biocides'', she argues, because their effects are rarely limited to the target pests.
As her research progressed, Carson found a sizable community of scientists who were documenting the physiological and environmental effects of pesticides.
Part of the argument she made in ''Silent Spring'' was that even if DDT and other insecticides had ''no'' environmental side effects, their indiscriminate overuse was counter-productive because it would create insect resistance to the pesticide(s), making the pesticides useless in eliminating the target insect populations:
Carson's work had a powerful impact on the environmental movement.
DuPont compiled an extensive report on the book's press coverage and estimated impact on public opinion.
After a summer course at the Marine Biological Laboratory, she continued her studies in zoology and genetics at Johns Hopkins in the fall of 1929.
Weakened from breast cancer and her treatment regimen, Carson became ill with a respiratory virus in January 1964.
Two research vessels currently sail in the US bearing the name R/V ''Rachel Carson''.
Carson is also a frequent namesake for prizes awarded by philanthropic, educational and scholarly institutions.
Chemical companies and associated organizations produced a number of their own brochures and articles promoting and defending pesticide use.
The book described the harmful effects of pesticides on the environment, and is widely credited with helping launch the environmental movement.
In late 1963, she received a flurry of awards and honors: the Audubon Medal (from the National Audubon Society), the Cullum Geographical Medal (from the American Geographical Society), and induction into the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
By 1948, Carson was working on material for a second book, and had made the conscious decision to begin a transition to writing full-time.
The chemical industry campaign backfired, as the controversy greatly increased public awareness of potential pesticide dangers, as well as ''Silent Spring'' book sales.
In addition to the thorough literature search, she had investigated hundreds of individual incidents of pesticide exposure and the human sickness and ecological damage that resulted.
In 2016, the University of California, Santa Cruz, renamed one of its colleges (formerly known as College Eight) to Rachel Carson College.
In one of her last public appearances, Carson testified before President John F. Kennedy's Science Advisory Committee.
The American Society for Environmental History has awarded the Rachel Carson Prize for Best Dissertation since 1993.
The result was the book ''Silent Spring'' (1962), which brought environmental concerns to an unprecedented share of the American people.
Using her research and consultations with marine biologists as starting points, she also wrote a steady stream of articles for ''The Baltimore Sun'' and other newspapers.
Carson rose within the Fish and Wildlife Service, supervising a small writing staff by 1945 and becoming chief editor of publications in 1949.
By August 1961, Carson finally agreed to the suggestion of her literary agent Marie Rodell: ''Silent Spring'' would be a metaphorical title for the entire book—suggesting a bleak future for the whole natural world—rather than a literal chapter title about the absence of birdsong.
Research at the Library of Medicine of the National Institutes of Health brought Carson into contact with medical researchers investigating the gamut of cancer-causing chemicals.
(e) Henry I. Miller and Gregory Conko, " Rachel Carson's Deadly Fantasies", Forbes.com, Sep 05, 2012.
The essay, published as ''Undersea'', was a vivid narrative of a journey along the ocean floor.
The resolution was blocked by Republican Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma, who said that "The junk science and stigma surrounding DDT—the cheapest and most effective insecticide on the planet—have finally been jettisoned."
Following the report's release, she also testified before a U.S. Senate subcommittee to make policy recommendations.
John Quiggin and Tim Lambert have written that "the most striking feature of the claim against Carson is the ease with which it can be refuted."
All of Carson's books remain in print.
The final writing was the first chapter, ''A Fable for Tomorrow'', which Carson intended as a gentle introduction to what might otherwise be a forbiddingly serious topic.
The natural world, particularly the ocean, was the common thread of her favorite literature.
She also wondered about the possible "financial inducements behind certain pesticide programs."
Carson attempted to leave the Bureau (by then transformed into the Fish and Wildlife Service) in 1945, but few jobs for naturalists were available as most money for science was focused on technical fields in the wake of the Manhattan Project.
It was the US federal government's 1957 gypsy moth eradication program, however, that prompted Carson to devote her research, and her next book, to pesticides and environmental poisons.
It marked a major turning point in Carson's writing career.
By 1972, the Environmental Defense Fund and other activist groups had succeeded in securing a phase-out of DDT use in the United States (except in emergency cases).
Carson began the four-year project of what would become ''Silent Spring'' by gathering examples of environmental damage attributed to DDT.
Mass outdoor spraying of DDT was abandoned in poor countries subject to malaria, such as Sri Lanka, in the 1970s and 1980s, not because of government prohibitions, but because the DDT had lost its ability to kill the mosquitoes (because of insects' very short breeding cycle and large number of offspring, the most resistant insects that survive and pass on their genetic traits to their offspring replace the pesticide-slain insects relatively rapidly.
Publishing house Simon & Schuster, impressed by ''Undersea'', contacted Carson and suggested that she expand it into a book.
Early in 1953, Carson began library and field research on the ecology and organisms of the Atlantic shore.
She had intended to continue for a doctorate, but in 1934 Carson was forced to leave Johns Hopkins to search for a full-time teaching position to help support her family.
She found this in Freeman.
The Rachel Carson Prize, founded in Stavanger, Norway in 1991, is awarded to women who have made a contribution in the field of environmental protection.
Carson was also undergoing radiation therapy to combat her spreading cancer, and expected to have little energy to devote to defending her work and responding to critics.
Her supervisor had deemed it too good for that purpose.
She discovered, however, that her right to review the script did not extend to any control over its content.
Accessed Jan 23, 2015.
She also made plans to buy and preserve from development an area in Maine she and Freeman called the "Lost Woods."
She died of a heart attack on April 14, 1964, in her home in Silver Spring, Maryland.
One is on the west coast, owned by MBARI, and the other is on the east coast, operated by the University of Maryland.
''Silent Spring'', Carson's most well-known book, was published by Houghton Mifflin on 27 September 1962.
Accessed September 23, 2007.
Of particular significance was the work of National Cancer Institute researcher and environmental cancer section founding director Wilhelm Hueper, who classified many pesticides as carcinogens.
By 1958, Carson had arranged a book deal, with plans to co-write with ''Newsweek'' science journalist Edwin Diamond.
(b) Keith Lockitch, " Rachel Carson's Genocide", ''Capitalism Magazine'', May 23, 2007.
As she was nearing full recovery in March (just as she was completing drafts of the two cancer chapters of her book), she discovered cysts in her left breast, one of which necessitated a mastectomy.
It contained thirteen essays by environmental writers and scientists.
Though her doctor described the procedure as precautionary and recommended no further treatment, by December Carson discovered that the tumor was in fact malignant and the cancer had metastasized.
The two women had a number of common interests, nature chief among them, and began exchanging letters regularly while apart.
The program included segments of Carson reading from ''Silent Spring'' and interviews with a number of other experts, mostly critics (including White-Stevens); according to biographer Linda Lear, "in juxtaposition to the wild-eyed, loud-voiced Dr. Robert White-Stevens in white lab coat, Carson appeared anything but the hysterical alarmist that her critics contended."
The committee issued its report on May 15, 1963, largely backing Carson's scientific claims.
Her plan for the next book was to address evolution, but the publication of Julian Huxley's ''Evolution in Action''—and her own difficulty in finding a clear and compelling approach to the topic—led her to abandon the project.
At the Pennsylvania College for Women (today known as Chatham University), as in high school, Carson was somewhat of a loner.
Carson further noted that "Malaria programmes are threatened by resistance among mosquitoes" and emphasized the advice given by the director of Holland's Plant Protection Service: "Practical advice should be 'Spray as little as you possibly can' rather than 'Spray to the limit of your capacity'...Pressure on the pest population should always be as slight as possible."
In fact, she concludes her section on DDT in ''Silent Spring'' not by urging a total ban, but with advice for spraying as little as possible to limit the development of resistance.
After her first year of graduate school, Carson became a part-time student, taking an assistantship in Raymond Pearl's laboratory, where she worked with rats and ''Drosophila'', to earn money for tuition.
Early in 1957, family tragedy struck a third time when one of the nieces she had cared for in the 1940s died at the age of 31, leaving a five-year-old orphan son, Roger Christie.
Landowners on Long Island filed a suit to have the spraying stopped, and many in affected regions followed the case closely.
With Carson's approval, editor Paul Brooks at Houghton Mifflin arranged for illustrations by Louis and Lois Darling, who also designed the cover.
After false starts with pit vipers and squirrels, she completed a dissertation project on the embryonic development of the pronephros in fish.
Carson began her career as an aquatic biologist in the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries, and became a full-time nature writer in the 1950s.
In 2012 ''Silent Spring ''was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society for its role in the development of the modern environmental movement.
Oxford University Press expressed interest in Carson's book proposal for a life history of the ocean, spurring her to complete the manuscript of what would become ''The Sea Around Us'' by early 1950.
The book closes with a call for a biotic approach to pest control as an alternative to chemical pesticides.
Carson's most direct legacy in the environmental movement was the campaign to ban the use of DDT in the United States (and related efforts to ban or limit its use throughout the world).
Her health was steadily declining as her cancer outpaced the radiation therapy, with only brief periods of remission.
Carson attended the ensuing FDA hearings on revising pesticide regulations; she came away discouraged by the aggressive tactics of the chemical industry representatives, which included expert testimony that was firmly contradicted by the bulk of the scientific literature she had been studying.
Between 1964 and 1990,  near Brookeville in Montgomery County, Maryland were acquired and set aside as the Rachel Carson Conservation Park, administered by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission.
Carson's biographer, Linda Lear, writes that "Carson sorely needed a devoted friend and kindred spirit who would listen to her without advising and accept her wholly, the writer as well as the woman."
In preparation for the anticipated attacks, Carson and her agent attempted to amass as many prominent supporters as possible before the book's release.
Until then, the same agency (the USDA) was responsible both for regulating pesticides and promoting the concerns of the agriculture industry; Carson saw this as a conflict of interest, since the agency was not responsible for effects on wildlife or other environmental concerns beyond farm policy.
''The Sea Around Us'' remained on the New York Times Best Seller List for 86 weeks, was abridged by ''Reader's Digest'', won the 1952 National Book Award for Nonfiction and the Burroughs Medal, and resulted in Carson's being awarded two honorary doctorates.
Many critics repeatedly asserted that she was calling for the elimination of all pesticides.
Among many others, Carson also sent a proof copy to Supreme Court Associate Justice William O. Douglas, a long-time environmental advocate who had argued against the court's rejection of the Long Island pesticide spraying case (and who had provided Carson with some of the material included in her chapter on herbicides).
In 1935, her father died suddenly, leaving Carson to care for her aging mother and making the financial situation even more critical.
Nine chapters were serialized in ''The New Yorker'' beginning June 1951 and the book was published July 2, 1951, by Oxford University Press.
The academic community—including prominent defenders such as H. J. Muller, Loren Eisley, Clarence Cottam, and Frank Egler—by and large backed the book's scientific claims; public opinion soon turned Carson's way as well.
That spring, Carson wrote a letter, published in ''The Washington Post'', that attributed the recent decline in bird populations—in her words, the "silencing of birds"—to pesticide overuse.
At the urging of her undergraduate biology mentor Mary Scott Skinker, she settled for a temporary position with the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries, writing radio copy for a series of weekly educational broadcasts entitled ''Romance Under the Waters''.
By 1959, the USDA's Agricultural Research Service responded to the criticism by Carson and others with a public service film, ''Fire Ants on Trial''; Carson characterized it as "flagrant propaganda" that ignored the dangers that spraying pesticides (especially dieldrin and heptachlor) posed to humans and wildlife.
Carson and the environmental movement were, and continue to be, criticized by some who argue that restrictions placed on pesticides, specifically DDT, have caused tens of millions of needless deaths and hampered agriculture (and, implicitly, that Carson bears responsibility for inciting such restrictions).
It was also influential on the rise of ecofeminism and on many feminist scientists.
It was difficult finding a title for the book; "Silent Spring" was initially suggested as a title for the chapter on birds.
Freeman shared parts of Carson's letters with her husband to help him understand the relationship, but much of their correspondence was carefully guarded.
Though the suit was lost, the Supreme Court granted petitioners the right to gain injunctions against potential environmental damage in the future; this laid the basis for later successful environmental actions.
Her widely praised 1951 bestseller ''The Sea Around Us'' won her a U.S. National Book Award, recognition as a gifted writer, and financial security.
Reactions from the estimated audience of ten to fifteen million were overwhelmingly positive, and the program spurred a congressional review of pesticide dangers and the public release of a pesticide report by the President's Science Advisory Committee.
On Earth Day (April 22, 2007), ''Courage for the Earth: Writers, Scientists, and Activists Celebrate the Life and Writing of Rachel Carson'' was released as "a centennial appreciation of Rachel Carson's brave life and transformative writing."
Most of the research and writing was done by the fall of 1960, except for the discussion of recent research on biological controls and investigations of a handful of new pesticides.
Carson's work, and the activism it inspired, are at least partly responsible for the deep ecology movement, and the overall strength of the grassroots environmental movement since the 1960s.
Instead, her interests were turning to conservation.
(d) Iain Murray, " ''Silent'' Alarmism: A Centennial We Could Do Without", ''National Review'', May 31, 2007.
However, her family responsibilities further increased in January 1937 when her older sister died, leaving Carson as the sole breadwinner for her mother and two nieces.
Biographer Hamilton Lytle believes these estimates unrealistic, even assuming that Carson can be "blamed" for worldwide DDT policies.
In Woods Hole, Massachusetts, near the US Fisheries building and adjacent to the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, the Marine Biological Laboratory has erected a life-sized bronze statue of Rachel, sitting on a bench, with a book.
Shortly before Carson's death, she and Freeman destroyed hundreds of letters.
Consequently, some experts have argued that restrictions placed on the agricultural use of DDT have increased its effectiveness as a tool for battling malaria.
Accessed May 31, 2007.
That was also the year of the "Great Cranberry Scandal": the 1957, 1958, and 1959 crops of U.S. cranberries were found to contain high levels of the herbicide aminotriazole (which caused cancer in laboratory rats) and the sale of all cranberry products was halted.
The Washington, D.C. chapter of the Audubon Society also actively opposed such spraying programs, and recruited Carson to help make public the government's exact spraying practices and the related research.
In the meantime, Carson's article-writing success continued—her features appeared in ''Sun Magazine'', ''Nature'', and ''Collier's''.
However, Carson's and the publishers' lawyers were confident in the vetting process ''Silent Spring'' had undergone.
In regards to the pesticide DDT, Carson never actually called for an outright ban.
No one since would be able to sell pollution as the necessary underside of progress so easily or uncritically."
A Pittsburgh bridge was also renamed in Carson's honor as the Rachel Carson Bridge.
However, in January, a duodenal ulcer followed by several infections kept her bedridden for weeks, greatly delaying the completion of ''Silent Spring''.
A number of conservation areas have been named for Carson as well.
Others went further, attacking Carson's scientific credentials (because her training was in marine biology rather than biochemistry) and her personal character.
She especially enjoyed the ''St.
This brought the book to the attention of the chemical industry and its lobbyists, as well as a wide swath of the American populace.
The surviving correspondence was published in 1995 as ''Always, Rachel: The Letters of Rachel Carson and Dorothy Freeman, 1952–1964: An Intimate Portrait of a Remarkable Friendship'', edited by Freeman's granddaughter.
She moved to Silver Spring, Maryland, to care for Roger, and much of 1957 was spent putting their new living situation in order and focusing on specific environmental threats.
Accessed May 24, 2007(c) Paul Driessen, " Forty Years of Perverse 'Responsibility,'", ''The Washington Times'', April 29, 2007.
Pesticide use became a major public issue, especially after the ''CBS Reports'' TV special "The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson" that aired April 3, 1963.
Her home in Colesville, Maryland where she wrote ''Silent Spring'' was named a National Historic Landmark in 1991.
It appeared in ''The New Yorker'' in two condensed installments shortly before its October 26 book release by Houghton Mifflin (again a new publisher).
Most of the book is devoted to pesticides' effects on natural ecosystems, but four chapters also detail cases of human pesticide poisoning, cancer, and other illnesses attributed to pesticides.
Fifteen years after its creation, one journalist described the EPA as "the extended shadow of ''Silent Spring''."
She began writing stories (often involving animals) at age eight, and had her first story published at age ten.
Yet Carson had made it clear she was not advocating the banning or complete withdrawal of helpful pesticides, but was instead encouraging responsible and carefully managed use with an awareness of the chemicals' impact on the entire ecosystem.
Investigative journalist Adam Sarvana and others characterize this notion as a "myth" promoted principally by Roger Bate of the pro-DDT advocacy group Africa Fighting Malaria (AFM).
Much of the agency's early work, such as enforcing the 1972 Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, was directly related to Carson's work.
By mid-1962, Brooks and Carson had largely finished the editing, and were laying the groundwork for promoting the book by sending the manuscript out to select individuals for final suggestions.
In the 2000s, however, criticism of the real and alleged ban(s) of DDT her work prompted became much more intense.
2007 was the centennial of Carson's birth.
The Rachel Carson room is just a few feet away from the EPA administrator's office and has been the site of numerous important announcements, including the Clean Air Interstate Rule, since the Agency moved to Ariel Rios in 2001.
The gypsy moth program involved aerial spraying of DDT and other pesticides (mixed with fuel oil), including the spraying of private land.
In 1994, an edition of ''Silent Spring'' was published with an introduction written by Vice President Al Gore.
These arguments have been dismissed as "outrageous" by former WHO scientist Socrates Litsios.
Within a year or so of publication, the attacks on the book and on Carson had largely lost momentum.
Though Carson received hundreds of other speaking invitations, she was unable to accept the great majority of them.
She also attempted to enlist others to join the cause: essayist E. B.
In mid-1945, Carson first encountered the subject of DDT, a revolutionary new pesticide (lauded as the "insect bomb" after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki) that was only beginning to undergo tests for safety and ecological effects.
it operated on the Great Lakes.
The magazine and book publications proceeded as planned, as did the large Book-of-the-Month printing (which included a pamphlet endorsing the book by William O. Douglas).
Late in the 1950s, Carson turned her attention to conservation, especially some environmental problems that she believed were caused by synthetic pesticides.
That person is Rachel Carson."
DDT was never banned for anti-malarial use, (its ban for agricultural use in the United States in 1972 did not apply outside the US or to anti-malaria spraying; the international treaty that banned most uses of DDT and other organochlorine pesticides—the 2001 Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants—included an exemption for DDT for the use of malaria control until affordable substitutes could be found.)
She was the daughter of Maria Frazier (McLean) and Robert Warden Carson, an insurance salesman.
She considered an environment-themed book project tentatively entitled ''Remembrance of the Earth'' and became involved with The Nature Conservancy and other conservation groups.
Around that time Carson also learned that ''Silent Spring'' had been selected as the Book-of-the-Month for October; as she put it, this would "carry it to farms and hamlets all over that country that don't know what a bookstore looks like—much less ''The New Yorker''."
DDT was but one of Carson's many writing interests at the time, and editors found the subject unappealing; she published nothing on DDT until 1962.
Google created a Google Doodle for Carson's 107th birthday on May 27, 2014.
Although ''Silent Spring'' was met with fierce opposition by chemical companies, it spurred a reversal in national pesticide policy, which led to a nationwide ban on DDT and other pesticides, and it inspired a grassroots environmental movement that led to the creation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
According to environmental engineer and Carson scholar H. Patricia Hynes, "''Silent Spring'' altered the balance of power in the world.
Nicholas Magazine'' (which carried her first published stories), the works of Beatrix Potter, and the novels of Gene Stratton Porter, and in her teen years, Herman Melville, Joseph Conrad and Robert Louis Stevenson.
This sea trilogy explores the whole of ocean life from the shores to the depths.
Carson also began submitting articles on marine life in the Chesapeake Bay, based on her research for the series, to local newspapers and magazines.
''Silent Spring'', in particular, was a rallying point for the fledgling social movement in the 1960s.
White-Stevens labeled her "...a fanatic defender of the cult of the balance of nature," while former U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson—in a letter to former President Dwight D. Eisenhower—reportedly concluded that because she was unmarried despite being physically attractive, she was "probably a Communist."
In 1969, the Coastal Maine National Wildlife Refuge became the Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge; expansions will bring the size of the refuge to about .
She spoke as much as she was physically able, however, including a notable appearance on ''The Today Show'' and speeches at several dinners held in her honor.
The creation of the Environmental Protection Agency by the Nixon Administration in 1970 addressed another concern that Carson had brought to light.
Several years of writing resulted in ''Under the Sea Wind'' (1941), which received excellent reviews but sold poorly.
That year, she took on a literary agent, Marie Rodell; they formed a close professional relationship that would last the rest of Carson's career.
Since 1998, the Society for Social Studies of Science has awarded an annual Rachel Carson Book Prize for "a book length work of social or political relevance in the area of science and technology studies."
Velsicol threatened legal action against Houghton Mifflin as well as ''The New Yorker'' and ''Audubon'' unless the planned ''Silent Spring'' features were canceled.
Also in 2007 American author Ginger Wadsworth wrote a biography of Carson.
American Cyanamid biochemist Robert White-Stevens and former Cyanamid chemist Thomas Jukes were among the most aggressive critics, especially of Carson's analysis of DDT.
(Diamond would later write one of the harshest critiques of ''Silent Spring'').
Though ''Silent Spring'' had generated a fairly high level of interest based on pre-publication promotion, this became much more intense with the serialization in ''The New Yorker'', which began in the June 16, 1962, issue.
Chemical industry representatives and lobbyists also lodged a range of non-specific complaints, some anonymously.
Though her position provided increasing opportunities for fieldwork and freedom in choosing her writing projects, it also entailed increasingly tedious administrative responsibilities.
In 1955, she completed the third volume of her sea trilogy, ''The Edge of the Sea'', which focuses on life in coastal ecosystems (particularly along the Eastern Seaboard).
The story of the birth defect-causing drug thalidomide broke just before the book's publication as well, inviting comparisons between Carson and Frances Oldham Kelsey, the Food and Drug Administration reviewer who had blocked the drug's sale in the United States.
According to one reviewer, the pair "fit Carolyn Heilbrun's characterization of a strong female friendship, where what matters is 'not whether friends are homosexual or heterosexual, lovers or not, but whether they share the wonderful energy of work in the public sphere'."
Democratic Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland had intended to submit a resolution celebrating Carson for her "legacy of scientific rigor coupled with poetic sensibility" on the 100th anniversary of her birth.
Carson predicted increased consequences in the future, especially as targeted pests develop resistance to pesticides, while weakened ecosystems fall prey to unanticipated invasive species.
The ceremonial auditorium on the third floor of U.S. EPA's main headquarters, the Ariel Rios Building, is named after Rachel Carson.
In regards to the extent of their relationship, commentators have said that: "the expression of their love was limited almost wholly to letters and very occasional farewell kisses or holding of hands".
Both Rachel's Sustainable Feast and the conference continue as annual events.
Carson attended the White House Conference on Conservation in May 1962; Houghton Mifflin distributed proof copies of ''Silent Spring'' to many of the delegates, and promoted the upcoming ''New Yorker'' serialization.
Allen proceeded in spite of Carson's objections to produce a very successful documentary.
Her condition worsened, and in February, doctors found that she had severe anemia from her radiation treatments and in March they discovered that the cancer had reached her liver.
Other publicity included a positive editorial in ''The New York Times'' and excerpts of the serialized version in ''Audubon'' magazine, with another round of publicity in July and August as chemical companies responded.
At the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries, Carson's main responsibilities were to analyze and report field data on fish populations, and to write brochures and other literature for the public.
''The Sea'''s success led to the republication of ''Under the Sea Wind'', which became a bestseller itself.
DDT is a prime example, but other synthetic pesticides come under scrutiny as well—many of which are subject to bioaccumulation.
Carson was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Jimmy Carter.
Chapters appeared in ''Science Digest'' and the ''Yale Review''—the latter chapter, ''The Birth of an Island'', winning the American Association for the Advancement of Science's George Westinghouse Science Writing Prize.
With success came financial security, and Carson was able to give up her job in 1952 to concentrate on writing full-time.
For the rest of her life, Carson's main professional focus would be the dangers of pesticide overuse.
Carson's supervisor, pleased with the success of the radio series, asked her to write the introduction to a public brochure about the fisheries bureau; he also worked to secure her the first full-time position that became available.
Near Pittsburgh, a  hiking trail, called the Rachel Carson Trail and maintained by the Rachel Carson Trails Conservancy, was dedicated to Carson in 1975.
From reading the scientific literature and interviewing scientists, Carson found two scientific camps when it came to pesticides: those who dismissed the possible danger of pesticide spraying barring conclusive proof, and those who were open to the possibility of harm and willing to consider alternative methods such as biological pest control.
Carson and the others involved with publication of ''Silent Spring'' expected fierce criticism.
