Political scientists Ross Hammond and Robert Axelrod created a computer simulation wherein virtual individuals were randomly assigned one of a variety of skin colors, and then one of a variety of trading strategies: be color-blind, favor those of your own color, or favor those of other colors.
These books, and others like them, feed into what has been called the "white savior narrative in film", in which the heroes and heroines are white even though the story is about things that happen to black characters.
Centuries of European colonialism in the Americas, Africa and Asia were often justified by white supremacist attitudes.
By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government.
In other words, "the coloured people of the world."
The term ''racism'' is a noun describing the state of being racist, i.e., subscribing to the belief that the human population can be classified according to race.
Indeed, to him the first three were all "internal foreigners", who threatened the ethnic unity of the French people.
Culture and race became considered intertwined and dependent upon each other, sometimes even to the extent of including nationality or language to the set of definition.
Modern nation-states appeared in the wake of the French Revolution, with the formation of patriotic sentiments for the first time in Spain during the Peninsula War (1808–1813, known in Spain as the Independence War).
The Ancient Hebrews, in referring to all who were not Hebrews as Gentiles, were indulging in ethnocentrism, not in racism.&nbsp;...
By making these generalizations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the gap.
), and finally the "''Homo mediterraneus''" (Neapolitan, Andalus, etc.)
), the British school of social anthropology (Bronisław Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, etc.
Nationalism had made its first appearance with the invention of the ''levée en masse'' by the French revolutionaries, thus inventing mass conscription in order to be able to defend the newly founded Republic against the ''Ancien Régime'' order represented by the European monarchies.
The word came into widespread usage in the Western world in the 1930s, when it was used to describe the social and political ideology of Nazism, which saw "race" as a naturally given political unit.
One form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation which existed until the 1960s when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Elements within Israeli society have been accused of discriminatory behavior towards Ethiopian Jews and other non-white Jews.
Tooby and Cosmides hypothesized that modern people use race as a proxy (rough-and-ready indicator) for coalition membership, since a better-than-random guess about "which side" another person is on will be helpful if one does not actually know in advance.
In France, the transition from Republican, liberal nationalism, to ethnic nationalism, which made nationalism a characteristic of far-right movements in France, took place during the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the 19th century.
They found their scientific legitimacy on physical anthropology, anthropometry, craniometry, phrenology, physiognomy, and others now discredited disciplines in order to formulate racist prejudices.
He considered ugly races as inferior, immoral and animal-like.
While much of the research and work on racism in the last half-century or so has concentrated on "white racism" in the Western world, historical accounts of race-based social practices can be found across the globe.
), the "''Homo alpinus''" (Auvergnat, Turkish, etc.
Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of the Mbuti pygmies, has asked the UN Security Council to recognise cannibalism as both a crime against humanity and an act of genocide.
There is widespread rejection of any methodology based on anything similar to Blumenbach's races.
Indigenous peoples have been –and are– often subject to racist attitudes.
To prevent misunderstanding a clear distinction must be made between racism and ethnocentrism&nbsp;...
Garner (2009: p.&nbsp;11)  summarizes different existing definitions of racism and identifies three common elements contained in those definitions of racism.
Nazi policies labeled Romani people, people of color and Slavs (Poles, Russians, Serbs, etc.)
In popular usage, as in some academic usage, little distinction is made between "racism" and "ethnocentrism".
Some sociologists also argue that, particularly in the West where racism is often negatively sanctioned in society, racism has changed from being a blatant to a more covert expression of racial prejudice.
''Racism'' and ''racial discrimination'' are often used to describe discrimination on an ethnic or cultural basis, independent of whether these differences are described as racial.
Article 1 of the 1945 UN Charter includes "promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race" as UN purpose.
The neo-Darwinian synthesis, first developed in the 1930s, eventually led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s.
Members of the Völkisch movement, in particular the Thule Society, would participate in the founding of the German Workers' Party (DAP) in Munich in 1918, the predecessor of the NSDAP Nazi party.
Other such studies have found significant evidence of discrimination in car sales, home insurance applications, provision of medical care, and hailing taxis.
Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified (or are inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feeling, thought, or action toward social objects.
Michel Foucault traced the genealogy of modern racism to this medieval "historical and political discourse of race struggle".
Boulainvilliers opposed the absolute monarchy, who tried to bypass the aristocracy by establishing a direct relationship to the Third Estate.
Such aspects are described in this section, although the list is not exhaustive.
They migrated to escape racial discrimination and wholesale nationalisation of private enterprise a few years later in 1964.
), the French school of ethnology (Claude Lévi-Strauss, etc.
He assimilated races and social classes, considering that the French upper class was a representation of the ''Homo europaeus'', while the lower class represented the ''Homo alpinus''.
Some 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s.
The Third Reich's racial policies, its eugenics programs and the extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, as well as Romani people in the Porrajmos (the Romani Holocaust) and others minorities led to a change in opinions about scientific research into race after the war.
Similar laws existed in Bulgaria- The Law for protection of the nation, Hungary, Romania, and Austria.
In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them from having any influence in education, politics, higher education and industry.
In both sociology and economics, the outcomes of racist actions are often measured by the inequality in income, wealth, net worth, and access to other cultural resources, such as education, between racial groups.
In Asia and Latin America, light skin is seen as more attractive.
In 1950, UNESCO suggested in ''The Race Question'' —a statement signed by 21 scholars such as Ashley Montagu, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.
The ''limpieza de sangre'' legislation was common also during the colonization of the Americas, where it led to the racial and feudal separation of peoples and social strata in the colonies.
They found that the ethnocentric individuals clustered together, then grew until all the non-ethnocentric individuals were wiped out.
Textual analysis of such writings can contrast sharply with black authors' descriptions of African Americans and their experiences in US society.
The bureau is pictured as a large domed building resembling the U.S. Capitol and is inscribed "Freedom and No Work."
The term was coined by Joel Kovel to describe the subtle racial behaviors of any ethnic or racial group who rationalize their aversion to a particular group by appeal to rules or stereotypes.
As its history indicates, popular use of the word ''racism'' is relatively recent.
UNESCO marks March 21 as the yearly International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in memory of the events that occurred on March 21, 1960 in Sharpeville, South Africa, where police killed demonstrators protesting against the apartheid regime.
Non-white South Africans were taxed differently than white South Africans and they were also required to carry on them at all times additional documentation, which later became known as "dom passes", to certify their non-white South African citizenship.
The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter.
This meant that they had no basic citizens' rights, e.g., the right to vote.
Van Dijk (1992), for example, examines the different ways in which descriptions of racism and racist actions are depicted by perpetrators of such actions and their victims.
Throughout history, when an adversary is identified as "other" based on notions of race or ethnicity (in particular when "other" is construed to mean "inferior"), the means employed by the self-presumed "superior" party to appropriate territory, human chattel, or material wealth often have been more ruthless, more brutal, and less constrained by moral or ethical considerations.
In response to such views, the Afro-Arab author Al-Jahiz, himself having a Zanj grandfather, wrote a book entitled ''Superiority Of The Blacks To The Whites'', and explained why the Zanj were black in terms of environmental determinism in the "On the Zanj" chapter of ''The Essays''.
Edith Sanders in 1969 cited the Babylonian Talmud, which divides mankind between the three sons of Noah, stating that "the descendants of Ham are cursed by being black, and it depicts Ham as a sinful man and his progeny as degenerates."
Many use the term "racism" to refer to more general phenomena, such as xenophobia and ethnocentrism, although scholars attempt to clearly distinguish those phenomena from racism as an ideology or from scientific racism, which has little to do with ordinary xenophobia.
He recognised racial differences as varieties of humanity, and emphasised the close similarities between people of all races in mental faculties, tastes, dispositions and habits, while still contrasting the culture of the "lowest savages" with European civilization.
Furthermore, they frequently made use of the idea of "survival of the fittest", a term coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864, associated with ideas of competition, which were named social Darwinism in the 1940s.
Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view, which held that the different races had been separately created.
While the Government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing Government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages.
This ambivalence may also be visible for example in hiring decisions where job candidates that are otherwise positively evaluated may be unconsciously disfavored by employers in the final decision because of their race.
It aimed both at debunking scientific racist theories, by popularizing modern knowledge concerning "the race question," and morally condemned racism as contrary to the philosophy of the Enlightenment and its assumption of equal rights for all.
The ideology underlying racism can become manifest in many aspects of social life.
Devah Pager, a sociologist at Princeton University, sent matched pairs of applicants to apply for jobs in Milwaukee and New York City, finding that black applicants received callbacks or job offers at half the rate of equally qualified whites.
Bar owners in central Beijing had been forced by the police "not to serve black people or Mongolians" during the 2008 Summer Olympics, as the police associates these ethnic groups with illegal prostitution and drug trafficking.
This view is based on studies of prejudice and discriminatory behavior, where some people will act ambivalently towards black people, with positive reactions in certain, more public contexts, but more negative views and expressions in more private contexts.
However, during the 19th century, West European colonial powers were involved in the suppression of the Arab slave trade in Africa, as well as in suppression of the slave trade in West Africa.
Thus, racism can be broadly defined to encompass individual and group prejudices and acts of discrimination that result in material and cultural advantages conferred on a majority or dominant social group.
This European analysis, which first appeared in Great Britain, was then carried on in France by people such as Boulainvilliers, Nicolas Fréret, and then, during the 1789 French Revolution, Sieyès, and afterward Augustin Thierry and Cournot.
The UN does not define "racism"; however, it does define "racial discrimination": According to the 1965 UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Pureness of race tended to be related to rather superficial characteristics that were easily addressed and advertised, such as blondness.
In the United States in the early 19th century, the American Colonization Society was established as the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater freedom and equality in Africa.
The Hottentots (Nama or Khoi) were formed by the merger of Hamitic and Bushmen (San) races—both being termed nowadays as Khoisan peoples).
Polygenist Christoph Meiners for example, split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the "beautiful White race" and the "ugly Black race".
Although the curse of Ham has been used as an explanation for the origin of dark-skinned people since the 3rd century A.D., David M. Goldenberg (2005) writes that this was based on a theory that different climates and sun exposure affect semen composition and through this the physical composition of descendants.
The anti-Chinese legislation was in the Indonesian constitution until 1998.
Although antisemitism has a long history, related to Christianity and e.g.
These evaluations are generally either favorable or unfavorable.
Other scientific authors include H.S.
With regard to employment, multiple audit studies have found strong evidence of racial  discrimination in the United States' labor market, with magnitudes of employers' preferences of white applicants found in these studies ranging from 50% to 240%.
Scottish philosopher and economist David Hume said, "I am apt to suspect the Negroes to be naturally inferior to the Whites.
The ideology underlying racist practices often includes the idea that humans can be subdivided into distinct groups that are different in their social behavior and innate capacities and that can be ranked as inferior or superior.
The Nazis considered most Slavs to be Non-Aryan ''Untermenschen''.
— to "drop the term ''race'' altogether and instead speak of ethnic groups".
Practices and ideologies of racism are condemned by the United Nations in the Declaration of Human Rights.
Earlier sources assign the punishment of blackness to Ham himself and make no mention of the people of Kush or their skin being a curse.
Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.
Resentment against Chinese workers has led to violent confrontations in Africa and Oceania.
Between 1948 and 1994, the Apartheid regime took place.
Race and race relations are prominent areas of study in sociology and economics.
In thinking about crime, for example, social psychologist Jennifer L. Eberhardt (2004) of Stanford University holds that, "...blackness is so associated with crime you're ready to pick out these crime objects."
The Norwegian Anti-Discrimination Act bans discrimination based on ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin color.
Some scholars consider modern racism to be characterized by an explicit rejection of stereotypes, combined with resistance to changing structures of discrimination for reasons that are ostensibly non-racial, an ideology that considers opportunity at a purely individual basis denying the relevance of race in determining individual opportunities and the exhibition of indirect forms of micro-aggression toward and/or avoidance of people of other races.
), as well as the discovery of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, such sciences, in particular anthropometry, were used to deduce behaviours and psychological characteristics from outward, physical appearances.
It was then restricted by Karl Friedrich Lepsius (1810–1877) to non-Semitic Afro-Asiatic languages.
H. P. Steensby, while strongly emphasizing that all humans today are of mixed origins, in 1907 claimed that the origins of human differences must be traced extraordinarily far back in time, and conjectured that the "purest race" today would be the Australian Aboriginals.
It further states that everyone is entitled to these rights "without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status."
Ethnic nationalism, which advocated the belief in a hereditary membership of the nation, made its appearance in the historical context surrounding the creation of the modern nation-states.
They come about from various influences in the individual experience.
In ''The Will to Knowledge'' (1976), Foucault analyzed another opponent of the "race struggle" discourse: Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis, which opposed the concepts of "blood heredity", prevalent in the 19th century racist discourse.
Chinese self-identification as a "yellow race" predated such European racial concepts.
In November 2009, British newspaper ''The Guardian'' reported that Lou Jing, of mixed Chinese and African parentage, had emerged as the most famous talent show contestant in China and has become the subject of intense debate because of her skin color.
In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport the Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad.
Sociologists, in general, recognize "race" as a social construct.
In their 1978 United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (Article 1), the UN states, "All human beings belong to a single species and are descended from a common stock.
), and for centuries wars were waged between princes (''Kabinettskriege'' in German).
Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that "we" are "here" and the "others" are over "there".
Bernard Lewis has cited the Greek philosopher Aristotle who, in his discussion of slavery, stated that while Greeks are free by nature, 'barbarians' (non-Greeks) are slaves by nature, in that it is in their nature to be more willing to submit to despotic government.
The black man wonders, "Whar is de use for me to work as long as dey make dese appropriations."
For instance, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November 20, 1963, address racial prejudice explicitly next to discrimination for reasons of race, colour or ethnic origin (Article I).
The origin of the root word "race" is not clear.
In the US during the 1860s, racist posters were used during election campaigns.
The term ''Hamite'' was applied to different populations within North Africa, mainly comprising Ethiopians, Eritreans, Somalis, Berbers, and the ancient Egyptians.
The politics of Zimbabwe promote discrimination against whites, in an effort to ethnically cleanse the country.
Further, the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination.
During the Spanish colonial period, Spaniards developed a complex caste system based on race, which was used for social control and which also determined a person's importance in society.
To objectify a culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalize that it is not like 'normal' society.
All of these legislative racial laws were abolished through a series of equal human rights laws which were passed at the end of the Apartheid era in the early 1990s.
Reverse racism describes discriminatory action by members of a minority group against a dominant or formerly dominant racial or other group representative of the majority in a particular society.
Sangre azul, blue blood, was thus a euphemism for being a white man—Spain's own particular reminder that the refined footsteps of the aristocracy through history carry the rather less refined spoor of racism.
In most cases, ethno-national conflict seems to owe itself to conflict over land and strategic resources.
So it was with the Hellenes who denominated all non-Hellenes——whether the wild Scythians or the Egyptians whom they acknowledged as their mentors in the arts if civilization——Barbarians, the term denoting that which was strange or foreign.
This led to the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) and then to the Napoleonic conquests, and to the subsequent European-wide debates on the concepts and realities of nations, and in particular of nation-states.
Racial discrimination refers to the separation of people through a process of social division into categories not necessarily related to races for purposes of differential treatment.
Chamberlain at the end of the 19th century (a British citizen who naturalized himself as German because of his admiration for the "Aryan race") and Madison Grant, a eugenicist and author of ''The Passing of the Great Race'' (1916).
A recent proposal is that it derives from the Arabic ''ra's'', which means "head, beginning, origin" or the Hebrew ''rosh'', which has a similar meaning.
Historian Dante A. Puzzo, in his discussion of Aristotle, racism, and the ancient world writes that: Racism rests on two basic assumptions: that a correlation exists between physical characteristics and moral qualities; that mankind is divisible into superior and inferior stocks.
They are born equal in dignity and rights and all form an integral part of humanity."
However, this project had been abandoned.
It is commonly agreed that racism existed before the coinage of the word, but there is not a wide agreement on a single definition of what racism is and what it is not.
Above in a cloud is an image of the "Freedman's Bureau!
It is more unclear to which extent and when ethnic and national stereotypes are accepted.
The 1931 Paris Colonial Exhibition displayed Kanaks from New Caledonia.
A report released by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination condemns Botswana's treatment of the 'Bushmen' as racist.
Dawkins writes that racial prejudice, while not evolutionarily adaptive, "could be interpreted as an irrational generalization of a kin-selected tendency to identify with individuals physically resembling oneself, and to be nasty to individuals different in appearance".
The same year, William Z. Ripley used identical racial classification in ''The Races of Europe'' (1899), which would have a great influence in the United States.
If race is disregarded in predominately white populations, for example, whiteness becomes the normative standard, whereas people of color are othered, and the racism these individuals experience may be minimized or erased.
Non-white South Africans were not allowed involvement in any governing matters, including voting; access to quality healthcare; the provision of basic services, including clean water; electricity; as well as access to adequate schooling.
Before being disqualified in the 20th century by the American school of cultural anthropology (Franz Boas, etc.
Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots, and thousands more were detained or fled the island.
Legislative state racism is known to have been enforced by the National Party of South Africa during its Apartheid regime between 1948 and 1994.
The Spanish nobility started taking shape around the ninth century in classic military fashion, occupying land as warriors on horseback.
According to him, it divided itself in the 19th century according to two rival lines: on one hand, it was incorporated by racists, biologists and eugenicists, who gave it the modern sense of "race" and, even more, transformed this popular discourse into a "state racism" (e.g.
Anti-Chinese rioting, involving tens of thousands of people, broke out in Papua New Guinea in May 2009.
Movements such as the Civil Rights Movement and the Anti-Apartheid Movement were examples of anti-racist movements.
In some cases, ethnicity and nationalism were harnessed to rally combatants in wars between great religious empires (for example, the Muslim Turks and the Catholic Austro-Hungarians).
Du Bois wrote, "The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line."
In 2001, the European Union explicitly banned racism, along with many other forms of social discrimination, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the legal effect of which, if any, would necessarily be limited to Institutions of the European Union: "Article 21 of the charter prohibits discrimination on any ground such as race, color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, disability, age or sexual orientation and also discrimination on the grounds of nationality."
It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to drain them off".
It can be defined as societal beliefs and customs that promote the assumption that the products of a given culture, including the language and traditions of that culture are superior to those of other cultures.
In the mid-20th century, the German scholar Carl Meinhof (1857–1944) claimed that the Bantu race was formed by a merger of Hamitic and Negro races.
Institutional racism (also known as structural racism, state racism or systemic racism) is racial discrimination by governments, corporations, religions, or educational institutions or other large organizations with the power to influence the lives of many individuals.
Researchers Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, at the University of Chicago and MIT found in a 2004 study that there was widespread racial discrimination in the workplace.
Whitecapping, which started in Indiana in the late 19th century, soon spread throughout all of North America, causing many African laborers to flee from the land they worked on.
They live in thickets and caves, and eat herbs and unprepared grain.
Accusations of racism range from birth control policies, education, and housing discrimination.
Thus, racist thoughts and actions can arise from stereotypes and fears of which we are not aware.
Bolstered by some nationalist and ethnocentric values and achievements of choice, this concept of racial superiority evolved to distinguish from other cultures that were considered inferior or impure.
Masaryk and Beneš took the initiative of calling for a conference to re-establish in the minds and consciences of men everywhere the truth about race&nbsp;... Nazi propaganda was able to continue its baleful work unopposed by the authority of an international organisation.''
In 1919, a proposal to include a racial equality provision in the Covenant of the League of Nations was supported by a majority, but not adopted in the Paris Peace Conference, 1919.
Changes within scientific disciplines, such as the rise of the Boasian school of anthropology in the United States contributed to this shift.
Furthermore, they believed that political boundaries should mirror these alleged racial and ethnic groups, thus justifying ethnic cleansing in order to achieve "racial purity" and also to achieve ethnic homogeneity in the nation-state.
Toledo), despite condemnations by the Church and the State, who were welcoming the new flock.
No ingenious manufacture among them, no arts, no sciences."
Serious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949.
As opposed to traditional, overt racism, which is characterized by overt hatred for and explicit discrimination against racial/ethnic minorities, aversive racism is characterized by more complex, ambivalent expressions and attitudes.
Late 19th century nationalists were the first to embrace contemporary discourses on "race", ethnicity, and "survival of the fittest" to shape new nationalist doctrines.
Applying Galton's eugenics to his theory of races, Vacher de Lapouge's "selectionism" aimed first at achieving the annihilation of trade unionists, considered to be a "degenerate"; second, creating types of man each destined to one end, in order to prevent any contestation of labour conditions.
Ultimately, race came to represent not only the most important traits of the human body, but was also regarded as decisively shaping the character and personality of the nation.
Following the expulsion of the Arabic Moors and most of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian peninsula, the remaining Jews and Muslims were forced to convert to Roman Catholicism, becoming "New Christians", who were sometimes discriminated by the "Old Christians" in some cities (e.g.
Also in 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted, widely used on racial discrimination issues.
Vacher de Lapouge thus created a hierarchical classification of races, in which he identified the "''Homo europaeus'' (Teutonic, Protestant, etc.
In ''The Selfish Gene'', evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that "Blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretable in terms of Hamilton's genetic theory."
Hegel further claimed that blacks had no "sense of personality; their spirit sleeps, remains sunk in itself, makes no advance, and thus parallels the compact, undifferentiated mass of the African continent."
Gobineau's theories would be expanded, in France, by Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854–1936)'s typology of races, who published in 1899 ''The Aryan and his Social Role'', in which he claimed that the white, "Aryan race", "dolichocephalic", was opposed to the "brachycephalic" race, of whom the "Jew" was the archetype.
The same year that Kipling published his poem, Joseph Conrad published ''Heart of Darkness'' (1899), a clear criticism of the Congo Free State owned by Leopold II of Belgium.
More than 30 years of field experiment studies have found significant levels of discrimination against non-whites in labor, housing, and product markets in 10 different countries.
"Ethnicity" is often used in a sense close to one traditionally attributed to "race": the division of human groups based on qualities assumed to be essential or innate to the group (e.g.
Racism, as an ideology, exists in a society at both the individual and the institutional level.
Eduardo Bonilla-Silva argues that color blind racism arises from an "abstract liberalism, biologization of culture, naturalization of racial matters, and minimization of racism".
Though the Qur'an expresses no racial prejudice, such prejudices later developed among Arabs for a variety of reasons: their extensive conquests and slave trade; the influence of Aristotelian ideas regarding slavery, which some Muslim philosophers directed towards Zanj (Bantu) and Turkic peoples; and the influence of Judeo-Christian ideas regarding divisions among humankind.
It ''creates'' them through a process of social division into categories: anybody can be racialised, independently of their somatic, cultural, religious differences."
The UN convention further concludes that superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous, and there is no justification for racial discrimination, anywhere, in theory or in practice.
It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist today ''de facto''.
Though Aristotle does not specify any particular races, he argues that people from outside Greece are more prone to the burden of slavery than those from Greece.
In other words, the first group of subjects, with no clues from clothing, used race as a visual guide to guessing who was on which side of the debate; the second group of subjects used the clothing color as their main visual clue, and the effect of race became very small.
An entry in the Oxford English Dictionary (2008) defines racialism simply as "An earlier term than racism, but now largely superseded by it," and cites it in a 1902 quote.
The remnants of such legislation persevered into the 19th century in military contexts.
Segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling's models of segregation and subsequent work.
Aversive racism is a form of implicit racism in which a person's unconscious negative evaluations of racial or ethnic minorities are realized by a persistent avoidance of interaction with other racial and ethnic groups.
He viewed only the white race as beautiful.
