The goal is to permanently isolate nuclear waste from the human environment.
The glass inside a cylinder is usually a black glossy substance.
Its radioactive decay will strongly influence the long-term activity curve of the SNF around 1 million years.
In the United States alone, the Department of Energy states there are "millions of gallons of radioactive waste" as well as "thousands of tons of spent nuclear fuel and material" and also "huge quantities of contaminated soil and water."
'''Low level waste''' ('''LLW''') is generated from hospitals and industry, as well as the nuclear fuel cycle.
Long-term storage of radioactive waste requires the stabilization of the waste into a form which will neither react nor degrade for extended periods of time.
In second half of 20th century, several methods of disposal of radioactive waste were investigated by nuclear nations, which are :
In addition to plutonium-239, which is highly suitable for building nuclear weapons, it contains large amounts of undesirable contaminants: plutonium-240, plutonium-241, and plutonium-238.
The amount of HLW worldwide is currently increasing by about 12,000 metric tons every year, which is the equivalent to about 100 double-decker buses or a two-story structure with a footprint the size of a basketball court.
Most scientists agree that the main proposed long-term solution is deep geological burial, either in a mine or a deep borehole.
They are not significantly radioactive.
These eventually build up to a level where they absorb so many neutrons that the chain reaction stops, even with the control rods completely removed.
Of particular concern in nuclear waste management are two long-lived fission products, Tc-99 (half-life 220,000 years) and I-129 (half-life 15.7 million years), which dominate spent fuel radioactivity after a few thousand years.
While these approaches all have merit and would facilitate an international solution to the problem of disposal of radioactive waste, they would require an amendment of the Law of the Sea.
It can be divided into two main classes.
The proposed land-based subductive waste disposal method disposes of nuclear waste in a subduction zone accessed from land and therefore is not prohibited by international agreement.
However, almost six decades after commercial nuclear energy began, no government has succeeded in opening such a repository for civilian high-level nuclear waste, although Finland is in the advanced stage of the construction of such facility, the Onkalo spent nuclear fuel repository.
The energy and the type of the ionizing radiation emitted by a radioactive substance are also important factors in determining its threat to humans.
Industrial source waste can contain alpha, beta, neutron or gamma emitters.
This makes up the majority of typical total dosage (with mean annual exposure from other sources amounting to 0.6&nbsp;mSv from medical tests averaged over the whole populace, 0.4&nbsp;mSv from cosmic rays, 0.005&nbsp;mSv from the legacy of past atmospheric nuclear testing, 0.005&nbsp;mSv occupational exposure, 0.002&nbsp;mSv from the Chernobyl disaster, and 0.0002&nbsp;mSv from the nuclear fuel cycle).
At present there are 70 nuclear power plant sites where spent fuel is stored.
As a melt, this product is poured into stainless steel cylindrical containers ("cylinders") in a batch process.
Another approach, considered safer but requiring more development, is to dedicate subcritical reactors to the transmutation of the left-over transuranic elements.
The Mongolian President Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj issued a presidential order on September 13 banning all negotiations with foreign governments or international organizations on nuclear-waste storage plans in Mongolia.
Other sources include medical and industrial wastes, as well as naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM) that can be concentrated as a result of the processing or consumption of coal, oil and gas, and some minerals, as discussed below.
A high number of launches would be required because no individual rocket would be able to carry very much of the material relative to the total amount that needs to be disposed of.
In other cases of radioactive waste accidents, lakes or ponds with radioactive waste accidentally overflowed into the rivers during exceptional storms.
Those isotopes emit different types and levels of radiation, which last for different periods of time.
The caesium will be fixed in the hollandite.
When cooled, the fluid solidifies ("vitrifies") into the glass.
Transmutation was banned in the US in April 1977 by President Carter due to the danger of plutonium proliferation, but President Reagan rescinded the ban in 1981.
A Blue Ribbon Commission was appointed by President Obama to look into future options for this and future waste.
It is common for medium active wastes in the nuclear industry to be treated with ion exchange or other means to concentrate the radioactivity into a small volume.
If a developing organism such as an unborn child is irradiated, it is possible a birth defect may be induced, but it is unlikely this defect will be in a gamete or a gamete-forming cell.
In an oil processing plant the area of the plant where propane is processed is often one of the more contaminated areas of the plant as radon has a similar boiling point to propane.'''
Japan did start discussions with the IAEA about the large quantities of enriched uranium and plutonium that were discovered in nuclear waste cleared away by Japanese nuclear operators.
Practical studies only consider up to 100 years as far as effective planning and cost evaluations are concerned.
According to a whistleblower, a manager of the Italy's state energy research agency Enea paid the clan to get rid of 600 drums of toxic and radioactive waste from Italy, Switzerland, France, Germany, and the US, with Somalia as the destination, where the waste was buried after buying off local politicians.
In countries with nuclear power plants, nuclear armament, or nuclear fuel treatment plants, the majority of waste originates from the nuclear fuel cycle and nuclear weapons reprocessing, otherwise there is no waste of nuclear origin.
In just one of these 108 larger designations, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, there were for example at least "167 known contaminant release sites" in one of the three subdivisions of the  site.
Vast mounds of uranium mill tailings are left at many old mining sites, especially in Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
Radioactive medical waste tends to contain beta particle and gamma ray emitters.
* Y-90, used for treating lymphoma (2.7 days)
Spent fuel is highly radioactive and often hot.
Under U.S. law, transuranic waste is further categorized into "contact-handled" (CH) and "remote-handled" (RH) on the basis of the radiation dose rate measured at the surface of the waste container.
* "Disposal in outer space" (for instance, inside the Sun), not implemented - as it would be currently too expensive.
CH TRUW does not have the very high radioactivity of high-level waste, nor its high heat generation, but RH TRUW can be highly radioactive, with surface dose rates up to 1,000,000 &nbsp;mrem/h (10,000&nbsp;mSv/h).
* I-131, used for thyroid function tests and for treating thyroid cancer (8.0 days)
Calcination involves passing the waste through a heated, rotating tube.
Coal contains a small amount of radioactive uranium, barium, thorium and potassium, but, in the case of pure coal, this is significantly less than the average concentration of those elements in the Earth's crust.
The resulting glass is a new substance in which the waste products are bonded into the glass matrix when it solidifies.
On 15 December 2011 top government spokesman Osamu Fujimura of the Japanese government admitted that nuclear substances were found in the waste of Japanese nuclear facilities.
All radionuclides contained in the waste have a half-life—the time it takes for half of the atoms to decay into another nuclide—and eventually all radioactive waste decays into non-radioactive elements (i.e., stable nuclides).
Japan estimated to hold 17,000 tons of HLW in storage in 2015.
The estimated world total of plutonium in the year 2000 was of 1,645 metric tons, of which 210 metric tons had been separated by reprocessing.
The UK's Nuclear Decommissioning Authority published a position paper in 2014 on the progress on approaches to the management of separated plutonium, which summarises the conclusions of the work that NDA shared with UK government.
'''Radioactive waste''' is waste that contains radioactive material.
There have also been theoretical studies involving the use of fusion reactors as so called "actinide burners" where a fusion reactor plasma such as in a tokamak, could be "doped" with a small amount of the "minor" transuranic atoms which would be transmuted (meaning fissioned in the actinide case) to lighter elements upon their successive bombardment by the very high energy neutrons produced by the fusion of deuterium and tritium in the reactor.
The radioactivity of all radioactive waste diminishes with time.
While these countries reprocess the fuel carrying out single plutonium cycles, India is the only country known to be planning multiple plutonium recycling schemes.
There have been proposals for reactors that consume nuclear waste and transmute it to other, less-harmful nuclear waste.
Because of such differences, the rules determining biological injury differ widely according to the radioisotope, time of exposure
Transportation accidents involving spent nuclear fuel from power plants are unlikely to have serious consequences due to the strength of the spent nuclear fuel shipping casks.
Additionally, a new research program called ACTINET has been started in the EU to make transmutation possible on a large, industrial scale.
The Australian Synroc (synthetic rock) is a more sophisticated way to immobilize such waste, and this process may eventually come into commercial use for civil wastes (it is currently being developed for US military wastes).
The Mongolian government has accused the newspaper of distributing false claims around the world.
* "Disposal at subduction zones", not implemented.
These mechanisms range from DNA, mRNA and protein repair, to internal lysosomic digestion of defective proteins, and even induced cell suicide—apoptosis
These isotopes are extremely difficult to separate, and more cost-effective ways of obtaining fissile material exist (e.g.
and sometimes also the nature of the chemical compound which contains the radioisotope.
File:Dangclass7.svg|The dangerous goods transport classification sign for radioactive materials
Deep borehole disposal is the concept of disposing of high-level radioactive waste from nuclear reactors in extremely deep boreholes.
Current major approaches to managing radioactive waste have been segregation and storage for short-lived waste, near-surface disposal for low and some intermediate level waste, and deep burial or partitioning / transmutation for the high-level waste.
The thermal flux of the waste materials fracture the formation and alters the chemical and/or physical properties of hydrocarbon material within the subterranean formation to allow removal of the altered material.
It has significant disadvantages, such as the potential for catastrophic failure of a launch vehicle, which could spread radioactive material into the atmosphere and around the world.
Over a timeframe of thousands of years, after the most active short half-life radioisotopes decayed, burying U.S. nuclear waste would increase the radioactivity in the top 2000 feet of rock and soil in the United States (10 million km2) by ≈ 1 part in 10 million over the cumulative amount of natural radioisotopes in such a volume, but the vicinity of the site would have a far higher concentration of artificial radioisotopes underground than such an average.
European limits are often more stringent than the standard suggested in 1990 by the International Commission on Radiation Protection by a factor of 20, and more stringent by a factor of ten than the standard proposed by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository for the first 10,000 years after closure.
The talks were kept secret, and although The ''Mainichi Daily News'' reported on them in May, Mongolia officially denied the existence of these negotiations.
Materials that originate from any region of an Active Area are commonly designated as LLW as a precautionary measure even if there is only a remote possibility of being contaminated with radioactive materials.
According to U.S. NCRP reports, population exposure from 1000-MWe power plants amounts to 490 person-rem/year for coal power plants, 100 times as great as nuclear power plants (4.8 person-rem/year).
Mill tailings are sometimes referred to as '''11(e)2 wastes''', from the section of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 that defines them.
Ordinarily (in spent nuclear fuel), plutonium is reactor-grade plutonium.
Certain radioactive elements (such as plutonium-239) will remain hazardous to humans and other creatures for hundreds or thousands of years.
In Germany a vitrification plant is in use; this is treating the waste from a small demonstration reprocessing plant which has since been closed down.
Naturally occurring uranium is not fissile because it contains 99.3% of U-238 and only 0.7% of U-235.
Dry cask storage typically involves taking waste from a spent fuel pool and sealing it (along with an inert gas) in a steel cylinder, which is placed in a concrete cylinder which acts as a radiation shield.
Breeder reactors can run on U-238 and transuranic elements, which comprise the majority of spent fuel radioactivity in the 1,000–100,000-year time span.
Radioactive waste is usually a by-product of nuclear power generation and other applications of nuclear fission or nuclear technology, such as research and medicine.
To further complicate matters, international agreements on the regulation of such a program would need to be established.
:""Sea" means all marine waters other than the internal waters of States, as well as the seabed and the subsoil thereof; it does not include sub-seabed repositories accessed only from land."
Radioactive waste comes from a number of sources.
Long term behavior of radioactive wastes remains a subject for ongoing research projects in geoforecasting.
All this work (in the United Kingdom) is done using hot cell systems.
This has an effect in the total activity curve of the three fuel types.
After the presidential order, the Mongolian president fired the individual who was supposedly involved in these conversations.
'''Intermediate-level waste''' ('''ILW''') contains higher amounts of radioactivity and in general require shielding, but not cooling.
Th-232 is a fertile material that can undergo a neutron capture reaction and two beta minus decays, resulting in the production of fissile U-233.
Intermediate-level wastes includes resins, chemical sludge and metal nuclear fuel cladding, as well as contaminated materials from reactor decommissioning.
A comparison of the activity associated to U-233 for three different SNF types can be seen in the figure on the top right.
They include burial beneath a stable abyssal plain, burial in a subduction zone that would slowly carry the waste downward into the Earth's mantle, and burial beneath a remote natural or human-made island.
It proceeded as far as large-scale tests, but was then canceled by the US Government.
The 'calcine' generated is fed continuously into an induction heated furnace with fragmented glass.
The main source of radiation in the human body is potassium-40 (40K), typically 17 milligrams in the body at a time and 0.4 milligrams/day intake.
Depending on the decay mode and the pharmacokinetics of an element (how the body processes it and how quickly), the threat due to exposure to a given activity of a radioisotope will differ.
Uranium mill tailings typically also contain chemically hazardous heavy metal such as lead and arsenic.
After this the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which wanted to buy nuclear fuel from Mongolia, joined in the negotiations.
Many people remain uncomfortable with the immediate stewardship cessation of this disposal system, suggesting perpetual management and monitoring would be more prudent.
A truncated PUREX type extraction process would be one possible method of making the separation.
Synroc was invented by Prof Ted Ringwood (a geochemist) at the Australian National University.
Classifications of radioactive waste varies by country.
This has resulted in a practical nuclear research reactor called Myrrha in which transmutation is possible.
Thus, these wastes must be shielded for centuries and isolated from the living environment for millennia.
The United States has at least 108 sites designated as areas that are contaminated and unusable, sometimes many thousands of acres.
These negotiations had started after U.S. Deputy Secretary of Energy Daniel B. Poneman visited Mongolia in September, 2010.
However, alarmed by this news, Mongolian citizens protested against the plans, and demanded the government withdraw the plans and disclose information.
* "'''Direct injection'''", done by USSR and USA.
In particular, the Integral Fast Reactor was a proposed nuclear reactor with a nuclear fuel cycle that produced no transuranic waste and in fact, could consume transuranic waste.
Bulk vitrification uses electrodes to melt soil and wastes, which are then buried underground.
The incidence of radiation-induced mutations in humans is small, as in most mammals, because of natural cellular-repair mechanisms, many just now coming to light.
* "Long term above ground storage", not implemented.
When looking at long term radioactive decay, the actinides in the SNF have a significant influence due to their characteristically long half-lives.
Thus, some have argued, as time passes, these deep storage areas have the potential to become "plutonium mines", from which material for nuclear weapons can be acquired with relatively little difficulty.
A few incidents have occurred when radioactive material was disposed of improperly, shielding during transport was defective, or when it was simply abandoned or even stolen from a waste store.
"An increasing backlog of plutonium from reprocessing is developing in many countries...
In January 2013, Cumbria county council rejected UK central government proposals to start work on an underground storage dump for nuclear waste near to the Lake District National Park.
This makes the proposal impractical economically and it increases the risk of at least one or more launch failures.
Other radionuclides remain radioactive for millions of years (though most of these products have so little activity as a result of their long half-lives that their radiation is lost in the background level).
Sweden and Finland are furthest along in committing to a particular disposal technology, while many others reprocess spent fuel or contract with France or Great Britain to do it, taking back the resulting plutonium and high-level waste.
The Fernald, Ohio site for example had "31 million pounds of uranium product", "2.5 billion pounds of waste", "2.75 million cubic yards of contaminated soil and debris", and a "223 acre portion of the underlying Great Miami Aquifer had uranium levels above drinking standards."
The Morris Operation is currently the only de facto high-level radioactive waste storage site in the United States.
Most countries are considerably ahead of the United States in developing plans for high-level radioactive waste disposal.
HLW accounts for over 95 percent of the total radioactivity produced in the process of nuclear electricity generation.
Since radioactive decay follows the half-life rule, the rate of decay is inversely proportional to the duration of decay.
In the U.S., it arises mainly from weapons production, and consists of clothing, tools, rags, residues, debris and other items contaminated with small amounts of radioactive elements (mainly plutonium).
At Maxey Flat, a low-level radioactive waste facility located in Kentucky, containment trenches covered with dirt, instead of steel or cement, collapsed under heavy rainfall into the trenches and filled with water.
The Nuclear Assisted Hydrocarbon Production Method, Canadian patent application 2,659,302, is a method for the temporary or permanent storage of nuclear waste materials comprising the placing of waste materials into one or more repositories or boreholes constructed into an unconventional oil formation.
As a gas, it undergoes enrichment to increase the U-235 content from 0.7% to about 4.4% (LEU).
Ocean floor disposal of radioactive waste has been suggested by the finding that deep waters in the North Atlantic Ocean do not present an exchange with shallow waters for about 140 years based on oxygen content data recorded over a period of 25 years.
Many of these can be disposed of by leaving it to decay for a short time before disposal as normal waste.
uranium enrichment or dedicated plutonium production reactors).
An option for getting rid of this plutonium is to use it as a fuel in a traditional Light Water Reactor (LWR).
Used fuel contains the highly radioactive products of fission (see high level waste below).
The fission products removed from the fuel are a concentrated form of high-level waste as are the chemicals used in the process.
The large stock of plutonium is a result of its production inside uranium-fueled reactors and of the reprocessing of weapons-grade plutonium during the weapons program.
A 1000-MW nuclear power plant produces about 27 tonnes of spent nuclear fuel (unreprocessed) every year.
However, modern reactors are only moderately enriched with U-235 relative to U-238, so the U-238 continues to serve as a denaturation agent for any U-235 produced by plutonium decay.
A Deep geological repository seems to be favored.
In the Soviet Union, waste stored in Lake Karachay was blown over the area during a dust storm after the lake had partly dried out.
A lot of this waste is alpha particle-emitting matter from the decay chains of uranium and thorium.
The ongoing controversy over high-level radioactive waste disposal is a major constraint on the nuclear power’s global expansion.
The U.S. EPA proposed a legal limit of a maximum of 3.5 millisieverts (350 millirem) each annually to local individuals after 10,000 years, which would be up to several percent of the exposure currently received by some populations in the highest natural background regions on Earth, though the U.S. DOE predicted that received dose would be much below that limit.
In a similar way, the alpha emitting actinides and radium are considered very harmful as they tend to have long biological half-lives and their radiation has a high relative biological effectiveness, making it far more damaging to tissues per amount of energy deposited.
The radioactivity of fly ash is about the same as black shale and is less than phosphate rocks, but is more of a concern because a small amount of the fly ash ends up in the atmosphere where it can be inhaled.
Article 1 (Definitions), 7., of the 1996 Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, (the London Dumping Convention) states:
For RGPu and WGPu, the initial amount of U-233 and its decay around 1 million years can be seen.
Fast reactors can theoretically consume some existing waste.
Some of the U.S. sites were smaller in nature, however, cleanup issues were simpler to address, and DOE has successfully completed cleanup, or at least closure, of several sites.
To reduce its volume, it is often compacted or incinerated before disposal.
:''This article is about radioactive waste, for contextual information, see Nuclear power.''
Many of these are neutron absorbers, called neutron poisons in this context.
Due to high energy demand, work on the method has continued in the EU.
After being inspected for external contamination, the steel cylinder is stored, usually in an underground repository.
Due to historic activities typically related to radium industry, uranium mining, and military programs, there are numerous sites that contain or are contaminated with radioactivity.
The purposes of calcination are to evaporate the water from the waste, and de-nitrate the fission products to assist the stability of the glass produced.
The two tables show some of the major radioisotopes, their half-lives, and their radiation yield as a proportion of the yield of fission of uranium-235.
After a nuclear fuel rod serves one fuel cycle and is removed from the core, it is considered HLW.
The chemical properties of the radioactive element will determine how mobile the substance is and how likely it is to spread into the environment and contaminate humans.
The IAEA, which publishes the Radioactive Waste Safety Standards (RADWASS), also plays a significant role.
The Synroc contains pyrochlore and cryptomelane type minerals.
This is a concern since if the waste is stored, perhaps in deep geological storage, over many years the fission products decay, decreasing the radioactivity of the waste and making the plutonium easier to access.
(The exposure from the complete nuclear fuel cycle from mining to waste disposal is 136 person-rem/year; the corresponding value for coal use from mining to waste disposal is "probably unknown".)
Specifically, the high radioactivity and heat (80 C in surrounding rock) greatly increases the difficulty of mining a storage area, and the enrichment methods required have high capital costs.
In other words, the radiation from a long-lived isotope like iodine-129 will be much less intense than that of a short-lived isotope like iodine-131.
* "'''Ocean disposal'''", done by the USSR, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, the United States, Belgium, France, The Netherlands, Japan, Sweden, Russia, Germany, Italy and South Korea.
Moreover, it may require more than one half-life until some nuclear materials lose enough radioactivity to cease being lethal to living things.
* "Disposal in ice sheets", rejected in Antarctic Treaty
One solution to this problem is to recycle the plutonium and use it as a fuel e.g.
After being formed, the glass is highly resistant to water.
After serious opposition had arisen about plans and negotiations between Mongolia with Japan and the United States of America to build nuclear-waste facilities in Mongolia, Mongolia stopped all negotiations in September 2011.
The undesirable contaminant Pu-240 decays faster than the Pu-239, and thus the quality of the bomb material increases with time (although its quantity decreases during that time as well).
It can range from a few days for highly radioactive isotopes to millions of years for slightly radioactive ones.
The time radioactive waste must be stored for depends on the type of waste and radioactive isotopes.
Deep borehole disposal seeks to place the waste as much as  beneath the surface of the Earth and relies primarily on the immense natural geological barrier to confine the waste safely and permanently so that it should never pose a threat to the environment.
Substances containing natural radioactivity are known as NORM.
Such LLW typically exhibits no higher radioactivity than one would expect from the same material disposed of in a non-active area, such as a normal office block.
It is refined from yellowcake (U3O8), then converted to uranium hexafluoride gas (UF6).
At the press conference Fujimura said: "Based on investigations so far, most nuclear substances have been properly managed as waste, and from that perspective, there is no problem in safety management," But according to him, the matter was at that moment still being investigated.
Shipments to Somalia continued into the 1990s, while the 'Ndrangheta clan also blew up shiploads of waste, including radioactive hospital waste, and sending them to the sea bed off the Calabrian coast.
It is stored, either as UF6 or as U3O8.
Talks took place in Washington DC between officials of Japan, the United States and Mongolia in February 2011.
Space disposal is attractive because it removes nuclear waste from the planet.
In Italy, several radioactive waste deposits let material flow into river water, thus contaminating water for domestic use.
* Cs-137, used for brachytherapy, external radiotherapy (30 years)
High-level waste is full of highly radioactive fission products, most of which are relatively short-lived.
In humans, a dose of 1 sievert carries a 5.5% risk of developing cancer, and this risk is assumed to be linearly proportional to dose even for low doses.
A summary of the amounts of radioactive waste and management approaches for most developed countries are presented and reviewed periodically as part of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.
After human processing that exposes or concentrates this natural radioactivity (such as mining bringing coal to the surface or burning it to produce concentrated ash), it becomes technologically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive material (TENORM).
Pu-239 decays to U-235 which is suitable for weapons and which has a very long half-life (roughly 109 years).
The exact definition of HLW differs internationally.
The U.S. EPA's proposed standard for greater than 10,000 years is 250 times more permissive than the European limit.
