Another minor source of naturally occurring radioactive nuclides are cosmogenic nuclides, formed by cosmic ray bombardment of material in the Earth's atmosphere or crust.
The resulting second daughter nuclide may also be radioactive.
The resulting transformation alters the structure of the nucleus and results in the emission of either a photon or a high-velocity particle that has mass (such as an electron, alpha particle, or other type).
Thereafter, the amount of carbon-14 in organic matter decreases according to decay processes that may also be independently cross-checked by other means (such as checking the carbon-14 in individual tree rings, for example).
The effects of radiation on genes, including the effect of cancer risk, were recognized much later.
Thus,  is longer than .
Red and purple show highly and extremely radioactive elements where the most stable isotopes exhibit half-lives measured on the order of one day and much less.
This case is perhaps the most useful, since it can derive both the one-decay equation (above) and the equation for multi-decay chains (below) more directly.
Marie and Pierre Curie’s study of radioactivity is an important factor in science and medicine.
(''A'', ''Z''&nbsp;−&nbsp;2)
By contrast, there are radioactive decay processes that do not result in a nuclear transmutation.
The rate of change of , that is , is related to the changes in the amounts of  and ,  can increase as  is produced from  and decrease as  produces .
The decay rate for a large collection of atoms, however, can be calculated from their measured decay constants or half-lives.
Decay energy therefore remains associated with a certain measure of mass of the decay system, called invariant mass, which does not change during the decay, even though the energy of decay is distributed among decay particles.
Rutherford and his student Frederick Soddy were the first to realize that many decay processes resulted in the transmutation of one element to another.
This is called a ''decay chain'' (see this article for specific details of important natural decay chains).
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by the French scientist Henri Becquerel, while working with phosphorescent materials.
In this case, it will also decay, producing radiation.
Given a sample of a particular radionuclide, the half-life is the time taken for half the radionuclide's atoms to decay.
The early researchers also discovered that many other chemical elements, besides uranium, have radioactive isotopes.
This constant probability may vary greatly between different types of nuclei, leading to the many different observed decay rates.
Radioactive primordial nuclides found in the Earth are residues from ancient supernova explosions which occurred before the formation of the solar system.
Radioactive decay results in a reduction of summed rest mass, once the released energy (the ''disintegration energy'') has escaped in some way.
A nucleus with mass number ''A'' and atomic number ''Z'' is represented as (''A'', ''Z'').
Both thallium-208 and polonium-212 are radioactive daughter products of bismuth-212, and both decay directly to stable lead-208.
Except for the radioactivity of radium, the chemical similarity of radium to barium made these two elements difficult to distinguish.
Thus, an avalanche results.
Lead, atomic number 82, is the heaviest element to have any isotopes stable (to the limit of measurement) to radioactive decay.
Eventually, a stable nuclide is produced.
Spontaneous fission
(''A'', ''Z''&nbsp;−&nbsp;2)
which is constant, since the total number of nuclides remains constant.
In this process, beta electron-decay of the parent nuclide is not accompanied by beta electron emission, because the beta particle has been captured into the K-shell of the emitting atom.
We have for all time :
While alpha decay was observed only in heavier elements of atomic number 52 (tellurium) and greater, the other two types of decay were produced by all of the elements.
Recent results suggest the possibility that decay rates might have a weak dependence on environmental factors.
Solving this equation for :
In the following formalism, the number of nuclides or the nuclide population ''N'', is of course a discrete variable (a natural number)—but for any physical sample ''N'' is so large that it can be treated as a continuous variable.
In some decays, the parent and the daughter nuclides are different chemical elements, and thus the decay process results in the creation of an atom of a different element.
'''Chain of any number of decays'''
Radioactive decay is seen in all isotopes of all elements of atomic number 83 (bismuth) or greater.
This is in marked contrast to complex objects which do show aging, such as automobiles and humans.
Radioactivity is one very frequently given example of exponential decay.
This is true because the decay energy must always carry mass with it, wherever it appears (see mass in special relativity) according to the formula ''E''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''mc''2.
In all of the above examples, the initial nuclide decays into only one product.
Their exploration of radium could be seen as the first peaceful use of nuclear energy and the start of modern nuclear medicine.
In a phenomenon called cluster decay, specific combinations of neutrons and protons other than alpha particles (helium nuclei) were found to be spontaneously emitted from atoms.
*decays, through alpha-emission, with a half-life of 4.5 billion years to thorium-234
*which decays, through alpha-emission, with a half-life of 140 days to lead-206, which is a stable nuclide.
A nucleus emits two electrons and two antineutrinos
The decay process, like all hindered energy transformations, may be analogized by a snowfield on a mountain.
*which decays, through alpha-emission, with a half-life of 240 thousand years to thorium-230
In the case of an excited atomic nucleus, the arbitrarily small disturbance comes from quantum vacuum fluctuations.
This process is a minority of free neutron decays (0.0004%) due to the low energy of hydrogen ionization, and is suppressed except in ionized atoms that have K-shell vacancies.
This can lead to a sequence of several decay events.
Another type of radioactive decay results in products that are not defined, but appear in a range of "pieces" of the original nucleus.
&beta;&minus; decay
Two protons ejected from nucleus simultaneously
For the general case of any number of consecutive decays in a decay chain, i.e.
Since  decays into , ''then''  decays into , the activity of  adds to the total number of  nuclides in the present sample, ''before'' those  nuclides decay and reduce the number of nuclides leading to the later sample.
Thus, (''A''&nbsp;−&nbsp;1, ''Z'') means that the mass number is one less than before, but the atomic number is the same as before.
Since then the ICRP has developed the present international system of radiation protection, covering all aspects of radiation hazard.
Other experimenters including Elihu Thomson, and Nikola Tesla also reported burns.
The radioactive decay of these radionuclides in rocks within Earth's mantle and crust contribute significantly to Earth's internal heat budget.
Passing alpha particles through a very thin glass window and trapping them in a discharge tube allowed researchers to study the emission spectrum of the captured particles, and ultimately proved that alpha particles are helium nuclei.
Bound state beta decay
The chance that a given atom will decay never changes, that is, it does not matter how long the atom has existed.
Green shows elements whose most stable isotope has a half-life measured in millions of years.
For example, approximately 36% of bismuth-212 decays, through alpha-emission, to thallium-208 while approximately 64% of bismuth-212 decays, through beta-emission, to polonium-212.
*which decays, through alpha-emission, with a half-life of 3.1 minutes to lead-214
Nucleus disintegrates into two or more smaller nuclei and other particles
*which decays, through beta-emission, with a half-life of 27 minutes to bismuth-214
Rolf Sievert was named Chairman, but a driving force was George Kaye of the British National Physical Laboratory.
In 7Be, a difference of 0.9% has been observed between half-lives in metallic and insulating environments.
where  is the value of  at time  = 0.
This is known as a nuclear transmutation.
The negative sign indicates that  decreases as time increases, as the decay events follow one after another.
In 1992, Jung et al.
For geological materials, the radioisotopes and some of their decay products become trapped when a rock solidifies, and can then later be used (subject to many well-known qualifications) to estimate the date of the solidification.
Radioactive decay half-life of nuclides has been measured over timescales of 55 orders of magnitude, from 2.3 x 10−23 seconds (for hydrogen-7) to 6.9 x 1031 seconds (for tellurium-128).
This particular nuclide (though not all nuclides in this situation) is almost equally likely to decay through proton decay, producing a  positron emission (18%), or through electron capture (43%), as it does through neutron decay by electron emission (39%).
Positron emission (&beta;+ decay)
Rhenium-187 is another spectacular example.
The committee met in 1931, 1934 and 1937.
of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research group observed an accelerated β&nbsp;decay of 163Dy66+.
A radioactive nucleus (or any excited system in quantum mechanics) is unstable, and can, thus, ''spontaneously'' stabilize to a less-excited system.
The extra presence of these stable radiogenic nuclides (such as Xe-129 from primordial I-129) against the background of primordial stable nuclides can be inferred by various means.
A neutron ejected from nucleus
This was considered at the first post-war ICR convened in London in 1950, when the present  International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) was born.
Half-lives of known radionuclides vary widely, from more than 1019 years, such as for the very nearly stable nuclide 209Bi, to 10−23 seconds for highly unstable ones.
Rare events that involve a combination of two beta-decay type events happening simultaneously are known (see below).
The factor of  in the above relations results from the fact that concept of "half-life" is merely a way of selecting a different base other than the natural base  for the lifetime expression.
These types of decay involve the nuclear capture of electrons or emission of electrons or positrons, and thus acts to move a nucleus toward the ratio of neutrons to protons that has the least energy for a given total number of nucleons.
Mathematically, the  life for the above situation would be found in the same way as aboveby setting '''',  and substituting into the decay solution to obtain
Thus, all radioactive nuclei are, therefore, relatively young with respect to the birth of the universe, having formed later in various other types of nucleosynthesis in stars (in particular, supernovae), and also during ongoing interactions between stable isotopes and energetic particles.
Differential calculus is needed to set up differential equations for the modelling the behaviour of the nuclear decay.
Nucleus emits a specific type of smaller nucleus (''A''1, ''Z''1) which is larger than an alpha particle
*which decays, through alpha-emission, with a half-life of 1.6 thousand years to radon-222
A nucleus absorbs one orbital electron, emits one positron and two neutrinos
Participating particles
Since radioactive decay is exponential with a constant probability, each process could as easily be described with a different constant time period that (for example) gave its "(1/3)-life" (how long until only 1/3 is left) or "(1/10)-life" (a time period until only 10% is left), and so on.
A nucleus emits an electron and an electron antineutrino
The uranium salts caused a blackening of the plate in spite of the plate being wrapped in black paper.
If energy circumstances are favorable, a given radionuclide may undergo many competing types of decay, with some atoms decaying by one route, and others decaying by another.
Subsequently, the radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy was formulated to describe the products of alpha and beta decay.
While friction between the ice crystals may be supporting the snow's weight, the system is inherently unstable with regard to a state of lower potential energy.
Other experiments showed beta radiation, resulting from decay and cathode rays, were high-speed electrons.
The first decay processes to be discovered were alpha decay, beta decay, and gamma decay.
Thus, the probability of its breaking down does not increase with time, but stays constant no matter how long the nucleus has existed.
These are summarized in the following table.
Isolated proton emission was eventually observed in some elements.
Although alpha, beta, and gamma radiations were most commonly found, other types of emission were eventually discovered.
An interesting example discussed in a final section, is bound state beta decay of rhenium-187.
This is a restatement of the equivalent laws of conservation of energy and conservation of mass.
However, such measurements are highly susceptible to systematic errors, and a subsequent paper has found no evidence for such correlations in seven other isotopes (22Na, 44Ti, 108Ag, 121Sn, 133Ba, 241Am, 238Pu), and sets upper limits on the size of any such effects.
The decay of an unstable nucleus is entirely random and it is impossible to predict when a particular atom will decay.
Thomson deliberately exposed a finger to an X-ray tube over a period of time and suffered pain, swelling, and blistering.
*which decays, through beta-emission, with a half-life of 5 days to polonium-210
An antineutrino is emitted, as in all negative beta decays.
where ''L'' =  is Avogadro's constant, '''' is the relative atomic mass number, and the amount of the substance is in moles.
A nucleus captures an orbiting electron and emits a neutrino; the daughter nucleus is left in an excited unstable state
(''A''&nbsp;−&nbsp;4, ''Z''&nbsp;−&nbsp;2)
Yellow and orange are progressively less stable, with half-lives in thousands or hundreds of years, down toward one day.
Marie Curie protested against this sort of treatment, warning that the effects of radiation on the human body were not well understood.
After their research on Becquerel's rays led them to the discovery on both radium and polonium, they coined the term "radioactivity."
Using the above result in a recursive form:
A proton ejected from nucleus
The interplay of these forces produces a number of different phenomena in which energy may be released by rearrangement of particles in the nucleus, or else the change of one type of particle into others.
This isotope has one unpaired proton and one unpaired neutron, so either the proton or the neutron can decay to the opposite particle.
The decay constants  and  determine the probability for the decay to result in products  or  as follows:
*which decays, through beta-emission, with a half-life of 24 days to protactinium-234
A radioactive source emits its decay products isotropically.
The expected decay  is proportional to an increment of time, :
In a similar fashion, and also subject to qualification, the rate of formation of carbon-14 in various eras, the date of formation of organic matter within a certain period related to the isotope's half-life may be estimated, because the carbon-14 becomes trapped when the organic matter grows and incorporates the new carbon-14 from the air.
187Re normally beta decays to 187Os with a half-life of 41.6 × 109&nbsp;years, but studies using fully ionised 187Re atoms (bare nuclei) have found that this can decrease to only 33&nbsp;years.
Gamma decay as a separate phenomenon, with its own half-life (now termed isomeric transition), was found in natural radioactivity to be a result of the gamma decay of excited metastable nuclear isomers, which were in turn created from other types of decay.
then the number of nuclei of , i.e.
For a summary table showing the number of stable and radioactive nuclides in each category, see radionuclide.
The dangers of ionizing radiation due to radioactivity and X-rays were not immediately recognized.
where  is the constant number of particles throughout the decay process, which is equal to the initial number of  nuclides since this is the initial substance.
Any decay process that does not violate the conservation of energy or momentum laws (and perhaps other particle conservation laws) is permitted to happen, although not all have been detected.
(''A''&nbsp;−&nbsp;''A''1, ''Z''&nbsp;−&nbsp;''Z''1) + (''A''1, ''Z''1)
random) process at the level of single atoms, in that, according to quantum theory, it is impossible to predict when a particular atom will decay.
These lightest stable nuclides (including deuterium) survive to today, but any radioactive isotopes of the light elements produced in the Big Bang (such as tritium) have long since decayed.
This relatively large effect is because beryllium is a small atom whose valence electrons are in '''2s''' atomic orbitals, which are subject to electron capture in 7Be because (like all '''s''' atomic orbitals in all atoms) they naturally penetrate into the nucleus.
A neutrino is not emitted, and none of the electron(s) and photon(s) emitted originate in the nucleus, even though the energy to emit all of them does originate there.
The radioactive decay modes of electron capture and internal conversion are known to be slightly sensitive to chemical and environmental effects that change the electronic structure of the atom, which in turn affects the presence of '''1s''' and '''2s''' electrons that participate in the decay process.
A sample of the substance is synthesized with a high concentration of unstable atoms.
This gave the opportunity for many physicians and corporations to market radioactive substances as patent medicines.
Excited nucleus transfers energy to an orbital electron, which is subsequently ejected from the atom
For example, carbon-14, a radioactive nuclide with a half-life of only 5,730 years, is constantly produced in Earth's upper atmosphere due to interactions between cosmic rays and nitrogen.
is the number of nuclides of type ,  is the initial number of nuclides of type ,  is the decay constant for  - and similarly for nuclide .
Curie later died from aplastic anaemia, likely caused by exposure to ionizing radiation.
The sum of these two terms gives the law for a decay chain for two nuclides:
They are those that contain thirty-four radionuclides that date before the time of formation of the solar system, and are known as primordial nuclides.
However, it is equally likely to decay at any instant in time.
and many physicians still claimed that there were no effects from X-ray exposure at all.
They reflect a fundamental principle only in so much as they show that the ''same proportion'' of a given radioactive substance will decay, during any time-period that one chooses.
Thus, while the sum of the rest masses of the particles is not conserved in radioactive decay, the ''system'' mass and system invariant mass (and also the system total energy) is conserved throughout any decay process.
Therefore, given a sample of a particular radioisotope, the number of decay events  expected to occur in a small interval of time  is proportional to the number of atoms present , that is
We have for all time :
The limits of these timescales are set by the sensitivity of instrumentation only, and there are no known natural limits to how brief or long a decay half life for radioactive decay of a radionuclide may be.
This is attributed to "bound-state β− decay" of the fully ionised atom – the electron is emitted into the "K-shell" ('''1s''' atomic orbital), which cannot occur for neutral atoms in which all low-lying bound states are occupied.
The solution to this first-order differential equation is the function:
The general solution to the recursive problem is given by '''''Bateman's equations''''':
Only a year after Röntgen's discovery of X rays, the American engineer Wolfram Fuchs (1896) gave what is probably the first protection advice, but it was not until 1925 that the first International Congress of Radiology (ICR) was held and considered establishing international protection standards.
(''A'', ''Z''&nbsp;+&nbsp;1)
Now consider the case of a chain of two decays: one nuclide  decaying into another  by one process, then  decaying into another  by a second process, i.e.
Solving this equation for  gives:
On the premise that radioactive decay is truly random (rather than merely chaotic), it has been used in hardware random-number generators.
The presence of the substance in one or another part of the system is determined by detecting the locations of decay events.
The second ICR was held in Stockholm in 1928 and proposed the adoption of the rontgen unit, and the 'International X-ray and Radium Protection Committee' (IXRPC) was formed.
This is the most common process of emitting nucleons, but in rarer types of decays, nuclei can eject protons, or in the case of cluster decay specific nuclei of other elements.
A decay, or loss of energy from the nucleus, results when an atom with one type of nucleus, called the ''parent radionuclide'' (or ''parent radioisotope''), transforms into an atom with a nucleus in a different state, or with a nucleus containing a different number of protons and neutrons.
The naturally occurring short-lived radiogenic radionuclides found in rocks are the daughters of these radioactive primordial nuclides.
(''A'', ''Z''&nbsp;−&nbsp;2)
The ''total'' energy does not change in this process, but, because of the second law of thermodynamics, avalanches have only been observed in one direction and that is toward the "ground state" — the state with the largest number of ways in which the available energy could be distributed.
Although decay energy is sometimes defined as associated with the difference between the mass of the parent nuclide products and the mass of the decay products, this is true only of rest mass measurements, where some energy has been removed from the product system.
Elements with at least one stable isotope are shown in light blue.
Well-known examples are uranium and thorium, but also included are naturally occurring long-lived radioisotopes such as potassium-40.
The mathematics of radioactive decay depend on a key assumption that a nucleus of a radionuclide has no "memory" or way of translating its history into its present behavior.
The number of decays observed over a given interval obeys Poisson statistics.
There exist twenty-nine chemical elements on Earth that are radioactive.
The energy of an excited nucleus may be emitted as a gamma ray in a process called gamma decay, or that energy may be lost when the nucleus interacts with an orbital electron causing its ejection from the atom, in a process called internal conversion.
In February of that year, Professor Daniel and Dr. Dudley of Vanderbilt University performed an experiment involving X-raying Dudley's head that resulted in his hair loss.
There exist stable radiogenic nuclides that were formed from short-lived extinct radionuclides in the early solar system.
Likewise, gamma radiation and X-rays were found to be high-energy electromagnetic radiation.
Despite this, there were some early systematic hazard investigations, and as early as 1902 William Herbert Rollins wrote almost despairingly that his warnings about the dangers involved in careless use of X-rays was not being heeded, either by industry or by his colleagues.
defining the ''total decay constant''  in terms of the sum of ''partial decay constants''  and :
The strong nuclear force, not observed at the familiar macroscopic scale, is the most powerful force over subatomic distances.
The electrostatic force is almost always significant, and, in the case of beta decay, the weak nuclear force is also involved.
Double proton emission
Such a collapse (a ''decay event'') requires a specific activation energy.
(''A'', ''Z''&nbsp;+&nbsp;1)
The rays were given the names alpha, beta, and gamma, in order of their ability to penetrate matter.
In other words, the number of second generation nuclei  increases as a result of the first generation nuclei decay of , and decreases as a result of its own decay into the third generation nuclei .
'''Different modes of beta decay:'''
as shown above for one decay.
This consequently produces a more stable (lower energy) nucleus.
Although neutral 163Dy is a stable isotope, the fully ionized 163Dy66+ undergoes β&nbsp;decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47&nbsp;days.
