By measuring the difference in phase of these two signals, an aircraft can determine its bearing or radial from the station, thus establishing a line of position.
At the receiver, these currents are demodulated, which is conversion to a usable signal form by a detector sub-system.
General purpose radars generally use navigational radar frequencies, but modulate and polarize the pulse so the receiver can determine the type of surface of the reflector.
This contribution has been very beneficial in saving lives in many instances.
Some can superimpose sonar data and map data from GPS position.
Electrical resonance of tuned circuits in radios allow individual stations to be selected.
Free radio stations, sometimes called pirate radio or "clandestine" stations, are unauthorized, unlicensed, illegal broadcasting stations.
The information in the waves can be extracted and transformed back into its original form.
Since the energy of an individual photon of radio frequency is too low to remove an electron from an atom, radio waves are classified as non-ionizing radiation.
Currently, the maximum broadcast power for a civilian AM radio station in the United States and Canada is 50&nbsp;kW, and the majority of stations that emit signals this powerful were grandfathered in (see List of 50 kW AM radio stations in the United States).
Early police radios used AM receivers to receive one-way dispatches.
AM stereo receivers can reproduce the same audio bandwidth that FM does due to the wider filter used in an AM stereo receiver, but today, AM radios limit the audio bandpass to 3–5&nbsp;kHz.
The United States passed on President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points to Germany via radio during the war.
Two stations may take turns sending and receiving, using a single radio frequency; this is called "simplex."
A computer in the receiver does the math.
A variety of jamming-resistant spread spectrum techniques were initially developed for military use, most famously for Global Positioning System satellite transmissions.
Early attempts at developing a system of amplitude modulation for voice and music were demonstrated in 1900 and 1906, but had little success.
VHF radio waves act more like light, traveling in straight lines; hence the reception range is generally limited to about .
Radar (Radio Detection And Ranging) detects objects at a distance by bouncing radio waves off them.
An ''antenna'' (or ''aerial'') is an electrical device which converts electric currents into radio waves, and vice versa.
Before 1960 navigators used movable loop antennas to locate commercial AM stations near cities.
Such a huge power level does not usually help to increase range as much as one might expect, because VHF frequencies travel in nearly straight lines over the horizon and off into space.
Modern radio communication systems include those that divide up a radio-frequency band by time-division multiplexing (TDM) and code-division multiplexing (CDM) as alternatives to the classical FDM strategy.
FM receivers are relatively immune to lightning and spark interference.
This modulation might be as simple as turning the energy on and off, or altering more subtle properties such as amplitude, frequency, phase, or combinations of these properties.
Radio amateurs use a variety of modes, including efficient ones like Morse code and experimental ones like Low-Frequency Experimental Radio.
AM is capable of the same audio bandwidth that FM employs.
CW uses less than 100&nbsp;Hz of bandwidth.
(Use of FM would result in stronger stations blocking out reception of weaker stations due to FM's capture effect).
Radio systems used for communication have the following elements.
These radio services involve the use of handheld units.
In 1886 Heinrich Rudolf Hertz noticed the same sparking phenomenon and, in published experiments (1887-1888), was able to demonstrate the existence of electromagnetic waves in an experiment confirming Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism.
Aircraft fly high enough that their transmitters can be received hundreds of miles away, even though they are using VHF.
When the VOR station is collocated with DME (Distance Measuring Equipment), the aircraft can determine its bearing and range from the station, thus providing a fix from only one ground station.
These are still used by the military and weather services.
The discovery of these "Hertzian waves" (radio waves) prompted many experiments by physicists.
Frequency modulation varies the frequency of the carrier.
The term "radio" is derived from the Latin word "radius", meaning "spoke of a wheel, beam of light, ray".
Starting in late 1894, Guglielmo Marconi began pursuing the idea of building a wireless telegraphy system based on Hertzian waves (radio).
In 1864 James Clerk Maxwell showed mathematically that electromagnetic waves could propagate through free space.
Marine voice radios can use single sideband voice (SSB) in the shortwave High Frequency (HF—3&nbsp;MHz to 30&nbsp;MHz) radio spectrum for very long ranges or Marine VHF radio / ''narrowband FM'' in the VHF spectrum for much shorter ranges.
One of the most memorable uses of marine telegraphy was during the sinking of the RMS ''Titanic'' in 1912, including communications between operators on the sinking ship and nearby vessels, and communications to shore stations listing the survivors.
The electrical resonance of tuned circuits in radios allow individual stations to be selected.
A radio communication system sends signals by radio.
The intensity of the waves diminishes due to geometric dispersion (the inverse-square law); some energy may also be absorbed by the intervening medium in some cases.
They may also provide emergency and service assistance in exceptional circumstances.
British Commonwealth countries continued to commonly use the term "wireless" until the mid-20th century, though the magazine of the British Broadcasting Corporation in the UK has been called Radio Times since its founding in the early 1920s.
They send a bit as one of two tones using frequency-shift keying.
The military operates a similar system of navaids, called TACANs, which are often built into VOR stations.
A ''radio receiver'' receives its input from an antenna, uses electronic filters to separate a wanted radio signal from all other signals picked up by this antenna, amplifies it to a level suitable for further processing, and finally converts through demodulation and decoding the signal into a form usable for the consumer, such as sound, pictures, digital data, measurement values, navigational positions, etc.
A few old, "grandfathered" stations do not conform to these power rules.
With the compression and improved modulation involved, a single "channel" can contain a high-definition program and several standard-definition programs.
AM receivers typically use narrower filters in the receiver to recover the signal with less noise.
When the directional signal is facing north, an omnidirectional signal pulses.
Digital data can be sent by shifting the carrier's frequency among a set of discrete values, a technique known as frequency-shift keying.
During unusual upper atmospheric conditions, FM signals are occasionally reflected back towards the Earth by the ionosphere, resulting in long distance FM reception.
Besides broadcasting, point-to-point broadcasting, including telephone messages and relays of radio programs, became widespread in the 1920s and 1930s.
Noise is also produced at every step due to the inherent properties of the devices used.
A radio receiver receives its input from an antenna and converts it into a form usable for the consumer, such as sound, pictures, digital data, measurement values, navigational positions, etc.
Targeting radars use the same principle as search radar but scan a much smaller area far more often, usually several times a second or more.
It was first applied to communications in 1881 when, at the suggestion of French scientist Ernest Mercadier, Alexander Graham Bell adopted "radiophone" (meaning "radiated sound") as an alternate name for his photophone optical transmission system.
The receiver is "tuned" to respond preferentially to the desired signals, and reject undesired signals.
This also makes the transmitter about three times more powerful, because it doesn't need to transmit the unused carrier and sideband.
In the early part of the 20th century, American AM radio stations broadcast with powers as high as 500&nbsp;kW, and some could be heard worldwide; these stations' transmitters were commandeered for military use by the US Government during World War II.
high frequency AC) to the antenna's terminals, and the antenna radiates the energy from the current as electromagnetic waves (radio waves).
Early 20th century radio systems transmitted messages by continuous wave code only.
The United States Navy would also play a role.
When radio waves strike an electrical conductor, the oscillating fields induce an alternating current in the conductor.
Radio systems also need an antenna to convert electric currents into radio waves, and vice versa.
The digital signal is often sent as QAM on the subchannels.
CW is still used, these days primarily by amateur radio operators (hams).
Strictly, on-off keying of a carrier should be known as "Interrupted Continuous Wave" or ICW or on-off keying (OOK).
For example, in broadcasting a single transmitter sends signals to many receivers.
Narrowband FM sacrifices fidelity to make more channels available within the radio spectrum, by using a smaller range of radio frequencies, usually with five kHz of deviation, versus the 75&nbsp;kHz used by commercial FM broadcasts, and 25&nbsp;kHz used for TV sound.
It may be either FM or phase modulation (PM).
Broadcasting began from San Jose, California in 1909, and became feasible in the 1920s, with the widespread introduction of radio receivers, particularly in Europe and the United States.
They usually scan the area two to four times a minute.
These 50&nbsp;kW stations are generally called "clear channel" stations (not to be confused with Clear Channel Communications), because within North America each of these stations has exclusive use of its broadcast frequency throughout part or all of the broadcast day.
An aircraft can get readings from two VORs and locate its position at the intersection of the two radials, known as a "fix."
If the magnitude of the noise is large enough, the desired signal will no longer be discernible; the signal-to-noise ratio is the fundamental limit to the range of radio communications.
The term started to become preferred by the general public in the 1920s with the introduction of broadcasting.
The first use of ''radio-'' in conjunction with electromagnetic radiation appears to have been by French physicist Édouard Branly, who in 1890 developed a version of a coherer receiver he called a ''radio-conducteur''.
Today, radio takes many forms, including wireless networks and mobile communications of all types, as well as radio broadcasting.
The radio equipment involved in communication systems includes a transmitter and a receiver, each having an antenna and appropriate terminal equipment such as a microphone at the transmitter and a loudspeaker at the receiver in the case of a voice-communication system.
In transmission, a radio transmitter supplies an electric current oscillating at radio frequency (i.e.
He was awarded U.S. patent No.
By using two radio frequencies, two stations may continuously and concurrently send and receive signals - this is called "
They use very short waves that reflect from earth and stone.
"AM" is often used to refer to the medium wave broadcast band (see AM radio), but it is used in various radiotelephone services such as the Citizen Band, amateur radio and especially in aviation, due to its ability to be received under very weak signal conditions and its immunity to capture effect, allowing more than one signal to be heard simultaneously.
Classical radio communications systems use frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) as a strategy to split up and share the available radio-frequency bandwidth for use by different parties communications concurrently.
Some weather radar use the Doppler effect to measure wind speeds.
Aviation voice radios use Aircraft band VHF AM.
The electromagnetic wave is intercepted by a tuned receiving antenna; this structure captures some of the energy of the wave and returns it to the form of oscillating electrical currents.
Other types of electromagnetic radiation, with frequencies above the RF range, are infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays.
'''Radio''' is the technology of using radio waves to carry information, such as sound, by systematically modulating some property of electromagnetic energy waves transmitted through space, such as their amplitude, frequency, phase, or pulse width.
In some countries, FM radios automatically re-tune themselves to the same channel in a different district by using sub-bands.
Several forms of radio were pioneered by radio amateurs and later became commercially important, including FM, single-sideband (SSB), AM, digital packet radio and satellite repeaters.
Groups of five or seven bits become a character printed by a teleprinter.
A radio communication system may send information only one way.
Wi-Fi also operates in unlicensed radio bands and is very widely used to network computers.
The transmitter contains a system to modulate (change) some property of the energy produced to impress a signal on it.
In some cases they used marine radiolocation beacons, which share a range of frequencies just above AM radio with amateur radio operators.
The next advance was continuous wave telegraphy, or CW (Continuous Wave), in which a pure radio frequency, produced by a vacuum tube electronic oscillator was switched on and off by a key.
COFDM breaks a digital signal into as many as several hundred slower subchannels.
Analog TV sound is also broadcast using FM.
An August 1894 lecture by the British physicist Oliver Lodge, where he transmitted and received "Hertzian waves" at distances up to 50 meters, was followed up a year later with experiments by Indian physicist Jagadish Bose in radio microwave optics and construction of a radio based lightning detector by Russian physicist Alexander Stepanovich Popov.
Radio became more useful after the invention of electronic devices such as the vacuum tube and later the transistor, which made it possible to amplify weak signals.
These are often low power transmitters operated on sporadic schedules by hobbyists, community activists, or political and cultural dissidents.
The use of "radio" as a standalone word dates back to at least December 30, 1904, when instructions issued by the British Post Office for transmitting telegrams specified that "The word 'Radio'... is sent in the Service Instructions".
Government, police, fire and commercial voice services also use narrowband FM on special frequencies.
A resonant circuit will respond strongly to a particular frequency, and much less so to differing frequencies.
In recent years the more general term "wireless" has gained renewed popularity, even for devices using electromagnetic radiation, through the rapid growth of short-range computer networking, e.g., Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth, as well as mobile telephony, e.g., GSM and UMTS cell phones.
TETRA, Terrestrial Trunked Radio is a digital cell phone system for military, police and ambulances.
Engineers like QAM because it packs the most bits into a radio signal when given an exclusive (non-shared) fixed narrowband frequency range.
For more, see radio programming.
Microwave dishes on satellites, telephone exchanges and TV stations usually use quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM).
These systems offer different tradeoffs in supporting multiple users, beyond the FDM strategy that was ideal for broadcast radio but less so for applications such as mobile telephony.
After the war, the experiments in television that had been interrupted were resumed, and it also became an important home entertainment medium.
Spark-gap transmitters are now illegal, because their transmissions span several hundred megahertz.
Diathermy equipment is used in surgery for sealing of blood vessels.
Consequently, 100,000-watt FM stations can regularly be heard up to   away, and farther, , if there are no competing signals.
In frequency modulation, amplitude variation at the microphone causes the transmitter frequency to fluctuate.
QAM sends data by changing both the phase and the amplitude of the radio signal.
Similar services exist in other parts of the world.
("Broadcasting" is based upon an agricultural term meaning roughly "scattering seeds widely".)
When the mobile phone nears the edge of the cell site's radio coverage area, the central computer switches the phone to a new cell.
Because the audio signal modulates the frequency and not the amplitude, an FM signal is not subject to static and interference in the same way as AM signals.
Noise will generally alter the desired signal; this electromagnetic interference comes from natural sources, as well as from artificial sources such as other transmitters and accidental radiators.
In some extremely crowded metropolitan areas, the sub-channel program might be an alternate foreign-language radio program for various ethnic groups.
Cell phones originally used FM, but now most use various digital modulation schemes.
Some pirate stations operating offshore in parts of Europe and the United Kingdom more closely resembled legal stations, maintaining regular schedules, using high power, and selling commercial advertising time.
Sub-carriers can also transmit digital data, such as station identification, the current song's name, web addresses, or stock quotes.
A Reed–Solomon error correction code adds redundant correction codes and allows reliable reception during moderate data loss.
The oldest form of digital broadcast was spark gap telegraphy, used by pioneers such as Marconi.
Radio was used to pass on orders and communications between armies and navies on both sides in World War I; Germany used radio communications for diplomatic messages once it discovered that its submarine cables had been tapped by the British.
The direction of the beam determines the direction of the reflection.
The earliest users included the Japanese Navy scouting the Russian fleet during the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.
613,809 for a "Method of and Apparatus for Controlling Mechanism of Moving Vessels or Vehicles."
Aircraft use a 1200 Baud radioteletype service over VHF to send their ID, altitude and position, and get gate and connecting-flight data.
In 1986 KTNN received the last granted 50,000-watt class A license.
An antenna can be used for both transmitting and receiving.
Systems that need reliability, or that share their frequency with other services, may use "coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing" or COFDM.
WBCT-FM (93.7) in Grand Rapids, Michigan, US, runs 320,000 watts ERP, and can increase to 500,000 watts ERP by the terms of its original license.
Due to its need for a wider bandwidth, FM is transmitted in the Very High Frequency (VHF, 30&nbsp;MHz to 300&nbsp;MHz) radio spectrum.
It is usually used with a radio transmitter or radio receiver.
Search radars scan a wide area with pulses of short radio waves.
Such stations are called VORTACs.
FM subcarrier services are secondary signals transmitted in a "piggyback" fashion along with the main program.
The rotating commutator produced a tone in the receiver, where a simple spark gap would produce a hiss, indistinguishable from static.
Some antennas can be used for both transmitting and receiving, even simultaneously, depending on the connected equipment.
However, this invention would not be widely adopted.
The polarization and frequency of the return can sense the type of surface.
Electronic amplification was a key development in changing radio from an experimental practice by experts into a home appliance.
Early radio systems relied entirely on the energy collected by an antenna to produce signals for the operator.
Radio systems need a transmitter to modulate (change) some property of the energy produced to impress a signal on it, for example using amplitude modulation or angle modulation (which can be frequency modulation or phase modulation).
FM has the "capture effect" whereby a receiver only receives the strongest signal, even when others are present.
By pressing the key, the operator could send messages in Morse code by energizing a rotating commutating spark gap.
For example, changes in the signal strength can be used to reflect the sounds to be reproduced by a speaker, or to specify the light intensity of television pixels.
The effects of electromagnetic waves (then-unexplained "action at a distance" sparking behavior) were actually observed before and after Maxwell's work by many inventors and experimenters including Luigi Galvani (1791), Peter Samuel Munk (1835), Joseph Henry (1842), Samuel Alfred Varley (1852), Edwin Houston, Elihu Thomson, Thomas Edison (1875) and David Edward Hughes (1878).
Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range (VOR), systems (used by aircraft), have an antenna array that transmits two signals simultaneously.
FM is commonly used at Very high frequency (VHF) radio frequencies for high-fidelity broadcasts of music and speech (see FM broadcasting).
Special receivers are required to utilize these services.
AM is used so that multiple stations on the same channel can be received.
Nevertheless, when there were fewer FM stations competing, this station could be heard near Bloomington, Illinois, US, almost  away.
Today radio systems are used for applications from walkie-talkie children's toys to the control of space vehicles, as well as for broadcasting, and many other applications.
Civil and military HF (high frequency) voice services use shortwave radio to contact ships at sea, aircraft and isolated settlements.
Although many current and future codecs can be sent in the MPEG transport stream container format, as of 2006 most systems use a standard-definition format almost identical to DVD: MPEG-2 video in Anamorphic widescreen and MPEG layer 2 (''MP2'') audio.
A receiver with a local oscillator would "heterodyne" with the pure radio frequency, creating a whistle-like audio tone.
LORAN systems also used time-of-flight radio signals, but from radio stations on the ground.
Commercial use of spread spectrum began in the 1980s.
Radio frequencies occupy the range from a 3&nbsp;kHz to 300&nbsp;GHz, although commercially important uses of radio use only a small part of this spectrum.
The electromagnetic wave is intercepted by a tuned receiving antenna.
In reception, an antenna intercepts some of the power of an electromagnetic wave in order to produce a tiny voltage at its terminals, that is applied to a receiver to be amplified.
After the war, commercial radio broadcasting began in the 1920s and became an important mass medium for entertainment and news.
Amplitude modulation of a carrier wave works by varying the strength of the transmitted signal in proportion to the information being sent.
Usually the bits are sent in "frames" that repeat.
The instantaneous frequency of the carrier is directly proportional to the instantaneous value of the input signal.
Most use single sideband voice (SSB), which uses less bandwidth than AM.
Although its translation of the 1906 Berlin Convention used the terms "wireless telegraph" and "wireless telegram", by 1912 it began to promote the use of "radio" instead.
This practice was universally adopted, and the word "radio" introduced internationally, by the 1906 Berlin Radiotelegraphic Convention, which included a Service Regulation specifying that "Radiotelegrams shall show in the preamble that the service is 'Radio'".
A special bit pattern is used to locate the beginning of a frame.
Today, the term "radio" specifies the transceiver device or chip, whereas "wireless" refers to the lack of physical connections; thus equipment employs embedded ''radio'' transceivers, but operates as ''wireless'' devices over ''wireless'' sensor networks.
FM receivers are subject to the capture effect, which causes the radio to only receive the strongest signal when multiple signals appear on the same frequency.
They are common on commercial ships and long-distance commercial aircraft.
Once generated, electromagnetic waves travel through space either directly, or have their path altered by reflection, refraction or diffraction.
Radio direction-finding is the oldest form of radio navigation.
Satellite phones use satellites rather than cell towers to communicate.
Sometimes search radars use the Doppler effect to separate moving vehicles from clutter.
Most new radio systems are digital, including Digital TV, satellite radio, and Digital Audio Broadcasting.
Radio frequencies occupy the range from a 3&nbsp;kHz to 300&nbsp;GHz, although commercially important uses of radio use only a small part of this spectrum.
Weather radars resemble search radars, but use radio waves with circular polarization and a wavelength to reflect from water droplets.
The transmitter sends the modulated electrical energy to a tuned resonant antenna; this structure converts the rapidly changing alternating current into an electromagnetic wave that can move through free space (sometimes with a particular polarization).
SSB cuts the bandwidth in half by suppressing the carrier and one of the sidebands.
Mobile phones transmit to a local cell site (transmitter/receiver) that ultimately connects to the public switched telephone network (PSTN) through an optic fiber or microwave radio and other network elements.
Viewed as a graph of frequency versus power, an AM signal shows power where the frequencies of the voice add and subtract with the main radio frequency.
Radio was unique among methods of dramatic presentation in that it used only sound.
Before the advent of television, commercial radio broadcasts included not only news and music, but dramas, comedies, variety shows, and many other forms of entertainment (the era from the late 1920s to the mid-1950s is commonly called radio's "Golden Age").
Another use of radio in the pre-war years was the development of detection and locating of aircraft and ships by the use of radar (''RA''dio ''D''etection ''A''nd ''R''anging).
Navigational radars scan a wide area two to four times per minute.
Commercial services such as XM, WorldSpace and Sirius offer encrypted digital satellite radio.
