However the very first receivers in the spark era could not be tuned at all.
*The different frequencies of different stations are all converted to the same frequency, the IF, for filtering, so the bandwidth and gain of the receiver is constant over its frequency range.
Therefore, a goal of tube receiver design was to get the most performance out of a limited number of tubes.
One was part of the wireless station of the RMS ''Titanic'' which was used to summon help during its famous 15 April 1912 sinking.
In 1901 Reginald Fessenden had invented a better means of accomplishing this.
The frequency of the station received '''''f''''' was determined by the capacitance '''''C''''' and inductance '''''L''''' in the tuned circuit:
*''RF front end'' - refers to all the components of the receiver up to and including the mixer; all the parts that process the signal at the original incoming radio frequency.
It had undistinguished performance, but it represented a breakthrough to the "all in one" concept of a receiver, and rapidly improving designs gradually made the receiver the mainstay of the marketplace.
An unmodulated sinusoidal signal '''''f''LO''' generated by a ''local oscillator'' (LO) is mixed with the incoming radio signal '''''f''RF''' from the antenna in a nonlinear vacuum tube or transistor called the "''mixer''".
The dynamic cone loudspeaker invented in 1924 greatly improved audio frequency response over the previous horn speakers, allowing music to be  reproduced with good fidelity.
During the wireless era it was used in commercial and military longwave stations with huge antennas to receive long distance radiotelegraphy traffic, even including transatlantic traffic.
It required a long wire antenna, and its sensitivity depended on how large the antenna was.
He invented the feedback oscillator, regenerative receiver, the superregenerative receiver, the superheterodyne receiver, and modern frequency modulation (FM).
This is called a converter.
When applied to an earphone this would reproduce the transmitted sound.
When a radio frequency voltage was applied to the electrodes, its resistance dropped and it conducted electricity.
However the usual range of coherer receivers even with the powerful transmitters of this era was limited to a few hundred miles.
Receivers vary greatly in price, and support stereophonic or surround sound.
The rest of the receiver after the mixer operates at a fixed frequency, the IF.
Marconi was able to obtain patents in the UK and France but the US version of his tuned four circuit patent, filed in November 1900, was initially rejected based on it being anticipated by Lodge's tuning system, and refiled versions were rejected because of the prior patents by Braun, and Lodge.
The earliest receivers, before 1897, did not have tuned circuits, they responded to all radio signals picked up by their antennas, so they had little frequency-discriminating ability and received any transmitter in their vicinity.
They can for example, record large swaths of the radio spectrum to a hard drive for "playback" at a later date.
This was solved by the invention of the Neutrodyne circuit ''(below)'' and the development of the tetrode later around 1930, and better shielding between stages.
The coils usually had taps which could be selected by a multiposition switch.
One preventative measure was to use a stage of RF amplification before the regenerative detector, to isolate it from the antenna.
In spite of much development work, it was a very crude unsatisfactory device.
His 1900 British #7,777 (four sevens) patent for tuning filed in April 1900 and granted a year later opened the door to patents disputes since it infringed on the Syntonic patents of Oliver Lodge, first filed in May of 1897, as well as patents filed by Ferdinand Braun.
By 1930 adequate rectifier tubes were developed, and the expensive batteries were replaced by a transformer power supply that worked off the house current.
Thus spark transmitters could not transmit audio (sound), and instead transmitted information by radiotelegraphy; the transmitter was switched on and off rapidly by the operator using a telegraph key, creating different length pulses of these damped radio waves  ("dots" and "dashes") to spell out text messages in Morse code.
The electrolytic action caused current to be conducted in only one direction.
In the "Navy type" loose coupler ''(see picture)'', widely used with crystal receivers, the smaller secondary coil was mounted on a rack which could be slid in or out of the primary coil, to vary the mutual inductance between the coils.
With such an automated receiver a radio operator didn't have to continuously monitor the receiver.
The magnetic detector was used on shipboard receivers due to its insensitivity to vibration.
In later TRF receivers the tuning capacitors were linked together mechanically ("ganged") on a common shaft so they could be adjusted with one knob, but in early receivers the frequencies of the tuned circuits could not be made to "track" well enough to allow this, and each tuned circuit had its own tuning knob.
One problem with the regenerative circuit was that when used with large amounts of regeneration the selectivity (Q) of the tuned circuit could be ''too'' sharp, attenuating the AM sidebands, thus distorting the audio modulation.
A vacuum tube receiver required several power supplies at different voltages, which in early radios were supplied by separate batteries.
These primitive devices are more accurately described as radio wave sensors, not "receivers", as they could only detect radio waves within about 100 feet of the transmitter, and were not used to attempt communication but were instead used as part of an experiment to verify a theoretical proof.
For really high-performance receivers, such as satellite communications receivers and military/naval receivers, two-stage ("double conversion") and even three-stage ("triple conversion") superheterodyne processing is frequently used.
Since there were no amplifying devices during this era, the sensitivity of the receiver mostly depended on the detector, and many different detector devices were tried.
It consisted of a mineral crystal, usually galena (PbS, lead sulfide) which was lightly touched by a fine springy wire (the "cat whisker") on an adjustable arm.
In consumer electronics, the terms ''radio'' and ''radio receiver'' are often used specifically for receivers designed to reproduce the audio (sound) signals transmitted by radio broadcasting stations, historically the first mass-market commercial radio application.
The first loudspeakers were produced around 1915.
By 1897 the advantages of tuned systems had become clear, and Marconi and the other wireless researchers had incorporated tuned circuits, consisting of capacitors and inductors connected together, into their transmitters and receivers.
The development of integrated circuits (ICs) in the 1970s created another revolution, allowing an entire radio receiver to be put on a chip.
The IF also contains the modulation (sidebands) that was present in the original RF signal.
However it still had poor selectivity compared to modern receivers.
Impedance matching was important to achieve maximum receiving range in the unamplified receivers of this era.
It had a high impedance at its resonant frequency, but a low impedance at all other frequencies.
The heterodyne receiver remained a laboratory curiosity until a cheap compact source of continuous waves appeared, the vacuum tube electronic oscillator invented by Edwin Armstrong and Alexander Meissner in 1913.
The early vacuum tubes had very low gain (around 5).
Both were adjusted to the same resonant frequency.
Some PC radios have the great advantage of being field upgradable by the owner.
Reflex radios were prone to a defect called "play-through" which meant that the volume of audio did not go to zero when the volume control was turned down.
Only particular sites on the crystal surface functioned as rectifying junctions, and the junction could be disrupted by the slightest vibration.
Audiophiles will refer to such a device as an '''integrated receiver''', while a single chassis that implements only one of the three component functions is called a '''discrete component'''.
The user simply connects it to a television, perhaps other components, and a set of loudspeakers.
A further clarification and re-submission was rejected because it infringed on parts of two prior patents Tesla had obtained for his wireless power transmission system.
The device which did this was called a "''detector''".
Although it was invented in 1904 in the wireless telegraphy era, the crystal radio receiver could also rectify AM transmissions and served as a bridge to the broadcast era.
The coherer was a glass tube with metal electrodes at each end, with loose metal powder between the electrodes.
A widely used design was the Armstrong circuit, in which a "tickler" coil in the plate circuit was coupled to the tuning coil in the grid circuit, to provide the feedback.
So a usable site was found by trial and error before each use; the operator would drag the cat's whisker across the crystal until the radio began functioning.
Marconi's lawyers manged to get a resubmitted patent reconsidered by another examiner who initially rejected it due to a pre-existing John Stone Stone tuning patent, but it was finally approved it in June of 1904 based on it having a unique system of variable inductance tuning that was different from Stone who tuned by varying the length of the antenna.
'''Double-conversion superheterodyne''': In choosing the intermediate frequency (IF) used in a superhet, there is a tradeoff between image rejection and selectivity.
*The total amplification of the receiver is divided between three amplifiers at different frequencies; the RF, IF, and audio amplifier.
They were able to evacuate tubes to a lower pressure of 10−9 atm, producing the first "hard vacuum" triodes.
Another advantage of the double-tuned transformer for AM reception was that when properly adjusted it had a "flat top" frequency response curve as opposed to the "peaked" response of a single tuned circuit.
In all known filtering techniques, the bandwidth of the filter increases in proportion with the frequency, so by performing the filtering at the lower IF, rather than the frequency of the original radio signal '''''f''RF''', a narrower bandwidth can be achieved.
Later tubes used 3V or 1.5V from dry cell batteries.
The second advantage was that due to "loose coupling" it had a much narrower bandwidth than a simple tuned circuit, and the bandwidth could be adjusted.
The regenerative receiver, invented by Edwin Armstrong  in 1913 when he was a 23-year-old college student,  was used very widely until the late 1920s particularly by hobbyists who could only afford a single-tube radio.
Selectivity became more important as spark transmitters were replaced by continuous wave transmitters which transmitted on a narrow band of frequencies, and broadcasting led to a proliferation of closely spaced radio stations crowding the radio spectrum.
The reflex receiver, invented in 1914 by Wilhelm Schloemilch and Otto von Bronk, and rediscovered and extended to multiple tubes in 1917 by Marius Latour and William H. Priess, was a design used in some inexpensive radios of the 1920s which enjoyed a resurgence in small portable tube radios of the 1930s and again in a few of the first transistor radios in the 1950s.
By 1914, Harold Arnold at Western Electric and Irving Langmuir at GE had realized that the residual gas in the tube that caused these problems was not necessary; the Audion could operate on electron conduction alone.
The manufacturer can then in effect add new features to the radio over time, such as adding new filters, DSP noise reduction, or simply to correct bugs.
Most receivers used a pair of tuned circuits with their coils magnetically coupled, called a resonant transformer (oscillation transformer) or "loose coupler".
In sophisticated crystal radios the "loose coupler" inductively-coupled tuned circuit was used to increase the Q.
In the receiver the coherer was connected directly between the antenna and ground.
This circuit had two advantages.
Modern FM and television broadcasting, cellphones and other communications services, with their narrow channel widths, would be impossible without the superheterodyne.
When the anode was positive, a current of electrons flowed from the cathode to the anode, but when the anode was negative the electrons were repelled and no current flowed.
*The most important advantage is that better selectivity can be achieved by doing the filtering at the lower intermediate frequency.
The first integrated stereo receiver was made by the Harman Kardon company, and came onto the market in 1958.
In vacuum tube radios these consisted of a tube amplifier followed by an air core interstage coupling transformer with a capacitor across one winding.
This is called the IF strip.
To receive this new modulation type, the receiver had to produce some kind of tone during the pulses of carrier.
This reduces problems with feedback and parasitic oscillations that are encountered in receivers where most of the amplifier stages operate at the same frequency, as in the TRF receiver.
The RF filter on the front end of the receiver is needed to prevent interference from any radio signals at the image frequency.
In a dual-conversion superhet there are two mixers, so the demodulator is called the "third detector".
The form of bandpass filter that was used in the first receivers, which has continued to be used in receivers until recently, was the  double-tuned inductively-coupled circuit, or resonant transformer (oscillation transformer or RF transformer).
In a digital receiver the IF signal is sampled and digitized, and the bandpass filtering and detection functions are performed by digital signal processing (DSP) on the chip.
It initially had a high resistance.
Many of the functions performed by analogue electronics can be performed by software instead.
The first radio receivers invented by Marconi, Oliver Lodge and Alexander Popov in 1894-5 used a primitive radio wave detector called a coherer, invented in 1890 by Edouard Branly and improved by Lodge and Marconi.
Frederick Seitz, a later semiconductor researcher, wrote:
The superheterodyne, invented in 1918 during World War 1 by Edwin Armstrong when he was in the Signal Corps, is the design used in almost all modern receivers, except a few specialized applications.
As the tube heated up, gas released from the metal elements would change the pressure in the tube, changing the plate current and other characteristics, so it required periodic bias adjustments to keep it at the correct operating point.
From the standpoint of modern receivers the disadvantage of the TRF is that the gain and bandwidth of the tuned RF stages are not constant but vary as the receiver is tuned to different frequencies.
It is also easier to build  tunable oscillators than tunable electronic filters.
The Neutrodyne receiver, invented in 1922 by Louis Hazeltine, was a TRF receiver with a "neutralizing" circuit added to each radio amplification stage to cancel the feedback to prevent the oscillations which caused the annoying whistles in the TRF.
During the vacuum tube era, the term "detector" changed from meaning a radio wave detector to mean a demodulator, a device that could extract the audio modulation signal from a radio signal.
It is a more complicated design than the other receivers above, and when it was invented required 6 - 9 vacuum tubes, putting it beyond the budget of most consumers, so it was initially used mainly in commercial and military communication stations.
The receiver would also have a resonant circuit (tuned circuit), and could receive a particular transmission by "tuning" its resonant circuit to the same frequency as the transmitter, analogously to tuning a musical instrument to resonance with another.
Whichever is chosen, the other frequency is called the ''image frequency''.
These parasitic oscillations mixed with the carrier of the radio signal in the detector tube, producing audible beat notes (heterodynes); annoying whistles, moans, and howls in the speaker.
Some receivers even use triple-conversion.
At the beginning of the 1920s the radio receiver was a forbidding high-tech device, with many cryptic knobs and controls requiring technical skill to operate, housed in an unattractive black metal box, with a tinny-sounding horn loudspeaker.
This was solved by the Neutrodyne circuit, and later the development of the tetrode and pentode around 1930.
Until recently the bandpass filters in the superheterodyne circuit used in all modern receivers were made with resonant transformers, called IF transformers.
A digital signal is essentially a stream or sequence of numbers that relay a message through some sort of medium such as a wire.
After this it became the standard method of receiving CW radiotelegraphy.
The heterodyne oscillator had to be retuned each time the receiver was tuned to a new station, but in modern superheterodyne receivers the BFO signal beats with the fixed intermediate frequency, so the beat frequency oscillator can be a fixed frequency.
*''IF strip'' - The IF filter and amplifier usually consists of several tuned amplifier stages as in the TRF receiver.
Armstrong later used Fessenden's heterodyne principle in his superheterodyne receiver ''(below)''.
The receiver uses electronic filters to separate the desired radio frequency signal from all the other signals picked up by the antenna, an electronic amplifier to increase the power of the signal for further processing, and finally recovers the desired information through demodulation.
The result at the output of the mixer is a heterodyne or beat frequency at the difference between these two frequencies:  '''''f''IF'''&nbsp;=&nbsp;|'''''f''RF'''&nbsp;−&nbsp;'''''f''LO'''| This lower frequency is called the ''intermediate frequency'' (IF).
Thus the "dots" and "dashes" of Morse code were audible as musical "beeps".
Connected between the antenna and the detector it served as a bandpass filter, passing the signal of the desired station to the detector, but routing all other signals to ground.
The resulting crude semiconductor junction functioned as a Schottky barrier diode, it only conducted current in one direction.
Many radio receivers also include a loudspeaker.
The development of amplitude modulation (AM) and vacuum tube transmitters during World War 1, and the availability of cheap receiving tubes after the war, set the stage for the start of AM broadcasting, which sprang up spontaneously around 1920.
Each Audion stage usually had a rheostat to adjust the filament current, and often a potentiometer or multiposition switch to control the plate voltage.
One of the most important ease-of-use innovations was "single knob tuning", achieved by linking the tuning capacitors together mechanically.
The radiotelegraphy signals produced by spark gap transmitters consisted of strings of damped waves repeating at an audio rate, so the "dots" and "dashes" of Morse code were audible as a tone or buzz in the receivers' earphones.
The amplifying vacuum tube used energy from a battery or electrical outlet to increase the power of the radio signal, so vacuum tube receivers could be more sensitive and have a greater reception range than the previous unamplified receivers.
The primary benefit of DSP hardware in shortwave receivers is the ability to tailor the bandwidth of the receiver to current reception conditions and to the type of signal being listened to.
The receiver was ahead of its time, because when it was invented there was no oscillator capable of producing the radio frequency sine wave  '''''f''O''' with the required stability.
By choosing '''''f''O''' correctly the lower heterodyne '''''f''C'''&nbsp;−&nbsp;'''''f''O'''  was in the audio frequency range, so it was audible as a tone in the earphone whenever the carrier was present.
Early regeneratives which oscillated easily were called "bloopers", and were made illegal in Europe.
The Fleming valve was used to a limited extent but was not popular because it was expensive, had limited filament life, and was not as sensitive as electrolytic or crystal detectors.
The heterodyne oscillator is the ancestor of the ''beat frequency oscillator'' (BFO) which is used to receive radiotelegraphy in communications receivers today.
In order to restore the coherer to its previous nonconducting state to receive the next pulse of radio waves, it had to be tapped mechanically to disturb the metal particles.
The information produced by the receiver may be in the form of sound (an audio signal), images (a video signal) or digital data.
Resonant transformers continued to be used as the bandpass filter in vacuum tube radios, and new forms such as the ''variometer'' were invented.
The receiver had a control to adjust the feedback.
A more serious drawback was that it could act as an inadvertent radio transmitter, producing interference (RFI) in nearby receivers.
These were inaudible in the receiver headphones.
The increased audio output power also allowed them to drive loudspeakers instead of earphones, permitting more than one person to listen.
When the operator encountered an interfering signal at a nearby frequency, the secondary could be slid further out of the primary, reducing the coupling, which narrowed the bandwidth, rejecting the interfering signal.
Features that can be found in advanced control software programs today include a band table, GUI controls corresponding to traditional radio controls, local time clock and a UTC clock, signal strength meter, an ILG database for shortwave listening with lookup capability, scanning capability, text-to-speech interface, and integrated Conference Server.
In addition to being the main type used in commercial  stations during the wireless telegraphy era, it was the first receiver to be used widely by the public.
Since the separation between the desired frequency and the image is  2'''''f''IF''', the higher the IF, the farther apart these two frequencies are, and the better the image rejection.
The standalone radio receiver is usually known in consumer electronics as a tuner.
The crystal radio used a crystal detector called a cat's whisker detector, invented by Harrison H. C. Dunwoody and Greenleaf Whittier Pickard in 1904, to rectify the radio signal to extract the audio from the radio frequency carrier.
However the new continuous wave radiotelegraph signals simply consisted of pulses of unmodulated carrier (sine waves).
In a long series of experiments Marconi found that by using an elevated wire monopole antenna instead of Hertz's dipole antennas he could transmit longer distances, beyond the curve of the Earth, demonstrating that radio was not just a laboratory curiosity but a commercially viable communication method.
The major radio receiver designs, listed below,  were invented during the vacuum tube era.
In the superheterodyne, the "heterodyne" technique invented by Reginald Fessenden is used to shift the frequency of the radio signal down to a lower "intermediate frequency" (IF), before it is processed.
*One or more tuned radio frequency amplifier stages, each consisting of an amplifying tube or transistor and a tuned circuit.
A radio receiver may be a separate piece of electronic equipment, or an electronic circuit within another device.
Although portable vacuum tube radios were made, tubes were bulky and inefficient, consuming large amounts of power and requiring several large batteries to produce the filament and plate voltage.
However, the lower the IF, the narrower the bandwidth the IF filter can achieve, and the better the selectivity.
The filament was heated by a separate current through it and emitted electrons into the tube by thermionic emission, an effect which had been discovered by Thomas Edison.
These were the standard batteries used in early radios:
During World War 1 civilian radio use was prohibited, but by 1920 these tubes came on the market and large scale production of vacuum tube radios began.
In the regenerative receiver the gain (amplification) of a vacuum tube or transistor is increased by using ''regeneration'' (positive feedback); some of the energy from the tube's output  circuit is fed back into the input circuit with a feedback loop.
Regenerative detectors were sometimes also used in TRF and superheterodyne receivers.
can be dynamically changed by software to react to changes in the environment; these systems are known as software-defined radios or cognitive radio.
Regeneration could not only increase the gain of the tube enormously, by a factor of 15,000 or more, it also increased the Q factor of the tuned circuit, decreasing (sharpening) the bandwidth of the receiver by the same factor, improving selectivity greatly.
He was the first to give a correct explanation of how De Forest's triode tube worked.
It is another example of an ingenious circuit invented to get the most out of a limited number of active devices.
For instance, a second CD player can be plugged into an "AUX" input, and will work the same as it will in the "CD" input jacks.
The coherer remained the dominant detector used in early radio receivers for about 10 years, until replaced by the crystal detector and electrolytic detector around 1907.
Fessenden first used his large radio frequency alternator, but this wasn't practical for ordinary receivers.
Convenience features like large lighted dials, tone controls, pushbutton tuning, tuning indicators and automatic gain control (AGC) were added.
Today active devices still perform poorly at the microwave frequencies which modern telecommunication links use.
This allowed a single tube to produce gains of over 106.
In nearby receivers, the regenerative's signal would beat with the signal of the station being received in the detector, creating annoying heterodynes, (beats), howls and whistles.
In radio communications, a '''radio receiver''' (commonly also called a '''radio''') is an electronic device that receives radio waves and converts the information carried by them to a usable form.
Therefore, the knobs had to be turned simultaneously.
Some audio purists still prefer three discrete units - tuner, preamplifier and power amplifier - but the integrated receiver has, for some years, been the mainstream choice for music listening.
When the incoming radio signal '''''f''RF''' is mixed with the local oscillator signal '''''f''LO''', ''two'' new frequencies (heterodynes) are created,  one at the sum '''''f''RF'''&nbsp;+&nbsp;'''''f''LO''', and one at the difference '''''f''RF'''&nbsp;−&nbsp;'''''f''LO''' of the frequencies.
Since the Graphical User Interface or GUI interface PC to the radio has unlimited flexibility, any number of new features can be added by the software designer.
Nikola Tesla's March 1893 lecture demonstrating the wireless transmission of power for lighting (mainly by what he thought was ground conduction) included elements of tuning.
Some modern integrated receivers can send audio out to seven loudspeakers and an additional channel for a subwoofer and often include connections for headphones.
The benefit is that software is not affected by temperature, physical variables, electronic noise and manufacturing defects.
Some control software designers have even integrated Google Earth to the shortwave databases, so it is possible to "fly" to a given transmitter site location with a click of a mouse.
This was done by a "decoherer", a clapper which struck the tube, operated by an electromagnet powered by the relay.
DSP technology, short for digital signal processing, is the use of digital means to process signals and is coming into wide use in modern shortwave receivers.
The field of software control of PC radios has grown rapidly in the last several years, with developers making a number of advances.
In addition to the antenna, the coherer was connected in a DC circuit with a battery and relay.
To receive  radiotelegraph (CW) or single-sideband modulation (SSB), a beat frequency oscillator (BFO) is used.
To receive radiotelegraphy, the feedback was increased until the tube oscillated, then the oscillation frequency was tuned to one side of the transmitted signal.
A full-featured radio control program allows for scanning and a host of other functions and, in particular, integration of databases in real-time, like a "TV-Guide" type capability.
The first receivers used an electric bell instead.
Today crystal radios, the simplest type of radio receivers, are constructed by students as educational science projects.
New versions of the DSP firmware can be downloaded from the manufacturer's web site and uploaded into the flash memory of the radio.
However it can be seen that it was essentially a bistable device, a radio-wave-operated switch, and so it did not have the ability to rectify the radio wave to demodulate the later amplitude modulated (AM) radio transmissions that carried sound.
*'''Crystal detector'''  ('''cat's whisker detector''') - invented around 1904-1906 by Henry H. C. Dunwoody and Greenleaf Whittier Pickard, based on Karl Ferdinand Braun's  1874 discovery of "asymmetrical conduction" in crystals, these were the most successful and widely used detectors before the vacuum tube era and gave their name to the ''crystal radio'' receiver ''(below)''.
Other patent disputes would crop up over the years including a 1943 US Supreme Court ruling on the Marconi Companies ability to sue the US government over patent infringement during World War One.
It is used with an antenna.
Another advantage of the circuit was that the tube could be made to oscillate, and thus a single tube could serve as both a beat frequency oscillator and a detector, functioning as a heterodyne receiver to make CW radiotelegraphy transmissions audible.
In the reflex receiver the RF signal from the tuned circuit is passed through one or more amplifying tubes or transistors, demodulated in a detector, then the resulting audio signal is passed ''again'' though the same amplifier stages for audio amplification.
The continuous wave radiotelegraphy signals produced by these transmitters required a different method of reception.
Today transistor versions of the circuit are still used in a few inexpensive applications like walkie-talkies.
This was due to feedback in the amplifiers; one major feedback path was the capacitance between the plate and grid in early triodes.
In his ''heterodyne receiver'' an unmodulated sine wave radio signal at a frequency '''''f''O''' offset from the incoming radio wave carrier '''''f''C''' was applied to a rectifying detector such as a crystal detector or electrolytic detector, along with the radio signal from the antenna.
Although in many modern radio receivers (such as television sets) this is done automatically by pressing a "channel up" or "channel down" button, some older radios still use the traditional method of turning a "tuning" knob until the station is heard in the speaker.
By the 1930s, the broadcast receiver had become a piece of furniture, housed in an attractive wooden case, with standardized controls anyone could use, which occupied a respected place in the home living room.
The Court rejected the Marconi Companies suit saying they could not sue for patent infringement when their own patents did not seem to have priority over the patents of Lodge, Stone, and Tesla.
