It is also the only gas under normal conditions that has no stable isotopes, and is considered a health hazard due to its radioactivity.
The likeness of the spectra of these three gases with those of argon, krypton, and xenon, and their observed chemical inertia led Sir William Ramsay to suggest in 1904 that the "emanations" might contain a new element of the noble gas family.
During this period, several entrepreneurs opened former uranium mines in the USA to the general public and advertised alleged health benefits from breathing radon gas underground.
Radon exposure in homes and offices may arise from certain subsurface rock formations, and also from certain building materials (e.g., some granites).
Radon is appreciably more soluble in organic liquids than in water.
Radon concentrations can vary daily, and accurate radon exposure estimates require long-term average radon measurements in the spaces where an individual spends a significant amount of time.
Surviving relatives may also apply in cases where the formerly employed person is deceased.
The four principal ways of reducing the amount of radon accumulating in a house are:
Despite the existence of Xe(VIII), no Rn(VIII) compounds have been claimed to exist; RnF8 should be highly unstable chemically (XeF8 is thermodynamically unstable).
The RnF+ ion is believed to form by the following reaction:
It is often the single largest contributor to an individual's background radiation dose, and is the most variable from location to location.
In the 1940s and '50s, radon was used for industrial radiography, Other X-ray sources, which became available after World War II, quickly replaced radon for this application, as they were lower in cost and had less hazard of alpha radiation.
Radium-226 decays by alpha-particle emission, producing radon that collects over samples of radium-226 at a rate of about 1&nbsp;mm3/day per gram of radium; equilibrium is quickly achieved and radon is produced in a steady flow, with an activity equal to that of the radium (50 Bq).
During the 1940s and '50s, when safety standards requiring expensive ventilation in mines were not widely implemented, radon exposure was linked to lung cancer among non-smoking miners of uranium and other hard rock materials in what is now the Czech Republic, and later among miners from the Southwestern United States and South Australia.
The SI unit of cumulative exposure is expressed in joule-hours per cubic meter (J·h/m3).
Radon levels fluctuate naturally, due to factors like transient weather conditions, so an initial test might not be an accurate assessment of a home's average radon level.
Radon concentration varies greatly with season and atmospheric conditions.
Radon has a half-life of approximately 3.8 days, which means that it can be found only shortly after it has been produced in the radioactive decay chain.
The octahedral molecule  was predicted to have an even lower enthalpy of formation than the difluoride.
High concentrations of radon can be found in some spring waters and hot springs.
The carcinogenic nature of radon due to its ionizing radiation became apparent later on.
Thus, the geometric mean is generally used for estimating the "average" radon concentration in an area.
Because the half-life of radon is only 3.8 days, removing or isolating the source will greatly reduce the hazard within a few weeks.
Because of the short half-life of radon and the radioactivity of its compounds, it has not been possible to study the compound in any detail.
Because of radon's rapid loss to air and comparatively rapid decay, radon is used in hydrologic research that studies the interaction between ground water and streams.
Generally, the indoor radon concentrations increase as ventilation rates decrease.
Purchasers of real estate are advised to delay or decline a purchase if the seller has not successfully abated radon to 4&nbsp;pCi/L or less.
Drinking therapy is applied in Bad Brambach, Germany.
Radon is found in some petroleum.
The higher fluorides RnF4 and RnF6 have been claimed, and are calculated to be stable, but it is doubtful whether they have yet been synthesized.
A cumulated exposure of 230&nbsp;Bq/m3 of radon gas concentration during a period of 1 year corresponds to 1&nbsp;WLM.
The highest average radon concentrations in the United States are found in Iowa and in the Appalachian Mountain areas in southeastern Pennsylvania.
In addition, typical systems re-inject the material deep underground rather that releasing it at the surface, so its environmental impact is minimal.
According to the EPA, the risk of lung cancer for smokers is significant due to synergistic effects of radon and smoking.
In addition, smoking is the most important risk factor for lung cancer.
Radon decays to form solid radioisotopes that form coatings on the inside of pipework.
If levels are 20 picocuries radon per liter of air (800&nbsp;Bq/m3) or higher, the home owner should consider some type of procedure to decrease indoor radon levels.
Typical domestic exposures are of approximately 100&nbsp;Bq/m3 (2.7 pCi/L) indoors.
In 1901, he demonstrated that the emanations are radioactive, but credited the Curies for the discovery of the element.
In the US and Europe there are several "radon spas", where people sit for minutes or hours in a high-radon atmosphere in the belief that low doses of radiation will invigorate or energize them.
''Theoretical upper limit:'' Radon gas (222Rn) at 100% concentration (1 atmosphere, 0&nbsp;°C); 1.538×105 curies/gram; 5.54×1019 Bq/m3.
Short-term radon test devices used for initial screening purposes are inexpensive, in some cases free.
This has been insufficiently studied.
Radon has been produced commercially for use in radiation therapy, but for the most part has been replaced by radionuclides made in accelerators and nuclear reactors.
Radon has been used in implantable seeds, made of gold or glass, primarily used to treat cancers.
* 214Pb, 26.8 minutes, beta decaying to...
Its decay goes through the following sequence:
Typical domestic exposures average about 48&nbsp;Bq/m3 indoors, though this varies widely, and 15&nbsp;Bq/m3 outdoors.
As the relative risk for miners has decreased, so has the ability to detect excess risks among that population.
Radon is formed as one intermediate step in the normal radioactive decay chains through which thorium and uranium slowly decay into lead.
Any significant concentration of radon in a stream is a good indicator that there are local inputs of ground water.
One of the most comprehensive radon studies performed in the United States by Dr. R. William Field and colleagues found a 50% increased lung cancer risk even at the protracted exposures at the EPA's action level of 4 pCi/L.
The first synthesized compound of radon, radon fluoride, was obtained in 1962.
After 12 half-lives (43 days), radon radioactivity is at 1/2000 of its original level.
In 1903, similar emanations were observed from actinium by André-Louis Debierne and were called ''Actinium Emanation'' (''Ac Em'').
The practice is discouraged because of the well-documented ill effects of high-doses of radiation on the body.
A detailed explanation of WL is given in Concentration Units).
Later that year, Robert B. Owens and Ernest Rutherford, at McGill University in Montreal, noticed variations when trying to measure radiation from thorium oxide.
On 8 July 2010 the UK's Health Protection Agency issued new advice setting a "Target Level" of 100&nbsp;Bq/m3 whilst retaining an "Action Level" of 200&nbsp;Bq/m3.
On a global scale, it is estimated that 2,400 million curies (90 EBq) of radon are released from soil annually.
A study of radiation from post mastectomy radiotherapy shows that the simple models previously used to assess the combined and separate risks from radiation and smoking need to be developed.
* Installing a radon sump system in the basement;
The gold layer keeps the radon within, and filters out the alpha and beta radiations, while allowing the gamma rays to escape (which kill the diseased tissue).
Digital radon detectors provide ongoing measurements giving both daily, weekly, short-term and long-term average readouts via a digital display.
Radon carbonyl RnCO has been predicted to be stable and to have a linear molecular geometry.
But the group that had been exposed to passive smoking at home appeared to bear the entire risk increase, while those who were not exposed to passive smoking did not show any increased risk with increasing radon level.
The 220Rn isotope is a natural decay product of the most stable thorium isotope (232Th), and is commonly referred to as thoron.
Typical entry points of radon into buildings are cracks in solid foundations, construction joints, cracks in walls, gaps in suspended floors, gaps around service pipes, cavities inside walls, and the water supply.
A trace amount of the (highly unstable) isotope 218Rn is also among the daughters of 222Rn.
Radon is obtained as a by-product of uraniferous ores processing after transferring into 1% solutions of hydrochloric or hydrobromic acids.
210Pb takes much longer (decades) to come in equilibrium with radon, but, if the environment permits accumulation of dust over extended periods of time, 210Pb and its decay products may contribute to overall radiation levels as well.
A well-known example of source of error is smoking.
Later, when isotopes were numbered instead of named, the element took the name of the most stable isotope, ''radon'', while Tn was renamed 220Rn and An was renamed 219Rn.
If such contaminated dust is inhaled, these particles can stick to the airways of the lung and increase the risk of developing lung cancer.
Thorium and uranium, their decay product radium, and its decay product radon, will therefore continue to occur for tens of millions of years at almost the same concentrations as they do now.
The greatest risk of radon exposure arises in buildings that are airtight, insufficiently ventilated, and have foundation leaks that allow air from the soil into basements and dwelling rooms.
The equilibrium factor found in epidemiological studies is 0.4.
Because radon has a similar pressure and temperature curve to propane, and oil refineries separate petrochemicals based on their boiling points, the piping carrying freshly separated propane in oil refineries can become radioactive because of decaying radon and its products.
According to the European pooling study, there is a difference in risk from radon between histological types.
Radon is condensed by liquid nitrogen and purified from residue gases by sublimation.
* Installing a positive pressurization or positive supply ventilation system.
222Rn belongs to the radium and uranium-238 decay chain, and has a half-life of 3.8235 days.
Three other radon isotopes have a half-life of over an hour: 211Rn, 210Rn and 224Rn.
Radon can be oxidized by powerful oxidizing agents such as fluorine, thus forming radon difluoride.
This form of soil suction is called submembrane suction, and when properly applied is the most effective way to reduce radon levels in crawlspace homes."
The generation of new cracks might not unreasonably be assumed to precede major earthquakes.
Radon-222 decay products have been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as being carcinogenic to humans, and as a gas that can be inhaled, lung cancer is a particular concern for people exposed to elevated levels of radon for sustained periods.
In 1910, Ramsay and Robert Whytlaw-Gray isolated radon, determined its density, and determined that it was the heaviest known gas.
In 1999 National Research Council investigated the issue of radon in drinking water.
There are approximately 21,000 deaths per year in the US due to radon-induced lung cancers.
Therefore, a high result (over 4&nbsp;pCi/L) justifies repeating the test before undertaking more expensive abatement projects.
Others have reached similar conclusions for the United Kingdom and France.
Thus, naturally-occurring radon is responsible for the majority of the public exposure to ionizing radiation.
Radon concentrations in the same location may differ by a factor of two over a period of 1 hour.
Allowable concentrations in uranium mines are approximately 1,220&nbsp;Bq/m3 (33 pCi/L)
Indoor radon concentration is usually assumed to follow a lognormal distribution on a given territory.
Similarly, it has found some limited use in prospecting for geothermal gradients.
North American and European Pooled analyses further support these findings.
Under these conditions each additional pCi/L of radon will increase exposure, by 0.01&nbsp;WL (Working Level -a measure of radioactivity commonly used in mining.
The equilibrium factor is also lowered by air circulation or air filtration devices, and is increased by airborne dust particles, including cigarette smoke.
In the United States radon test kits are available to the public at retail stores, such as hardware stores, for home use and testing is available through licensed professionals, who are often home inspectors.
Radium-rich springs are also used in traditional Japanese onsen in Misasa, Tottori Prefecture.
For this reason, it has been hypothesized that increases in radon concentration is due to the generation of new cracks underground, which would allow increased ground water circulation, flushing out radon.
Radon's molecule-damaging radioactivity has been used to kill cancerous cells, but it does not increase the health of healthy cells.
Some of the highest readings ever have been recorded in the Irish town of Mallow, County Cork, prompting local fears regarding lung cancer.
Soil suction, for example, prevents radon from entering your home by drawing the radon from below the home and venting it through a pipe, or pipes, to the air above the home where it is quickly diluted" and "EPA does not recommend the use of sealing alone to reduce radon because, by itself, sealing has not been shown to lower radon levels significantly or consistently".
WHO presented in 2009 a recommended reference level (the national reference level), 100 Bq/m3, for radon in dwellings.
In the West, tobacco smoke is estimated to cause about 90% of all lung cancers.
No radon isotopes occur significantly in the neptunium (237Np) decay series, though a trace amount of the (extremely unstable) isotope 217Rn is produced.
Measurements between 4 and 10&nbsp;pCi/L warrant a long term radon test.
This fact has been put to use by some atmospheric scientists.
The mixture is purified by passing it over copper at 720&nbsp;°C to remove the  and the , and then KOH and  are used to remove the acids and moisture by sorption.
Being a rare gas, it usually migrates freely through faults and fragmented soils, and may accumulate in caves or water.
In the open air, it ranges from 1 to 100&nbsp;Bq/m3, even less (0.1&nbsp;Bq/m3) above the ocean.
Because of its cost and radioactivity, experimental chemical research is seldom performed with radon, and as a result there are very few reported compounds of radon, all either fluorides or oxides.
* Sub-slab depressurization (soil suction) by increasing under-floor ventilation;
Generally indoor radon can be mitigated by sub-slab depressurization and exhausting such radon-laden air to the outdoors, away from windows and other building openings.
Intense radioactivity has also hindered chemical studies of radon and only a few compounds are known.
Radon has been considered the second leading cause of lung cancer and leading environmental cause of cancer mortality by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Radon is one of the densest substances that remains a gas under normal conditions.
An exposure to 1&nbsp;WL for 1 working month (170 hours) equals 1&nbsp;WLM cumulative exposure.
Radon soil-concentration has been used in an experimental way to map buried close-subsurface geological faults because concentrations are generally higher over the faults.
Because of the difficulties of measuring the risk of radon relative to smoking, models of their effect have often made use of them.
As well as being ingested through drinking water, radon is also released from water when temperature is increased, pressure is decreased and when water is aerated.
As a result, in the late 20th century and early 21st century, "health mines" established in Basin, Montana attracted people seeking relief from health problems such as arthritis through limited exposure to radioactive mine water and radon.
About 2,900 of these deaths occur among people who have never smoked.
The risk is from smoking, compounded by a synergistic effect of radon for smokers.
A national reference level should not be a limit, but should represent the maximum acceptable annual average radon concentration in a dwelling.
While radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer, it is the number one cause among non-smokers, according to EPA estimates.
Radon exposure (mostly radon daughters) has been linked to lung cancer in numerous case-control studies performed in the United States, Europe and China.
Another unit of measurement common in the US is picocuries per liter (pCi/L); 1&nbsp;pCi/L=37&nbsp;Bq/m3.
The kit includes a collector that the user hangs in the lowest habitable floor of the house for 2 to 7 days.
It was then dismissed by many as an unreliable indicator.
Optimum conditions for radon release and exposure occur during showering.
The radon equilibrium factor is the ratio between the activity of all short-period radon progenies (which are responsible for most of radon's biological effects), and the activity that would be at equilibrium with the radon parent.
To be classified as a radon mineral water, radon concentration must be above 2&nbsp;nCi/L (74&nbsp;kBq/m3).
Concentrations reaching 1,000,000&nbsp;Bq/m3 can be found in unventilated uranium mines.
Very high radon concentrations (>1000&nbsp;Bq/m3) have been found in houses built on soils with a high uranium content and/or high permeability of the ground.
During routine monitoring at a Pennsylvania nuclear power plant, a worker was found to be contaminated with radioactivity.
It is inert to most common chemical reactions, such as combustion, because the outer valence shell contains eight electrons.
Radon is one of the densest gases at room temperature and is the densest of the noble gases.
At this stage, the predominant residual activity originates from the radon decay product 210Pb, whose half-life (22.3 years) is 2000 times that of radon (and whose activity is thus 1/2000 of radon's), and its descendants 210Bi and 210Po.
The equilibrium factor is 1 when both activities are equal, meaning that the decay products have stayed close to the radon parent long enough for the equilibrium to be reached, within a couple of hours.
Homes built on a crawl space may benefit from a radon collector installed under a "radon barrier" (a sheet of plastic that covers the crawl space).
Radon (222Rn), decays to 210Pb and other radioisotopes.
Radon mostly appears with the decay chain of the radium and uranium series (222Rn), and marginally with the thorium series (220Rn).
In the U.S. the Environmental Protection Agency recommends all houses be tested for radon.
Inhalation therapy is carried out in Gasteiner-Heilstollen, Austria, in Świeradów-Zdrój, Czerniawa-Zdrój, Kowary, Lądek Zdrój, Poland, in Harghita Băi, Romania, and in Boulder, United States.
Theoretical studies on this molecule predict that it should have a Rn–F bond distance of 2.08&nbsp;Å, and that the compound is thermodynamically more stable and less volatile than its lighter counterpart .
The concentration in the air at the (unventilated) Gastein Healing Gallery averages 43&nbsp;kBq/m3 (about 1.2&nbsp;nCi/L) with maximal value of 160&nbsp;kBq/m3 (about 4.3&nbsp;nCi/L).
It is a radioactive, colorless, odorless, tasteless noble gas, occurring naturally as a decay product of radium.
Rutherford noticed that the compounds of thorium continuously emit a radioactive gas that retains the radioactive powers for several minutes, and called this gas ''emanation'' (from Latin "emanare"—to elapse and "emanatio"—expiration), and later ''Thorium Emanation'' (''Th Em'').
Some researchers have investigated changes in groundwater radon concentrations for earthquake prediction.
These conditions are not always met; in many homes, the equilibrium fraction is typically 40%; that is, there will be 0.004&nbsp;WL of daughters for each pCi/L of radon in air.
Measurements over 10&nbsp;pCi/L warrant only another short term test so that abatement measures are not unduly delayed.
For crawlspaces, the EPA states "An effective method to reduce radon levels in crawlspace homes involves covering the earth floor with a high-density plastic sheet.
Radon mostly enters a building directly from the soil through the lowest level in the building that is in contact with the ground.
High levels of radon in the water supply can also increase indoor radon air levels.
Efforts to reduce indoor radon levels are called radon mitigation.
* 210Pb, which has a much longer half-life of 22.3 years, beta decaying to...
In the 1970s and 1980s, scientific measurements of radon emissions near faults found that earthquakes often occurred with no radon signal, and radon was often detected with no earthquake to follow.
The risks associated with ingestion was considered almost negligible.
The activity of radon mineral water reaches 2,000&nbsp;kBq/m3 in Merano and 4,000&nbsp;kBq/m3 in Lurisia (Italy).
In the early part of the 20th century in the US, gold contaminated with 210Pb entered the jewelry industry.
A vent pipe and fan are used to draw the radon from under the sheet and vent it to the outdoors.
In high concentrations, airborne radon isotopes contribute significantly to human health risk.
Before that, in 1899, Pierre and Marie Curie observed that the gas emitted by radium remained radioactive for a month.
The mean concentration ranges from less than 10&nbsp;Bq/m3 to over 100&nbsp;Bq/m3 in some European countries.
The molecules  and RnXe were found to be significantly stabilized by spin-orbit coupling.
Most countries have adopted a radon concentration of 200–400&nbsp;Bq/m3 for indoor air as an Action or Reference Level.
If a closed volume is constantly supplied with radon, the concentration of short-lived isotopes will increase until an equilibrium is reached where the rate of decay of each decay product will equal that of the radon itself.
The danger of high exposure to radon in mines, where exposures reaching 1,000,000&nbsp;Bq/m3 can be found, has long been known.
Radon oxides are among the few other reported compounds of radon; only the trioxide has been confirmed.
Beginning in the 1970s research was initiated to address sources of indoor radon, determinants of concentration, health effects, and approaches to mitigation.
The gamma rays are produced by radon and the first short-lived elements of its decay chain (218Po, 214Pb, 214Bi, 214Po).
It disperses rapidly, and no radiological hazard has been demonstrated in various investigations.
There are very important protocols for taking short-term radon tests and it is imperative that they be strictly followed.
The basic data for the European pooling study makes it impossible to exclude that such synergy effect is an explanation for the (very limited) increase in the risk from radon that was stated for non-smokers.
The levels of 210Pb can be measured.
Results from epidemiological studies indicate that the risk of lung cancer increases with exposure to residential radon.
Residues from the petroleum and natural gas industry often contain radium and its daughters.
A 1000&nbsp;Bq/m3 (relatively high) concentration corresponds to 0.17&nbsp;picogram per cubic meter.
In 1530, Paracelsus described a wasting disease of miners, the ''mala metallorum'', and Georg Agricola recommended ventilation in mines to avoid this mountain sickness (''Bergsucht'').
Radon concentration varies widely from place to place.
A cumulative exposure of 1&nbsp;WLM is roughly equivalent to living one year in an atmosphere with a radon concentration of 230&nbsp;Bq/m3.
Also, the concentration in one room of a building may be significantly different from the concentration in an adjoining room.
The instability of Rn(VIII) is due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s shell, also known as the inert pair effect.
Radon detection devices are commercially available.
Radon is a known pollutant emitted from geothermal power stations because it is present in the material pumped from deep underground.
Radon, like other known or suspected external risk factors for lung cancer, is a threat for smokers and former smokers.
One WLM is equivalent to 3.6&nbsp;×&nbsp;10−3 J·h/m3.
For other histological types such as adenocarcinoma, the type that primarily affects never smokers, the risk from radon appears to be lower.
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer, after cigarette smoking, causing 21,000 lung cancer deaths per year in the United States.
About 100,000&nbsp;Bq/m3 (2.7&nbsp;nCi/L) was measured in Stanley Watras's basement.
Most models of residential radon exposure are based on studies of miners, and direct estimates of the risks posed to homeowners would be more desirable.
It was a small, sealed room for patients to be exposed to radon for its "medicinal effects".
This produces a stable, minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound.
Iowa has the highest average radon concentrations in the United States due to significant glaciation that ground the granitic rocks from the Canadian Shield and deposited it as soils making up the rich Iowa farmland.
The ionizing radiation causes the formation of free radicals, which results in genetic and other cell damage, resulting in increased rates of illness, including cancer.
In some countries these tests are methodically done in areas of known systematic hazards.
