Rainbands associated with cold fronts can be warped by mountain barriers perpendicular to the front's orientation due to the formation of a low-level barrier jet.
Therefore, one way to saturate a parcel of air is to cool it.
Coalescence generally happens most often in clouds above freezing, and is also known as the warm rain process.
Elevated portions of weather fronts (which are three-dimensional in nature) force broad areas of upward motion within the Earth's atmosphere which form clouds decks such as altostratus or cirrostratus.
As these larger water droplets descend, coalescence continues, so that drops become heavy enough to overcome air resistance and fall as rain.
The air can rise due to convection, large-scale atmospheric motions, or a physical barrier such as a mountain (orographic lift).
Intensity and duration of rainfall are usually inversely related, i.e., high intensity storms are likely to be of short duration and low intensity storms can have a long duration.
The distribution tends to fit averaged rainfall, while instantaneous size spectra often deviate and have been modeled as gamma distributions.
The dew point is the temperature to which a parcel must be cooled in order to become saturated.
In mountainous areas, heavy precipitation is possible where upslope flow is maximized within windward sides of the terrain at elevation which forces moist air to condense and fall out as rainfall along the sides of mountains.
Convective rain, or showery precipitation, occurs from convective clouds (e.g., cumulonimbus or cumulus congestus).
Rain is also known or suspected on other planets, where it may be composed of methane, neon, sulfuric acid, or even iron rather than water.
Nitric acid is produced by natural sources such as lightning, soil bacteria, and natural fires; while also produced anthropogenically by the combustion of fossil fuels and from power plants.
The forecasts can be verified through use of rain gauge measurements, weather radar estimates, or a combination of both.
A wide variety of weather can be found along an occluded front, with thunderstorms possible, but usually their passage is associated with a drying of the air mass.
Areas in their path can receive a year's worth of rainfall from a tropical cyclone passage.
Orographic precipitation occurs on the windward side of mountains and is caused by the rising air motion of a large-scale flow of moist air across the mountain ridge, resulting in adiabatic cooling and condensation.
Rain becomes acidic primarily due to the presence of two strong acids, sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3).
The most commonly used form of the Köppen classification has five primary types labeled A through E. Specifically, the primary types are A, tropical; B, dry; C, mild mid-latitude; D, cold mid-latitude; and E, polar.
Terrain is considered in QPFs by use of topography or based upon climatological precipitation patterns from observations with fine detail.
The main ways water vapor is added to the air are: wind convergence into areas of upward motion, precipitation or virga falling from above, daytime heating evaporating water from the surface of oceans, water bodies or wet land, transpiration from plants, cool or dry air moving over warmer water, and lifting air over mountains.
This generally requires more mass than coalescence when occurring between the crystal and neighboring water droplets.
Convective precipitation falls over a certain area for a relatively short time, as convective clouds have limited horizontal extent.
Westerly flow from the mild north Atlantic leads to wetness across western Europe, in particular Ireland and the United Kingdom, where the western coasts can receive between , at sea-level and , on the mountains of rain per year.
Some deserts are also occupying much of southern Africa : the Namib and the Kalahari.
When noted on weather radar imagery, this precipitation elongation is referred to as banded structure.
Smaller drops are called cloud droplets, and their shape is spherical.
Large rain drops become increasingly flattened on the bottom, like hamburger buns; very large ones are shaped like parachutes.
The phrase ''acid rain'' was first used by Scottish chemist Robert Augus Smith in 1852.
On Titan, Saturn's largest natural satellite, infrequent methane rain is thought to carve the moon's numerous surface channels.
Most summer rainfall occurs during thunderstorms and from occasional tropical cyclones.
Globally there has been no statistically significant overall trend in precipitation over the past century, although trends have varied widely by region and over time.
In mountainous parts of the world subjected to relatively consistent winds (for example, the trade winds), a more moist climate usually prevails on the windward side of a mountain than on the leeward or downwind side.
Drought can kill crops and increase erosion, while overly wet weather can cause harmful fungus growth.
Rain is a major component of the water cycle and is responsible for depositing most of the fresh water on the Earth.
The Sahel, the Mediterranean, southern Africa and parts of southern Asia have become drier.
There are four main mechanisms for cooling the air to its dew point: adiabatic cooling, conductive cooling, radiational cooling, and evaporative cooling.
Behind extratropical cyclones during fall and winter, rainbands can form downwind of relative warm bodies of water such as the Great Lakes.
In heavily populated areas that are near the coast, such as the United States' Eastern Seaboard, the effect can be dramatic: there is a 22% higher chance of rain on Saturdays than on Mondays.
Rainbands can be stratiform or convective, and are generated by differences in temperature.
In dry places, such as India, or during periods of drought, rain lifts people's moods.
For example, certain cacti require small amounts of water, while tropical plants may need up to hundreds of inches of rain per year to survive.
Systems known as Kona storms affect the state with heavy rains between October and April.
The monsoon trough can reach as far north as the 40th parallel in East Asia during August before moving southward thereafter.
QPF can be generated on a quantitative, forecasting amounts, or a qualitative, forecasting the probability of a specific amount, basis.
Since rain only falls as liquid, in frozen temperatures, rain cannot fall.
The climate is characterized by hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters.
The source of this scent is petrichor, an oil produced by plants, then absorbed by rocks and soil, and later released into the air during rainfall.
In South America, the Andes mountain range blocks Pacific moisture that arrives in that continent, resulting in a desertlike climate just downwind across western Argentina.
Rain drops associated with melting hail tend to be larger than other rain drops.
Some areas with pronounced rainy seasons will see a break in rainfall mid-season when the intertropical convergence zone or monsoon trough move poleward of their location during the middle of the warm season.
Plants need varying amounts of rainfall to survive.
Some cities induce a total precipitation increase of 51%.
The likelihood or probability of an event with a specified intensity and duration, is called the return period or frequency.
In certain conditions precipitation may fall from a cloud but then evaporates or sublimes before reaching the ground.
It falls as showers with rapidly changing intensity.
On America's East Coast, rain that is derived from the Atlantic Ocean typically has a pH of 5.0-5.6; rain that comes across the continental from the west has a pH of 3.8-4.8; and local thunderstorms can have a pH as low as 2.0.
Rainbands in advance of warm occluded fronts and warm fronts are associated with weak upward motion, and tend to be wide and stratiform in nature.
Large thunderstorm areas known as mesoscale convective complexes move through the Plains, Midwest, and Great Lakes during the warm season, contributing up to 10% of the annual precipitation to the region.
Hail becomes an increasingly infrequent occurrence when the freezing level within the atmosphere exceeds  above ground level.
Bergen, Norway is one of the more famous European rain-cities with its yearly precipitation of  on average.
The urban heat island effect leads to increased rainfall, both in amounts and intensity, downwind of cities.
Within Asia, rainfall is favored across its southern portion from India east and northeast across the Philippines and southern China into Japan due to the monsoon advecting moisture primarily from the Indian Ocean into the region.
Most temperate rainforests are located on mountainous west coasts between 45 and 55 degrees latitude, but they are often found in other areas.
An oceanic (or maritime) climate is typically found along the west coasts at the middle latitudes of all the world's continents, bordering cool oceans, as well as southeastern Australia, and is accompanied by plentiful precipitation year round.
Excessive rain during short periods of time can cause flash floods.
Warmer air can contain more water vapor than cooler air before becoming saturated.
If sea breeze rainbands become active enough just ahead of a cold front, they can mask the location of the cold front itself.
In Hawaii, Mount Waiʻaleʻale, on the island of Kauai, is notable for its extreme rainfall, as it has the second highest average annual rainfall on Earth, with .
When the wet season occurs during the warm season, or summer, rain falls mainly during the late afternoon and early evening hours.
All plants need at least some water to survive, therefore rain (being the most effective means of watering) is important to agriculture.
How much water vapor a parcel of air can contain before it becomes saturated (100%&nbsp;relative humidity) and forms into a cloud (a group of visible and tiny water and ice particles suspended above the Earth's surface) depends on its temperature.
Global warming is also causing changes in the precipitation pattern globally, including wetter conditions across eastern North America and drier conditions in the tropics.
Graupel and hail indicate convection.
The intensity of a storm can be predicted for any return period and storm duration, from charts based on historic data for the location.
Analysis of 65 years of United States of America rainfall records show the lower 48 states have an increase in heavy downpours since 1950.
Precipitation forecasts tend to be bound by synoptic hours such as 0000, 0600, 1200 and 1800&nbsp;GMT.
Tropical cyclone rainbands contain showers and thunderstorms that, together with the eyewall and the eye, constitute a hurricane or tropical storm.
Rainforests are areas of the world with very high rainfall.
Contrary to popular belief, their shape does not resemble a teardrop.
It can also be the focus of locally heavy precipitation, with thunderstorms possible if the atmosphere along the trowal is unstable enough for convection.
If a network is not available in the area where one lives, the nearest local weather or met office will likely be interested in the measurement.
Precipitation generally increased over land north of 30°N from 1900 through 2005 but has declined over the tropics since the 1970s.
The equatorial region near the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), or monsoon trough, is the wettest portion of the world's continents.
Rainbands within tropical cyclones are curved in orientation.
Starting in the mid to late 1990s, QPFs were used within hydrologic forecast models to simulate impact to rivers throughout the United States.
The amount of moisture in air is also commonly reported as relative humidity; which is the percentage of the total water vapor air can hold at a particular air temperature.
The standard way of measuring rainfall or snowfall is the standard rain gauge, which can be found in 100-mm (4-in) plastic and 200-mm (8-in) metal varieties.
The term ''green season'' is also sometimes used as a euphemism by tourist authorities.
Many people find the scent during and immediately after rain pleasant or distinctive.
The wet season is a time when air quality improves, freshwater quality improves, and vegetation grows significantly.
Cultural attitudes towards rain differ across the world.
Other types of gauges include the popular wedge gauge (the cheapest rain gauge and most fragile), the tipping bucket rain gauge, and the weighing rain gauge.
Any of the above rain gauges can be made at home, with enough know-how.
Radar imagery forecasting techniques show higher skill than model forecasts within 6 to 7&nbsp;hours of the time of the radar image.
Rain can also bring joy, as some consider it to be soothing or enjoy the aesthetic appeal of it.
The rainfall will be greater and the flooding will be worse than the worst storm expected in any single year.
Although cyclones can take an enormous toll in lives and personal property, they may be important factors in the precipitation regimes of places they impact, as they may bring much-needed precipitation to otherwise dry regions.
A QPF will be specified when a measurable precipitation type reaching a minimum threshold is forecast for any hour during a QPF valid period.
Similar, but weaker, monsoon circulations are present over North America and Australia.
In clouds below freezing, when ice crystals gain enough mass they begin to fall.
The biggest raindrops on Earth were recorded over Brazil and the Marshall Islands in 2004&nbsp;— some of them were as large as .
Tropical cyclones, a source of very heavy rainfall, consist of large air masses several hundred miles across with low pressure at the centre and with winds blowing inward towards the centre in either a clockwise direction (southern hemisphere) or counter clockwise (northern hemisphere).
'''Rain''' is liquid water in the form of droplets that have condensed from atmospheric water vapor and then precipitated—that is, become heavy enough to fall under gravity.
The major cause of rain production is moisture moving along three-dimensional zones of temperature and moisture contrasts known as weather fronts.
In addition, because of the great temperature difference between cloud and ground level, these ice crystals may melt as they fall and become rain.
where Z represents the radar reflectivity, R represents the rainfall rate, and A and b are constants.
Forecast models show significant sensitivity to humidity levels within the planetary boundary layer, or in the lowest levels of the atmosphere, which decreases with height.
Rainfall amounts can be estimated by weather radar.
The distribution has an upper limit due to droplet fragmentation.
There has been an increase in the number of heavy precipitation events over many areas during the past century, as well as an increase since the 1970s in the prevalence of droughts—especially in the tropics and subtropics.
McAllen, Texas is the city with the largest increase, 700%.
The rainfall will be extreme and flooding to be worse than a 1 in 10&nbsp;year event.
As commuters and commercial traffic cause pollution to build up over the course of the week, the likelihood of rain increases: it peaks by Saturday, after five days of weekday pollution has been built up.
Annually, the rain belt within the tropics marches northward by August, then moves back southward into the Southern Hemisphere by February and March.
As with all probability events, it is possible, though improbable, to have multiple "1 in 100&nbsp;Year Storms" in a single year.
Approximately  of water falls as precipitation each year across the globe with  of it over the oceans.
Occluded fronts usually form around mature low-pressure areas.
The El Niño-Southern Oscillation affects the precipitation distribution, by altering rainfall patterns across the western United States, Midwest, the Southeast, and throughout the tropics.
Windward sides face the east to northeast trade winds and receive much more rainfall; leeward sides are drier and sunnier, with less rain and less cloud cover.
The eastern half of the contiguous United States east of the 98th meridian, the mountains of the Pacific Northwest, and the Sierra Nevada range are the wetter portions of the nation, with average rainfall exceeding  per year.
On Venus, sulfuric acid virga evaporates  from the surface.
The Sierra Nevada range creates the same effect in North America forming the Great Basin and Mojave Deserts.
There is likely to be rain of various compositions in the upper atmospheres of the gas giants, as well as precipitation of liquid neon in the deep atmospheres.
The METAR code for rain is RA, while the coding for rain showers is SHRA.
Air resistance typically causes the water droplets in a cloud to remain stationary.
It provides suitable conditions for many types of ecosystems, as well as water for hydroelectric power plants and crop irrigation.
The most successful attempts at influencing weather involve cloud seeding, which include techniques used to increase winter precipitation over mountains and suppress hail.
One of the main uses of weather radar is to be able to assess the amount of precipitations fallen over large basins for hydrological purposes.
When a precipitation measurement is made, various networks exist across the United States and elsewhere where rainfall measurements can be submitted through the Internet, such as CoCoRAHS or GLOBE.
The Köppen classification depends on average monthly values of temperature and precipitation.
In Botswana, the Setswana word for rain, ''pula'', is used as the name of the national currency, in recognition of the economic importance of rain in this desert country.
They are widespread on Africa, and are also found in India, the northern parts of South America, Malaysia, and Australia.
This process is temperature dependent, as supercooled water droplets only exist in a cloud that is below freezing.
Various skill scores can be determined to measure the value of the rainfall forecast.
After the inner cylinder is filled, the amount inside it is discarded, then filled with the remaining rainfall in the outer cylinder until all the fluid in the outer cylinder is gone, adding to the overall total until the outer cylinder is empty.
Most of Australia is semi-arid or desert, making it the world's driest inhabited continent.
Ice caps see no rain at all, making Antarctica the world's driest continent.
In mid-latitudes, convective precipitation is intermittent and often associated with baroclinic boundaries such as cold fronts, squall lines, and warm fronts.
If one wants an accumulated rainfall over a time period, one has to add up all the accumulations from each grid box within the images during that time.
Its poleward progression is accelerated by the onset of the summer monsoon which is characterized by the development of lower air pressure (a thermal low) over the warmest part of Asia.
This is commonly referred to as the Marshall–Palmer law after the researchers who first characterized it.
Once a cyclone occludes, a '''tr'''ough '''o'''f '''w'''arm air '''al'''oft, or "trowal" for short, will be caused by strong southerly winds on its eastern periphery rotating aloft around its northeast, and ultimately northwestern, periphery (also known as the warm conveyor belt), forcing a surface trough to continue into the cold sector on a similar curve to the occluded front.
The urban heat island effect warms cities  to  above surrounding suburbs and rural areas.
The large size is explained by condensation on large smoke particles or by collisions between drops in small regions with particularly high content of liquid water.
Downwind of islands, bands of showers and thunderstorms can develop due to low level wind convergence downwind of the island edges.
A common biome in this area is the tundra which has a short summer thaw and a long frozen winter.
One millimeter of rainfall is the equivalent of one liter of water per square meter.
It can also form due to the lifting of advection fog during breezy conditions.
What separates rainfall from other precipitation types, such as ice pellets and snow, is the presence of a thick layer of air aloft which is above the melting point of water, which melts the frozen precipitation well before it reaches the ground.
To produce radar accumulations, rain rates over a point are estimated by using the value of reflectivity data at individual grid points.
The parameters are somewhat temperature-dependent, and the slope also scales with the rate of rainfall  (d in centimeters and R in millimetres per hour).
The Mediterranean climate regime resembles the climate of the lands in the Mediterranean Basin, parts of western North America, parts of Western and South Australia, in southwestern South Africa and in parts of central Chile.
Extrasolar planet OGLE-TR-56b in the constellation Sagittarius is hypothesized to have iron rain.
Coalescence occurs when water droplets fuse to create larger water droplets.
Several cultures have developed means of dealing with rain and have developed numerous protection devices such as umbrellas and raincoats, and diversion devices such as gutters and storm drains that lead rains to sewers.
Climate classification systems such as the Köppen climate classification system use average annual rainfall to help differentiate between differing climate regimes.
Humid subtropical climates lie on the east side continents, roughly between latitudes 20° and 40° degrees away from the equator.
Deserts are defined as areas with an average annual precipitation of less than  per year, or as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation.
Developing countries have noted that their populations show seasonal weight fluctuations due to food shortages seen before the first harvest, which occurs late in the wet season.
Air contains water vapor, and the amount of water in a given mass of dry air, known as the ''mixing ratio'', is measured in grams of water per kilogram of dry air (g/kg).
Offshore California, this has been noted in the wake of cold fronts.
Local climates vary considerably on each island due to their topography, divisible into windward (''Koolau'') and leeward (''Kona'') regions based upon location relative to the higher mountains.
Conductive cooling occurs when the air comes into contact with a colder surface, usually by being blown from one surface to another, for example from a liquid water surface to colder land.
The term ''1 in 10&nbsp;year storm'' describes a rainfall event which is rare and is only likely to occur once every 10&nbsp;years, so it has a 10&nbsp;percent likelihood any given year.
Satellite derived rainfall estimates use passive microwave instruments aboard polar orbiting as well as geostationary weather satellites to indirectly measure rainfall rates.
Water vapor normally begins to condense on condensation nuclei such as dust, ice, and salt in order to form clouds.
Deviations can occur for small droplets and during different rainfall conditions.
During the summer, the Southwest monsoon combined with Gulf of California and Gulf of Mexico moisture moving around the subtropical ridge in the Atlantic ocean bring the promise of afternoon and evening thunderstorms to the southern tier of the United States as well as the Great Plains.
During the fall, winter, and spring, Pacific storm systems bring most of Hawaii and the western United States much of their precipitation.
For those looking to measure rainfall the most inexpensively, a can that is cylindrical with straight sides will act as a rain gauge if left out in the open, but its accuracy will depend on what ruler is used to measure the rain with.
If there is a shallow near surface layer that is below freezing, freezing rain (rain which freezes on contact with surfaces in subfreezing environments) will result.
For instance, river flood control, sewer management and dam construction are all areas where planners use rainfall accumulation data.
Plastic gauges have markings on the inner cylinder down to  resolution, while metal gauges require use of a stick designed with the appropriate  markings.
The fine particulate matter produced by car exhaust and other human sources of pollution forms cloud condensation nuclei, leads to the production of clouds and increases the likelihood of rain.
Rhode Island is the state with the largest increase 104%.
The "length", or more accurately, "depth" being measured is the depth of rain water that would accumulate on a flat, horizontal and impermeable surface during a given amount of time, typically an hour.
Rainbands spawned near and ahead of cold fronts can be squall lines which are able to produce tornadoes.
Changes in precipitation and evaporation over the oceans are suggested by the decreased salinity of mid- and high-latitude waters (implying more precipitation), along with increased salinity in lower latitudes (implying less precipitation and/or more evaporation).
Tropical rainforests technically do not have dry or wet seasons, since their rainfall is equally distributed through the year.
Eastern portions of North and South America, northern Europe, and northern and central Asia have become wetter.
Tropical cyclones enhance precipitation across southern sections of the United States, as well as Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
In South America, the Andes mountain range blocks Pacific moisture that arrives in that continent, resulting in a desertlike climate just downwind across western Argentina.
Sulfuric acid is derived from natural sources such as volcanoes, and wetlands (sulfate reducing bacteria); and anthropogenic sources such as the combustion of fossil fuels, and mining where H2S is present.
Given the Earth's surface area, that means the globally averaged annual precipitation is .
The final droplet size distribution is an exponential distribution.
As a result, very cold climates see very little rainfall and are often known as polar deserts.
Rain forests are characterized by high rainfall, with definitions setting minimum normal annual rainfall between .
A tropical savanna is a grassland biome located in semi-arid to semi-humid climate regions of subtropical and tropical latitudes, with rainfall between  a year.
Rainforests are also responsible for 28% of the world's oxygen turnover.
Across Asia, a large annual rainfall minimum, composed primarily of deserts, stretches from the Gobi Desert in Mongolia west-southwest through western Pakistan (Balochistan) and Iran into the Arabian Desert in Saudi Arabia.
The term ''1 in 100&nbsp;year storm'' describes a rainfall event which is extremely rare and which will occur with a likelihood of only once in a century, so has a 1&nbsp;percent likelihood in any given year.
Rainbands are cloud and precipitation areas which are significantly elongated.
Rainfall is measured using rain gauges.
Savanna climates and areas with monsoon regimes have wet summers and dry winters.
Stratiform (a broad shield of precipitation with a relatively similar intensity) and dynamic precipitation (convective precipitation which is showery in nature with large changes in intensity over short distances) occur as a consequence of slow ascent of air in synoptic systems (on the order of cm/s), such as in the vicinity of cold fronts and near and poleward of surface warm fronts.
The northern half of Africa is occupied by the world's most extensive hot, dry region, the Sahara Desert.
Moisture is removed by orographic lift, leaving drier air (see katabatic wind) on the descending and generally warming, leeward side where a rain shadow is observed.
Rain may be harvested through the use of rainwater tanks; treated to potable use or for non-potable use indoors or for irrigation.
Over the contiguous United States, total annual precipitation increased at an average rate of 6.1&nbsp;percent since 1900, with the greatest increases within the East North Central climate region (11.6 percent per century) and the South (11.1&nbsp;percent).
