Richardson turned down the role of Estragon in Peter Hall's premiere of the English language version of Samuel Beckett's ''Waiting for Godot'' in 1955 and later reproached himself for missing the chance to be in "the greatest play of my generation".
Burrell, whom Richardson had asked to direct, was not up to the task – possibly, Miller speculates, because of nervous exhaustion from the recent traumas at the Old Vic.
He had consulted Gielgud, who dismissed the piece as rubbish, and even after discussing the play with the author, Richardson could not understand the play or the character.
Olivier would have preferred the roles to be cast the other way about, but Richardson did not wish to attempt Lear.
Lydia wanted Richardson to become a priest.
After his final Old Vic season he made two films in quick succession for Korda.
His performance parodied the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini so effectively that the film was immediately banned in Italy.
He worked in films throughout most of his career, and played more than sixty cinema roles.
He was the New Young Man of his time and I didn't like him."
Succeeding Gielgud as leading man at the Old Vic, Richardson had a varied season, in which there were conspicuous successes interspersed with critical failures.
Thorndike was joined by, among others, Harcourt Williams, Joyce Redman and Margaret Leighton.
The film did not prosper at the box-office despite good reviews,  an Academy Award for Best Actress for Havilland, and nominations for the director (William Wyler) and Richardson.
''The Fallen Idol'' was followed by Richardson's first Hollywood part.
Both actors won excellent notices, but the play, an allegory of Britain's decline, did not attract the public.
Richardson, though hardly ever satisfied with his own performances, evidently believed he had done well as Falstaff.
He filled it by accepting an invitation from Katharine Cornell and Guthrie McClintic to play Mercutio in their production of ''Romeo and Juliet'' on a US tour and on Broadway.
He resigned from the office post, just in time to avoid being dismissed, and enrolled at the Brighton School of Art.
The following year he was cast in his first starring role in a film, as the hero in ''The Return of Bulldog Drummond''.
During the run of ''Cyrano'', Richardson was knighted, to Olivier's undisguised envy.
For ''The Times'', he "was ideally equipped to make an ordinary character seem extraordinary or an extraordinary one seem ordinary".
The heyday of the touring actor-manager was nearing its end but some companies still flourished.
In 1967 he played Lord Emsworth on BBC television in dramatisations of PGWodehouse's Blandings Castle stories, with his wife playing Emsworth's bossy sister Constance, and Stanley Holloway as the butler, Beach.
He had a more reliable vehicle in Shaw's ''You Never Can Tell'' (1966) in which he played the philosopher-waiter William, and in the same year he had a great success as Sir Anthony Absolute in ''The Rivals''.
Throughout rehearsals the cast treated the love-triangle theme as one of despair, and were astonished to find themselves playing to continual laughter.
Back at the Royal Court in 1971 Richardson starred in John Osborne's ''West of Suez'', after which, in July 1972, he surprised many by joining Peggy Ashcroft in a drawing-room comedy, ''Lloyd George Knew My Father'' by William Douglas-Home.
Films in which Richardson appeared in the later 1970s and early 1980s include ''Rollerball'' (1975), ''The Man in the Iron Mask'' (1977) ''Dragonslayer'' (1981) in which he played a wizard and ''Time Bandits'' (1981) in which he played the Supreme Being.
The producer was Alexander Korda; the two men formed a long and mutually beneficial friendship.
In the second production of the festival his Macbeth, directed by Gielgud, was generally considered a failure.
He himself touched on this dichotomy in his variously reported comments that acting was "merely the art of keeping a large group of people from coughing" or, alternatively, "dreaming to order".
Richardson's final role was Don Alberto in ''Inner Voices'' by Eduardo De Filippo at the National in 1983.
Both Agate and Darlington commented on how the actor transformed the character from the bumbling workman to the magically changed creature on whom Titania dotes.
In 1931 he joined the Old Vic, playing mostly Shakespearean roles.
He had taken flying lessons during the 1930s and had logged 200 hours of flying time, but, though a notoriously reckless driver, he admitted to being a timid pilot.
Richardson's next stage role was in a starry revival of ''The School for Scandal'', as Sir Peter Teazle, directed by Gielgud in 1962.
His last stage part in the 1930s was Robert Johnson, an Everyman figure, in Priestley's ''Johnson Over Jordan'' directed by Basil Dean.
By 1944, with the tide of the war turning, Guthrie felt it time to re-establish the company in a London base, and invited Richardson to head it.
He was encouraged by Guthrie, who, having instigated the appointment of Richardson and Olivier, had come to resent their knighthoods and international fame.
In 1983 he was seen as Pfordten in Tony Palmer's ''Wagner''; this was a film of enormous length, starring Richard Burton as Richard Wagner and was noted at the time, and subsequently, for the cameo roles of three conspiratorial courtiers, played by Gielgud, Olivier and Richardson – the only film in which the three played scenes together.
''The Morning Post'' commented that it placed him in the first rank of Shakespearean actors.
For Richardson, parting company with the Old Vic brought the advantage of being free, for the first time, to earn substantial pay.
As well as Benson's, there were those of Sir John Martin-Harvey, Ben Greet, and, only slightly less prestigious, Charles Doran.
He received nominations and awards in the UK, Europe and the US for his stage and screen work from 1948 until his death, and beyond, with a posthumous Academy Award nomination for his final film, ''Greystoke''.
The critics began to notice Richardson and he gained some favourable reviews.
He played an amnesiac bank clerk who fears he may have committed murder.
As a teenager, the director Peter Hall saw the production; he said fifty years later, "Of the performances I've seen in my life I'm gladdest I saw that."
With his characteristic liking for switching between modern roles and the classics, his next stage part was Colonel Vershinin in ''Three Sisters'' in 1951.
His only reason for playing in the piece was the chance of acting with Gielgud, but both men quickly regretted their involvement.
The performances divided critical opinion.
Throughout the war Guthrie had striven to keep the Old Vic company going, even after German bombing in 1942 left the theatre a near-ruin.
The couple had met while both were in Paris, studying with the painter William-Adolphe Bouguereau.
A leading actor of a younger generation, Albert Finney, has said that Richardson was not really an actor at all, but a magician.
He remained with Doran's company for most of the next two years, gradually gaining more important roles, including Banquo in ''Macbeth'' and Mark Antony in ''Julius Caesar''.
His paternal grandmother died and left him £500, which, he later said, transformed his life.
Its profile had been raised considerably by Baylis's producer, Harcourt Williams, who in 1929 persuaded the young West End star John Gielgud to lead the drama company.
He played an old man who denounces the next-door family for murder and then realises he dreamt it but cannot persuade the police that he was wrong.
He then toured for three months in Eden Phillpotts's comedy ''Devonshire Cream'' with Jackson's company led by Cedric Hardwicke.
His final West End play was ''The Understanding'' (1982), a gentle comedy of late-flowering love.
With only a week to go before the first performance, the producer, Binkie Beaumont, asked him to stand down, and Gielgud was recruited in his place.
The play was a hit with the public, and when Ashcroft left after four months, Celia Johnson took over until May 1973, when Richardson handed over to Andrew Cruickshank in the West End.
There does not seem to have been a religious element, although Arthur was a dedicated Quaker, whose first two sons were brought up in that faith, whereas Lydia was a devout convert to Roman Catholicism, in which she raised Ralph.
There, his most celebrated roles included Peer Gynt and Falstaff.
He served at several bases in the south of England, and in April 1941, at the Royal Naval Air Station, Lee-on-Solent, he was able to welcome Olivier, newly commissioned as a temporary sub-lieutenant.
He said, "I've never been one of those chaps who scoff at films.
Richardson afterwards toured the play in Australia and Canada with his wife as co-star.
For the latter he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor.
For the Caedmon Audio label he re-created his role as ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' opposite Anna Massey as Roxane, and played the title role in a complete recording of ''Julius Caesar'', with a cast that included Anthony Quayle as Brutus, John Mills as Cassius and Alan Bates as Antony.
Mother and son had a variety of homes, the first of which was a bungalow converted from two railway carriages in Shoreham-by-Sea on the south coast of England.
For television, Richardson played Simeon in ''Jesus of Nazareth'' (1977), made studio recordings of ''No Man's Land'' (1978) and ''Early Days'' (1982), and was a guest in the 1981 Morecambe and Wise Christmas Show.
He had poor reviews for his Prospero in ''The Tempest'', judged too prosaic.
According to John Miller's biography, whatever underlying causes there may have been are unknown.
After ''No Man's Land'', Richardson once again turned to light comedy by Douglas-Home, from whom he commissioned ''The Kingfisher''.
Olivier was by now running the National Theatre, temporarily based at the Old Vic, but showed little desire to recruit his former colleague for any of the company's productions.
His second wife was the actress Meriel Forbes, a member of the Forbes-Robertson theatrical family.
An earlier biographer, Garry O'Connor, speculates that Arthur Richardson might have been having an extramarital affair.
Peter Hall said of Richardson, "I think he was the greatest actor I have ever worked with."
In 1933 he had his first speaking part in a film, playing the villain, Nigel Hartley, in ''The Ghoul'', which starred Cedric Hardwicke and Boris Karloff.
In the 1940s, together with Olivier and John Burrell, Richardson was the co-director of the Old Vic company.
The first production of the season was ''Henry IV, Part 1'', with Gielgud as Hotspur and Richardson as Prince Hal; the latter was thought by ''The Daily Telegraph'' "vivacious, but a figure of modern comedy rather than Shakespeare."
The critic David Benedictus wrote of Richardson's performance, "...he is choleric and gouty certainly, the script demands that he shall be, but his most engaging quality, his love for his son in spite of himself, shines through every line."
In 1942, on his way to visit his wife at the cottage where she was cared for by a devoted couple, Richardson crashed his motor-bike and was in hospital for several weeks.
He played a gendarme in an adaptation of ''Les Misérables'', and was soon entrusted with larger parts including Banquo in ''Macbeth'' and Malvolio in ''Twelfth Night''.
A legend, possibly apocryphal, grew that during the short run Richardson walked to the front of the stage one night and asked, "Is there a doctor in the house?"
In 1936 London Films released ''Things to Come'', in which Richardson played the swaggering warlord "The Boss".
He was still unsure what to do, when he saw Sir Frank Benson as Hamlet in a touring production.
Salaries at the Old Vic and the Festival were not large, and Richardson was glad of a job as an extra in the 1931 film ''Dreyfus''.
He had ambitions to be the first head of the National Theatre and had no intention of letting actors run it.
During the summer break between the Old Vic 1930–31 and 1931–32 seasons, Richardson played at the Malvern Festival, under the direction of his old Birmingham director, Ayliff.
Interspersed with his stage plays, Richardson made thirteen cinema films during the decade.
In May 1930 Richardson was given the role of Roderigo in ''Othello'' in what seemed likely to be a prestigious production, with Paul Robeson in the title role.
Back in the West End, Richardson was in another Sherriff play, ''The White Carnation'', in 1953, and in November of the same year he and Gielgud starred together in NCHunter's ''A Day by the Sea'', which ran at the Haymarket for 386 performances.
After he left the company, a series of leading roles took him to stardom in the West End and on Broadway.
And I just cannot believe in Mr Richardson wallowing in misery: his voice is the wrong colour."
Richardson's roles were Peer, Bluntschli, Richmond and Vanya; Olivier played the Button Moulder, Sergius, Richard and Astrov.
All the theatres in London dimmed their lights in tribute; the funeral Mass was at Richardson's favourite church, the Church of our Lady of the Assumption and St Gregory, in Soho; he was buried in Highgate Cemetery; and the following month there was a memorial service in Westminster Abbey.
The notices for the production were mixed; those for Richardson's next West End play were uniformly dreadful.
As a pupil at a series of schools he was uninterested in most subjects and was an indifferent scholar.
'''Sir Ralph David Richardson''' (19 December 1902&nbsp;– 10 October 1983) was an English actor who, along with his contemporaries John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier, dominated the British stage of the mid-20th century.
For Decca Records Richardson recorded the narration for Prokofiev's ''Peter and the Wolf'', and for RCA the superscriptions for Vaughan Williams's ''Sinfonia antartica'' – both with the London Symphony Orchestra, the Prokofiev conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent and the Vaughan Williams by André Previn.
The piece was to open in February 1949 at Richardson's favourite theatre, the Haymarket.
A revival of ''Six Characters in Search of an Author'' in 1963 was judged by the critic Sheridan Morley to have been a high-point of the actor's work in the 1960s.
Tynan wrote in ''The New Yorker'' that Richardson "made me feel that I have known this man all my life and that I have never met anyone who more adroitly buttonholed me while keeping me firmly at arm's length."
His studies there convinced him that he lacked creativity, and that his draughtsmanship was not good enough.
Arthur Richardson had been senior art master at Cheltenham Ladies' College from 1893.
The younger man received the accolade six months later, by which time the days of the triumvirate were numbered.
Tynan, who could be brutally critical when he thought Richardson miscast, nevertheless thought there was something godlike about him, "should you imagine the Almighty to be a whimsical, enigmatic magician, capable of fearful blunders, sometimes inexplicably ferocious, at other times dazzling in his innocence and benignity".
During the war Richardson compered occasional morale-boosting shows at the Royal Albert Hall and elsewhere, and made one short film and three full-length ones, including ''The Silver Fleet'', in which he played a Dutch Resistance hero, and ''The Volunteer'', a propaganda film in which he appeared as himself.
He paid a local theatrical manager, Frank R Growcott, ten shillings a week to be a member of his company and be taught the craft of an actor.
The first three productions met with acclaim from reviewers and audiences; ''Uncle Vanya'' had a mixed reception.
Richardson left the run of ''Yellow Sands'' in March 1928 and rejoined Ayliff, playing Pygmalion in ''Back to Methuselah'' at the Royal Court Theatre; also in the cast was a former colleague from the Birmingham Repertory, Laurence Olivier.
While on that tour he married Muriel Hewitt, a young member of Doran's company, known to him as "Kit".
The play was not liked by audiences and ran for only forty-seven performances, but Richardson, in Agate's phrase, "ran away with the piece", and established himself as a West End star.
Hall and others tried hard to get him to play the part again, but referring to it he said, "Those things I've done in which I've succeeded a little bit, I'd hate to do again."
In 1930 Richardson, with some misgivings, accepted an invitation to join The Old Vic company.
Richardson's film career began as an extra in 1931.
After it closed, in May 1939, he did not act on stage for more than five years.
The director David Ayliff, son of Richardson's and Olivier's mentor, said, "Ralph was a natural actor, he couldn't stop being a perfect actor; Olivier did it through sheer hard work and determination."
The pay, ten shillings a week, was attractive, but office life was not; he lacked concentration, frequently posting documents to the wrong people as well as engaging in pranks that alarmed his superiors.
His last radio broadcast was in 1982 in a documentary programme about Little Tich, whom he had watched at the Brighton Hippodrome before the First World War.
Richardson then went to the US to appear in Sidney Lumet's film adaptation of ''Long Day's Journey into Night'', alongside Katharine Hepburn.
The second season, in 1945, featured two double-bills.
There is both comedy and pain in the piece: the critic Michael Coveney called their performance "the funniest double-act in town", but Peter Hall said of Richardson, "I do not think any other actor could fill Hirst with such a sense of loneliness and creativity as Ralph does.
The film bears the superscription, "Dedicated to Ralph Richardson 1902–1983 – In Loving Memory"
In 1907 the family split up; there was no divorce or formal separation, but the two elder boys, Christopher and Ambrose, remained with their father and Lydia left them, taking Ralph with her.
He was thrilled, and felt at once that he must become an actor.
From December of that year they were members of the main repertory company in Birmingham.
Richardson so liked his part that he decided to play it in the West End, with Ashcroft as Sloper's daughter Catherine.
Some critics felt the play was too slight for its two stars, but Harold Hobson thought Richardson found unsuspected depths in the character of the ostensibly phlegmatic General Boothroyd.
For his next four stage productions, Richardson was at the Haymarket.
He did not attempt Chekhov again for more than a quarter of a century.
Richardson also recorded some English Romantic poetry, including ''The Rime of the Ancient Mariner'' and poems by Keats and Shelley for the label.
The theatre may give you big chances, but the cinema teaches you the details of craftsmanship."
Here is something better than virtuosity in character-acting – the spirit of the part shining through the actor."
Richardson left the art school in 1920, and considered how else he might make a career.
It was for the same reason, in O'Connor's view, that he never attempted the title roles in ''Hamlet'' or ''King Lear''.
''Father Carving a Statue'' (1964) by Graham Greene was short-lived.
The production was a critical and box-office success, and played at the Old Vic, in the West End, at the Lyttelton Theatre in the new National Theatre complex, on Broadway and on television, over a period of three years.
Rehearsals were chaotic.
The following year he worked with Olivier again, playing Buckingham to Olivier's Richard in the 1955 film of ''Richard III''.
''The Times'' said that the triumvirate's years were the greatest in the Old Vic's history; as ''The Guardian'' put it, "the governors summarily sacked them in the interests of a more mediocre company spirit".
At the beginning of 1931 Baylis re-opened Sadler's Wells Theatre with a production of ''Twelfth Night'' starring Gielgud as Malvolio and Richardson as Sir Toby Belch.
Richardson thought himself temperamentally unsuited to the great tragic roles, and most reviewers agreed, but to critics of several generations he was peerless in classic comedies.
He emphasised the plausible charm of the murderous Iago to a degree that Agate thought "very good Richardson, but indifferent Shakespeare", whereas ''The Times'' said, "He never stalked or hissed like a plain villain, and, in fact, we have seldom seen a man smile and smile and be a villain so adequately."
Agate wrote that most of those who had played the part hitherto "seem to have thought Bottom, with the ass's head on, was the same Bottom, only funnier.
The ostensible cause of the couple's separation was a row over Lydia's choice of wallpaper for her husband's study.
For much of 1929 he toured South Africa in Gerald Lawrence's company in three period costume plays, including ''The School for Scandal'', in which he played Joseph Surface.
After that, Lumet was sparing with suggestions.
Richardson's ''Timon of Athens'' in his 1956 return to the Old Vic was well received, as was his Broadway appearance in ''The Waltz of the Toreadors'' for which he was nominated for a Tony Award in 1957.
Richardson was born in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the third son and youngest child of Arthur Richardson and his wife Lydia (née Russell).
In 1967 he again played Shylock; this was the last time he acted in a Shakespeare play on stage.
Looking back in 1971, Bernard Levin wrote that the Old Vic company of 1944 to 1947 "was probably the most illustrious that has ever been assembled in this country".
It closed after four weeks, the last in a succession of West End productions in which Richardson appeared to much acclaim but which were box-office failures.
The direction was criticised by reviewers, but Richardson's performance won high praise.
Richardson's last films – one for television and two for the cinema – were released after his death.
Richardson began the 1960s with a failure.
Kenneth Tynan judged any Falstaff against Richardson's, which he considered "matchless", and Gielgud judged "definitive".
These recordings were later released commercially on disc.
''The Heiress'' had been a Broadway play before it was a film.
After a short run in ''The Silent Knight'', described by Miller as "a Hungarian fantasy in rhymed verse set in the fifteenth century", Richardson returned to the Old Vic for the 1937–38 season, playing Bottom once again and switching parts in ''Othello'', playing the title role, with Olivier as Iago.
In ''The Observer'', George Melly wrote, "As for Sir Ralph as Dr Rank, he grows from the ageing elegant cynic of his first appearance (it's even a pleasure to watch him remove his top hat) to become the heroic dying stoic of his final exit without in any way forcing the pace."
''The Times'' commented, "Mr Ralph Richardson makes Drummond as brave and stupid on the screen as he is in print."
''The Times'' thought Olivier's Astrov "a most distinguished portrait" and Richardson's Vanya "the perfect compound of absurdity and pathos".
During this period, Richardson played Dr Watson in an American/BBC radio co-production of Sherlock Holmes stories, with Gielgud as Holmes and Orson Welles as the evil Professor Moriarty.
For television he recorded studio versions of two plays in which he had appeared on stage: ''Johnson Over Jordan'' (1965) and ''Twelfth Night'' (1968).
With Sybil Thorndike as a guest star and Richardson as Ralph, ''The Knight of the Burning Pestle'' was a hit with audiences and critics, as was a revival of ''Twelfth Night'', with Edith Evans as Viola and Richardson again playing Sir Toby, finishing the season to renewed praise.
Celia Johnson was cast as his co-star, but died suddenly just before the first night.
Richardson would introduce colleagues to his ferrets by name, ride at high speed on his powerful motor-bike in his seventies, have a parrot flying round his study eating his pencils, or take a pet mouse out for a stroll, but behind such unorthodox behaviour there was a closely guarded self who remained an enigma to even his closest colleagues.
It was a conspicuous failure.
During the decade, Richardson made numerous sound recordings.
After one long run in ''The Heiress'', Richardson appeared in another, RCSherriff's ''Home at Seven'', in 1950.
In 1919, aged sixteen, Richardson took a post as office boy with the Brighton branch of the Liverpool and Victoria insurance company.
There are more graceful players than he upon the stage; there is none who has been so touched by Grace."
What a Lovely War'' and ''Khartoum'' included Olivier, but he and Richardson did not appear in the same scenes, and never met during the filming.
It ran for six months, and would have lasted much longer had Johnson not withdrawn, leaving Richardson unwilling to rehearse the piece with anyone else.
In 1945 the company toured Germany, where they were seen by many thousands of Allied servicemen; they also appeared at the Comédie-Française theatre in Paris, the first foreign company to be given that honour.
Comparing the two, Hobson said that Olivier always made the audience feel inferior, and Richardson always made them feel superior.
His performance won critical praise, but the rest of the cast were less well received.
In Coveney's phrase, "His oddness was ever startling and never hardened into mere eccentricity."
Richardson's other roles in the season were Inspector Goole in ''An Inspector Calls'', Face in ''The Alchemist'' and John of Gaunt in ''Richard II'', which he directed, with Alec Guinness in the title role.
For the following season Williams wanted Richardson to join, with a view to succeeding Gielgud from 1931 to 1932.
During the run Muriel Hewitt began to show early symptoms of encephalitis lethargica, a progressive and ultimately fatal illness.
In Miller's words, "Carol Reed's sensitive direction drew faultless performances not just from Ralph as Baines (the butler and mistakenly suspected murderer), but also from Michèle Morgan as his mistress, Sonia Dresdel as his cold-hearted wife, and especially from Bobby Henrey as the distraught boy, Felipe."
The director, Tyrone Guthrie, wanted to experiment with the theory that Iago's villainy is driven by suppressed homosexual love for Othello.
He was not known for his portrayal of the great tragic roles in the classics, preferring character parts in old and new plays.
A small troupe toured the provinces, with Sybil Thorndike at its head.
The high profile of the two star actors did not endear them to the new chairman of the Old Vic governors, Lord Esher.
Richardson had gained a national reputation as a great actor while at the Old Vic; films gave him the opportunity to reach an international audience.
Occasionally his precision was greater than directors wished, as when, in ''Khartoum'', he insisted on wearing a small black finger-stall because the real Gladstone had worn one following an injury.
Olivier played the warrior Hotspur in the first and the doddering Justice Shallow in the second.
Frank Muir said of him, "It's the Ralphdom of Ralph that one has to cling to; he wasn't really quite like other people."
In 1964 Richardson was the voice of General Haig in the twenty-six-part BBC documentary series ''The Great War''.
Richardson wrote to all four managers: the first two did not reply; Greet saw him but had no vacancy; Doran engaged him, at a wage of £3 a week.
Over the next two years Richardson appeared in six plays in London ranging from ''Peter Pan'' (as Mr Darling and Captain Hook) to ''Cornelius'', an allegorical play written for and dedicated to him by JBPriestley.
Richardson was not known for his political views.
Kit was at that point mobile enough to visit him, but later in the year her condition worsened and in October she died.
Enid Bagnold's play ''The Last Joke'' was savaged by the critics ("a meaningless jumble of pretentious whimsy" was one description).
It was an experimental piece, using music (by Benjamin Britten) and dance as well as dialogue, and was another production in which Richardson was widely praised but which did not prosper at the box-office.
A doctor stood up, and Richardson sadly said to him, "Doctor, isn't this a terrible play?"
Gielgud played Spooner, a down-at-heel sponger and opportunist, and Richardson was Hirst, a prosperous but isolated and vulnerable author.
Esher terminated their contracts while both were out of the country, and they and Burrell were said to have "resigned".
The triumvirate secured the New Theatre for their first season and recruited a company.
