There are some references to the urban soundscape: brief impressions of street music, with the sound of the barrel organ mimicked by the orchestra; the characteristic chant of the lavender-seller; the jingle of hansom cabs; and the chimes of Big Ben played by harp and clarinet.
Frogley writes of this period that Vaughan Williams was considerably older than most of his comrades, and "the back-breaking labour of dangerous night-time journeys through mud and rain must have been more than usually punishing".
On 19 September, at a crowded memorial service, the ashes were interred near the burial plots of Purcell and Stanford in the north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey.
In addition to the music for ''Scott of the Antarctic'', Vaughan Williams composed incidental music for eleven other films, from ''49th Parallel'' (1941) to ''The Vision of William Blake'' (1957).
Between the mid-1890s and the late 1950s Vaughan Williams set more than eighty poems for voice and piano accompaniment.
After his anti-war cantata ''Dona nobis pacem'' in 1936 he did not complete another work of substantial length until late in 1941, when the first version of the Fifth Symphony was completed.
The composer dismissed such interpretations, and insisted that the work was absolute music, with no programme of any kind; nonetheless, some of those close to him, including Foss and Boult, remained convinced that something of the troubled spirit of the age was captured in the work.
The only work that the composer designated as an opera is the comedy ''Sir John in Love'' (1924–28).
The extent to which it is a true symphony has been debated; in a 2013 study, Alain Frogley describes it as a hybrid work, with elements of symphony, oratorio and cantata.
By comparison with his output in other genres, Vaughan Williams's music for chamber ensembles and solo instruments forms a small part of his oeuvre.
Vaughan Williams is among the best-known British symphonists, noted for his very wide range of moods, from stormy and impassioned to tranquil, from mysterious to exuberant.
Nevertheless, a university education was expected of him, and in 1892 he temporarily left the RCM and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he spent three years, studying music and history.
There were no children of the marriage.
Vaughan Williams spent three months in Paris in the winter of 1907–08, working with him four or five times each week.
Twenty years later, though in his sixties and devotedly married, he was reinvigorated by a love affair with a much younger woman, who later became his second wife.
He and his wife travelled extensively in Europe, and in 1954 he visited the US once again, having been invited to lecture at Cornell and other universities and to conduct.
In addition to composition he occupied himself in several capacities during the first decade of the century.
The continual noise of the guns damaged his hearing, and led to deafness in his later years.
The quintet (1912) was written two years after the success of the ''Tallis Fantasia'', with which it has elements in common, both in terms of instrumental layout and the mood of rapt contemplation.
In 1953 the composer said that of his choral works ''Sancta Civitas'' was his favourite.
In 1942 Michael Wood died suddenly of heart failure.
It was the year of Queen Elizabeth's coronation; Vaughan Williams's contribution was an arrangement of the Old Hundredth psalm tune, and a new setting of "O taste and see" from Psalm 34, performed at the service in Westminster Abbey.
The children were under the care of a nurse, Sara Wager, who instilled in them not only polite manners and good behaviour but also liberal social and philosophical opinions.
''The Record Guide'' (1955) contained nine pages of listings of his music on disc, compared with five for Walton, and four apiece for Elgar and Britten.
Vaughan Williams conducted a handful of recordings for gramophone and radio.
Vaughan Williams refused a knighthood at least once, and declined the post of Master of the King's Music after Elgar's death.
Vaughan Williams had been working on and off for many years on his operatic version of Bunyan's ''The Pilgrim's Progress''.
Schwartz comments that the symphony, in its "unified presentation of widely heterogeneous elements", is "very much like the city itself".
None of these works have rivalled the popularity of the symphonies or the short orchestral works mentioned above.
''Grove'' lists a dozen more, composed between 1905 and 1935.
He was musically a late developer, not finding his true voice until his late thirties; his studies in 1907–08 with the French composer Maurice Ravel helped him clarify the textures of his music and free it from Teutonic influences.
Ravel declared Vaughan Williams to be "my only pupil who does not write my music"; nevertheless, commentators including Kennedy, Adams, Hugh Ottaway and Alain Frogley find Vaughan Williams's instrumental textures lighter and sharper in the music written after his return from Paris, such as the String Quartet in G minor, ''On Wenlock Edge'', the Overture to ''The Wasps'' and ''A Sea Symphony''.
In the years between his return from Paris in 1908 and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Vaughan Williams increasingly established himself as a figure in British music.
Among those with whom Vaughan Williams became friendly at Cambridge were the philosophers G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell, the historian G. M. Trevelyan and the musician Hugh Allen.
For some of his songs the composer expands the accompaniment to include two or more string instruments in addition to the piano; they include ''On Wenlock Edge'', and the Chaucer cycle ''Merciless Beauty'' (1921), judged by an anonymous contemporary critic as "surely among the best of modern English songs".
''Grove'' lists twenty-four pieces under the heading "Chamber and instrumental"; three are early, unpublished works.
''Hugh the Drover, or Love in the Stocks'' (completed 1919, premiere 1924) has a libretto, by the writer and theatre critic Harold Child, which was described by ''The Stage'' as "replete with folksy, Cotswold village archetypes".
In his 1964 analysis of the nine, Schwartz found it striking that no two of the symphonies are alike, either in structure or in mood.
On their return they settled in London, originally in Westminster and, from 1905, in Chelsea.
Despite his age—he was forty-two in 1914—Vaughan Williams volunteered for military service on the outbreak of the First World War.
Vaughan Williams had a modest private income, which in his early career he supplemented with a variety of musical activities.
She and Vaughan Williams grew close, and in June 1897, after he had left Cambridge, they became engaged to be married.
''A London Symphony'' (1911–13) which the composer later observed might more accurately be called a "symphony by a Londoner", is for the most part not overtly pictorial in its presentation of London.
The degree to which the French composer influenced the Englishman's style is debated.
Over this period Vaughan Williams composed steadily, producing songs, choral music, chamber works and orchestral pieces, gradually finding the beginnings of his mature style.
His comparatively few chamber works are not among his better known compositions.
His works include operas, ballets, chamber music, secular and religious vocal pieces and orchestral compositions including nine symphonies,  written over nearly fifty years.
His academic and sporting achievements there were satisfactory, and the school encouraged his musical development.
He graduated as Bachelor of Music in 1894 and Bachelor of Arts the following year.
Stanford, who had been adventurous in his younger days, had grown deeply conservative; he clashed vigorously with his modern-minded pupil.
Vaughan Williams's choral works for concert performance include settings of both secular and religious words.
Vaughan Williams knew the Savoy operas well, and his music for this piece was and is widely regarded as in the Sullivan vein.
Two days later, after a private funeral at Golder's Green, he was cremated.
His vocal works include hymns, folk-song arrangements and large-scale choral pieces.
The work is inspired by William Blake's ''Illustrations of the Book of Job'' (1826).
The popularity of his most accessible works, particularly the ''Tallis Fantasia'' and ''The Lark Ascending'' increased, but a wide public also became aware of what a reviewer of Bridcut's film called "a genius driven by emotion".
It is an almost verbatim setting of J. M. Synge's 1902 play of the same name, depicting family tragedy in an Irish fishing village.
Among the most familiar of his other concert works are ''Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis'' (1910) and ''The Lark Ascending'' (1914).
Always committed to music-making for the whole community, he helped found the amateur Leith Hill Music Festival in 1905, and was appointed its principal conductor, a post he held until 1953.
After unsuccessfully seeking lessons from Sir Edward Elgar, he contemplated studying with Vincent d'Indy in Paris.
In 1921 he succeeded Allen as conductor of the Bach Choir, London.
Great Uncle Charles thinks it took longer: but we need not worry about it, for it is equally wonderful either way".
Ravel took few pupils, and was known as a demanding taskmaster for those he agreed to teach.
They commented that the composer's vision is expressed in two main contrasting moods: "the one contemplative and trance-like, the other pugnacious and sinister".
All the composer's major works and many of the minor ones have been recorded.
The earliest to survive is "A Cradle Song", to Coleridge's words, from about 1894.
This softened into "a cheerful agnosticism", and he continued to attend church regularly to avoid upsetting the family.
He had always been interested in them, and now followed the example of a recent generation of enthusiasts such as Cecil Sharp and Lucy Broadwood in going into the English countryside noting down and transcribing songs traditionally sung in various locations.
''The Pilgrim's Progress'' (1951), the composer's last opera, was the culmination of more than forty years' intermittent work on the theme of Bunyan's religious allegory.
Beneath Stanford's bluster lay a recognition of Vaughan Williams's talent and a desire to help the young man correct his opaque orchestration and extreme predilection for modal music.
The Ninth, premiered at a Royal Philharmonic Society concert conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent in April 1958, puzzled critics with its sombre, questing tone, and did not immediately achieve the recognition it later gained.
He held the position at St Barnabas, in the inner London district of South Lambeth, from 1895 to 1899 for a salary of £50 a year.
Vaughan Williams, like most leading British 20th-century composers, was not drawn to the solo piano and wrote little for it.
A. Fuller Maitland of ''The Times'' and Samuel Langford of ''The Manchester Guardian'', were strong in their praise.
The former include ''Toward the Unknown Region'' to words by Whitman (composed 1904–06), ''Five Tudor Portraits'', words by John Skelton (1935), and the Shakespearean ''Serenade to Music'' (in its alternative version for chorus and orchestra, 1938).
Holst's death was a severe personal and professional blow to Vaughan Williams; the two had been each other's closest friends and musical advisers since their college days.
This, together with his love of Tudor and Stuart music, helped shape his compositional style for the rest of his career.
The final symphony, the Ninth, was completed in late 1957 and premiered in April 1958, four months before the composer's death.
Michael Kennedy characterises Vaughan Williams's music as a strongly individual blending of the modal harmonies familiar from folk‐song with the French influence of Ravel and Debussy.
In 1919 he accepted an invitation from Hugh Allen, who had succeeded Parry as director, to teach composition at the RCM; he remained on the faculty of the college for the next twenty years.
The first three symphonies, to which Vaughan Williams assigned titles rather than numbers,  form a sub-group within the nine, having programmatic elements, absent from the later six.
The piece has not been seen frequently since its premiere, but was revived in a student production at the RCM in 1937.
Saylor sums up the critical consensus that the work is something between "a frothy romantic comedy and a satirical fairy-tale", and not quite successful in either category.
Although the organ was not his preferred instrument, the only post he ever held for an annual salary was as a church organist and choirmaster.
Some English musicians who had not fought in the First World War misunderstood the work and heard only the slow tempi and quiet tone, failing to notice the character of a requiem in the music and mistaking the piece for a rustic idyll.
It is based on Shakespeare's ''The Merry Wives of Windsor''.
In the view of the critic Richard Traubner the piece is a cross between traditional ballad opera and the works of Puccini and Ravel, "with rhapsodic results."
Kennedy comments that the music "is not a major work but it is fun."
After a compulsory course in harmony with Francis Edward Gladstone, professor of organ, counterpoint and harmony, he studied organ with Walter Parratt and composition with Hubert Parry.
Vaughan Williams was born at Down Ampney, Gloucestershire, the third child and younger son of the vicar, the Reverend Arthur Vaughan Williams (1834–1875) and his wife, Margaret, ''née'' Wedgwood (1842–1937).
Described as "one of the strangest journeys ever undertaken in music", it is marked ''pianissimo'' throughout its 10–12-minute duration.
The composer firmly contradicted any notions that the work was programmatical in any respect, and Kennedy calls attempts to give the work "a meretricious programme ... a poor compliment to its musical vitality and self-sufficiency".
Margaret Vaughan Williams was a great-granddaughter of Josiah Wedgwood and niece of Charles Darwin.
Throughout his life he sought to be of service to his fellow citizens, and believed in making music as available as possible to everybody.
While at Charterhouse Vaughan Williams found that religion meant less and less to him, and for a while he was an atheist.
Vaughan Williams wrote four concertos: for violin (1925), piano (1926), oboe (1944) and tuba (1954); another concertante piece is his Romance for harmonica, strings and piano (1951).
The music Vaughan Williams wrote for the BBC to celebrate the end of the war, ''Thanksgiving for Victory'', was marked by what the critic Edward Lockspeiser called the composer's characteristic avoidance of "any suggestion of rhetorical pompousness".
There is widespread agreement among commentators that this was partly due to the composer's poor choice of librettists for some, though not all, of his operas.
Many composers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries wrote sentimental works for female voice; by contrast, songs by Vaughan Williams's songs such as "The Vagabond" from ''Songs of Travel'', to words by Robert Louis Stevenson, are "a particularly masculine breath of fresh air" (Fuller), "virile open-air verses" (Kennedy).
In 2002 the magazine ''Gramophone'' described the second quartet as a masterpiece that should be, but is not, part of the international chamber repertory.
''Old King Cole'' (1923) is a humorous ballet.
The work has been criticised for a preponderance of slow music and stretches lacking in dramatic action, but some commentators believe the work to be one of Vaughan Williams's supreme achievements.
''A Sea Symphony'' (1910), the only one of the series to include a part for full choir, differs from most earlier choral symphonies in that the choir sings in all the movements.
Despite the internal tensions caused by the deliberate conflict of modality in places, the work is generally serene in character, and was particularly well received for the comfort it gave at a time of all-out war.
Many had seen the Fifth, composed when he was seventy, as a valedictory work, and the turbulent, troubled Sixth came as a shock.
The ballet ''Job: A Masque for Dancing'' (1930) and the Fourth Symphony (1935) surprised the public and critics.
The composer was dismissive of programmatic theories: "It never seems to occur to people that a man might just want to write a piece of music."
He described his early songs as "more or less simple and popular in character", and the musicologist Sophie Fuller describes this simplicity and popularity as consistent throughout his career.
Live concert tapings include the ''Serenade to Music'', and the Fifth Symphony, recorded in 1951 and 1952, respectively.
In this, as in many other things in his life, he was, according to his biographer Michael Kennedy, "that extremely English product the natural nonconformist with a conservative regard for the best tradition".
In 1949 he wrote of their relationship, "Holst declared that his music was influenced by that of his friend: the converse is certainly true."
But commentators have heard—and the composer never denied or confirmed—some social comment in sinister echoes at the end of the scherzo and an orchestral outburst of pain and despair at the opening of the finale.
She was a poet, and had approached the composer with a proposed scenario for a ballet.
The Eighth, though wistful in parts, is predominantly lighthearted in tone; it was received enthusiastically at its premiere in 1956, given by the Hallé Orchestra under the dedicatee, Sir John Barbirolli.
From his mature years, there survive for standard chamber groupings two string quartets (1908–09, revised 1921; and 1943–44), a "phantasy" string quintet (1912), and a sonata for violin and piano (1954).
The First World War, in which he served in the army, had a lasting emotional effect.
Its sheer length—about eighty minutes—was unprecedented for an English symphonic work, and within its thoroughly tonal construction it contains harmonic dissonances that pre-echo the early works of Stravinsky which were soon to follow.
Throughout the 1920s Vaughan Williams continued to compose, conduct and teach.
Ursula recorded that during air raids all three slept in the same room in adjacent beds, holding hands for comfort.
The texts of his lectures were published under the title ''National Music'' in 1934; they sum up his artistic and social credo more fully than anything he had published previously, and remained in print for most of the remainder of the century.
Although versions of the play had already been set by Nicolai, Verdi, and Holst, Vaughan Williams's is distinctive for its greater emphasis on the love music rather than on the robust comedy.
Kennedy describes it as "like a musical state occasion".
Vaughan Williams was born to a well-to-do family with strong moral views and a progressive social outlook.
Throughout its course one is never sure whether one is listening to something very old or very new".
During the war Vaughan Williams stopped writing music, and after returning to civilian life he took some time before feeling ready to compose new works.
Hubert Foss dubbed it "The Romantic" and Frank Howes called it "The Fascist".
The first mood, generally predominant in the composer's output, was more popular, as audiences, preferred "the stained-glass beauty of the Tallis Fantasia, the direct melodic appeal of the ''Serenade to Music'', the pastoral poetry of ''The Lark Ascending'', and the grave serenity of the Fifth Symphony".
He wrote eight works for stage performance between 1919 and 1951.
In 1888 he organised a concert in the school hall, which included a performance of his G major Piano Trio (now lost) with the composer as violinist.
Vaughan Williams's liking for long ''tableaux'', however disadvantageous in his operas, worked to successful effect in this ballet.
The earliest recording of a Vaughan Williams opera was ''Hugh the Drover'', in an abridged version conducted by Sargent in 1924.
From September to December of that year he was in the US as a visiting lecturer at Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania.
There is a recording of Vaughan Williams conducting the ''St Matthew Passion'' with his Leith Hill Festival forces.
''On Christmas Night'' (1926), a masque by Adolph Bolm and Vaughan Williams, combines singing, dancing and mime.
His two best known hymn tunes, both from c. 1905, are "Down Ampney" to the words "Come Down, O Love Divine", and "''Sine nomine''" "For All the Saints".
The song "Linden Lea" became the first of his works to appear in print, published in the magazine ''The Vocalist'' in April 1902 and then as separate sheet music.
The first quartet was written soon after Vaughan Williams's studies in Paris with Ravel, whose influence is strongly evident.
Having been in excellent health, Vaughan Williams died suddenly in the early hours of 26 August 1958 at Hanover Terrace.
In 1880, when he was eight, he took a correspondence course in music from Edinburgh University and passed the associated examinations.
For a rising composer it was important to receive performances at the big provincial music festivals, which generated publicity and royalties.
''The Bridal Day'' (1938–39) is a masque, to a scenario by Ursula, combining voice, mime and dance, first performed in 1953 on BBC television.
Vaughan Williams said in his later years that this was his favourite of the symphonies.
From 1904 to 1906 he was music editor of a new hymn-book, ''The English Hymnal'', of which he later said, "I now know that two years of close association with some of the best (as well as some of the worst) tunes in the world was a better musical education than any amount of sonatas and fugues".
In 1938 Vaughan Williams met Ursula Wood (1911–2007), the wife of an army officer, Captain (later Lieutenant-Colonel) Michael Forrester Wood.
The first three movements are for orchestra alone; a wordless solo soprano or tenor voice is added in the finale.
Most of the orchestral recordings have been by British orchestras and conductors, but notable non-British conductors who have made recordings of Vaughan Williams's works include Herbert von Karajan, Leonard Bernstein, Leopold Stokowski, and, most frequently, André Previn, who conducted the London Symphony Orchestra in the first complete stereo cycle of the symphonies, recorded between 1967 and 1972.
He did not greatly like the piano, and was pleased to begin violin lessons the following year.
His studio recordings are the overture to ''The Wasps'', and the ballet ''Old King Cole'' (both made in 1925), ''Dona Nobis Pacem'' (1936), and the Fourth Symphony (1937).
In his second spell at the RCM (1895–96) Vaughan Williams got to know a fellow student, Gustav Holst, who became a lifelong friend.
In 1899 Vaughan Williams passed the examination for the degree of Doctor of Music at Cambridge; the title was formally conferred on him in 1901.
Vaughan Williams's music is often described as visionary; Kennedy cites the masque ''Job'' and the Fifth and Ninth Symphonies.
In the 21st century this neglect has been reversed.
The piece was revived the following year, but was still not a great success.
He idolised Parry, and recalled in his ''Musical Autobiography'' (1950):
The seventh—officially unnumbered, and titled ''Sinfonia antartica''—divided opinion; the score is a reworking of music Vaughan Williams had written for the 1948 film ''Scott of the Antarctic'', and some critics thought it not truly symphonic.
Saylor describes the work as a "dramatic hodgepodge" which has not attracted the interest of later performers.
The work is in five movements, with wordless vocal lines for female chorus and solo soprano in the first and last movements.
Since the 1960s there have been stereophonic recordings of ''Hugh the Drover'', ''Sir John in Love'', ''Riders to the Sea'', ''The Poisoned Kiss'', and ''The Pilgrim's Progress''.
Record companies with extensive lists of Vaughan Williams recordings include EMI, Decca, Chandos, Hyperion and Naxos.
Despite his agnosticism Vaughan Williams composed many works for church performance.
The society has promoted premieres of neglected works, and has its own record label, Albion Records.
The other church works include a ''Magnificat'' and ''Nunc Dimittis'' (1925), a Mass (1920–21) and a ''Te Deum'' (1928).
The seventh symphony, the ''Sinfonia antartica'' (1952), a by-product of the composer's score for ''Scott of the Antarctic'', has consistently divided critical opinion on whether it can be properly classed as a symphony.
It is as a symphonist that Vaughan Williams is best known.
After leaving the university he returned to complete his training at the RCM.
In 1910 his music featured at two of the largest and most prestigious festivals, with the premieres of the ''Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis'' at the Three Choirs Festival in Gloucester Cathedral in September and ''A Sea Symphony'' at the Leeds Festival the following month.
The mood is more sombre than that of the Eighth; ''Grove'' calls its mood "at once heroic and contemplative, defiant and wistfully absorbed".
The piece was first given in Chicago by Bolm's company; the London premiere was in 1935.
Vaughan Williams later observed, "What one really learns from an Academy or College is not so much from one's official teachers as from one's fellow-students&nbsp;... we discussed every subject under the sun from the lowest note of the double bassoon to the philosophy of ''Jude the Obscure''".
He went on composing through his seventies and eighties, producing his last symphony months before his death at the age of eighty-five.
Bartók was among the admirers of the Piano Concerto, written for and championed by Harriet Cohen, but it has remained, in the words of the critic Andrew Achenbach, a neglected masterpiece.
The last of the first group is ''A Pastoral Symphony'' (1921).
During the 1930s Vaughan Williams came to be regarded as a leading figure in British music, particularly after the deaths of Elgar, Delius and Holst in 1934.
Relations between teacher and student were stormy.
Whether Adeline knew, or suspected, that Ursula and Vaughan Williams were lovers is uncertain, but the relations between the two women were of warm friendship throughout the years they knew each other.
It is scored for a large orchestra, including three saxophones, a flugelhorn, and an enlarged percussion section.
In a 2013 survey of Vaughan Williams's stage works, Eric Saylor writes, "With the possible exception of Tchaikovsky, no composer's operatic career was less emblematic of his success elsewhere."
In 1951 Adeline died, aged eighty.
In some of Vaughan Williams's music of the 1930s there is an explicitly dark, even violent tone.
''Grove'' lists more than thirty works by Vaughan Williams for orchestra or band over and above the symphonies.
Summaries of the music vary from "beautiful, if something of a stylistic jumble" (Saylor) to "a synthesis of Vaughan Williams's stylistic progress over the years, from the pastoral mediation of the 1920s to the angry music of the middle symphonies and eventually the more experimental phase of the ''Sinfonia antartica'' in his last decade" (Kennedy).
The score is divided into nine sections and an epilogue, presenting dance interpretations of some of Blake's engravings.
The work was enthusiastically received at its early performances, and has remained among Vaughan Williams's most popular works.
Neville Cardus later wrote, "The Fifth Symphony contains the most benedictory and consoling music of our time."
Charles Villiers Stanford, Vaughan Williams's second composition teacher at the RCM
'''Ralph Vaughan Williams'''  ( 12 October 1872– 26 August 1958) was an English composer.
Kennedy ranks the score as "one of Vaughan Williams's mightiest achievements", and notes that it is familiar in concert programmes, having "the stature and cohesion of a symphony."
The Eighth Symphony (1956) in D minor is noticeably different from its seven predecessors by virtue of its brevity and, despite its minor key, its general light-heartedness.
Although rarely staged, the operas have fared well on disc.
Between these successes and the start of war Vaughan Williams's largest-scale work was the first version of ''A London Symphony'' (1914).
Kennedy describes the score as "organized almost symphonically" with much of the thematic material developed from the brief prelude.
Vaughan Williams insisted that it is "self-expressive, and must stand or fall as 'absolute' music".
In 1955 the authors of ''The Record Guide'', Edward Sackville-West and Desmond Shawe-Taylor, wrote that Vaughan Williams's music showed an exceptionally strong individual voice: Vaughan Williams's style is "not remarkable for grace or politeness or inventive colour", but expresses "a consistent vision in which thought and feeling and their equivalent images in music never fall below a certain high level of natural distinction".
Strongly influenced by Tudor music and English folk-song, his output marked a decisive break in British music from its German-dominated style of the 19th century.
Folk song is used, though more discreetly than in ''Hugh the Drover'' and the score is described by Saylor as "ravishingly tuneful".
The violin sonata has made little impact.
A further factor was the composer's expressed preference for "slow, long ''tableaux''", which tended to reduce dramatic impact, although he believed them essential, as "music takes a long time to speak—much longer than words by themselves."
The work, choreographed by Ninette de Valois, made a powerful impression at its early stagings, and has been revived by the Royal Ballet several times.
Another problem was his keenness to encourage amateurs and student groups, which sometimes led to the staging of his operas with less than professional standards.
In the same year Vaughan Williams's last opera, ''The Pilgrim's Progress'', was staged at Covent Garden as part of the Festival of Britain.
