Upon reaching Mount Sumeru, Hanuman was unable to identify the herb that could cure Lakshmana, and so decided to bring the entire mountain back to Lanka.
The ''Ramayana'' became popular in southeast Asia during the 8th century and was represented in literature, temple architecture, dance and theatre.
When he asks Sita not to follow him, she says, "the forest where you dwell is Ayodhya for me and Ayodhya without you is a veritable hell for me."
Starting in 1978 and under the supervision of Baba Hari Dass, the Ramayana has been performed every year by Mount Madonna School in Watsonville, California.
One day, a female child was found in the field by the king in the deep furrow dug by his plough.
He chooses Rama, who is followed by Lakshmana, his constant companion throughout the story.
In earlier versions this event does not occur and many scholars consider it to have been added later as society became more patriarchal.
Hanuman rescues Rama and Lakshmana after they are kidnapped by the Ahi-Mahi Ravana at the behest of Ravana and held prisoner in a subterranean cave, to be sacrificed to the goddess Kali.
Padmanabh Jaini notes that, unlike in the Hindu puranas, the names Baladeva and Vasudeva are not restricted to Balarama and Krishna in Jain Puranas.
The ''kishkindha kanda'' is set in the ape (''Vanar'') citadel Kishkindha.
:By hukam (supreme command), he created his ten incarnations,
In Tulsidas's Ramacharitamanas Sita was under the protection of Agni (see Maya Sita) so it was necessary to bring her out before reuniting with Rama.
The Ramayana text has several regional renderings, recensions, and subrecensions.
:हुकमि उपाए दस अउतारा॥
However, it is predicted that ultimately they both will be reborn as upright persons and attain liberation in their future births.
Furthermore, Sita takes renunciation as a Jain ascetic after Rama abandons her and is reborn in heaven.
He gives a bold lecture to Ravana to release Sita.
On the verge of hysterics, Sita insists that it is not she but Rama who needs Lakshmana's help.
According to Jain version, Rama had four chief-queen's: Maithili, Prabhavati, Ratinibha, and Sridama.
He allows himself to be captured and produced before Ravana.
The joyous search party returns to Kishkindha with the news.
When news of these events reaches Ravana, he resolves to destroy Rama by capturing Sita with the aid of the ''rakshasa'' Maricha.
Rama yields to public opinion and reluctantly banishes Sita to the forest, where the sage Valmiki provides shelter in his ''ashrama'' (hermitage).
Dasharatha, the king of Saketa had four queens: Aparajita, Sumitra, Suprabha and Kaikeyi.
Valmiki composes the ''Ramayana'' and teaches Lava and Kusha to sing it.
The child was named Sita, the Sanskrit word for furrow.
There they are joined by Ravana's renegade brother Vibhishana.
Ultimately, he attains Kevala Jnana omniscience and finally liberation.
Rama predicts that Ravana and Lakshmana, who were in fourth hell, will attain liberation in their future births.
When Lava and Kusha recite about Sita's exile, Rama becomes grief-stricken and Valmiki produces Sita.
Valmiki's ''Ramayana'' inspired the ''Sri Ramacharit Manas'' by Tulsidas in 1576, an epic Awadhi (a dialect of Hindi) version with a slant more grounded in a different realm of Hindu literature, that of bhakti; it is an acknowledged masterpiece of India, popularly known as ''Tulsi-krta Ramayana''.
One of the most important literary works of ancient India, the ''Ramayana'' has had a profound impact on art and culture in the Indian subcontinent and southeast Asia with the lone exception of Vietnam.
In dasam granth, Guru Gobind Singh also explained that he does not believe Ramchandra as a God.
Kaikeyi demands Rama to be exiled into the wilderness for fourteen years, while the succession passes to her son Bharata.
Having received Hanuman's report on Sita, Rama and Lakshmana proceed with their allies towards the shore of the southern sea.
Ravana demands Sita marry him, but Sita, eternally devoted to Rama, refuses.
Traditionally, the ''Ramayana'' is attributed to Valmiki.
He had three wives: Kausalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra.
The apes named Nala and Nila construct a floating bridge (known as ''Rama Setu'') across the sea, using stones that floated on water because they had Rama's name written on them.
In the Jain epic of ''Ramayana'', it is Lakshmana who ultimately kills Ravana and not Rama as told in the Hindu version.
Rama annihilates Khara and his demons.
Kaikeyi's son was Bharata and Suprabha's son was Shatrughna.
The knowledge of the location of the island of Lanka also lacks detail.
The weddings are celebrated with great festivity at Mithila and the marriage party returns to Ayodhya.
It has also inspired much secondary literature in various languages, notably the Kambaramayanam by the Tamil poet Kambar of the 12th century, the Telugu-language ''Molla Ramayanam'' by poet Molla and ''Ranganatha Ramayanam'' by poet Gona Budda Reddy, 14th century Kannada poet Narahari's Torave Ramayana, and 15th century Bengali poet Krittibas Ojha's Krittivasi Ramayan, as well as the 16th century Awadhi version, Ramacharitamanas, written by Tulsidas.
After nine years, Dasaratha died and Lakkhaṇa and Sita returned; Rāmapaṇḍita, in deference to his father's wishes, remained in exile for a further two years.
There has been discussion as to whether the first and the last chapters of Valmiki's ''Ramayana'' were composed by the original author.
When Sita plunges into the sacrificial fire, Agni the lord of fire raises Sita, unharmed, to the throne, attesting to her purity.
In the explanatory commentary on the Jātaka, Rāmapaṇḍita is said to have been a previous incarnation of the Buddha and Sītā an incarnation of Yasodharā.
Mainly because of his writing of Nepali Ramayana, Bhanubhakta is also called 'Aadi Kavi' or 'The Pioneering Poet'.
On meeting Sita, Rama asks her to undergo an "agni pareeksha" (test of fire) to prove her purity, as he wants to get rid of the rumours surrounding Sita's purity.
The name ''Ramayana'' is a tatpuruṣa compound of '''' and '''' ("going, advancing"), translating to Rama's Journey.
Also, in the epic Mahabharata, there is a version of Ramayana known as Ramopakhyana.
According to Jain texts, Ravana will be the future Tirthankara (omniscient teacher) of Jainism.
During their search, they meet the demon Kabandha and the ascetic Shabari, who direct them towards Sugriva and Hanuman.
There are diverse regional versions of the ''Ramayana'' written by various authors in India.
He also said that the almighty, invisible, all prevailing God created so many of Indras, Moons and Suns, Deities, Demons and sages, so many saints and Brahmanas (enlightened people).
It was dramatised as the Uttararamacarita by the Sanskrit poet Bhavabhuti.
Rama befriends Sugriva and helps him by killing his elder brother Vali thus regaining the kingdom of Kiskindha, in exchange for helping Rama to recover Sita.
It adapts the Hindu concepts to Buddhist themes and show's the balance of good and evil in the world.
Instead they serve as names of two distinct class of mighty brothers, who appear nine times in each half time cycle and jointly rule the half the earth as half-chakravartins.
There is a sub-plot to ''Ramayana'', prevalent in some parts of India, relating the adventures of Ahi Ravana and Mahi Ravana, the evil brother of Ravana, which enhances the role of Hanuman in the story.
But Rama, determined to carry out his father's orders to the letter, refuses to return before the period of exile.
She attempts to seduce the brothers and failing in this, attempts to kill Sita.
The painting is currently in the permanent collection of the Malaysian National Visual Arts Gallery.
The names of the characters (Rama, Sita, Dasharatha, Janaka, Vashista, Vishwamitra) are all known in late Vedic literature.
On the eve of the great event, Kaikeyi—her jealousy aroused by Manthara, a wicked maidservant—claims two boons that Dasharatha had long ago granted her.
Vibhisana (''phiphek''), the astrologer brother of Ravana, predicts calamity from the horoscope of Sita.
This is the beginning of Ram Rajya, which implies an ideal state with good morals.
The ''Ramayana'' written by Bhanubhakta Acharya is one of the most popular verses in Nepal.
He was childless for a long time and anxious to produce an heir, he performs a fire sacrifice known as ''putra-kameshti yagya''.
The sage Vishwamitra takes Rama and Lakshmana to Mithila to show the bow.
Thailand's popular national epic ''Ramakien'' (thai:รามเกียรติ์.,from Sanskrit ''rāmakīrti'', "glory of Rama") is derived from the Hindu epic.
The ''sundara kanda'' forms the heart of Valmiki's Ramayana and consists of a detailed, vivid account of Hanuman's adventures.
Sumitra's son was Narayana: he became to be known by another name, Lakshmana.
Unaware of the devious plan of her guest, Sita is tricked into leaving the rekha and is then forcibly carried away by the evil Ravana.
When Rama is 16 years old, the sage Vishwamitra comes to the court of Dasharatha in search of help against demons who were disturbing sacrificial rites.
After Rama's departure, King Dasharatha, unable to bear the grief, passes away.
Scholar Romesh Chunder Dutt writes that "the ''Ramayana'', like the ''Mahabharata'', is a growth of centuries, but the main story is more distinctly the creation of one mind."
A lengthy war ensues.
The definition of ''itihāsa''  is a narrative of past events (''purāvṛtta'') which includes teachings on the goals of human life.
The Hindu tradition is unanimous in its agreement that the poem is the work of a single poet, the sage Valmiki, a contemporary of Rama and a peripheral actor in the drama.
Lava and Kusha sing the ''Ramayana'' in the presence of Rama and his vast audience.
Lord Rama, aware that this is the ploy of the demons, cannot dissuade Sita from her desire and chases the deer into the forest, leaving Sita under Lakshmana's guard.
A number of plays, movies and television serials have also been produced based upon the ''Ramayana''.
Rama gets married to Sita, Lakshmana to Urmila, Bharata to Mandavi and Shatrughan to Shrutakirti.
In particular, the ''Ramayana'' related in north India differs in important respects from that preserved in south India and the rest of south-east Asia.
Sugriva then sends search parties to the four corners of the earth, only to return without success from north, east and west.
Overwhelmed with joy, the king regarded the child as a "miraculous gift of god".
According to Hindu tradition, Rama is an incarnation (''Avatar'') of the god Vishnu.
Here, Hanuman explores the demons' kingdom and spies on Ravana.
Then Rama desires to lift it and goes on to wield the bow and, when he draws the string, it breaks.
At Lanka, Sita is kept under the heavy guard of ''rakshasis''.
After some time, Sita hears Rama calling out to her; afraid for his life, she insists that Lakshmana rush to his aid.
Bharata refuses to profit from his mother's wicked scheming and visits Rama in the forest.
There is an extensive tradition of oral storytelling based on the ''Ramayana'' in Indonesia, Cambodia, Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Laos, Vietnam and Maldives.
Gujarati poet Premanand wrote a version of ''Ramayana'' in the 17th century.
Also known as ''Lanka kanda'', this book describes the Ramayana War between the army of Rama and the army of Ravana.
Adbhuta Ramayana is a version that is obscure but also attributed to Valmiki - intended as a supplementary to original Valmiki Ramayana.
The clever former ape queen Tara (wife of Vali) calmly intervenes to prevent an enraged Lakshmana from destroying the ape citadel.
During the 12th century, Kamban wrote ''Ramavataram'', known popularly as Kambaramayanam in Tamil.
According to Hindu tradition, the ''Ramayana'' takes place during a period of time known as Treta Yuga.
Some of them differ significantly from each other.
Rama and Lakshmana meet Hanuman, the bigest devotee of Rama, the greatest of ape heroes and an adherent of Sugriva, the banished pretender to the throne of Kishkindha.
He draws a chalk outline, the Lakshmana rekha, around the cottage and casts a spell on it that prevents anyone from entering the boundary but allows people to exit.
After being crowned king, Rama passes time pleasantly with Sita.
In the Buddhist variant of ''Rāmāyaṇa'' (''Dasarathajātaka'', #467), Dasaratha was the king of Benares and not Ayodhya.
Reamker in Cambodia is not confined to the realm of literature but extends to all Cambodian art forms, such as sculpture, Khmer classical dance, theater known as ''lakhorn luang'' (the foundation of the royal ballet), poetry and the mural and bas reliefs seen at the Silver Pagoda and Angkor Wat.
Each year, many devout pilgrims trace their journey through India and Nepal, halting at each of the holy sites along the way.
The story ushered in the tradition of the next thousand years of massive-scale works in the rich diction of regal courts and Hindu temples.
But they too were caught in the noose of death (KAAL) (Transmigration of the soul).
In the end, Rama who led an upright life renounces his kingdom, becomes a Jain monk and attains moksha.
Rama then installs Vibhishana on the throne of Lanka.
In ''mappila ramayana'', the story of the ''Ramayana'' has been changed into that of a sultan, and there are no major changes in the names of characters except for that of Rama which is `laman' in many places.
The ''Ramayana'' has also been depicted in many paintings, most notably by the Malaysian artist Syed Thajudeen in 1972.
The ''uttara kanda'' is regarded to be a later addition to the original story by Valmiki and concerns the final years of Rama, Sita and Rama's brothers.
The episode of ''agni pariksha'' varies in the versions of Ramayana by Valmiki and Tulsidas.
Dasharatha was the king of Ayodhya.
She then eloquently convinces Sugriva to honour his pledge.
Rāma called Rāmapaṇḍita in this version was son of Kausalya, first wife of Dasaratha, Lakṣmaṇa Lakkhaṇa was sibling of Rama and son of Sumitra second wife of Dasaratha, and Sita wife of Rama.
There is general consensus that books two to six form the oldest portion of the epic, while the first and last books (bala kanda and uttara kanda, respectively) are later additions.
The characters Rāma, Sītā, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata, Hanumān and Rāvaṇa are all fundamental to the cultural consciousness of India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and south-east Asian countries such as Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia and Indonesia.
Accordingly, Ravana is the future tirthankara of next half ascending time cycle and Sita will be his Ganadhara.
The ''Ramayana'' is one of the largest ancient epics in world literature.
On the other hand, Lakshmana and Ravana go to hell.
Father Kamil Bulke, author of ''Ramakatha'', has identified over 300 variants of ''Ramayana''.
Rama accepts his father's reluctant decree with absolute submission and calm self-control which characterises him throughout the story.
After entering into Lanka he finds a demon lankini who protects the entire Lanka and Hanuman fights with her and kills her in order to get into Lanka.
He offers to carry Sita back to Rama, however she refuses and says that it is not the dharma.
Rama, Lakshmana and Ravana are the eighth baladeva, vasudeva, and prativasudeva respectively.
Famous retellings include Gona Budda Reddy's ''Ramayanam'' in Telugu, Kamban's ''Ramavataram'' in Tamil (c. 11th–12th century), Madhava Kandali's ''Saptakanda Ramayana'' in Assamese (c. 14th century), Krittibas Ojha's ''Krittivasi Ramayan'' (also known as ''Shri Rama panchali'') in Bengali (c. 15th century), Sarala Das' ''Vilanka Ramayana'' (c. 15th century) and Balaram Das' ''Dandi Ramayana'' (also known as the ''Jagamohan Ramayana'') (c. 16th century) both in Odia, sant Eknath's ''Bhavarth Ramayan'' (c. 16th century) in Marathi, Tulsidas' ''Ramcharitamanas'' (c. 16th century) in Awadhi (which is an eastern form of Hindi) and Thunchaththu Ezhuthachan's ''Adhyathmaramayanam'' in Malayalam.
Most Hindus still believe they are integral parts of the book, in spite of some style differences and narrative contradictions between these two chapters and the rest of the book.
The popularization of the 'Ramayana' and its tale, originally written in Sanskrit Language was greatly enhanced by the work of Bhanubhakta.
The main purpose of this incarnation is to demonstrate the righteous path (''dharma'') for all living creatures on earth.
Textual scholar Robert P. Goldman differentiates two major regional recensions: the northern (n) and the southern (s).
These four queens had four sons.
Hearing of this, her demon brother, Khara, organises an attack against the princes.
Jaini traces the origin of this list of brothers to the ''jinacharitra'' (lives of the jinas) by Acharya Bhadrabahu (3–4th century BCE).
He is joined by Sita and Lakshmana.
Ravana has her thrown into the water, but is later rescued by Janaka (''chanok'').
Hanuman then wreaks havoc in Lanka by destroying trees and buildings and killing Ravana's warriors.
This is very well same to as explained in Geeta which is part of Mahabharata.
There are many other versions of the ''Ramayana'' in Indian languages, besides Buddhist and Jain adaptations; and also Cambodian, Indonesian, Filipino, Thai, Lao, Burmese, and Malaysian versions of the tale.
In Guru Granth Sahib, there is description of two types of ''Ramayana''.
The Jain versions have some variations from Valmiki's ''Ramayana''.
Ramakien can be seen in an elaborate illustration at Wat Phra Kaew in Bangkok.
In ''Hikayat Seri Rama'' of Malaysia, Dasharatha is the great-grandson of the Prophet Adam.
Historian and indologist Arthur Llewellyn Basham is of the opinion that Rama may have been a minor chief who lived in the 8th or the 7th century BC.
Ravana receives boons from Allah instead of Brahma.
In many Malay language versions, Lakshmana is given greater importance than Rama, whose character is considered somewhat weak.
The princes and their army cross over to Lanka.
Thirteen years pass and in the last year of exile Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana journey southward along the banks of river Godavari, where they build cottages and live off the land.
In Hindu tradition, it is considered to be the ādi-kāvya (first kāvya poem).
It depicts the duties of relationships, portraying ideal characters like the ideal father, the ideal servant, the ideal brother, the ideal wife and the ideal king.
However Sugriva soon forgets his promise and spends his time in enjoying his powers.
King Ramchandra was one of those and it is not covered in Guru Granth Sahib.
Other Southeast Asian adaptations include ''Kakawin Ramayana'' of Java, ''Ramakavaca'' of Bali (Indonesia), ''Maharadia Lawana'' and ''Darangen'' of the Moro Muslims of Mindanao (Philippines) and the ''Yama Zatdaw'' of Myanmar.
During a battle, Ravana's son Indrajit hurls a powerful weapon at Lakshmana, who is badly wounded and is nearly killed.
The author or authors of bala kanda and ayodhya kanda appear to be familiar with the eastern Gangetic basin region of northern India and with the Kosala and Magadha region during the period of the sixteen Janapadas, based on the fact that the geographical and geopolitical data accords with what is known about the region.
Rama and Lakshmana receive instructions and supernatural weapons from Vishwamitra and proceed to destroy the demons.
With the coast finally clear, Ravana appears in the guise of an ascetic requesting Sita's hospitality.
This version is depicted as a narration to Yudhishthira.
Meanwhile, Bharata who was on a visit to his maternal uncle, learns about the events in Ayodhya.
Guru Granth Sahib also believes in existence of dasavtara who were kings of their times which tried their best to bring revolution in the world.
Rama returns to his celestial abode.
Furthermore, not much was thought of Rama's fidelity to Sita.
He obeys her wish but stipulates that she is not to leave the cottage or entertain any strangers.
The text survives in several thousand partial and complete manuscripts, the oldest of which is a palm-leaf manuscript found in Nepal and dated to the 11th century CE.
Guru Granth Sahib states:
Currently, it is the largest yearly, Western version of the epic being performed.
Baba Hari Dass has taught acting arts, costume-attire design, mask making and choreography to bring alive characters of Sri Ram, Sita, Hanuman, Lakshmana, Shiva, Parvati, Vibhishan, Jatayu, Sugriva, Surpanakha, Ravana and his rakshasa court, Meghnadha, Kumbhakarna and the army of monkeys and demons.
While the main story is identical to that of the ''Ramayana'', many other aspects were transposed into a Thai context, such as the clothes, weapons, topography and elements of nature, which are described as being Thai in style.
Here, she gives birth to twin boys, Lava and Kusha, who become pupils of Valmiki and are brought up in ignorance of their identity.
He reassures her, giving Rama's signet ring as a sign of good faith.
Like the ''Mahabharata'', the ''Ramayana'' is not just a story: it presents the teachings of ancient Hindu sages in narrative allegory, interspersing philosophical and ethical elements.
Rama then learns that Lava and Kusha are his children.
In its extant form, Valmiki's ''Ramayana'' is an epic poem of some 24,000 verses.
According to the modern academic view, Vishnu, who, according to bala kanda, was incarnated as Rama, first came into prominence with the epics themselves and further, during the puranic period of the later 1st millennium CE.
After some time, Sita gets pregnant with twin children.
In Ramakien, Sita is the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari (''thotsakan'' and ''montho'').
Rama, after Lakshmana's death, also renounces his kingdom and becomes a Jain monk.
A Times of India report dated 18 Dec 2015 informs about discovery of a 6th-century manuscript of Ramayana at the Asiatic Society library, Kolkata.
On the way he faces many challenges like facing a gandharva kanya who comes in the form of demon to test his abilities and he faces a mountain naming Mainakudu who offers Lord Hanuman some help to take some rest but he refuses because of the time is running out and there is a very less time remaining for searching Sita.
As a consequence, Rama is first born to Kausalya,  Bharata is born to Kaikeyi, Lakshmana and Shatrughna are born to Sumitra.
Lakshmana tries to assure her that Rama is invincible and that it is best if he continues to follow Rama's orders to protect her.
The southern search party under the leadership of Angad and Hanuman learns from a vulture named Sampati (elder brother of Jatayu), that Sita was taken to Lanka.
He requests Rama to return and rule.
Lakshmana stops her by cutting off her nose and ears.
At the expiration of his term of exile, Rama returns to Ayodhya with Sita and Lakshmana, where the coronation is performed.
Eventually, the war ends when Rama kills Ravana.
As in many oral epics, multiple versions of the ''Ramayana'' survive.
The language and the imagery projected in the mappilapattu are in accordance with the social fabric of the earlier Muslim community.
The story's original version in Sanskrit is known as ''Valmiki Ramayana''.
According to Jain cosmology, every half time cycle has nine sets of Balarama, Vasudeva and prativasudeva.
Jatayu, a vulture, tries to rescue Sita, but is mortally wounded.
To protect his children from his wife Kaikayi, who wished to promote her son Bharata, Dasaratha sent the three to a hermitage in the Himalayas for a twelve-year exile.
Other versions include ''Krittivasi Ramayan'', a Bengali version by Krittibas Ojha in the 15th century; the ''Vilanka Ramayana'' by the 15th century poet Sarala Dasa and the ''Dandi'' ''Ramayana'' (also known as ''Jagamohana Ramayana'') by the 16th century poet Balarama Dasa both in Odia; a Torave Ramayana in Kannada by the 16th-century poet Narahari; ''Adhyathmaramayanam'', a Malayalam version by Thunchaththu Ramanujan Ezhuthachan in the 16th century; in Marathi by Sridhara in the 18th century; in Maithili by Chanda Jha in the 19th century; and in the 20th century, Rashtrakavi Kuvempu's ''Sri Ramayana Darshanam'' in Kannada.
Rama, the hero of the ''Ramayana'', is one of the most popular deities worshipped in the Hindu religion.
The poem is not seen as just a literary monument, but serves as an integral part of Hinduism, and is held in such reverence that the mere reading or hearing of it, or certain passages of it, is believed by Hindus to free them from sin and bless the reader or listener.
However, nowhere in the surviving Vedic poetry is there a story similar to the Ramayana of Valmiki.
