Transmission of HIV after one exposure to penetrative vaginal intercourse is 0.05 to 0.15 percent.
In the United Kingdom, figures on reported rape cases show an ongoing decline in the conviction rate, putting it at an all-time low of 5.6% in 2002.
In 2007, 40% of the 90,427 forcible rapes reported were cleared by arrest or "exceptional means."
In 2006, the UN Secretary-General's ''In-depth study on all forms of violence against women'' stated that (pg 113): "Marital rape may be prosecuted in at least 104 States.
This was especially true in the case of betrothed virgins, as the loss of chastity was perceived as severely depreciating her value to a prospective husband.
According to Rogerius of Apulia, a monk who survived the Mongol invasion of Hungary, the Mongol warriors "found pleasure" in humiliating local women.
Sexual aggression is often perceived as masculine identity characteristic of manhood in some male groups and is significantly correlated to the desire to be held higher in esteem among male peers.
An estimated 50,000 women and girls were raped, although estimates vary from 5,000 to 200,000.
They were asked if they had ever said no to sex, even though they fully intended to have sexual intercourse.
Another effect of rape and sexual assault is the stress created in those who counsel the survivors.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in its landmark 1998 judgment used a definition of rape which did not use the word 'consent': "a physical invasion of a sexual nature committed on a person ''under circumstances which are coercive''."
In England, for example, the Buggery Act 1533, which remained in force until 1828, provided for the death penalty for "buggery".
The humanitarian news organization IRIN claims that an estimated "500,000 rapes are committed annually in South Africa", once called 'the world's rape capital.'
Maintaining the Chain of evidence from the medical examination, testing and tissue sampling from its origin of collection to court allows the results of the sampling to be admitted as evidence.
Serious injuries can result along with the risk of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections.
Women who have been raped are sometimes deemed to have behaved improperly.
Internal injuries to the cervix and vagina can be visualized using colposcopy.
Once the injuries of the patient have been treated and she or he is stabilized, the sample gathering will begin.
Emotional and psychological treatment has the purpose of identifying predictors of recidivism, or the potential that the offender will commit rape again.
penetration with objects, fingers or other body parts) as well as insertion of the penis in the mouth.
* Liver function tests
French women in Normandy complained about rapes during the liberation of Normandy.
This was especially prevalent in laws where the crime of rape did not include, as a necessary element, the violation of the woman's body, thus dividing the crime in the current meaning of rape and a means for a man and woman to force their families to permit marriage.
A female Soviet war correspondent described what she had witnessed: "The Russian soldiers were raping every German female from eight to eighty.
Women who did not fit in any of these categories were not considered legal victims of the crime of rape.
Both of these forms of ''raptus'' had a civil penalty and possible excommunication for the family and village receiving the abducted woman, although ''raptus violentiae'' also incurred punishments of mutilation or death.
Routine treatment for HIV after rape or sexual assault is controversial due to the low risk of infection after one sexual assault.
Lack of consent may result from either forcible compulsion by the perpetrator or an incapacity to consent on the part of the victim (such as persons who are asleep, intoxicated or otherwise mentally compromised).
Sexual assault may be prevented by secondary school, college, and workplace education programs.
While penetrative rape generally does not involve the use of a condom, in some cases a condom is used.
Some stereotypes identify men who 'pursue' other men are the most virile of all.
Since 2006, several other states have outlawed marital rape (for example Thailand in 2007).
This is called vicarious trauma.
Even after months, these problems may be severe and upsetting and may prevent the victim from revealing their ordeal to friends or family, or seeking police or medical assistance.
If the patient or the caregivers, (typically parents) agree, the medical team utilizes standardized sampling and testing usually referred to a "rape kit".
In the case of male-on-female rape, these include the idea that power is reserved to men whereas women are meant for sex and objectified, that women want forced sex and to be pushed around, and that male sexual impulses and behaviors are uncontrollable and must be satisfied.
Some physical effects of the rape are not immediately apparent.
Sexually transmitted infections (STI) can be transmitted from the perpetrator to the victim.
Cuts and abrasions can become infected with microorganisms that are present on the skin surface but can become pathogenic if they gain access into body tissues.
Transmission of HIV after one exposure to penetrative anal sex is estimated to be 0.5 to 3.2 percent.
Such evidence-gathering is only done with the complete consent of the patient or the caregivers of the patient.
Other definitions of rape have changed over time.
The sooner that samples are obtained after the assault, the more likely that evidence is present in the sample and will provide valid results.
Any victim with abrasions are immunized for tetanus if 5 years have elapsed since their last immunization.
Adolescence and other children can be the perpetrators of rape, although this is uncommon.
Some psychological and emotional effects of rape are apparent immediately afterwards and others don't develop later or even much later.
One fourth of the girls had been forced to kiss someone and 10% of both the girls and the boys reported having been forced against their wills to do something sexual other than kissing.
Context changes again when a man solicits sex from another man.
The underlying message of this research seems to be that when certain stereotypical elements of rape are in place, rape victims are prone to being blamed.
In some instances, as in the case of Germany, penetration is not required for the act to be defined as rape.
One of the most distinctive features of rape historically was the fact that not all incidents of forced intercourse constituted this crime.
Victims may become the target of slut-shaming and cyberbullying.
This is claimed to be in the advantage of both the victim—who does not remain unmarried and doesn't lose social status—and of the rapist, who avoids punishment.
For research purposes, incidence of rapes are classified into a number of categories.
They can develop somatic disorders.
There are many options for treatment, some more successful than others.
HIV can also be contracted through the oral route but is considered rare.
Treatment can be lengthy and be challenging for both the counselor and the patient.
International Crime on Statistics and Justice by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) find that worldwide,  most victims of rape are women and most perpetrators male.
This is especially the case in cultures where female virginity is highly valued and considered mandatory before marriage; in extreme cases, rape victims are killed in honor killings.
French Moroccan troops known as Goumiers committed rapes and other war crimes after the Battle of Monte Cassino.
Positive outcomes of emotional and psychiatric treatment for rape exist; these can be an improved self-concept, the recognition of growth, and implementing new coping styles.
In 1960 law enforcement cited false reporting rates at 20%.
The number of reported rapes in Great Britain is lower than both incidence and prevalence rates.
Four States are considering legislation that would allow marital rape to be prosecuted."
Once widely accepted or ignored by law, spousal rape is now denounced by international conventions and is increasingly criminalized.
The boys and girls indicated that the behavior they experienced included pinching, grabbing, touching in a sexual manner.
The explanations in support of their answers were that they were fearful of being considered promiscuous.
Rape is also recognized as an element of the crime of genocide when committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a targeted ethnic group.
This decision may be made by the clinician with prophylactic antibiotic treatment for vaginitis, gonorrhea, trichomoniasis and chlamydia.
Since the 14th century, the term has come to mean "to seize and take away by force".
Emperor Justinian continued the use of the statute to prosecute rape during the sixth century in the Eastern Roman Empire.
An oral exam is done if there have been injuries to the mouth, teeth, gums or pharynx.
For example, the actus reus of the crime, was, in most societies, the insertion of the penis into the vagina, and, until the 19th century, many jurisdictions required ejaculation for the act to constitute the offense of rape.
The study also found that rapes against women are rarely reported to the police and that the number of female rape victims is significantly underestimated.
Included in the latter figure are about 15,000 Jews, largely victims of executions by Hungarian Arrow Cross Party militia.
In 1563, the Council of Trent expressly declared that legal Catholic marriages had to be done with consent of both parties, but did not require parental consent, essentially declaring forced marriages invalid.
Women are typically offered contraceptive medications because about 5% of male-on-female rapes result in pregnancy.
In nonsexually active patients, an initial, baseline negative test that is followed by a subsequent STI could be used as evidence, if the perpetrator also had an STI.
A 2010 study by David Lisak, Lori Gardinier and other researchers published in the journal of ''Violence against Women'' found that out of 136 cases reported in a ten-year period, only 5.9% were found false.
The term ''rape'' originates in the Latin ''rapere'' (supine stem ''raptum''), "to snatch, to grab, to carry off".
FBI reports consistently put the number of "unfounded" rape accusations around 8%.
Amy M. Buddie and Arthur G. Miller, in a review of studies of rape myths, state:
In more violent cases, the victim may need to have gunshot wounds or stab wounds treated.
Chlamydial and gonococcal infections in women are of particular concern due to the possibility of ascending infection.
Rape victims are blamed more when they resist the attack later in the rape encounter rather than earlier (Kopper, 1996), which seems to suggest the stereotype that these women are engaging in token resistance (Malamuth & Brown, 1994; Muehlenhard & Rogers, 1998) or leading the man on because they have gone along with the sexual experience thus far.
"Unfounded" is not synonymous with false allegation and as Bruce Gross of the Forensic Examiner explains,
* Depersonalization or Dissociation (feeling numb and detached, like being in a daze or a dream, or feeling that the world is strange and unreal)
At least one program for fraternity men produced "sustained behavioral change."
When bruises or broken bones are not apparent, this is seen as proof that the woman consented.
Research on male-on-male and female-on-male rape is rare.
There may, however, be situations in which testing has the legal purpose, as in cases where the threat of transmission or actual transmission of an STI was part of the crime.
These practices are crimes against humanity and war crimes.
At this point in the treatment, experienced social support staff are made available to the patient and family.
A wood lamp is a device that can detect semen on the skin.
Contemporary documents say that after a conquest, the Mongol soldiers looted, pillaged and raped.
The transmission of HIV is frequently a major concern of the patient.
They also state that "individuals may endorse rape myths and at the same time recognize the negative effects of rape."
People who have been raped or sexually assaulted are sometimes blamed and considered responsible for the crime.
Common genital injuries are anal injury, labial abrasions, hymenal bruising, tears of the posterior fourchette and fossa.
Now it will be considered a war crime.
The ''ius primae noctis'' ("law of the first night") is a term now popularly used to describe an alleged legal right allowing the lord of an estate to take the virginity of his serfs' maiden daughters.
Victims of rape or sexual assault come from a wide range of sexual orientations, genders, ages, and degrees of impairment or disability.
In addition, their credibility may be challenged.
Rationales for condom use include: avoiding contracting infections or diseases (particularly HIV), especially in cases of rape of sex workers or in gang rape (to avoid contracting infections or diseases from fellow rapists); eliminating evidence, making prosecution more difficult (and giving a sense of invulnerability); giving the appearance of consent (in cases of acquaintance rape); and thrill from planning and the use of the condom as an added prop.Concern for the victim is generally not considered a factor.
Internationally, the incidence of rapes recorded by the police during 2008 ranged, per 100,000 people, from 0.2 in Azerbaijan to 92.9 in Botswana with 6.3 in Lithuania as the median.
Follow up examinations also assess the patient for tension headaches, fatigue, sleep pattern disturbances, gastrointestinal irritability, chronic pelvic pain, menstrual pain or irregularity, pelvic inflammatory disease, multiple yeast infections, sexual dysfunction, premenstrual distress, fibromyalgia, vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, burning during urination, and generalized vaginal pain.
The Israelite, Persian, Greek and Roman armies reportedly engaged in war rape.
The claim that the myth drives either HIV infection or child sexual abuse in South Africa is disputed by researchers Rachel Jewkes and Helen Epstein.
In general, rape and sexual assault are among the most common causes of PTSD in women.
In Medieval Europe, a woman could be legally married by her parents to a stranger without her consent, and, once she was married, she could no longer refuse to consent to sex: the medieval concept of rape did not allow for the possibility of being raped by one's husband.
In other contexts, men never say 'no' when confronted with female pressure to engage in sex.
Since the 1970s, many changes have occurred in the perception of sexual assault due in large part to the feminist movement and its public characterization of rape as a crime of power and control rather than purely of sex.
In some places, girls and women who are raped are often forced by their families to marry their rapist.
Instead, Kanin classified reports that the police department classified as false also as false.
The way sexuality was conceptualized in many societies rejected the very notion that a woman could force a man into sex&nbsp;— women were often seen as passive while men were deemed to be assertive and aggressive.
These acts may be perpetrated by the rapist or by friends and relatives of the rapist, as a way of preventing the victims from reporting the rape, of punishing them for reporting it, or of forcing them to withdraw the complaint; or they may be perpetrated by the relatives of the victim as a punishment for "bringing shame" to the family.
In most Western countries, the defense of provocation is not accepted as a mitigation for rape.
A 2010 study published in the journal ''Archives of Sexual Behavior'' found that sexual narcissism such as sexual entitlement, sexual exploitation, lower empathy and sexual skill predicted risk for sexual aggression.
A 1998 report by the National Institute of Justice found that DNA evidence excluded the primary suspect in 26% of rape cases and concluded that this "strongly suggests that postarrest and postconviction DNA exonerations are tied to some strong, underlying systemic problems that generate erroneous accusations and convictions."
The updated definition includes recognizing any gender of victim and perpetrator and that rape with an object can be as traumatic as penile/vaginal rape.
Immunization against hepatitis B is often considered.
Marital rape is not a prosecutable offence in at least 53 States.
Treatment may include the administration of Zidovudine/lamivudine, Tenofovir/emtricitabine, Ritonavir/lopinvir.
The average rate of unfounded reports for Index crimes is 2%.
In Roman law the carrying off of a woman by force, with or without intercourse, constituted "raptus".
Other categories of rape describe the relationship of the perpetrator to the victim and the context of the sexual assault.
Several treatment options exist and vary by accessibility, cost, or whether or not insurance coverage exists for the treatment.
Many countries criminalized "non-traditional" forms of sexual activity well into the modern era: notably, in the U.S. state of Idaho, sodomy between consensual partners was punishable by a term of five years to life in prison as late as 2003, and this law was only ruled to be inapplicable to married couples in 1995.
The act may be carried out by physical force, coercion, abuse of authority or against a person who is incapable of giving valid consent, such as one who is unconscious, incapacitated, has an intellectual disability or is below the legal age of consent.
The clothing and sheet are properly bagged and labeled along with other samples that can be removed from the body or clothing of the patient.
Students reported that 80% of the unwelcome sexual behavior had come from other students with the remainder coming from teachers, coaches, or other adults.
In Roman law, it or ''raptus'' was classified as a form of ''crimen vis'', "crime of assault".
The examiner notes the presence of broken bones, pregnancy, bites, swelling, bruising, lacerations and scratches.
Additionally, gender neutral laws have combated the older perception that rape never occurs to men,
During World War II an estimated 200,000 Korean and Chinese women were forced into prostitution in Japanese military brothels, as so-called "Comfort women".
The degree of success for emotional and psychiatric treatments is often dependent upon the terminology used in the treatment, i.e.
In the US, the criminalization of marital rape started in the mid-1970s and in 1993 North Carolina became the last state to make marital rape illegal.
'''Rape''' is a type of sexual assault usually involving sexual intercourse or other forms of sexual penetration perpetrated against a person without that person's consent.
Staff will encourage the presence of a rape/sexual assault counselor to provide an advocate and reassurance.
The loss of virginity was an especially serious matter.
A person may face violence or threats from the rapist, and, in some cultures, from the victim's family and relatives.
However David Lisak, an associate professor of psychology and director of the Men's Sexual Trauma Research Project at the University of Massachusetts Boston states that quote "Kanin's 1994 article on false allegations is a provocative opinion piece, but it is not a scientific study of the issue of false reporting of rape".
Using colposcopy has increased the detection of internal trauma from six percent to fifty-three percent.
Conversely, unwanted sexual advances have created a legal precedent: Homosexual Panic Defense.
Both sexist stereotypes and common law combined to make rape a "criminal proceeding on which the victim and her behavior were tried rather than the defendant".
Rape is categorized as date rape, gang rape, marital rape, incestual rape, child sexual abuse, prison rape, acquaintance rape, war rape and statutory rape.
85% of the girls and 76% of the boys said that this had occurred.
The health care provider, often trained specifically to treat rape and sexual assault patients, examines the victim and looks for signs and symptoms of internal injuries and note if the victim has experienced unconsciousness during or after the rape or sexual assault.
In Medieval English law the same term could refer to either kidnapping or rape in the modern sense of "sexual violation".
The researchers noted that some of these classifications were based on the personal judgments of the police investigators and were made in violation of official criteria for establishing a false allegation.
It is not known how common the myth is and to what degree rapes happen because of the belief in it.
Finally, rape victims are blamed more when they are raped by an acquaintance or a date rather than by a stranger (e.g., Bell, Kuriloff, & Lottes, 1994; Bridges, 1991; Bridges & McGr ail, 1989; Check & Malamuth, 1983; Kanekar, Shaherwalla, Franco, Kunju, & Pinto, 1991; L'Armand & Pepitone, 1982; Tetreault & Barnett, 1987), which seems to evoke the stereotype that victims really want to have sex because they know their attacker and perhaps even went out on a date with him.
Those who have been raped have relatively more reproductive tract infections than those who have not been raped.
Current data suggest that the incidence of rape has risen significantly in India.
Some countries or jurisdictions differentiate between rape and sexual assault by defining rape as involving penile penetration of the vagina, or solely penetration involving the penis, while other types of non-consensual sexual activity are called sexual assault.
* Cultures for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis from each penetrated location
Sexually transmitted bacterial, viral and other infections, if diagnosed, are treated.
Forty-three percent of high school and young college men reported being coerced into sexual behavior and, of those, 95% reported that a female was the aggressor.
American clinical psychologist David Lisak, co-author of a 2002 study of undetected rapists, says that compared with non-rapists, both undetected and convicted rapists are measurably more angry at women and more motivated by a desire to dominate and control them, are more impulsive, disinhibited, anti-social, hyper-masculine, and less empathic.
Still, in many countries, spousal rape either remains legal, or is illegal but widely tolerated and accepted as a husband's prerogative.
Professional counseling and on-going treatment by trained health care providers is often sought by the victim.
Symptoms of emotional and psychological difficulties can be a decreased ability to concentrate.
In this instance, appropriate counseling and evaluation are usually conducted.
Investigating the developmental background of the infant fender can help explain why the abusive behavior occurred in the first place.
This was not universally accepted: for example, in France, women were not granted the right to marry without parental consent until 1793.
These laws prevent having such evidence used against someone who was raped.
Rape shield laws protect the person who was raped and who has positive test results.
An initial examination is performed by emergency room staff.
Refusal or lack of consent is interpreted by cultural expectations of women.
Prior to the complete bodily and genital exam, the patient is asked to undress, standing on a white sheet that collects any debris that may be in the clothing.
In the 1950s, in some states a white woman having consensual sex with a black man was considered rape.
This can lead to the presumption of consent.
A 2011 study published in the ''Journal PLOS ONE'' found that factors associated with rapists in South Africa were having been raped by a man when younger, higher maternal education, gender inequality views on women, acceptance of physical violence against women, gang membership, higher scores on psychopathic personality and sexual entitlement beliefs.
A common view is that a woman's refusal of sex cannot be 'heard' in strict patriarchal culture.
Duress is the situation when the person is threatened by overwhelming force or violence, and may result in the absence of an objection to intercourse.
In 1940, a husband could not be charged with raping his wife.
In this same situation the lack of consent would be a threat and identify him as homosexual.
Four States criminalize marital rape only when the spouses are judicially separated.
* Avoidance of things, places, thoughts, and/or feelings that remind the victim of the assault
One of the first two rape crisis centers, the D.C. Rape Crisis Center, opened in 1972.
Acts other than vaginal intercourse did not constitute rape in common law countries and in many other societies.
Treatment also varies dependent upon the expertise of the counselor—some have more experience and or have specialized in the treatment of sexual trauma and rape.
Other studies have suggested that the rate of false allegations in America may be much higher.
It is a form of partner rape, of domestic violence, and of sexual abuse.
We want to send out a strong message that rape is no longer a trophy of war."
The risk of infection is dependent upon the site of exposure, geographic region, the infection status of the perpetrator, and the type of assault.
It may be implied from the context and from the relationship of the parties, but the absence of objection does not of itself constitute consent.
Hepatitis B is sometimes acquired.
Victims can have difficulties returning to normal functioning they possessed prior to the assault.
The HIV virus can be transmitted through rape.
Additional symptoms of acute stress disorder include:
redefining the event and experience.
Many rape victims blame themselves.
The damage due to loss of virginity was reflected in her reduced prospects in finding a husband and in her bride price.
The term ''rape'' is sometimes used interchangeably with the term ''sexual assault.''
Short-term treatment with a benzodiazepine may help with anxiety and antidepressants may be helpful for symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder, depression and panic attacks.
* Difficulty remembering important parts of the assault
These can be gender, age, ethnicity, geographical location, culture or historical periods.
It is common to experience acute stress disorder, including symptoms similar to those of posttraumatic stress disorder.
