Since then the culture has extended to all ages, ranging from kids in their early teens to college students and more.
have been called the Merry Pranksters of the Rave scene.
Raves could be found in many different kinds of venues, as opposed to just basements and warehouses.
This scene marks the post-industrial, pre-rave period of tranced out dance parties in the U.S..
During the 1970s and early 1980s until its resurrection, the term was not in vogue, one notable exception being in the lyrics of the song "Drive-In Saturday" by David Bowie (from his 1973 album ''Aladdin Sane'') which includes the line, "It's a crash course for the ravers."
In Sydney, common areas used for outdoor events included Sydney Park, a reclaimed garbage dump in the inner south west of the city, Cataract Park and various other natural, unused locations and bush lands.
Section 65 allows any uniformed constable who believes a person is on their way to a rave within a five-mile radius to stop them and direct them away from the area; non-compliant citizens may be subject to a maximum fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale (£1000).
The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act empowered police to stop a rave in the open air when a hundred or more people are attending, or where two or more are making preparations for a rave.
The following year (1988) saw acid house making as significant an impact on popular consciousness in Germany and Central Europe as it had in England.
Many of the attendees of raves were die-hard football fans.
Dreadlocks, dyed hair and mohawks are popular, as are tattoos and piercings.
Activities were related to the party atmosphere of Ibiza, a Mediterranean island in Spain, frequented by British, Italian, Greek, Irish and German youth on vacation, who would hold raves and dance parties.
LASERS from Pennsylvania produced the 1st electronic Dance Festival "IMPACT" with Josh Wink, Superstar DJ Keoki in PA, and then later became the most well known laser company at raves in East Coast by cross-promoting these rave events State to State as far south as Florida and Louisiana.
For almost ten years after the initial raves took place, there were several parties each weekend.
EDM began to become popular.
LEDs come in various colours with different settings.
Items such as jewelry, body chains, temporary tattoos, furry leg warmers (also known as fluffies), sunglasses, fanny packs, pasties, light up items, spirit hoods, and much more can be seen at any major rave event around the US and globe.
The galleria that once held a 'concert' in 1992 with artists such as Moby, Aphex twin, Prodigy and Space time continuum, was used for a few one-off events that utilized all five floors of the building with a different music style on each floor.
Narnia which would become famous for a morning hand holding circle of unity was featured on MTV and twice in LIFE magazine being honored with Event of the Year in 1995.
These ranged from former warehouses and industrial sites in London, to fields and country clubs in the countryside.
Although electro composer Paul Kalkbrenner from Friedrichshain, Berlin, made "Berlin Techno" world popular again, he is touring on his Berlin Calling (named after the movie he acted the main character and the soundtrack he produced for) tour through Europe and America.
A sense of participation in a group event is among the chief appeals of rave music and dancing to pulsating beats is its immediate outlet.
This said "vibe" is a concept in the raver ethos that represents the allure and receptiveness of an environment's portrayed and or innate energy.
By 1987, a German party scene, started by Tauseef Alam, based on the Chicago House sound was well established.
This level of secrecy, necessary for avoiding any interference by the police, on account of the illicit drug use, enabled the ravers to use locations they could stay in for ten hours at a time.
Although rave parties are commonly associated with warehouse break-ins & such, raves themselves are more often considered to be legal, & often commercial gatherings in recent times.
Through the mid 1990s and into the 2000s the city of Seattle also shared in the tradition of West Coast rave culture.
Gloving has evolved into a separate dance form that has grown exponentially in the last couple of years while still keeping its rave roots.
The traditional Rav'n lights are limited now, but many stores have developed newer, brighter, and more advanced version of lights with a plethora of colors and modes—modes include solid, stribbon, strobe, dops, hyper flash, and other variations.
Events proved to be one of the main forces in rave, holding legendary events across the north-east and Scotland.
Raves took place the SOMA art museum, 'Where the wild things are' museum on top of the Sony Metreon, and in the Maritime hall (1998-2002).
Venues and parties such as Stompy, Harmony, CloudFactory, Cyborganic lounge, Acme warehouse started to fuse the Breakbeat sound from hardcore trax with the more melodic pace of house music.
San Francisco became a notorious destination for raves in the United States, and to a lesser extent, the world at large.
By the mid-1990s, the scene had fragmented into many different styles of dance music, making large parties more expensive to set up and more difficult to promote.
They were mobilised versions of the 'warehouse parties', across Britain.
Events are still dedicated to the various forms of electronic music across the greater Bay Area.
These were nearly all pay-to-enter events; however, it could be argued that rave organisers saw the writing on the wall and moved towards more organised and "legitimate" venues, enabling a continuation of large-scale indoor raves well into the mid-nineties.
A '''rave''' (from the verb: ''to rave'') is a large dance party featuring performances by DJs and occasionally live performers playing electronic music, particularly electronic dance music (EDM).
Smaller, intimate venues continued just like they had from the start and underground raves became the norm in the years after the tech boom of the 1990s.
Sometimes club-oriented dances would be danced to rave music, too, for example, tecktonik is sometimes danced to fast-paced electro house.
In the late 1950s in London the term "rave" was used to describe the "wild bohemian parties" of the Soho beatnik set.
"The Laser Dome" featured two separate dance areas, "Hardcore" and "Garage", as well as over 20 video game machines, a silent-movie screening lounge, replicas of the "Statue of Liberty", "San Francisco Bridge", and a large glass maze.
Rubell and Schrager hired Scott Bromley as architect, Ron Doud as interior designer and Brian Thompson as lighting designer.
Parties were known to attract tens of thousands in venues like Homebase or 85th/Baldwin for a night of continuous dancing.
Awestruck by weirdness, Sin Magazine's warehouse office was soon thereafter offered to & annexed by the cult which was being driven from the upscale estate by neighbors whom were not fans of the late night electronic music arts.
Across Europe, rave culture was becoming part of a new youth movement.
The Sub coulter or Raves with in Melbourne was taken to new heights with the opening of clubs such as Bass Station and Hard candy.
Certain facets of dance music culture in the UK, Europe and globally, are also welcoming to the older generation (especially the free party/squat party/gay scenes).
Because of the legality, they had to be secretive about time and place.
Symbolic & predictive of the changes to come, they were known to march on & raid the early Burning Man rave camps, analog & un-amplified, to take the DJ hostage.
Instead of all night and into the next day, parties now had to end at 2 a.m. Two of the largest venues closed down soon after, and there wasn't enough momentum to sustain parties that catered to tens of thousands of people.
Some old locations were re-used, such as the concourse that saw thousands of ravers in 1992, was used again in 1999.
This emerging sound was influenced by Dutch gabber and Belgian hardcore.
office amongst many others—something of a Waco meets Warhol in the MIT media lab—was a crossroads of the scene.
However, there is no set dress code for the illegal rave scene.
In the early 1990s, the scene was slowly changing, with local councils passing by-laws and increasing fees in an effort to prevent or discourage rave organisations from acquiring necessary licenses.
The UK was finally recognized for its rave culture around the late 1980s early 1990s.
Every weekend a few hundred would show up at venues like the Townsend warehouse, the King Street garage, and other mid-size warehouses located in the SOMA and south San Francisco area.
Club drugs include MDMA (more commonly known as "Ecstasy" or "Molly"), Amphetamine (commonly referred to as "Speed"), GHB and Rohypnol (also known as the "date rape" drugs), Ketamine (also known as "Special K"), Methamphetamine (also known as "Tina" or "Ice" ), and LSD (commonly referred to as "Lucy" or "Acid").
Modern raving venues attempt to immerse the raver in a fantasy-like world.
By late 2012, derivates of the psychedelic 2C-X drugs, the NBOMes and especially 25I-NBOMe, had become common at raves in Europe.
The perception of the word changed again in the late 1980s when the term was revived and adopted by a new youth culture, possibly inspired by the use of the term in Jamaica.
Some electronic dance music festivals have features of raves, but on a large, often commercial scale.
Despite this, rave parties of 90s momentum became fewer after the 20th century came to an end.
Guaranteed Overdose (NYC), Local 13 (NJ), Caffeine (NYC), Liquid Grooove aka Liquified (GA), Columns of Knowledge (CT), Special K aka Circle Management (PA), Zen Festivals (FL), Disco Donnie (LA), Ultra Music Festival (FL),  and later the west coast, causing a true "scene" to develop.
West coast funky break-beat was born from this and stormed the dance scene.
The Homebase warehouse that held parties from 1996-2000 burned down in 2004.
In European countries, this kandi culture is much less common.
Over 8,000 people participated.
Crews included 'The Gathering', 'Toontown', 'Wiked', 'Rave Called Sharon', 'The Church', and 'Osmosis'.
There has also been a recent trend in the use of Diffraction and Kaleidoscope Glasses in the festival industry to create or enhance an MDMA or ecstasy experience.
In the U.S., some law enforcement agencies have branded the subculture as a drug-centric culture, as rave attendees have been known to use drugs such as marijuana, 2CB, and DMT.
With the rapid change of British pop culture from the mod era of 1963–1966 to the hippie era of 1967 and beyond, the term fell out of popular usage.
The key motive for remaining underground in many parts of the US had to do with curfew and the standard 2:00am closing of clubs.
One might remember that the earliest house and acid house clubs were themselves effectively "nightclubs".
The Act was officially introduced because of the noise and disruption caused by all night parties to nearby residents, and to protect the countryside.
In the UK, in 1988–89, raves were similar to football matches, in that they provided a setting for working-class unification, at a time of union movement in decline and few jobs.
2000 saw the demise of massive raves as curfews were placed on permits handed out to promoters.
The percussive group Crash Worship in particular, sometimes working out of the Loft, mechanistically generated the essence of techno tribal dionysian abandon of which the raves scene is rooted.
However "after-hours" clubs, as well as large outdoor events, create a similar type of alternate atmosphere, but focus much more on vibrant visual effects, such as props and décor.
What was once an extension of the rave culture has now blossomed into a hobby or a form of dance.
On 9 November 1989 the Berlin Wall fell, free underground Techno parties mushroomed in East Berlin, and a rave scene comparable to that in the UK was established.
within clubs, warehouses and free-parties, first in Manchester in the mid-1980s and then later in London.
Particularly notable events of this period included ESP's Dreamscape 20 on 9 September 1995 at Brafield aerodrome fields, Northants and Helter Skelter's Energy 97 event on 9 Aug 1997 at Turweston Aerodrome, Northants.
Featuring local San Diego DJ's Jon Bishop, Steve Pagan, Alien Tom, Jeff Skot and Mark E. Quark, Global Underworld's events were the first prop-heavy, themed parties in America.
In 1990, raves were also held "underground" in several cities, such as Berlin, Milan and Patras, in basements, warehouses and forests.
Almost all of these new EDM-based rave events (now simply referred generically to as "music festivals") sell out, proving that the market is there and willing to pay money to be a part of this new culture.
Even though gloving originated in Southern California, it can now be seen in Northern California, Florida, New York, and many other states in the US.
Its use during that era would have been perceived as a quaint or ironic use of bygone slang: part of the dated 1960s lexicon along with words such as "groovy".
EXODUS collective which was founded in Luton famously known for London Luton airport and hat manufacturing.
Fearing reprisals from the police the event was advertised as "A thousand Points of Light" referring to the power of healing crystals of the Crystal Methods name.
The word "rave" was later used in the burgeoning mod youth culture of the early 1960s as the way to describe any wild party in general.
Prior to the commercialization of the rave scene, when large legal venues became the norm for these events, the location of the rave was kept secret until the night of the event, usually being communicated through mobile messaging, secret flyers, and websites.
The origins of gloving is often credited to Hermes who put together 10 Rav'n lights into a pair of white gloves in 2006.
According to the FBI, Raves are one of the most popular venues where club drugs are distributed, and as such feature a prominent drug subculture.
The no alcohol rule fueled the ecstasy-driven parties to a much larger crowd, and soon the first large scale raves were held.
In 2013, EDC had attendance of approximately 345,000 people, a record for the festival.
Gabber, UK hardcore, happy hardcore
Dances like Jumpstyle, Tecktonik, Liquid and digits, Melbourne Shuffle and Brisbane Stomp may be sometimes highly dependent on pre-planned choreography for performances at raves, therefore such dance styles may be practised professionally.
The massive parties were taking place in outdoor fields, airplane hangars and hilltops that surround the valley.
The mid-late 1990s saw a slight decline in rave attendance, attributed to the death of Anna Wood at a licensed inner-city Sydney venue, which was hosting a rave party known as "Apache".
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a boom in rave culture in the Bay Area.
The music is accompanied by laser light shows, projected images, visual effects and fog machines.
In this time, however, a new West Coast sound was formed and developed by DJs such as Jeno, Tony, Spun, Galen, Solar, Harry Who?, and Rick Preston.
Scotland's clubs, such as the FUBAR in Stirling, Hangar 13 in Ayr, and Nosebleed in Rosyth played important roles in the development of these dance music styles.
In both the New Moon and Gateway collectives, "pagan altars are set up, sacred images from primitive cultures decorate the walls, and rituals of cleansing are performed over the turntables and the dance floor" This type of spatial strategy is an integral part of the raving experience because it sets the initial "vibe" in which the ravers will immerse themselves.
At capacity "The Laser Dome" held in excess of 6,000 people.
Due to the association of illegal party drugs such as MDMA (ecstasy) and the use of non-authorized, secret venues for some raves, such as squat parties at warehouses, law enforcement attention has been directed at the rave scene in many countries.
This led some clubs and event organizers to search participants on entry and confiscate such items due to it being evidence of drug use inside the venue.
Narnia became known as the "Woodstock of Generation X" & Nicholas Luckinbill and Branden Powers of G.U.N.
Tectonik (electro dance)
Raves were no longer a secret, where one had to know the right people to gain access to map points.
Under the ''Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994'', the definition of music played at a rave was given as:
'Poppers' is the street name for alkyl nitrites (the most well-known being amyl nitrite), which are inhaled for their intoxicating effects.
+ List of rave dance styles
Also during the 1970's the Chicago house movement continued to expand along with a new club - Studio 54.
During this period the resurfacing of the "Melbourne Shuffle", a Melbourne club/rave dance style, became a huge YouTube sensation and  many videos have been uploaded.
This proved to be the turning point in northern California's rave history.
In more recent years, large commercial events are held at the same locations year after year with similar reoccurring themes every year.
Pop musicians such as Steve Marriott of The Small Faces and Keith Moon of The Who were self-described "ravers".
Festival attendance at the Electric Daisy Carnival (EDC) increased by 39.1%, or 90,000 attendees from 2011 to 2012.
In November 1994, the Zippies staged an act of electronic civil disobedience to protest against the CJB (i.e., Criminal Justice Bill).
The music is amplified with a large, powerful sound reinforcement system, typically with large subwoofers to produce a deep bass sound.
While San Francisco's crowd attendance and variety of DJs might have peaked, it still maintains a much smaller but dedicated cadre of various crews, DJs, promoters and producers.
In 1991 a number of party venues closed, including Ufo, and the Berlin Techno scene centred itself around three locations close to the foundations of the Berlin Wall: the ''E-Werk'', ''Der Bunker'' and the now legendary ''Tresor''.
Heather Heart's Under One Sky.
After 1993, the main outlet for raves in the UK were a number of licensed venues, amongst them Helter Skelter, Life at Bowlers (Trafford Park, Manchester), The Edge (formerly the Eclipse Coventry), The Sanctuary (Milton Keynes) and Club Kinetic.
This meant that the days of legal one-off parties were numbered.
Insomniac, one of the largest EDM event promoters in the US, has been throwing yearly EDC and other EDM events around the country for over 20 years now, and is a good example of how far "raves" have come in the US.
The Crystal Method played their first out of town show for G.U.N.
The annual Love Parade festivals in Berlin (in the Metropolitan Ruhr area onwards) attracted more than one million party-goers between 1997 and 2000.
DJs from all corners of the globe began performing in San Francisco.
Simultaneously in NYC, events called NASA were introducing electronic dance music to New York.
However, rave and club culture remains on the whole very much a youth-driven movement in terms of its core fan base.
The following is an incomplete list of venues associated with the rave subculture:
As well as clothing there developed a range of accessories carried by many ravers including: Vicks VapoRub, which ravers find pleasant under the influence of MDMA, pacifiers to satiate the need to grind one's teeth (bruxism) caused by taking MDMA, and glow sticks which adjunct the mild psychedelia of MDMA's effect.
Public perception of raves was also overshadowed in the press by the 1995 death of Leah Betts, a teenager who died after taking MDMA; journalists and billboard campaigns focused on drug use, despite Betts cause of death being water intoxication in her home, not an MDMA overdose at a rave.
In late 1991, raves started to expand across northern California, and cities like Sacramento, Oakland, Silicon Valley (Palo Alto, San Jose) holding raves every weekend.
Of the four types of light-orientated dances, gloving in particular has evolved beyond and outside of the rave culture.
Some venues would have up to 20,000 people every weekend; 'Homebase', and '85 & Baldwin' were the largest venues to be used in the Bay Area.
They contain words or phrases that are unique to the raver and they can choose to trade with each other using "PLUR" (Peace, Love, Unity, Respect).
Promoters started to take notice and put together the massives of the late 1990s with many music forms under one roof for 12-hour events.
Rave crews started to become famous not only for their music and parties but also for the 'vibe'.
In the United States and other countries, rave fashion is characterized by colorful clothing and accessories, most notably "kandi" jewellery, that fluoresce under ultraviolet light.
Where formerly all clubs had been very dark, at Studio 54 the crowd could be lit brightly.
The happy old skool style was replaced by the darker jungle and the faster happy hardcore.
Candy Raver style, friendship and culture became particularly popular in the West Coast rave scene, both in Seattle and San Francisco.
In 1958, Buddy Holly recorded the hit "Rave On," citing the madness and frenzy of a feeling and the desire for it never to end.
Between 1992 and 1994, promotional groups sprung up across the east coast such as Ultraworld (MD,DC), Park Rave Madness (NYC), Satellite Productions (NYC), G.O.
Presaging the word's subsequent 1980s association with electronic music, the word "rave" was a common term used regarding the music of mid-1960s garage rock and psychedelia bands (most notably The Yardbirds, who released an album in the US called ''Having a Rave Up'').
It promoted the sense of deviance and removal from social control.
It was a desire to keep the party going past legal hours that created the underground direction.
Raves had tens of thousands of attendees, youth magazines featured styling tips, and television networks launched music magazines on House and Techno music.
People who were gregarious party animals were described as "ravers".
Police crackdowns on these often unauthorized parties drove the rave scene into the countryside.
LA Scene promoters such as Vince Bannon and Phil Blaine held gigs for electronic acts like 808 State, Aphex Twin, Prodigy, and Massive Attack.
In the 2000s, this level of secrecy still exists in the underground rave scene.
Meanwhile, the more commercial sound of happy hardcore topped the music charts across Europe.
Groups that have addressed alleged drug use at raves e.g.
The club played a formative role in the growth of disco music and nightclub culture in general, The club was notorious for its no entry policy, frequent celebrities and drug use.
Politicians spoke out against raves and began to fine promoters who held unauthorized parties.
In the late 1980s, the word "rave" was adopted to describe the subculture that grew out of the acid house movement.
Nitrites originally came as small glass capsules that were popped open, which led to the nickname "poppers."
Sections 63, 64 & 65 of the Act targeted electronic dance music played at raves.
Along with being an alternative term for partying at such garage events in general, the "rave-up" referred to a specific crescendo moment near the end of a song where the music was played faster, more heavily and with intense soloing or elements of controlled feedback.
Judgement Day, History of Dance, and now REGENeration continued the Rezerection legacy.
EDM (trance, DnB, glitch hop, etc.)
In 2005, Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, advocated drug testing on highways as a countermeasure against drug use at raves.
These sites were later represented in the rhythmic dances, in order to achieve a greater level of connectivity.
In the late 1970s, the club was arguably the best-known nightclub in the world.
It was later part of the title of an electronic music performance event held on 28 January 1967 at London's Roundhouse titled the "Million Volt Light and Sound Rave".
For example, The Numic Ghost Dancers rituals were held on specific geographical sites, considered to hold powerful natural flows of energy.
While some raves may be small parties held at nightclubs or private residences, some raves have grown to immense size, such as the Castlemorton Common Festival in 1992.
Most raves are illegal and take place outside or in poorly heated warehouses, so keeping warm is a priority.
(It was this that gave the band Orbital their name.)
The average ticket for EDC cost over $300 and the event contributed $278 million to the Clark County economy in 2013.
San Francisco has long been a Mecca for ravers from all over the world.
In the 1990s, one of the most influential Rave organisers / promoters in America was San Diego's, Global Underworld Network.
In addition, suburban locations were also used: basketball gymnasiums, train stations and even circus tents were all common venues.
Rave parties began in Australia as early as the 1980s and continued well into the late 1990s.
One Fantazia party, called One Step Beyond, was an open-air, all-night affair that attracted 30,000 people.
Such dances are usually freestyle in nature, since they are very rarely choreographed in preparation for such events (although some ravers may create personal dance routines).
East German DJ Paul van Dyk has remarked that the Techno-based rave scene was a major force in re-establishing social connections between East and West Germany during the unification period.
Hardstyle, Jumpstyle
The loose, casual and sports clothing was originally adopted by the acid house set earlier on in Ibiza, utilizing easy-to-dance-in attire from hip hop and football/soccer culture.
The Electric Daisy Carnival in Las Vegas drew more than 300,000 fans over three days in the summer of 2012, making it the largest EDM music festival in North America.
The rise of the Internet has both helped and hindered the cause, with much wider and more accessible communication resulting in bigger parties, but consequently increasing the risk of police involvement.
At first, small underground parties sprung up all over the SOMA district in vacant warehouses, loft spaces, and clubs like DV8 and 1015 Folsom, and basement of Jessie Street that had permits to run to 6 am as long as no alcohol was served.
The iconic fairy and pixie craze with ravers getting fairy tattoos and wearing wings to parties likely started from an image of a winged fairy on the first Narnia flyer.
This festival takes place at a 1,000-acre complex featuring a half dozen custom built stages, enormous interactive art installations, and hundreds of EDM artists.
Most did not have drugs or alcohol, that came later
Similarly, a year later, 'The Gathering' held New Year's Eve of 1992 in Vallejo with 12,000 people.
In the late 80s, rave culture began to filter through from English ex-pats and DJs who would visit Europe.
Adults are often active members of the U.S. scene and are well represented at events.
However, some participants in the scene claimed it was an attempt to lure youth culture away from MDMA and back to taxable alcohol.
Melbourne, Australia
Some ravers participate in one of four light-oriented dances, called ''glowsticking'', ''glowstringing'', ''gloving'', and ''lightshows''.
There was no curfew in place.
This style of attire, along with the entire rave culture, is now spilling out into the mainstream, especially in the US.
Jules Fisher and Paul Marantz, two well-known lighting designers, created the dance floor environment and created moveable theatrical sets and lights using the copious existing TV lighting circuits and fly system, which allowed for a dynamic constantly changing environment.
