Bradbury cited H. G. Wells and Jules Verne as his primary science fiction influences.
I hate people like that – I call them the neo-Luddites", and "In a sense computers are simply books.
"The Merry-Go-Round", a half-hour film adaptation of Bradbury's "The Black Ferris", praised by ''Variety'', was shown on ''Starlight Summer Theater'' in 1954 and NBC's ''Sneak Preview'' in 1956.
* In 2000, he was awarded the Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters from the National Book Foundation.
Bradbury's legacy was celebrated by the bookstore Fahrenheit 451 Books in Laguna Beach, California in the 1970s and 1980s.
* In 1994, he won an Emmy Award for the screenplay, ''The Halloween Tree''.
Capote picked the Bradbury manuscript from a slush pile, which led to its publication.
Having been inspired by science fiction heroes like Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers, Bradbury began to publish science fiction stories in fanzines in 1938.
These early influences inspired the pair to believe in themselves and affirm their career choices.
Bradbury resisted that categorization, however:
He studied Eudora Welty for her "remarkable ability to give you atmosphere, character, and motion in a single line."
Bradbury's first paid piece, "Pendulum," written with Henry Hasse, was published in the pulp magazine ''Super Science Stories'' in November 1941, for which he earned $15.
Bradbury's grandson, Danny Karapetian, said Bradbury's works had "influenced so many artists, writers, teachers, scientists, and it's always really touching and comforting to hear their stories".
Bradbury recounted when he came into his own as a writer, the afternoon he wrote a short story about his first encounter with death.
* In 2007, Bradbury received the French Commandeur ''Ordre des Arts et des Lettres'' medal.
In Green Town, Bradbury's favorite uncle sprouts wings, traveling carnivals conceal supernatural powers, and his grandparents provide room and board to Charles Dickens.
* An asteroid discovered in 1992 was named "9766 Bradbury" in his honor.
In the winter of 1955–56, after a consultation with his Doubleday editor, Bradbury deferred publication of a novel based on Green Town, the pseudonym for his hometown.
Bradbury identified with Verne, saying, "He believes the human being is in a strange situation in a very strange world, and he believes that we can triumph by behaving morally."
Bradbury had just graduated from high school when he met Robert Heinlein, then 31 years old.
Bradbury's first story about them was "Homecoming," published in the 1946 Halloween issue of ''Mademoiselle'', with Addams illustrations.
The film won the best feature award at the International Horror and Sci-Fi Film Festival in Phoenix.
Despite this he continued to write, and had even written an essay for ''The New Yorker'', about his inspiration for writing, published only a week prior to his death.
We've got too many internets.
This meant that they could stay, however, and Bradbury—who was in love with Hollywood—was ecstatic.
''Homecoming'' won a place in The O. Henry Prize Stories of 1947.
The plays debuted at the Coronet Theater in Hollywood and featured Booth Coleman, Joby Baker, Fredric Villani, Arnold Lessing, Eddie Sallia, Keith Taylor, Richard Bull, Gene Otis Shane, Henry T. Delgado, F. Murray Abraham, Anne Loos and Len Lesser.
The revamped Bradbury Award replaced the Nebula Award for Best Script.
In 1966, Bradbury helped Lynn Garrison create AVIAN, a specialist aviation magazine.
The family lived about four blocks from the Uptown Theater on Western Avenue in Los Angeles, the flagship theater for MGM and Fox.
He and Addams planned a larger collaborative work that would tell the family's complete history, but it never materialized, and according to a 2001 interview, they went their separate ways.
It was based on his story "The Magic White Suit" originally published in ''The Saturday Evening Post'' in 1957.
Bradbury's favorite writers growing up included Katherine Anne Porter, who wrote about the American South, Edith Wharton, and Jessamyn West.
A significant result of the film was Bradbury's book ''Green Shadows, White Whale'', a semi-fictionalized account of the making of the film, including Bradbury's dealings with Huston and his time in Ireland, where exterior scenes that were set in New Bedford, Massachusetts, were filmed.
The series began airing on BBC Radio 4 Extra on June 12, 2011.
The story had also previously been adapted as a play, a musical, and a 1958 television version.
Their shared love for science fiction, ''King Kong'', and the King Vidor-directed film ''The Fountainhead'', written by Ayn Rand, was the beginning of a lifelong friendship.
When later asked about the lyrical power of his prose, Bradbury replied, "From reading so much poetry every day of my life.
The second incident occurred in 1932, when a carnival entertainer, one Mr. Electrico, touched the young man on the nose with an electrified sword, made his hair stand on end, and shouted, "Live forever!"
The comics featuring Bradbury's stories included ''Tales from the Crypt'', ''Weird Science'', ''Weird Fantasy'', ''Crime Suspenstories'', ''Haunt of Fear'' and others.
Numerous Bradbury fans paid tribute to the author, noting the influence of his works on their own careers and creations.
Bradbury attended Los Angeles High School and was active in the drama club.
More than eight million copies of his works, published in over 36 languages, have been sold around the world.
In 1936, at a secondhand bookstore in Hollywood, Bradbury discovered a handbill promoting meetings of the Los Angeles Science Fiction Society.
Bradbury claimed a wide variety of influences, and described discussions he might have with his favorite poets and writers Robert Frost, William Shakespeare, John Steinbeck, Aldous Huxley, and Thomas Wolfe.
''The Martian Chronicles'' became a three-part TV miniseries starring Rock Hudson which was first broadcast by NBC in 1980.
After a rejection notice from the pulp ''Weird Tales'', Bradbury submitted "Homecoming" to ''Mademoiselle'' which was spotted by a young editorial assistant named Truman Capote.
From Steinbeck, he said he learned "how to write objectively and yet insert all of the insights without too much extra comment."
Bradbury chose a burial place at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles, with a headstone that reads "Author of Fahrenheit 451".
These two titles show what stories and episodes Bradbury decided to retain as he created the two books out of one.
From 1985 to 1992 Bradbury hosted a syndicated anthology television series, ''The Ray Bradbury Theater'', for which he adapted 65 of his stories.
If he had not discovered writing, he would have become a magician.
He was given the middle name "Douglas," after the actor Douglas Fairbanks.
Bradbury headed the Pandemonium Theatre Company in Los Angeles for many years and had a five-year relationship with the Fremont Centre Theatre in South Pasadena.
In addition to comics, he loved Edgar Rice Burroughs, creator of ''Tarzan of the Apes'', especially Burroughs' John Carter of Mars series.
There, Bradbury learned how to sneak in and watched previews almost every week.
When Bradbury returned to Los Angeles, he connected all the short stories that became ''The Martian Chronicles.''
At age 17, Bradbury read stories published in ''Astounding Science Fiction'', and read everything by Robert A. Heinlein, Arthur C. Clarke, and the early writings of Theodore Sturgeon and A. E. van Vogt.
* In 2005 he was awarded the degree of Doctor of Laws (honoris causa) by the National University of Ireland, Galway at a conferring ceremony in Los Angeles.
The latter was adapted from his 1957 novel ''Dandelion Wine''.
He was raised Baptist by his parents who were themselves infrequent churchgoers.
Also in the early 1950s, adaptations of Bradbury's stories were televised in several anthology shows, including ''Tales of Tomorrow'', ''Lights Out'', ''Out There'', ''Suspense'', ''CBS Television Workshop'', ''Jane Wyman's Fireside Theatre'', ''Star Tonight'', ''Windows'' and ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents''.
Between 1940 and 1947, he was a contributor to Rob Wagner's film magazine, ''Script''.
The family arrived with only $40, which paid for rent and food until his father finally found a job making wire at a cable company for $14 a week.
My favorite writers have been those who’ve said things well."
He said "libraries raised me", and shunned colleges and universities, comparing his own lack of funds during the Depression with poor contemporary students.
The film ''The Butterfly Effect'' revolves around the same theory as ''A Sound of Thunder'' and contains many references to its inspiration.
He is quoted, "If you're reluctant to weep, you won't live a full and complete life."
Bradbury suffered a stroke in 1999 that left him partially dependent on a wheelchair for mobility.
* In 2010, Spike TV Scream Awards Comic-Con Icon Award went to Bradbury
Bradbury and director Charles Rome Smith co-founded Pandemonium in 1964, staging the New York production of ''The World of Ray Bradbury'' (1964), adaptations of "The Pedestrian", "The Veldt", and "To the Chicago Abyss".
In his youth, he spent much time in the Carnegie library in Waukegan, reading such authors as H. G. Wells, Jules Verne, and Edgar Allan Poe.
''The Washington Post'' noted several modern day technologies that Bradbury had envisioned much earlier in his writing, such as the idea of banking ATMs and earbuds and Bluetooth headsets from ''Fahrenheit 451'', and the concepts of artificial intelligence within ''I Sing the Body Electric''.
Containing the prologue and three short stories from the book, the film received mediocre reviews.
It was later published at about 50,000 words under the name ''Fahrenheit 451'', for a total cost of $9.80, due to the library's typewriter-rental fees of ten cents per half-hour.
In 1969, ''The Illustrated Man'' was brought to the big screen, starring Rod Steiger, Claire Bloom and Robert Drivas.
Bradbury admitted that he stopped reading genre books in his twenties and embraced a broad field of literature that included Alexander Pope and poet John Donne.
Bradbury recalled, "He was well known, and he wrote humanistic science fiction, which influenced me to dare to be human instead of mechanical."
He took a Greyhound bus to New York and checked into a room at the YMCA for fifty cents a night.
As an adult, Bradbury considered himself a "delicatessen religionist" who resisted categorization of his beliefs and took guidance from both Eastern and Western faiths.
In 1965, three of Bradbury's stories were adapted for the stage.
Reviewing ''Dark Carnival'' for the ''New York Herald Tribune'', Will Cuppy proclaimed Bradbury "suitable for general consumption" and predicted that he would become a writer of the caliber of British fantasy author John Collier.
The New York Times called Bradbury "the writer most responsible for bringing modern science fiction into the literary mainstream."
He won a First Fandom Hall of Fame Award in 1996 and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 1999, its fourth class of two deceased and two living writers.
In Bradbury's works of fiction, 1920's Waukegan becomes "Green Town," Illinois.
The same year, Bradbury approached composer Jerry Goldsmith, who had worked with Bradbury in dramatic radio of the 1950s and later scored the film version of ''The Illustrated Man'', to compose a cantata ''Christus Apollo'' based on Bradbury's text.
Bradbury's short story ''I Sing the Body Electric'' (from the book of the same name) was adapted for the 100th episode of ''The Twilight Zone''.
Beginning 2010, the Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation is presented annually according to Nebula Awards rules and procedures, although it is not a Nebula Award.
In 1939, Bradbury joined Laraine Day's Wilshire Players Guild where for two years he wrote and acted in several plays.
Writer Neil Gaiman felt that "the landscape of the world we live in would have been diminished if we had not had him in our world".
His opinion varied on modern technology.
In 2002, Bradbury's own Pandemonium Theatre Company production of ''Fahrenheit 451'' at Burbank's Falcon Theatre combined live acting with projected digital animation by the  Pixel Pups.
Bradbury was married to Marguerite McClure (January 16, 1922&nbsp;– November 24, 2003) from 1947 until her death; they had four daughters: Susan, Ramona, Bettina and Alexandra.
On February 6, 2015, ''The New York Times'' reported that the house that Bradbury lived and wrote in for fifty years of his life, at 10265 Cheviot Drive in Cheviot Hills, Los Angeles, California, had been demolished by the buyer, architect Thom Mayne.
Bradbury found the miniseries "just boring".
Bradbury sold his first story, "The Lake", for $13.75 at the age of twenty-two.
The work premiered in late 1969, with the California Chamber Symphony performing with narrator Charlton Heston at UCLA.
In 2012, EDM artist deadmau5, along with guest vocalist Chris James, crafted a song called "The Veldt" inspired by Bradbury's short story of the same title.
Later, in 2006, Bradbury published the original novel remaining after the extraction, and retitled it ''Farewell Summer''.
When he was a boy, he met a young girl at the beach and she went out into the water and never came back.
* On April 14, 2007, Bradbury received the Sir Arthur Clarke Award's Special Award, given by Clarke to a recipient of his choice.
He often roller-skated through Hollywood in hopes of meeting celebrities.
In July 1939, Ackerman gave nineteen-year-old Bradbury the money to head to New York for the First World Science Fiction Convention in New York City, and funded Bradbury's fanzine, titled ''Futuria Fantasia''.
The young Bradbury was also a cartoonist and loved to illustrate.
He wrote about Tarzan and drew his own Sunday panels.
(Bradbury's first pay as a writer was at the age of fourteen, when Burns hired him to write for the Burns and Allen show).
In high school, Bradbury was active in both the Poetry Club and the Drama club, continuing plans to become an actor but becoming serious about his writing as his high school years progressed.
He rollerskated there as well as all over town, as he put it "hell-bent on getting autographs from glamorous stars.
When the publishing rights for ''Fahrenheit 451'' came up for renewal in December 2011, Bradbury permitted its publication in electronic form provided that the publisher, Simon & Schuster, allowed the e-book to be digitally downloaded by any library patron.
The grand opening of an annex to the store was attended by Bradbury and his favorite illustrator, Joseph Mugnaini in the mid-1980s.
Bradbury was born on August 22, 1920 in Waukegan, Illinois, to Esther (née Moberg) Bradbury (1888–1966), a Swedish immigrant, and Leonard Spaulding Bradbury (1890–1957), a power and telephone lineman of English descent.
It was at that age that Bradbury first started to do magic, which was his first great love.
* In 2003, he received an honorary doctorate from Woodbury University where he presented the Ray Bradbury Creativity Award each year until his death.
The Ray Bradbury Award for excellency in screenwriting was occasionally presented by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America – presented to six people on four occasions from 1992 to 2009.
In 2005, it was reported that Bradbury was upset with filmmaker Michael Moore for using the title ''Fahrenheit 9/11'', which is an allusion to Bradbury's ''Fahrenheit 451'', for his documentary about the George W. Bush administration.
It's a very bad place for writers because the teachers always think they know more than you do – and they don’t."
Short film adaptations of ''A Piece of Wood'' and ''The Small Assassin'' were released in 2005 and 2007 respectively.
Bradbury wrote most of its four issues, each limited to under 100 copies.
* On December 6, 2012, the Los Angeles street corner at 5th and Flower Streets was named in his honor.
Books are all over the place, and computers will be too".
He made a film adaptation of The Veldt ("Вельд") in 1987.
Three weeks later came the release of Eugène Lourié's ''The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms'' (1953), which featured one scene based on Bradbury's "The Fog Horn", about a sea monster mistaking the sound of a fog horn for the mating cry of a female.
Voiceover actor Paul Frees provided narration, while Bradbury himself was responsible for the opening voiceover; Greg Hansen and Roger Hoffman scored the episodes.
In 1984, Michael McDonough of Brigham Young University produced "Bradbury 13", a series of 13 audio adaptations of famous stories from Bradbury, in conjunction with National Public Radio.
The 1998 film ''The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit'', released by Touchstone Pictures, was written by Bradbury.
Bradbury was hired in 1953 by director John Huston to work on the screenplay for his film version of Melville's ''Moby Dick'' (1956), which stars Gregory Peck as Captain Ahab, Richard Basehart as Ishmael, and Orson Welles as Father Mapple.
* On May 17, 2008, Bradbury received the inaugural J. Lloyd Eaton Lifetime Achievement Award in Science Fiction, presented by the UCR Libraries at the 2008 Eaton Science Fiction Conference, "Chronicling Mars".
Among the creative and talented people Bradbury met this way were special effects pioneer Ray Harryhausen and radio star George Burns.
Bradbury would later return the favor by writing a short story, "Tyrannosaurus Rex", about a stop-motion animator who strongly resembled Harryhausen.
It serves as the setting of his semi-autobiographical classics ''Dandelion Wine'', ''Something Wicked This Way Comes'', and ''Farewell Summer'' as well as in many of his short stories.
Just before getting ready to go home, Bradbury had dinner with an editor at Doubleday.
Bradbury was invited by Forrest J. Ackerman  to attend the Los Angeles Science Fiction Society, which at the time met at Clifton's Cafeteria in downtown Los Angeles.
They were, as Bradbury later described, "so incredibly bad" that he gave up playwriting for two decades.
He told ''The Paris Review'', "You can't learn to write in college.
His first collection of short stories, ''Dark Carnival'', was published in 1947 by Arkham House, a small press in Sauk City, Wisconsin, owned by writer August Derleth.
Each episode would begin with a shot of Bradbury in his office, gazing over mementoes of his life, which he states (in narrative) are used to spark ideas for stories.
Bradbury was once described as a "Midwest surrealist" and is often labeled a science fiction writer, which he described as "the art of the possible."
The  shop  closed its doors in 1987 but in 1990 another shop with the same name (with different owners) opened in Carlsbad, California.
* On February 24, 2013, Bradbury was honored during the 85th Academy Awards in the 'In Memoriam' segment.
This period provided foundations for both the author and his stories.
Bradbury appeared in the documentary ''The Fantasy Film Worlds of George Pal'' (1985), produced and directed by Arnold Leibovit.
Instead, he extracted seventeen stories and, with three other Green Town tales, bridged them into his 1957 book ''Dandelion Wine''.
Bradbury relates the following meeting with Sergei Bondarchuk, director of Soviet epic film series ''War and Peace'', at a Hollywood award ceremony in Bondarchuk's honor:
At twelve, Bradbury began writing traditional horror stories and said he tried to imitate Poe until he was about eighteen.
Another close friend was animator Ray Harryhausen, who was best man at Bradbury's wedding.
The teachers recognized his talent and  furthered his interest in writing, but he did not attend college.
Bradbury's works and approach to writing are documented in Terry Sanders' film ''Ray Bradbury: Story of a Writer'' (1963).
We have got to get rid of those machines.
Bradbury remained an enthusiastic playwright all his life, leaving a rich theatrical legacy as well as literary.
On his death in 2012, ''The New York Times'' called Bradbury "the writer most responsible for bringing modern science fiction into the literary mainstream."
The episode was first aired on May 18, 1962.
* In 2012, the NASA ''Curiosity'' rover landing site () on the planet Mars was named "Bradbury Landing".
The full-cast dramatizations featured adaptations of "The Ravine," "Night Call, Collect," "The Veldt", "There Was an Old Woman", "Kaleidoscope", "Dark They Were, and Golden-Eyed", "The Screaming Woman," "A Sound of Thunder," "The Man", "The Wind", "The Fox and the Forest", "Here There Be Tygers" and "The Happiness Machine".
In 1972 The Screaming Woman was adapted as an ABC Movie-of-the-Week starring Olivia de Havilland.
Initially, the writers plagiarized his stories, but a diplomatic letter from Bradbury about it led to the company paying him and negotiating properly licensed adaptations of his work.
We have too many machines now".
Excited to find there were others sharing his interest, Bradbury joined a weekly Thursday-night conclave at age sixteen.
During a BAFTA 2010 awards tribute in honor of Ray Harryhausen's 90th birthday, Bradbury spoke of his first meeting Harryhausen at Forrest J Ackerman's house when they were both 18 years old.
* Bradbury received a World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement at the 1977 World Fantasy Convention and was named Gandalf Grand Master of Fantasy at the 1980 World Science Fiction Convention.
Bradbury made regular appearances at science fiction conventions until 2009, when he retired from the circuit.
When they first appeared on the scene, people were saying, 'Oh my God, I'm so afraid.'
That evening, he stayed up all night at the YMCA and typed out an outline.
As a teen in Beverly Hills, he often visited his mentor and friend, science fiction writer Bob Olsen, sharing ideas and maintaining contact.
Bradbury was a close friend of Charles Addams, and Addams illustrated the first of Bradbury's stories about the Elliotts, a family that would resemble Addams' own Addams Family placed in rural Illinois.
Oskar Werner and Julie Christie starred in ''Fahrenheit 451'' (1966), an adaptation of Bradbury's novel directed by François Truffaut.
On June 6, 2012, in an official public statement from the White House Press Office, President Barack Obama said:
Bradbury's first published story was "Hollerbochen's Dilemma", which appeared in the January 1938 number of Forrest J. Ackerman's fanzine ''Imagination!''.
Bradbury was free to start a career in writing when, owing to his bad eyesight, he was rejected admission into the military during World War II.
But the novels and stories remain, in all their resonance and strange beauty."
In regard to his education, Bradbury said:
The director was Charles Rome Smith and the production company was Pandemonium Productions.
* On April 16, 2007, Bradbury received a special citation by the Pulitzer Prize jury "for his distinguished, prolific, and deeply influential career as an unmatched author of science fiction and fantasy."
He listened to the radio show ''Chandu the Magician'', and when the show went off the air every night he would sit and write the entire script from memory.
* For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Bradbury was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on April 1, 2002.
His wife of fifty-six years, Maggie, as she was affectionately called, was the only woman Bradbury ever dated.
* In 1994, he received the Peggy V. Helmerich Distinguished Author Award, presented annually by the Tulsa Library Trust.
I have written every single day of my life since that day 69 years ago."
In 1985 Bradbury wrote, "I see nothing but good coming from computers.
Bradbury is featured prominently in two documentaries related to his classic 1950s-1960s era: Jason V Brock's  ''Charles Beaumont: The Life of Twilight Zone's Magic Man'', which details his troubles with Rod Serling, and his friendships with writers Charles Beaumont, George Clayton Johnson, and most especially his dear friend William F. Nolan, as well as Brock's  ''The AckerMonster Chronicles!
Bradbury's poem "Groon" was voiced as a tribute in 2012.
In 1984 a cartoon adaptation of There Will Come Soft Rains («Будет ласковый дождь») came out by Uzbek director Nazim Tyuhladziev.
Though he lived in Los Angeles, Bradbury never obtained a driver's license but relied on public transportation or his bicycle.
A reinvention of Waukegan, Green Town is a symbol of safety and home, which is often juxtaposed as a contrasting backdrop to tales of fantasy or menace.
The park contains locations described in ''Dandelion Wine'', most notably the "113 steps".
In 1984, Telarium released a game for Commodore 64 based on ''Fahrenheit 451''.
The 1982 television movie, ''The Electric Grandmother'', was based on Bradbury's short story "I Sing the Body Electric."
He became a full-time writer by the end of 1942.
In 1989 came out a cartoon adaptation of "Here There Be Tygers" («Здесь могут водиться тигры») by director Vladimir Samsonov.
An aunt read him short stories when he was a child.
Bradbury asserted that he did not want any of the money made by the movie, nor did he believe that he deserved it.
When Bradbury recounted that everyone wanted a novel and he didn't have one, the editor, coincidentally named Walter Bradbury, asked if the short stories might be tied together into a book length collection.
Instead, he sold newspapers at the corner of South Norton Avenue and Olympic Boulevard.
Bradbury attributed to two incidents his lifelong habit of writing every day.
The sound I hear today is the thunder of a giant's footsteps fading away.
One of the latter was called 'A Sound of Thunder.'
Bradbury is credited with writing 27 novels and over 600 short stories.
Isherwood's glowing review followed.
In 1989 the Horror Writers Association gave him the fourth or fifth Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement in horror fiction and the Science Fiction Writers of America made him its 10th SFWA Grand Master.
The 1983 horror film ''Something Wicked This Way Comes'', starring Jason Robards and Jonathan Pryce, is based on the Bradbury novel of the same name.
The best description of my career as a writer is, 'At play in the fields of the Lord.'"
