Psychologists and cognitive scientists have attempted to study and explain how people reason, e.g.
The two competing theories concerning the origins of reason are relevant to political and ethical thought because, according to the Aristotelian theory, a best way of living together exists independently of historical circumstances.
Going further back, although Aristotle is a source of the idea that only humans have reason (''logos''), he does mention that animals with imagination, for whom sense perceptions can persist, come closest to having something like reasoning and ''nous'', and even uses the word "logos" in one place to describe the distinctions which animals can perceive in such cases.
These therefore are not to be blamed on nature or God.
For example, in opposition to subject-centred reason, Habermas has proposed a model of communicative reason that sees it as an essentially cooperative activity, based on the fact of linguistic intersubjectivity.
Therefore, suggested Kant, on the basis of such a self, it is in fact possible to reason both about the conditions and limits of human knowledge.
Analogical reasoning can be viewed as a form of inductive reasoning from a single example, but if it is intended as inductive reasoning it is a bad example, because inductive reasoning typically uses a large number of examples to reason from the particular to the general.
Instead, the unity of reason has to be strictly formal, or "procedural."
The earliest major philosophers to publish in English, such as Francis Bacon, Thomas Hobbes, and John Locke also routinely wrote in Latin and French, and compared their terms to Greek, treating the words "''logos''", "''ratio''", "''raison''" and "reason" as inter-changeable.
Within the human mind or soul (''psyche''), reason was described by Plato as being the natural monarch which should rule over the other parts, such as spiritedness (''thumos'') and the passions.
In the last several decades, a number of proposals have been made to "re-orient" this critique of reason, or to recognize the "other voices" or "new departments" of reason:
The proposal that reason gives humanity a special position in nature has been argued to be a defining characteristic of western philosophy and later western modern science, starting with classical Greece.
Since the 17th century rationalists, reason has often been taken to be a subjective faculty, or rather the unaided ability (pure reason) to form concepts.
Imitation is found especially in monkeys and apes ... but ... Mimesis is fundamentally different from imitation and mimicry in that it involves the invention of intentional representations.
This thinking (''dianoia'') is "...an activity which consists in making the vast and diffuse jungle of the visible world depend on a plurality of more 'precise' ''noēta''."
Philosophy can be described as a way of life based upon reason, and in the other direction reason has been one of the major subjects of philosophical discussion since ancient times.
The other question is whether a life of reason, a life that aims to be guided by reason, can be expected to achieve a happy life more so than other ways of life (whether such a life of reason results in knowledge or not).
For Habermas, these three spheres are the domain of experts, and therefore need to be mediated with the "lifeworld" by philosophers.
Subsequently, several alternative theories were proposed, including the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development.
One of the most important of these changes involved a change in the metaphysical understanding of human beings.
Breaking with tradition and many thinkers after him, Descartes explicitly did not divide the incorporeal soul into parts, such as reason and intellect, describing them as one indivisible incorporeal entity.
What Klein refers to as ''dianoetic eikasia'' is the ''eikasia'' concerned specifically with thinking and mental images, such as those mental symbols, icons, ''signes'', and marks discussed above as definitive of reason.
which cognitive and neural processes are engaged, and how cultural factors affect the inferences that people draw.
He asked what really can be said about what is natural to mankind.
A deduction is also the conclusion reached by a deductive reasoning process.
If anything is specifically human in this theory, it is the flexibility and adaptability of humans.
In the essay "What is Enlightenment?
Conclusions reached in this way are considered more certain than sense perceptions on their own.
The ancient Greek ''anamnēsis'', normally translated as "recollection" was opposed to ''mneme'' or ''memory''.
For example, it is the means by which rational beings understand themselves to think about cause and effect, truth and falsehood, and what is good or bad.
Kant attempted to show that pure reason could form concepts (time and space) that are the conditions of experience.
Donald like Plato (and Aristotle, especially in ''On Memory and Recollection''), emphasizes the peculiarity in humans of voluntary initiation of a search through one's mental world.
Human reason requires more than being able to associate two ideas, even if those two ideas might be described by a reasoning human as a cause and an effect, perceptions of smoke, for example, and memories of fire.
Aristotle, Plato's student, defined human beings as rational animals, emphasizing reason as a characteristic of human nature.
Research in this area includes research into the structure and function of normally functioning brains, and of damaged or otherwise unusual brains.
This effectively puts the human race into slavery.
He ''defined'' the highest human happiness or well being (''eudaimonia'') as a life which is lived consistently, excellently and completely in accordance with reason.
Patricia Cohen, writing for The New York Times, summarizes some of Mercier's thoughts on this "Argumentative Theory" (which states that reason is adapted to persuasion).
Trained apes are able to make this distinction; young children make this distinction early – hence, their effortless distinction between play-acting an event and the event itself
Reason is for Plotinus both the provider of form to material things, and the light which brings individuals souls back into line with their source.
Imagination is not only found in humans.
Damasio argues that these somatic markers (known collectively as "gut feelings") are "intuitive signals" that direct our decision making processes in a certain way that cannot be solved with rationality alone.
*Conclusion: Socrates is mortal.
Damasio further argues that rationality requires emotional input in order to function.
Nature was no longer assumed to be human-like, with its own aims or reason, and human nature was no longer assumed to work according to anything other than the same "laws of nature" which affect inanimate things.
In other words, according to Rousseau, reason, language and rational community did not arise because of any conscious decision or plan by humans or gods, nor because of any pre-existing human nature.
... By nature, then, the drive for such a community exists in everyone, but the first to set one up is responsible for things of very great goodness.
Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them."
Deduction is a form of reasoning in which a conclusion follows necessarily from the stated premises.
Secular critics sometimes accuse all religious adherents of irrationality, since they claim such adherents are guilty of ignoring, suppressing, or forbidding some kinds of reasoning concerning some subjects (such as religious dogmas, moral taboos, etc.).
According to him, both are related to the primary perceptive ability of animals, which gathers the perceptions of different senses and defines the order of the things that are perceived without distinguishing universals, and without deliberation or ''logos''.
For reason to be involved, the association of smoke and the fire would have to be thought through in a way which can be explained, for example as cause and effect.
When Aristotle referred to "the logical" (''hē logikē''), he was referring more broadly to rational thought.
The field of logic studies ways in which human beings reason through argument.
In the 18th century, Immanuel Kant attempted to show that Hume was wrong by demonstrating that a "transcendental" self, or "I", was a necessary condition of all experience.
In Greek, "first principles" are ''archai'', "starting points", and the faculty used to perceive them is sometimes referred to in Aristotle and Plato as ''nous'' which was close in meaning to ''awareness'' or ''consciousness''.
Animal psychology considers the question of whether animals other than humans can reason.
According to Strauss the beginning of philosophy involved the "discovery or invention of nature" and the "pre-philosophical equivalent of nature" was supplied by "such notions as 'custom' or 'ways, which appear to be ''really universal in all times and places''.
Reason and imagination rely on similar mental processes.
Tolkien wrote in his essay "On Fairy Stories" that the terms "fantasy" and "enchantment" are connected to not only "....the satisfaction of certain primordial human desires...." but also "...the origin of language and of the mind."
This permits voluntary recall of mimetic representations, without the aid of external cues – probably the earliest form of representational ''thinking''."
A classic example of inductive reasoning comes from the empiricist David Hume:
This new understanding eventually displaced the previous world view that derived from a spiritual understanding of the universe.
Stoic philosophy by contrast considered all passions bad.
People use logic, deduction, and induction, to reach conclusions they think are true.
On the other hand, if such reasoned conclusions are only built originally upon a foundation of sense perceptions, then, our most logical conclusions can never be said to be certain because they are built upon the very same fallible perceptions they seek to better.
What distinguishes abduction from the other forms of reasoning is an attempt to favour one conclusion above others, by attempting to falsify alternative explanations or by demonstrating the likelihood of the favoured conclusion, given a set of more or less disputable assumptions.
When communicated, such speech becomes language, and the marks or notes or remembrance are called "Signes" by Hobbes.
Assessing how well someone engages in reasoning is the project of determining the extent to which the person is rational or acts rationally.
Looking at logical categorizations of different types of reasoning the traditional main division made in philosophy is between deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning.
Similar to Descartes, Hobbes asserted that "No discourse whatsoever, can end in absolute knowledge of fact, past, or to come" but that "sense and memory" is absolute knowledge.
Experiments investigate how people make inferences about factual situations, hypothetical possibilities, probabilities, and counterfactual situations.
French social and cognitive scientist Dan Sperber, with his colleague Hugo describes the idea that there could have been other forces driving the evolution of reason.
Some Enlightenment camps took after the Stoics to say Reason should oppose Passion rather than order it, while others like the Romantics considered Passion the ruler over Reason or to the exclusion of Reason, thus the Modern colloquy of "follow your heart".
... Mimesis is not absolutely tied to external communication.
It is for these reasons that both utility ''chrēsimon'' and pleasure ''hēdu'' seem to be found in this kind of friendship.
According to Hegel, "...the only thought which Philosophy brings with it to the contemplation of History, is the simple conception of reason; that reason is the Sovereign of the World; that the history of the world, therefore, presents us with a rational process."
He used the word ''speech'' as an English version of the Greek word ''logos'' so that speech did not need to be communicated.
But this is not yet reason, because human imagination is different.
Although there is this special history of debate concerning reason and faith in the Islamic, Christian and Jewish traditions, the pursuit of reason is sometimes argued to be compatible with the other practice of other religions of a different nature, such as Hinduism, because they do not define their tenets in such an absolute way.
It followed from this that animals have reason, only much less complex than human reason.
Empiricism (sometimes associated with Aristotle but more correctly associated with British philosophers such as John Locke and David Hume, as well as their ancient equivalents such as Democritus) asserts that sensory impressions are the only available starting points for reasoning and attempting to attain truth.
As a result, he claimed, living together in rationally organized communities like modern humans is a development with many negative aspects compared to the original state of man as an ape.
Relatedly, the conclusion of an inductive argument contains more information than is already contained in the premises.
Meta-reasoning is reasoning about reasoning.
They test whether people can make valid deductions about spatial and temporal relations, e.g., ''A is to the left of B'', or ''A happens after B'', and about quantified assertions, e.g., ''All the A are B''.
Kant made his argument in opposition to Hume, who denied that reason had any role to play in experience.
*Premise 2:  Beyoncé is human.
This argument has remained a central argument in all political, ethical and moral thinking since then, and has become especially controversial since firstly Rousseau's Second Discourse, and secondly, the Theory of Evolution.
Memory, shared with some animals, requires a consciousness not only of what happened in the past, but also ''that'' something happened in the past, which is in other words a kind of ''eikasia'' "...but nothing except man is able to recollect."
For example, perhaps reason alone is not enough to explain such big questions as the origins of the universe, the origin of life, the origin of consciousness, the foundation of morality, or the destiny of the human race.
But speech ''logos'' serves to make plain what is advantageous and harmful and so also what is just and unjust.
For example, in the neo-platonist account of Plotinus, the cosmos has one soul, which is the seat of all reason, and the souls of all individual humans are part of this soul.
This requires a programming language capable of reflection, the ability to observe and modify its own structure and behaviour.
An informal fallacy is an error in reasoning that occurs due to a problem with the ''content'', rather than mere ''structure'', of the argument.
Peter Simpson's translation, with Greek terms inserted in square brackets.)
This distinction, as suggested, has two dimensions:
He thus described reason as a group of three autonomous spheres (on the model of Kant's three critiques):
Voice, of course, serves to indicate what is painful and pleasant; that is why it is also found in other animals, because their nature has reached the point where they can perceive what is painful and pleasant and express these to each other.
The reason is that injustice is most difficult to deal with when furnished with weapons, and the weapons a human being has are meant by nature to go along with prudence and virtue, but it is only too possible to turn them to contrary uses.
All the same, Rousseau understands such corrections to be only ameliorations of an essentially unsatisfactory condition, that of socially and intellectually corrupted humanity."
Scientists and philosophers began to question the teleological understanding of the world.
For it is a peculiarity of humans, in contrast to the other animals, to have perception of good and bad, just and unjust, and the like; and the community in these things makes a household or city ''polis''.
Intentions are nothing more than imagined actions, internalizings of the external.
:Conclusion: The sun will also rise in the east tomorrow.
Rousseau says that he almost dares to assert that nature does not destine men to be healthy.
This eventually became known as epistemological or "subject-centred" reason, because it is based on the ''knowing subject'', who perceives the rest of the world and itself as a set of objects to be studied, and successfully mastered by applying the knowledge accumulated through such study.
Hume famously remarked that, "We speak not strictly and philosophically when we talk of the combat of passion and of reason.
First we hold an intense interest in our own well-being.
Starting with a modern author, Merlin Donald writes
This could also help explain why humans, according to Sperber, are not optimized to reason effectively alone.
The oldest surviving writing to explicitly consider the rules by which reason operates are the works of the Greek philosopher Aristotle, especially ''Prior Analysis'' and ''Posterior Analysis''.
Foucault, believe there are other ''forms'' of reason, neglected but essential to modern life, and to our understanding of what it means to live a life according to reason.
In drawing such a picture of reason, Habermas hoped to demonstrate that the substantive unity of reason, which in pre-modern societies had been able to answer questions about the good life, could be made up for by the unity of reason's formalizable procedures.
In these circumstances, "the use of reason must be free and public."
(Aristotle's Politics 1253a 1.2.
Thus, this method of reasoning is ampliative.
The meaning of the word "reason" in senses such as "human reason" also overlaps to a large extent with "rationality" and the adjective of "reason" in philosophical contexts is normally "rational", rather than "reasoned" or "reasonable".
A dog might perceive the "meaning" of a fight that was realistically play-acted by humans, but it could not reconstruct the message or distinguish the representation from its referent (a real fight).
In artificial intelligence and computer science, scientists study and use automated reasoning for diverse applications including automated theorem proving the formal semantics of programming languages, and formal specification in software engineering.
And so long as these limits are respected, reason can be the vehicle of morality, justice and understanding.
Such research may focus, for example, on how people perform on tests of reasoning such as intelligence or IQ tests, or on how well people's reasoning matches ideals set by logic (see, for example, the Wason test).
Any group that managed to find ways of reasoning effectively would reap benefits for all its members, increasing their fitness.
Recollection is a deliberate effort to search for and recapture something once known.
Rationality is often divided into its respective theoretical and practical counterparts.
One example of such a system of artificial symbols and signs is language.
As pointed out by philosophers such as Hobbes, Locke and Hume, some animals are also clearly capable of a type of "associative thinking", even to the extent of associating causes and effects.
*Premise 2: Socrates is a human.
Hume took it in an especially skeptical direction, proposing that there could be no possibility of deducing relationships of cause and effect, and therefore no knowledge is based on reasoning alone, even if it seems otherwise.
If so, reason can work on those problems over which it has authority while other sources of knowledge or opinion can have authority on the big questions.
Perhaps starting with Pythagoras or Heraclitus, the cosmos is even said to have reason.
Idealism, (associated with Plato and his school), claims that there is a "higher" reality, from which certain people can directly arrive at truth without needing to rely only upon the senses, and that this higher reality is therefore the primary source of truth.
The conclusions to be drawn from the discussions of Aristotle and Plato on this matter are amongst the most debated in the history of philosophy.
Other results are consciousness, and imagination or fantasy.
Religious adherents sometimes respond by arguing that faith and reason can be reconciled, or have different non-overlapping domains, or that critics engage in a similar kind of irrationalism:
After the critiques of reason in the early Enlightenment the appetites were rarely discussed or conflated with the passions.
Accordingly, in the 17th century, René Descartes explicitly rejected the traditional notion of humans as "rational animals," suggesting instead that they are nothing more than "thinking things" along the lines of other "things" in nature.
One classic example of deductive reasoning is that found in syllogisms like the following:
This approach always leads to the controversial conclusion that absolute knowledge is not attainable.
There are many religious traditions, some of which are explicitly fideist and others of which claim varying degrees of rationalism.
But teleological accounts such as Aristotle's were highly influential for those who attempt to explain reason in a way which is consistent with monotheism and the immortality and divinity of the human soul.
*Premise 1: Socrates is human and male.
Experiments examine how people make inferences from conditionals e.g., ''If A then B'' and how they make inferences about alternatives, e.g., ''A or else B''.
More generally, reason in the strict sense requires the ability to create and manipulate a system of symbols, as well as indices and icons, according to Charles Sanders Peirce, the symbols having only a nominal, though habitual, connection to either smoke or fire.
#'''Aesthetic reason''' is typically found in works of art and literature, and encompasses the novel ways of seeing the world and interpreting things that those practices embody.
Some thinkers, e.g.
The first question is concerning whether we can be confident that reason can achieve knowledge of truth better than other ways of trying to achieve such knowledge.
Since classical times a question has remained constant in philosophical debate (which is sometimes seen as a conflict between movements called Platonism and Aristotelianism) concerning the role of reason in confirming truth.
An argument that contains a formal fallacy will always be invalid.
In contrast to reason as an abstract noun, a reason is a consideration which explains or justifies some event, phenomenon, or behavior.
Formal logic has been described as ''the science of deduction''.
*Premise 1: All humans are mortal.
According to Velkley, "Rousseau outlines certain programs of rational self-correction, most notably the political legislation of the ''Contrat Social'' and the moral education in ''Émile''.
For example, when a patient displays certain symptoms, there might be various possible causes, but one of these is preferred above others as being more probable.
In various ways,  German Idealism after Kant, and major later figures such Nietzsche, Bergson, Husserl, Scheler, and Heidegger, remain pre-occupied with problems coming from the metaphysical demands or ''urges'' of ''reason''.
We become dependent upon each other, and on relationships of authority and obedience.
It also does not mean that humans acting on the basis of experience or habit are using their reason.
These two passions lead us to desire more than we could achieve.
Such an approach allowed religious philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas and Étienne Gilson to try to show that reason and revelation are compatible.
After Plato and Aristotle,  western literature often treated reason as being the faculty that trained the passions and appetites.
Reason is often said to be reflexive, or "self-correcting," and the critique of reason has been a persistent theme in philosophy.
", Michel Foucault proposed a concept of critique based on Kant's distinction between "private" and "public" uses of reason.
Consequently, if a human being lacks virtue, he is the most unholy and savage thing, and when it comes to sex and food, the worst.
Rousseau's theory, that human nature is malleable rather than fixed, is often taken to imply, for example by Karl Marx, a wider range of possible ways of living together than traditionally known.
For nature, as we say, makes nothing in vain, and humans are the only animals who possess reasoned speech ''logos''.
All action is therefore imitation of action; it is poetic...
Reason or "reasoning" is associated with thinking, cognition, and intellect.
Sperber points out that reasoning is very difficult for humans to do effectively, and that it is hard for individuals to doubt their own beliefs.
Two categories of problem concerning reason have long been discussed by philosophers concerning reason, essentially being reasonings about reasoning itself as a human aim, or philosophizing about philosophizing.
*'''Private reason''' is the reason that is used when an individual is "a cog in a machine" or when one "has a role to play in society and jobs to do: to be a soldier, to have taxes to pay, to be in charge of a parish, to be a civil servant."
I am therefore precisely nothing but a thinking thing; that is a mind, or intellect, or understanding, or reason – words of whose meanings I was previously ignorant.
The field of automated reasoning studies how reasoning may or may not be modeled computationally.
Hume also took his definition of reason to unorthodox extremes by arguing, unlike his predecessors, that human reason is not qualitatively different from either simply conceiving individual ideas, or from judgments associating two ideas, and that "reason is nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our souls, which carries us along a certain train of ideas, and endows them with particular qualities, according to their particular situations and relations."
Rousseau saw "two principles prior to reason" in human nature.
In the late 17th century, through the 18th century, John Locke and David Hume developed Descartes' line of thought still further.
Already in Aristotle there was an awareness that the ''polis'' had not always existed and had needed to be invented or developed by humans themselves.
This is the ability to perceive whether a perception is an image of something else, related somehow but not the same, and therefore allows humans to perceive that a dream or memory or a reflection in a mirror is not reality as such.
In contrast, modern proponents of a genetic pre-disposition to language itself include Noam Chomsky and Steven Pinker, to whom Donald and Deacon can be contrasted.
In classical descriptions, an equivalent description of this mental faculty is ''eikasia'', in the philosophy of Plato.
In Michael Davis's account of the theory of man in this work.
* '''Non-overlapping magisteria:''' Evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould argues that there need not be conflict between reason and religious belief because they are each authoritative in their own domain (or "magisterium").
This leads to the question of what types of first principles, or starting points of reasoning, are available for someone seeking to come to true conclusions.
It is used to observe events, to predict and control outcomes, and to intervene in the world on the basis of its hypotheses;
''Mimēsis'' is a concept, now popular again in academic discussion, that was particularly prevalent in Plato's works, and within Aristotle, it is discussed mainly in the ''Poetics''.
But justice is something political to do with the ''polis'', for right is the arrangement of the political community, and right is discrimination of what is just.
The word "formal" refers to this link to the ''form'' of the argument.
It is the distinctive feature of human action, that whenever we choose what we do, we imagine an action for ourselves as though we were inspecting it from the outside.
At this time I admit nothing that is not necessarily true.
In the vision of these thinkers, reason is divine or at least has divine attributes.
:Premise: The sun has risen in the east every morning up until now.
It has been defined in different ways, at different times, by different thinkers about human nature.
To Cohen, the idea is that humans debate like lawyers: they often commit to one side of an argument and converse until the truth is discovered.
Some philosophers, Thomas Hobbes for example, also used the word ''ratiocination'' as a synonym for "reasoning".
Abductive reasoning, or argument to the best explanation, is a form of inductive reasoning, since the conclusion in an abductive argument does not follow with certainty from its premises and concerns something unobserved.
This view of the animal origins of distinctive human characteristics later received support from Charles Darwin's Theory of Evolution.
The household came first, and the first villages and cities were just extensions of that, with the first cities being run as if they were still families with Kings acting like fathers.
Although the Ancient Greeks had no separate word for logic as distinct from language and reason, Aristotle's newly coined word "syllogism" (''syllogismos'') identified logic clearly for the first time as a distinct field of study.
The concept of human nature being fixed in this way, implied, in other words, that we can define what type of community is always best for people.
Analogical reasoning often leads to wrong conclusions.
Many writers (such as Nikos Kazantzakis) extol passion and disparage reason.
