A disadvantage of this type of recycling is that the molecular weight of the polymer can change further and the levels of unwanted substances in the plastic can increase with each remelt.
San Francisco's refuse hauler, Recology, operates an effective recyclables sorting facility in San Francisco, which helped San Francisco reach a record-breaking diversion rate of 80%.
Large pieces of corrugated fiberboard and plastic bags are removed by hand at this stage, as they can cause later machinery to jam.
The post-processed material can then be sold on, hopefully creating a profit.
Such a process would be able to accept almost any polymer or mix of polymers, including thermoset materials such as vulcanized rubber tires and the biopolymers in feathers and other agricultural waste.
There is a simple test for determining whether something is a resource... or just garbage...
Transportation and the compaction of materials can make it more difficult to separate material back into separate waste streams.
Television sets and monitors must be manually disassembled to remove lead from CRTs or the mercury backlight from LCDs.
In a study done by social psychologist Shawn Burn, it was found that personal contact with individuals within a neighborhood is the most effective way to increase recycling within a community.
In the European Union, the WEEE Directive requires producers of consumer electronics to reimburse the recyclers' costs.
In his study, he had 10 block leaders talk to their neighbors and persuade them to recycle.
An Emergy life-cycle analysis on recycling revealed that fly ash, aluminum, recycled concrete aggregate, recycled plastic, and steel yield higher efficiency ratios, whereas the recycling of lumber generates the lowest recycle benefit ratio.
The City and County of San Francisco's Department of the Environment is attempting to achieve a city-wide goal of  Zero Waste by 2020.
By contrast, in wild ecosystems, one population's wastes are another population's resources, and succession results in efficient exploitation of available resources.
After these schemes were set up, many countries did not have the capacity to deal with the sheer quantity of e-waste they generated or its hazardous nature.
Certain countries trade in unprocessed recyclates.
Many recyclers do not recycle e-waste responsibly.
In 2008, the prices of recyclable waste plummeted before rebounding in 2009.
This process of recycling as well as reusing the recycled material has proven advantageous because it reduces amount of waste sent to landfills, conserves natural resources, saves energy, reduces greenhouse gas emissions and helps create new jobs.
This separation is usually done by hand but has become automated in some sorting centers: a spectroscopic scanner is used to differentiate between different types of paper and plastic based on the absorbed wavelengths, and subsequently divert each material into the proper collection channel.
For example, paperboard packaging for food products is more easily recycled than most plastic, but is heavier to ship and may result in more waste from spoilage.
Many secondary goods were collected, processed and sold by peddlers who scoured dumps and city streets for discarded machinery, pots, pans and other sources of metal.
However, recent studies have concluded that social pressure is unviable in this context.
Another process involves conversion of assorted polymers into petroleum by a much less precise thermal depolymerization process.
Content mandates specify that a certain percentage of a new product must consist of recycled material.
The extra must be downcycled into building materials or re-inserted into the regular waste stream.
Some recycling advocates believe that laissez-faire individual-based recycling does not cover all of society's recycling needs.
The report authors observed that, as metals are inherently recyclable, the metal stocks in society can serve as huge mines above ground (the term "'''urban mining'''" has been coined with this idea in mind).
One labor-intensive underused waste is electronic and computer waste.
These include an adequate source of recyclates, a system to extract those recyclates from the waste stream, a nearby factory capable of reprocessing the recyclates, and a potential demand for the recycled products.
Examples include: decreased air pollution and greenhouse gases from incineration, reduced hazardous waste leaching from landfills, reduced energy consumption, and reduced waste and resource consumption, which leads to a reduction in environmentally damaging mining and timber activity.
In a 2002 article for The Heartland Institute, Jerry Taylor, director of natural resource studies at the Cato Institute, wrote, "If it costs X to deliver newly manufactured plastic to the market, for example, but it costs 10X to deliver reused plastic to the market, we can conclude the resources required to recycle plastic are 10 times more scarce than the resources required to make plastic from scratch.
Recycling of plastics is more difficult, as most programs are not able to reach the necessary level of quality.
Recycling is more efficient in densely populated areas, as there are economies of scale involved.
Some critics argue that it takes more energy to produce recycled products than it does to dispose of them in traditional landfill methods, since the curbside collection of recyclables often requires a second waste truck.
Tierney also points out that "the prices paid for scrap materials are a measure of their environmental value as recyclables.
The material is collected in various methods and delivered to a facility where it undergoes re-manufacturing so that it can used in the production of new materials or products.
Certain requirements must be met for recycling to be economically feasible and environmentally effective.
For example, to facilitate the re-manufacturing of clear glass products there are tight restrictions for colored glass going into the re-melt process.
Virgin plastic resin costs 40 percent less than recycled resin.
The construction industry may recycle concrete and old road surface pavement, selling their waste materials for profit.
Curbside collection encompasses many subtly different systems, which differ mostly on where in the process the recyclates are sorted and cleaned.
Fiscal efficiency is separate from economic efficiency.
Thomas C. Kinnaman concludes that a landfill tax would force consumers, companies and councils to recycle more.
With the creation of large recycling organizations that may be profitable, either by law or economies of scale, the poor are more likely to be driven out of the recycling and the remanufacturing market.
Gasification is a similar process, but is not technically recycling since polymers are not likely to become the result.
Other studies have shown that recycling in itself is inefficient to perform the "decoupling" of economic development from the depletion of non-renewable raw materials that is necessary for sustainable development.
However, in Brazil and Argentina, waste pickers/informal recyclers work alongside the authorities, in fully or semi-funded cooperatives, allowing informal recycling to be legitimized as a paid public sector job.
The main categories are mixed waste collection, commingled recyclables and source separation.
Given below is the list of suitable plastic raw materials for pyrolysis:
Daniel K. Benjamin argues that it wastes people's resources and lowers the wealth of a population.
A number of different systems have been implemented to collect recyclates from the general waste stream.
Some scholars use emergy (spelled with an m) analysis, for example, budgets for the amount of energy of one kind (exergy) that is required to make or transform things into another kind of product or service.
The Institute for Local Self-Reliance argues that the cost of recycling depends on various factors, such as landfill fees and the amount of disposal that the community recycles.
Since no trace of biodegradable material is best kept in the packaging before placing it in a trash bag, some packaging also needs to be rinsed.
The first electronic waste recycling scheme was implemented in Switzerland, beginning with collection of old refrigerators but gradually expanding to cover all devices.
Some plastics are remelted to form new plastic objects; for example, PET water bottles can be converted into polyester destined for clothing.
Recycling of PVC often results in downcycling of the material, which means only products of lower quality standard can be made with the recycled material.
This works alongside other prominent legislation, such as the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive of the EU the United States National Computer Recycling Act, to prevent poisonous chemicals from entering waterways and the atmosphere.
This problem is most prevalent with glass: both Britain and the U.S. import large quantities of wine bottled in green glass.
Type 4 (low-density polyethylene) is found in shopping bags, squeezable bottles, tote bags, clothing, furniture and carpet.
Source separation is the other extreme, where each material is cleaned and sorted prior to collection.
Type 6 is polystyrene and makes up meat trays, egg cartons, clamshell containers and compact disc cases.
It may either be sorted by hand, or via an automated machine that uses colored filters to detect different colors.
Many schools have created recycling awareness clubs in order to give young students an insight on recycling.
Some have complained that the ultimate fate of recyclates sold to another country is unknown and they may end up in landfills instead of reprocessed.
Because the social support of a country is likely to be less than the loss of income to the poor undertaking recycling, there is a greater chance the poor will come in conflict with the large recycling organizations.
Preliminary life-cycle analysis (LCA) indicates that such distributed recycling of HDPE to make filament of 3-D printers in rural regions is energetically favorable to either using virgin resin or conventional recycling processes because of reductions in transportation energy.
Utilization rates are a more flexible option: industries are permitted to meet the recycling targets at any point of their operation or even contract recycling out in exchange for tradeable credits.
At one end of the spectrum is mixed waste collection, in which all recyclates are collected mixed in with the rest of the waste, and the desired material is then sorted out and cleaned at a central sorting facility.
In 1813, Benjamin Law developed the process of turning rags into "shoddy" and "mungo" wool in Batley, Yorkshire.
Standardized recycling labeling can also have a positive effect on supply of recyclates if the labeling includes information on how and where the product can be recycled.
In addition, exergy, which is a measure of useful energy can be used.
New and better paths are opened to reach the goals desired."
Similarly, the northwestern United States has difficulty finding markets for recycled newspaper, given the large number of pulp mills in the region as well as the proximity to Asian markets.
Historically, this was identified as the metabolic rift by Karl Marx, who identified the unequal exchange rate between energy and nutrients flowing from rural areas to feed urban cities that create effluent wastes degrading the planet's ecological capital, such as loss in soil nutrient production.
Materials to be recycled are either brought to a collection centre or picked up from the curbside, then sorted, cleaned and reprocessed into new materials destined for manufacturing.
Plastic Pyrolysis can convert petroleum based waste streams such as plastics into quality fuels, carbons.
Type 2 (high-density polyethylene) is found in most hard plastics such as milk jugs, laundry detergent bottles and some dishware.
Recyclate quality is generally referring to how much of the raw material is made up of target material compared to the amount of non-target material and other non-recyclable material.
Container deposit legislation involves offering a refund for the return of certain containers, typically glass, plastic and metal.
The recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment in India and China generates a significant amount of pollution.
In pre-industrial times, there is evidence of scrap bronze and other metals being collected in Europe and melted down for perpetual reuse.
It states that communities begin to save money when they treat recycling as a replacement for their traditional waste system rather than an add-on to it and by "redesigning their collection schedules and/or trucks."
Creating a new piece of plastic, for instance, may cause more pollution and be less sustainable than recycling a similar piece of plastic, but these factors will not be counted in market cost.
Paper recycling was first recorded in 1031, when Japanese shops sold repulped paper.
Buy-back centers differ in that the cleaned recyclates are purchased, thus providing a clear incentive for use and creating a stable supply.
As of 2014, the European Union has about 50% of world share of the waste and recycling industries, with over  companies employing  persons, with a turnover of €24 billion.
Food packaging should no longer contain any organic matter (organic matter, if any, needs to be placed in a biodegradable waste bin or be buried in a garden).
Though much of this glass is sent to be recycled, outside the American Midwest there is not enough wine production to use all of the reprocessed material.
Certain regions have difficulty using or exporting as much of a material as they recycle.
The West Yorkshire shoddy industry in towns such as Batley and Dewsbury, lasted from the early 19th century to at least 1914.
Non-ferrous metals are ejected by magnetic eddy currents in which a rotating magnetic field induces an electric current around the aluminum cans, which in turn creates a magnetic eddy current inside the cans.
Recyclable materials include many kinds of glass, paper and cardboard, metal, plastic, tires, textiles and electronics.
Complete recycling is impracticable as highly dispersed wastes become so diluted that the energy needed for their recovery becomes increasingly excessive.
Other industries deal in niche or specialized products, depending on the nature of the waste materials that are present.
Because municipal recycling programs traditionally have targeted packaging—primarily bottles and containers—the resin coding system offered a means of identifying the resin content of bottles and containers commonly found in the residential waste stream.
The 2000s saw a large increase in both the sale of electronic devices and their growth as a waste stream: in 2002, e-waste grew faster than any other type of waste in the EU.
This results in a large amount of recyclable waste, paper especially, being too soiled to reprocess, but has advantages as well: the city need not pay for a separate collection of recyclates and no public education is needed.
This greatly reduces the need for post-collection cleaning but does require public education on what materials are recyclable.
The Panel reported that the increase in the use of metals during the 20th and into the 21st century has led to a substantial shift in metal stocks from below ground to use in applications within society above ground.
A waste collection vehicle generally picks up the waste.
In plants, a variety of materials are sorted such as paper, different types of plastics, glass, metals, food scraps and most types of batteries.
If broken, they may be disassembled for parts still having high value if labor is cheap enough.
Biogeochemical paths become fairly straight relative to wild ecosystems, with very reduced recycling, resulting in large flows of waste and low total energy efficiencies.
And because recycling is supposed to be about the conservation of resources, mandating recycling under those circumstances will do more harm than good."
In the United Kingdom, the Waste and Resources Action Programme stated that Great Britain's recycling efforts reduce CO2 emissions by 10–15 million tonnes a year.
Energy conservation also leads to what is known as Jevon's paradox, where improvements in energy efficiency lowers the cost of production and leads to a rebound effect where rates of consumption and economic growth increases.
The amount of money actually saved through recycling depends on the efficiency of the recycling program used to do it.
Type 5 is polypropylene and makes up syrup bottles, straws, Tupperware and some automotive parts.
To make such nonfiscal benefits economically relevant, advocates have pushed for legislative action to increase the demand for recycled materials.
This magnetic eddy current is repulsed by a large magnetic field, and the cans are ejected from the rest of the recyclate stream.
Type 1 (polyethylene terephthalate) is commonly found in soft drink and water bottles.
The ubiquitous nature of cardboard packaging makes cardboard a commonly recycled waste product by companies that deal heavily in packaged goods, like retail stores, warehouses and distributors of goods.
Only target material is likely to be recycled, so a higher amount of non-target and non-recyclable material will reduce the quantity of recycling product.
Reprocessing facilities may require further sorting steps to further reduce the amount of non-target and non-recyclable material.
A comparison group was sent fliers promoting recycling.
The final government regulation towards increased demand is recycled product labeling.
One aim of this method is to create a viable economy for proper disposal of banned products.
The international transportation or recycle material flows through "...&nbsp;different trade networks of the three countries result in different flows, decay rates, and potential recycling returns."
There is some debate over whether recycling is economically efficient.
In a commingled or single-stream system, all recyclables for collection are mixed but kept separate from other waste.
Recycling household materials meant more resources for war efforts and a better chance of victory.
A high proportion of non-target and non-recyclable material can make it more difficult for re-processors to achieve "high-quality" recycling.
This surcharge can be reclaimed by the consumer if the container is returned to a collection point.
A study conducted by the Technical University of Denmark according to the Economist found that in 83 percent of cases, recycling is the most efficient method to dispose of household waste.
For example, "cities do not follow all the strategies of ecosystem development.
Because this waste may still be functional and wanted mostly by those on lower incomes, who may sell or use it at a greater efficiency than large recyclers.
They began to export the problem to developing countries without enforced environmental legislation.
Like the parable of the broken window, there is a net loss to the poor and possibly the whole of a society to make recycling artificially profitable e.g.
Beverage bottles were recycled with a refundable deposit at some drink manufacturers in Great Britain and Ireland around 1800, notably Schweppes.
According to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat, the overwhelming direct cause of deforestation is subsistence farming (48% of deforestation) and commercial agriculture (32%), which is linked to food, not paper production.
The report warned that the recycling rates of some rare metals used in applications such as mobile phones, battery packs for hybrid cars and fuel cells, are so low that unless future end-of-life recycling rates are dramatically stepped up these critical metals will become unavailable for use in modern technology.
These policies are either "set-asides," which reserve a certain amount of spending solely towards recycled products, or "price preference" programs which provide a larger budget when recycled items are purchased.
Recycling was a highlight throughout World War II.
The main driver for these types of recycling was the economic advantage of obtaining recycled feedstock instead of acquiring virgin material, as well as a lack of public waste removal in ever more densely populated areas.
It became necessary for most homes to recycle their waste, as recycling offered an extra source of materials allowing people to make the most of what was available to them.
The struggles of war claimed much of the material resources available, leaving little for the civilian population.
The amount of energy saved through recycling depends upon the material being recycled and the type of energy accounting that is used.
Another study done by Stuart Oskamp examines the effect of neighbors and friends on recycling.
Unfortunately, government subsidies are necessary to make buy-back centres a viable enterprise, as according to the U.S. National Waste & Recycling Association, it costs on average US$50 to process a ton of material, which can only be resold for US$30.
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) states on its website that "a paper mill uses 40 percent less energy to make paper from recycled paper than it does to make paper from fresh lumber."
The quality of recyclates is recognized as one of the principal challenges that needs to be addressed for the success of a long-term vision of a green economy and achieving zero waste.
Alternatively, legal means (such as a carbon tax) can be used to bring externalities into the market, so that the market cost of the material becomes close to the true cost.
Much of the difficulty inherent in recycling comes from the fact that most products are not designed with recycling in mind.
They suggest that every product (and all packaging they require) should have a complete "closed-loop" cycle mapped out for each component—a way in which every component will either return to the natural ecosystem through biodegradation or be recycled indefinitely.
The best recycling can do is to delay, complete closure of material loops to achieve 100 percent recycling of nonrenewables is impossible as micro-trace materials dissipate into the environment causing severe damage to the planet's ecosystems.
* Mixed plastic (HDPE, LDPE, PE, PP, Nylon, Teflon, PS, ABS, FRP, etc.)
There are many actions along the recycling supply chain that can influence and affect the material quality of recyclate.
Economic analysis of recycling does not include what economists call externalities, which are unpriced costs and benefits that accrue to individuals outside of private transactions.
Both minimum recycled content mandates and utilization rates increase demand directly by forcing manufacturers to include recycling in their operations.
He argues that manufacturers should shoulder more of the burden of waste disposal.
The terephthalate diester can be used with ethylene glycol to form a new polyester polymer, thus making it possible to use the pure polymer again.
A RESEM Technology plant of this type in Carthage, Missouri, USA, uses turkey waste as input material.
Precious metals can be dissolved in acid, sorted, and smelted into ingots.
Plastic recycling is the process of recovering scrap or waste plastic and reprocessing the material into useful products, sometimes completely different in form from their original state.
Tierney also referenced a study conducted by the Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA) that found in the six communities involved in the study, "all but one of the curbside recycling programs, and all the composting operations and waste-to-energy incinerators, increased the cost of waste disposal."
A variation on this is where the manufacturer bears responsibility for the recycling of their goods.
After the cargo barge Khian Sea dumped 14,000 metric tons of toxic ash in Haiti, the Basel Convention was formed to stem the flow of hazardous substances into poorer countries.
The quality of recyclate not only supports high quality recycling, but it can also deliver significant environmental benefits by reducing, reusing and keeping products out of landfills.
Scrap aluminum fetches a high price because recycling it consumes so much less energy than manufacturing new aluminum."
In 1996 and 2015 articles for ''The New York Times'', John Tierney argued that it costs more money to recycle the trash of New York City than it does to dispose of it in a landfill.
The remaining glass and plastic fractions are separated by density and sold to re-processors.
During the war, financial constraints and significant material shortages due to war efforts made it necessary for countries to reuse goods and recycle materials.
'''Recyclate''' is a raw material that is sent to, and processed in a waste recycling plant or materials recovery facility which will be used to form new products.
Thus, it does not negate the need for an organized recycling program.
Type 3 (polyvinyl chloride) includes items such as shampoo bottles, shower curtains, hula hoops, credit cards, wire jacketing, medical equipment, siding and piping.
Higher income levels from the sale of quality recyclates can return value which can be significant to local governments, households and businesses.
It was found that the neighbors that were personally contacted by their block leaders recycled much more than the group without personal contact.
The composting or other reuse of biodegradable waste—such as food or garden waste—is also considered recycling.
Cardboard averaged about £53/tonne from 2004–2008, dropped to £19/tonne, and then went up to £59/tonne in May 2009.
* Multi-layered plastic
For some waste materials such as plastic, recent technical devices called recyclebots enable a form of distributed recycling.
Hence, the specific nature of the recycling process, the methods used to analyse the process, and the products involved affect the energy savings budgets.
.new values appear.
When foresting companies cut down trees, more are planted in their place.
Moreover, the highest emergy efficiency accrues from systems geared toward material recycling, where materials are engineered to recycle back into their original form and purpose, followed by adaptive reuse systems where the materials are recycled into a different kind of product, and then by-product reuse systems where parts of the products are used to make an entirely different product.
Although consumer electronics such as the television have been popular since the 1920s, recycling of them was almost unheard of until early 1991.
Local government can consider the activities of the recycling poor as contributing to property blight.
Correct accounting for this saved energy can be accomplished with life-cycle analysis using real energy values.
This is done in a series of stages, many of which involve automated processes such that a truckload of material can be fully sorted in less than an hour.
Many studies have addressed recycling behaviour and strategies to encourage community involvement in recycling programmes.
The uranium left over from processing it into nuclear weapons and fuel for nuclear reactors is called depleted uranium, and it is used by all branches of the U.S. military use for armour-piercing shells and shielding.
The recycling code for plastics was introduced in 1988 by the plastics industry through the Society of the Plastics Industry.
Source separation used to be the preferred method due to the high sorting costs incurred by commingled (mixed waste) collection.
The focus of many recycling programs done by industry is the cost–effectiveness of recycling.
Glass fragments smaller than  across cannot be sorted automatically, and are mixed together as "glass fines."
Another reason is that individual recycling does not take place in the public view.
These resource shortages caused by the world wars, and other such world-changing occurrences, greatly encouraged recycling.
Known reserves of phosphorus will be exhausted within the next 100 years at current rates of usage.
Types 1 and 2 are the most commonly recycled.
Governments have used their own purchasing power to increase recycling demand through what are called "procurement policies."
Municipalities often see fiscal benefits from implementing recycling programs, largely due to the reduced landfill costs.
However, recycling proponents point out that a second timber or logging truck is eliminated when paper is collected for recycling, so the net energy consumption is the same.
One reason for this is that social pressure functions well in small group sizes of 50 to 150 individuals (common to nomadic hunter–gatherer peoples) but not in communities numbering in the millions, as we see today.
He believes that recycling's benefit cannot be effectively quantified by traditional ''laissez-faire'' economics.
Having a recycling code or the chasing arrows logo on a material is not an automatic indicator that a material is recyclable but rather an explanation of what the material is.
The different collection systems can result in different levels of contamination.
However, the cost effectiveness of creating the additional jobs remains unproven.
Demand in Asia for electronic waste began to grow when scrap yards found that they could extract valuable substances such as copper, silver, iron, silicon, nickel and gold, during the recycling process.
