It has been used by Indian monks and hermits for centuries to dye their robes.
File:Indian Army-Rajput regiment.jpeg|Soldiers of the Rajput Regiment of the Indian Army
The red color of the Grand Canyon and other geological features is caused by hematite or red ochre,  both forms of iron oxide.
When the days of autumn are bright and cool, and the nights are chilly but not freezing, the brightest colorations usually develop.
It was buried by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD and preserved.
A red-painted wooden bowl was found at a Neolithic site in Yuyao, Zhejiang.
A red dye called Kermes was made beginning in the Neolithic Period by drying and then crushing the bodies of the females of a tiny scale insect in the genus ''Kermes'', primarily ''Kermes vermilio''.
This is the principle that is used to make all of the colors on your computer screen and your television.
'''Red hair''' occurs naturally on approximately 1–2% of the human population.
In Roman times, most cinnabar came from mines at Almadén in Spain, where the miners were usually prisoners and slaves.
Navy flags are often red and yellow.
Officers and NCOs of those regiments which previously wore red retain scarlet as the color of their "mess" or formal evening jackets.
File:Pau-brasil mococa sp.jpg| The Sappanwood tree, native to India, Malaysia and Sri Lanka, and later the related Brazilwood tree (shown here), from the coast of South America, were the source of a popular red pigment and dye called brazilin.
Red was long seen as having a dark side, particularly in Christian theology.
The field of the flag of Portugal is green and red.
File:Demonstration on October 17, 1905 by Ilya Repin (adumbration 1906).jpg|A demonstration in Moscow during the unsuccessful Russian Revolution of 1905, painted by Ilya Repin.
The ''Little Red Book'', a collection of quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung, founding father of the People's Republic of China (PRC), was published in 1966 and widely distributed thereafter.
Red is the color of the flags of several countries that once belonged to the former British Empire.
The Thin Red Line was a famous incident in the Battle of Balaclava (1854) during the Crimean War, when a thin line of Scottish Highlander infantry, assisted by Royal Marines and Turkish infantrymen, repulsed a Russian cavalry charge.
In the New Testament, in the Book of Revelation, the Antichrist appears as a red monster, ridden by a woman dressed in scarlet, known as the Whore of Babylon:
File:Woven silk, Western Han Dynasty.jpg| Woven silk from the Western Han Dynasty, 2nd century BC.
Red illumination was (and sometimes still is) used as a safelight while working in a darkroom as it does not expose most photographic paper and some films.
In 1870, following the stunning defeat of the French Army by the Germans in the Franco-Prussian War, French workers and socialist revolutionaries seized Paris and created the Paris Commune.
In other parts of Africa, however, red is a color of mourning, representing death.
This convention is relatively recent: before the 2000 presidential election, media outlets assigned red and blue to both parties, sometimes alternating the allocation for each election.
Today, red and red-orange laser diodes are widely available to the public in the form of extremely inexpensive laser pointers.
A Roman general receiving a triumph had his entire body painted red in honor of his achievement.
These studies were avidly followed by artists such as Vincent van Gogh.
A combination of red, green and blue light in varying proportions makes all the colors on your computer screen and television screen.
File:Gaozong Of Song.jpg|the Emperor Gaozong of Song (1127–1162 AD), wearing red, the color his astrologers considered most auspicious for his reign
It remained so until the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The Commune lasted for two months before it was crushed by the French Army, with much bloodshed.
File:Red lipstick (photo by weglet).jpg|Red lipstick has been worn by women as a cosmetic since ancient times.
Red is the complementary color of cyan.
The ancient Egyptians began manufacturing pigments in about 4000 BC.
The sRGB number of pure red, for example, is 255, 00, 00, which means the red component is at its maximum intensity, and there is no green or blue.
In ''Mein Kampf'', Hitler explained that they were "revered colors expressive of our homage to the glorious past."
The term '''redhead''' (originally ''redd hede'') has been in use since at least 1510.
Together they flooded the basilica with a mystical light.
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 057.jpg|''Reine de joie'', (''Queen of Joy''), a book cover illustration by Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1892) about a Paris prostitute
File:Richard II King of England.jpg|King Richard II of England (1390s) dressed in red
Matisse was also one of the first 20th-century artists to make color the central element of the painting, chosen to evoke emotions.
File:SPD logo.svg|Logo of the German Social Democratic Party
File:Flag of England.svg|The St George's cross was the banner of the First Crusade, then, beginning in the 13th century, the flag of England.
Red was used to color statues and the skin of gladiators.
In 2004 Georgia adopted a new white flag, which consists of four small and one big red cross in the middle touching all four sides.
By the beginning of the 17th century it was the preferred luxury red for the clothing of cardinals, bankers, courtesans and aristocrats.
Light just past this range is called infrared, or below red, and cannot be seen by human eyes, although it can be sensed as heat.
In Medieval painting red was used to attract attention to the most important figures; both Christ and the Virgin Mary were commonly painted wearing red mantles.
The site has evidence of habitation as early as 700,000 years ago.
The Romans prepared it by the roasting of lead white pigment.
The 19th century also saw the use of red in art to create specific emotions, not just to imitate nature.
''Coccus'', from the ancient Greek ''Kokkos'', means a tiny grain and is the term that was used in ancient times for the Kermes vermilio insect used to make the Kermes dye.
In association football, teams such as Liverpool, Manchester United, Bayern Munich, Arsenal, Toronto FC, and S.L.
A different variety of dye was made from ''Porphyrophora hamelii'' (Armenian cochineal) scale insects that lived on the roots and stems of certain herbs.
In humans, wearing red has been linked with increased performance in competitions, including professional sport and multiplayer video games.
It was chosen partly because red is the brightest color in daytime (next to orange), though it is less visible at twilight, when green is the most visible color.
This may have driven further adaptations by species taking advantage of this new ability, such as the emergence of red faces.
The flags of Japan and Bangladesh both have a red circle in the middle of different colored backgrounds.
File:At the Devil's Ball 1.jpg|Sheet music for ''At the Devil's Ball'', by Irving Berlin, United States, 1915.
Dyed fabrics have been hung up to dry.
His followers were known as the ''camicie rosse'', or (redshirts) during the fight for Italian Risorgimento in 1860.
Because of public concerns about possible health risks associated with synthetic dyes, many companies have switched to using natural pigments such as carmine, made from crushing the tiny female cochineal insect.
In the United States, political commentators often refer to the "red states", which traditionally vote for Republican candidates in presidential elections, and "blue states", which vote for the Democratic candidate.
File:Rembrandt Harmensz.
Red lead or Lead tetroxide pigment was widely used as the red in Persian and Indian miniature paintings as well as in European art, where it was called minium.
And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus''.
So that the maximum number of colors can be accurately reproduced on your computer screen, each color has been given a code number, or sRGB, which tells your computer the intensity of the red, green and blue components of that color.
Since the US Marine uniform is blue with red facings, the band wears the reverse.
It is the red color (along with that of the Cross of Saint Patrick) in the flag of the United Kingdom, and, by adoption, of the red in the flag of the United States.
File:Dyeing British Library Royal MS 15.E.iii, f. 269 1482.jpg|Dyeing wool, England (1482), from the British Museum
Its secret ingredient was arsenic, which brightened the color.
Their formation depends on the breakdown of sugars in the presence of bright light as the level of phosphate in the leaf is reduced.
File:Les furies de guillotine.jpg|During the Reign of Terror during the later French Revolution, the "Furies of the Guillotine" cheered on each execution.
In Ancient Rome, Tyrian purple was the color of the Emperor, but red had an important religious symbolism.
These include the Australian, Jamaican, New Zealand, Fijian, Canadian, Kenyan, Ghanaian, Indian, Singaporean, Sri Lankan and Pakistani armies.
File:Meridan Gate.jpg|The Meridan Gate of the Forbidden City in Beijing.
During the French Revolution, many in the Paris crowds also wore a red phrygian cap, a symbol of liberty, modeled after the caps worn in ancient Rome by freed slaves; but the colors of the Revolution finally became blue, white and red.
File:Flag of the Soviet Union.svg|The flag of the Soviet Union (1923–1992).
File:Cranberries20101210.jpg|Cranberries also get their red color from anthocyanins.
It was commonly used in the Middle Ages for the headings and decoration of illuminated manuscripts.
In nature, the red color of blood comes from hemoglobin, the iron-containing protein found in the red blood cells of all vertebrates.
Red was associated with fire.
The red part of the flag was also chosen to attract attention - Hitler wrote: "the new flag ... should prove effective as a large poster" because "in hundreds of thousands of cases a really striking emblem may be the first cause of awakening interest in a movement."
File:Paracas textile, British Museum.jpg| Textiles dyed red from the Paracas culture of Peru (about 200 BC), in the British Museum
File:The Wedding Dance.JPG|''The Wedding Dance'' (1566), by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
File:Bathing of a Red Horse (Petrov-Vodkin).jpg|''Bathing of a Red Horse'', by the Russian symbolist painter Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin (1912), used a bright red horse to surprise and shock viewers.
In China, India and many other Asian countries it is the color of symbolizing happiness and good fortune.
In Saudi Arabia, in 2002 and 2011, religious police banned the sale of all Valentine's Day items, telling shop workers to remove any red items, as the day is considered a Christian holiday.
In the mid-19th century, red became the color of a new political and social movement, socialism.
In later dynasties red was reserved for the walls of temples and imperial residences.
Some Communist countries, such as Cuba, chose to keep their old flags; and other countries used red flags which had nothing to do with Communism or socialism; the red flag of Nepal, for instance, represents the national flower.
An ivory painter's palette found inside the tomb of King Tutankhamun had small compartments with pigments of red ochre and five other colors.
In the Tang and Song Dynasties, gates of palaces were usually painted red, and nobles often painted their entire mansion red.
Jars of kermes have been found in a Neolithic cave-burial at Adaoutse, Bouches-du-Rhône.
File:Alizarin-sample.jpg| Alizarin was the first synthetic red dye, created by German chemists in 1868.
File:Jonathan G Meath portrays Santa Claus.jpg|Santa Claus traditionally wears red, because the original Saint Nicholas was a bishop of the Greek Christian church in the 4th century.
Later, the number of teams was increased to four, including drivers in light green and sky blue.
The Red Hat Society is a social group founded in 1998 for women 50 and over.
Special red packets ( in Mandarin or ''lai see'' in Cantonese) are specifically used during Chinese New Year celebrations for giving monetary gifts.
File:Kustodiev The Bolshevik.jpg| Red was the color of the Russian Revolution in 1917.
These include teams from Spain (with their association football national team nicknamed ''La Furia Roja'' or "The Red Fury"), Belgium (whose football team bears the nickname ''Rode Duivels'' or "Red Devils"), other examples being teams from England, Wales, Canada, Denmark, Tonga, Chile, Puerto Rico, Russia and Switzerland.
Like the Egyptians, they made a red dye from the madder plant to color silk fabric for gowns and used pigments colored with madder to make red lacquerware.
In the 19th century novel ''The Red Badge of Courage'' by Stephen Crane, a story about the American Civil War, the red badge was the blood from a wound, by which a soldier could prove his courage.
It was standarized as the international color at the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals of 1968.
Controlled tests have demonstrated that wearing red does not increase performance or levels of testosterone during exercise, so the effect is likely to be produced by perceived rather than actual performance.
After the end of the Reign of Terror, France went back to the blue, white and red tricolor, whose red was taken from the traditional color of Saint Denis, the Christian martyr and patron saint of Paris.
The cave of Altamira in Spain has a painting of a bison colored with red ochre that dates to between 15,000 and 16,500 BC.
Red, gold, green, and black are the colors of Pan-Africanism.
Carmine lake was made from the cochineal insect from Central and South America, Kermes lake came from a different scale insect, ''kermes vermilio'', which thrived on oak trees around the Mediterranean.
Chemically it is known as lead tetroxide.
The fabric was more expensive but resulted in a fine bright and lasting red, similar to carmine, perfectly suited to cotton.
Several studies have indicated that red carries the strongest reaction of all the colors, with the level of reaction decreasing gradually with the colors orange, yellow, and white, respectively.
File:Winner of a Roman chariot race.jpg|Ancient Roman mosaic of the winner of a chariot race, wearing the colors of the red team.
Red played an important role in Chinese philosophy.
Red-dyed textiles from the Paracas culture (800–100 BC) have been found in tombs in Peru.
In 1587, Mary, Queen of Scots, accused of treason against Queen Elizabeth I, wore a red shirt at her execution, to proclaim that she was an innocent martyr.
In Europe, Allura Red AC is not recommended for consumption by children.
The early inhabitants of America had their own vivid crimson dye, made from the cochineal, an insect of the same family as the Kermes of Europe and the Middle East, which feeds on the Opuntia, or prickly pear cactus plant.
I just try to find a color which corresponds to my feelings."
There were guilds of dyers who specialized in red in Venice and other large Europeans cities.
In the 1920s they were adopted as the colors of the Nazi flag.
A red carpet is often used to welcome distinguished guests.
Later, in the 19th century, British and French authors described a specific language of flowers; giving a single red rose meant 'I love you,'
Ochre was the first pigment used by man in prehistoric cave paintings.
The government was denounced by the more radical revolutionaries.
Red is the color most commonly associated with joy and well being.
This is Pope Innocent III, in about 1219.
The dye came from the root of the madder plant, which tended toward orange.
Surveys show it is the color most frequently associated with visibility, proximity, and extroverts.
The red also symbolized the social program of the Nazis, aimed at German workers.
It became one of the most profitable exports from the New World, and gave its name to the nation of Brazil.
Several African countries thus use the color on their flags, including South Africa, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, Ethiopia, Togo, Guinea, Benin, and Zimbabwe.
Other red-painted ceremonial objects have been found at other sites dating to the Spring and Autumn period (770–221 BC).
File:Tamashiro-kata-Tampere-2006.jpg|In martial arts, a red belt shows a high degree of proficiency, second only, in some schools, to the black belt.
In automobile races, the red flag is raised if there is danger to the drivers.
In 1868, German chemists Carl Graebe and Liebermann were able to synthesize alizarin, and to produce it from coal tar.
In the Old Testament of the Bible, the Book of Isaiah said: "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow."
Walls, columns, windows and gates of palaces and temples were traditionally painted red.
This led to British soldiers being known as red coats.
The flags of the Czech Republic and Poland use red for historic heraldic reasons (see Coat of arms of Poland and Coat of arms of the Czech Republic) & not due to Pan-Slavic connotations.
Red ochre is composed of clay tinted with hematite.
Plants like apples, strawberries, cherries, tomatoes, peppers, and pomegranates are often colored by forms of carotenoids, red pigments that also assist photosynthesis.
The celebration of Saint Valentine's Day is forbidden or strongly condemned in many Islamic countries, including Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Iran.
The sRGB number for crimson is 220, 20, 60, which means that the red is slightly less intense and therefore darker, there is some green, which leans it toward orange; and there is a larger amount of blue,which makes it slightly blue-violet.
It was one of the finest reds of ancient times – the paintings have retained their brightness for more than twenty centuries.
File:Whore of Babylon (XIV).jpg|The Whore of Babylon, depicted in a 14th-century French illuminated manuscript.
Beginning in the 1960s and the 1970s, paramilitary extremist groups such as the Red Army Faction in Germany, the Japanese Red Army and the Shining Path Maoist movement in Peru used red as their color.
File:AltamiraBison.jpg |Image of a bison from the cave of Altamira in Spain, painted with red ochre between 15,000 and 16.500 BC.
File:Alfa Romeo 33 SC 12 Sovralimentata 1977 red vr TCE.jpg|An Alfa Romeo Grand Prix car in 1977, painted Rosso Corsa, ("racing red"), the traditional racing color of Italy from the 1920s until the late 1960s.
Many of them wore a red Phrygian cap, or liberty cap, modeled after the caps worn by freed slaves in Ancient Rome.
File:Pech Merle main.jpg|Image of a human hand created with red ochre in Pech Merle cave, France (Gravettian era, 25,000 BC).
Red lac was made from the gum lac, the dark red resinous substance secreted by various scale insects, particularly the Laccifer lacca from India.
It provoked a furious discussion among Russian critics.
It worked particularly well on silk, satin and other luxury textiles.
Matisse used red to stimulate the emotions he wanted the viewer to feel.
The red in the French flag was taken from the emblem of the city of Paris, where it represented the city's patron saint, Saint Denis.
The uniform was adapted from the tunic of the British Army.
In both Christian and Hebrew tradition, red is also sometimes associated with murder or guilt, with "having blood on one's hands", or "being caught red-handed."
Primates can distinguish the full range of the colors of the spectrum visible to humans, but many kinds of mammals, such as dogs and cattle, have dichromacy, which means they can see blues and yellows, but cannot distinguish red and green (both are seen as gray).
File:Paolo Uccello 050.jpg|Saint George and the Dragon, by Paolo Uccello (1456-1460).
Because red bears are associated with death in many parts of Africa, the Red Cross has changed its colors to green and white in parts of the continent.
These same pigments often combine with the carotenoids' colors to create the deeper orange, fiery reds, and bronzes typical of many hardwood species.
For those with even more money there was Polish Cochineal; also known as ''Kermes vermilio'' or "Blood of Saint John", which was made from a related insect, the ''Margodes polonicus''.
For pigments, they used cinnabar, which produced the famous vermillion or "Chinese red" of Chinese laquerware.
It was mentioned in texts as early as the 8th century BC, and it was used by the ancient Assyrians and Persians.
In fact, teachers at a primary school in the UK have been told not to mark children's work in red ink because it encourages a "negative approach".
It saw the systematic study of color theory, and particularly the study of how complementary colors such as red and green reinforced each other when they were placed next to each other.
The guillotines used during the Reign of Terror in 1792 and 1793 were painted red, or made of red wood.
The use of red has similar connotations from country to country: the blood, sacrifice, and courage of those who defended their country; the sun and the hope and warmth it brings; and the sacrifice of Christ's blood (in some historically Christian nations) are a few examples.
It is also the color most associated with dynamism and activity.
The flag of the Communist Party of China became a red banner with a hammer and sickle, similar to that on the Soviet flag.
Describing his painting, The ''Night Cafe'', to his brother Theo in 1888, Van Gogh wrote: "I sought to express with red and green the terrible human passions.
File:Innozenz3.jpg|Roman Catholic Popes wear red as the symbol of the blood of Christ.
They also produce the red of strawberries, apples, and plums.
"And upon her forehead was a name written a mystery: ''Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and of all the abominations of the earth'':
Today modern darkrooms usually use an amber safelight.
The Royal Gibraltar Regiment has a scarlet tunic in its winter dress.
Rothko also began using the new synthetic pigments, but not always with happy results.
Since their culture sees the color as a symbol of life and health, sick people are also painted with it.
China had a monopoly on the manufacture of silk until the 6th century AD, when it was introduced into the Byzantine Empire.
Karl Marx published the Communist Manifesto in February 1848, with little attention.
The use of red laser diodes became widespread with the commercial success of modern DVD players, which use a 660&nbsp;nm laser diode technology.
In the 17th century, a red flag signalled defiance.
Beginning in the Middle Ages, the Pope and Cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church wore red to symbolize the blood of Christ and the Christian martyrs.
However, a few days later the French Revolution of 1848 broke out, which replaced the monarchy of Louis Philippe with the Second French Republic.
Boxers named or nicknamed "red" include Red Burman, Ernie "Red" Lopez, and his brother Danny "Little Red" Lopez.
The Cincinnati Red Stockings are the oldest professional baseball team, dating back to 1869.
File:Amsterdam red light district 24-7-2003.JPG|The red-light district in Amsterdam (2003).
In the United States, Allura Red AC is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in cosmetics, drugs, and food.
File:RothkoFourDarksRed.jpg|''Four Darks in Red'' by Mark Rothko (1958).
The insects live on the sap of certain trees, especially Kermes oak trees near the Mediterranean region.
Large red-light districts are found today in Bangkok and Amsterdam.
Red hair appears in people with two copies of a recessive gene on chromosome 16 which causes a mutation in the MC1R protein.
Red flags are also used to symbolize storms, bad water conditions, and many other dangers.
File:Flag of Palaeologus Dynasty.svg|The flag of the Byzantine Empire from 1260 to its fall in 1453
File:Banpo bowl.jpg | Painted red and black bowl from the Yangshao culture period in China (4500 BC), in the National Museum of Beijing
It duplicated the colorant in the madder plant, but was cheaper and longer lasting.
It is characterized by high levels of the reddish pigment pheomelanin (which also accounts for the red color of the lips) and relatively low levels of the dark pigment eumelanin.
Modern surveys in the United States and Europe show red is also the color most commonly associated with heat, activity,  passion, sexuality, anger, love and joy.
