'''Iberian fox'''''V.
They maintain their wild counterpart's strong instinct of concealment, and may pose a threat to domestic birds, even when well fed.
It is listed as least concern by the IUCN.
According to the Tasmanian government, red foxes were introduced to the previously fox-free island of Tasmania in 1999 or 2000, posing a significant threat to native wildlife including the eastern bettong, and an eradication program conducted by the Tasmanian Department of Primary Industries and Water has been established.
Although already native to North America, red foxes from England were imported for sporting purposes to Virginia and Maryland in 1730 by prosperous tobacco planters.
Named for the Wasatch Mountains, near Great Salt Lake, Utah, found in the Rocky Mountains from Colorado and Utah, western Wyoming and Montana through Idaho north to southern Alberta
Practical uses for tame foxes are few, though they can be encouraged to kill rats and mice in granaries.
''beringensis'' (Merriam, 1902)
Compare with  West Frisian ''foks'', Dutch ''vos'', and German ''Fuchs''.
'''Blackish-brown'''
Kits begin emitting the "''wow wow wow''" call at the age of 19 days, when craving attention.
Unlike badgers, which fastidiously clean their earths and defecate in latrines, red foxes habitually leave pieces of prey around their dens.> The average sleep time of a captive red fox is 9.8 hours per day.
However, killing foxes has little effect on the population in an urban area; those that are killed are very soon replaced, either by new cubs during the breeding season or by other foxes moving into the territory of those that were killed.
Eventually, Belyaev's team selected only those that showed the most positive response to humans, thus resulting in a population of foxes whose behaviour and appearance was significantly changed.
Both species will kill each other's kits, given the opportunity.
There are three main colour morphs; red, silver/black and cross (see ''Mutations'').
Gekkering occurs mostly during the courting season from rival males or vixens rejecting advances.
Non-breeding vixens will guard, play, groom, provision and retrieve kits, an example of kin selection.
The red fox has been implicated in the extinction and decline of several native Australian species, particularly those of the family Potoroidae including the desert rat-kangaroo.
Red and Arctic foxes were both introduced to almost every island from the Aleutian Islands to the Alexander Archipelago during the 1830s–1930s by fur companies.
Interior of British Columbia and probably southeastern Alaska, US
Because of its widespread distribution and large population, the red fox is one of the most important furbearing animals harvested for the fur trade.
The rump and lower back are dark brown or dark grey, with varying degrees of silver on the guard hairs.
Arctic foxes generally escape competition from red foxes by living farther north, where food is too scarce to support the larger-bodied red species.
This large subspecies has yellowish-rusty or dirty-reddish fur with a well-developed cross, and often a black area on the belly.
Among northern foxes, the North American varieties generally have the silkiest guard hairs, while most Eurasian red foxes have coarser fur.
Mothers remain with the kits for 2–3 weeks, as they are unable to thermoregulate.
v. alascensis'', but with a lighter, longer and more slender skull
North American red foxes, particularly those of northern Alaska, are the most valued for their fur, as they have guard hairs of a silky texture, which, after dressing, allow the wearer unrestricted mobility.
''cinerascens'' (Birula, 1913)''splendens'' (Thomas, 1902)
Fruit and vegetable matter is also eaten sometimes.
High Sierra, California
During such fights, red foxes will stand on each other's upper bodies with their forelegs, using open mouthed threats.
All Europe, except Scandinavia, Iberian Peninsula and some islands of the Mediterranean Sea, introduced to Australia and Virginia
The upper parts of the limbs are rusty reddish, while the paws are black.
''acaab'' (Cabrera, 1916)
In January 2014 it was reported that "Fleet", a relatively tame urban fox tracked as part of a wider study by the University of Brighton in partnership with the BBC's ''Winterwatch'', had unexpectedly travelled 195 miles in 21 days from his neighbourhood in Hove, at the western edge of East Sussex, across rural countryside as far as Rye, at the eastern edge of the county.
A strain of truly domesticated red foxes was introduced by Russian geneticist Dmitry Konstantinovich Belyaev who, over a 40-year period, bred several generations of silver morph foxes on fur farms, selecting only those individuals that showed the least fear of humans.
A large subspecies, its coat is variable in colour, ranging from reddish to red-grey and nearly grey.
'''British Columbian fox'''''V.
v. hoole'', but unlike other Chinese red foxes, it closely approaches ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;vulpes'' in size.
The underside of the tail is pale grey with a straw-coloured tint.
The ears measure 7.7–12.5&nbsp;cm (3–5&nbsp;in) and the hind feet 12–18.5&nbsp;cm (5–7&nbsp;in).
The fur is rusty grey or rusty brown, with a brighter rusty stripe along the spine.
Red foxes live in family groups sharing a joint territory.
The forefoot print measures  in length and  in width, while the hind foot print measures  long and  wide.
'''Labrador fox'''''V.
himalaicus (Ogilby, 1837)
In Greek mythology, the Teumessian fox or Cadmean vixen, was a gigantic fox that was destined never to be caught.
Slightly smaller than ''V.
''algeriensis'' (Loche, 1858)
The oval-shaped caudal gland is  long and  wide, and reportedly smells of violets.
Red foxes have binocular vision, but their sight reacts mainly to movement.
Red foxes may compete with striped hyenas on large carcasses.
'''Turkmenian fox'''''V.
Recent analyses identify 12 different sounds produced by adults and 8 by kits.
Some postures may blend the two together.
Their pelts are used for trimmings, scarfs, muffs, jackets and coats.
Urban red foxes are most active at dusk and dawn, doing most of their hunting and scavenging at these times.
In areas in North America where red fox and coyote populations are sympatric, fox ranges tend to be located outside coyote territories.
The species primarily feeds on small rodents, though it may also target rabbits, game birds, reptiles, invertebrates and young ungulates.
*'''Southern grey desert foxes''' include the Asian subspecies ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;griffithi'', ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;pusilla'', and ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;flavescens''.
waddelli (Bonhote, 1906)
In London, arthritis is not uncommon in foxes, being particularly frequent in the spine.
''anadyrensis'' (J.
Secondary prey species include birds (with passeriformes, galliformes and waterfowl predominating), leporids, porcupines, raccoons, opossums, reptiles, insects, other invertebrates and flotsam (marine mammals, fish and echinoderms).
Edward, Second Duke of York assisted the climb of foxes as more prestigious quarries in his ''The Master of Game''.
Fossils dating from the Wisconsian are present in 25 sites in Arkansas, California, Colorado, Idaho, Missouri, New Mexico, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wyoming.
Apart from its large size, the red fox is distinguished from other fox species by its ability to adapt quickly to new environments.
''kiyomassai'' (Kishida and Mori, 1929)
''hypomelas'' (Wagner, 1841)
Near Vladikavkaz, Caucasus, Russia
''alticola'' (Ognev, 1926)
'''Trans-Caucasian montane fox'''''V.
A black spot, the location of the supracaudal gland, is usually present at the base of the tail.
'''Trans-Baikal fox'''''V.
Some vixens may reach sexual maturity at the age of 9–10 months, thus bearing their first litters at one year of age.
Lack of genetic diversity is consistent with the red fox being a highly vagile species, with one red fox covering  in under a year's time.
The fur is bright red with a strongly developed whitish and yellow ripple on the lower back.
''lutea'' (Bechstein, 1801)
'''Tobol'sk fox'''''V.
'''Anadyr fox'''''V.
Slightly larger than ''V.
'''Wasatch Mountain fox'''''V.
Red foxes readily eat plant material, and in some areas fruit can amount to 100% of their diet in autumn.
'''Kenai Peninsula fox'''
''anubis'' (Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1833)
They are rare in areas where industry, commerce or council-rented houses predominate.
In later European folklore, the figure of Reynard the Fox symbolises trickery and deceit.
When afraid, red foxes grin in submission, arching their backs, curving their bodies, crouching their legs and lashing their tails back and forth with their ears pointing backwards and pressed against their skulls.
This competition reaches a peak during early spring, when food is scarce.
These foxes display transitional features between northern red foxes and smaller fox species; their skulls possess more primitive, neotenous traits than the northern forms, and they are much smaller; the maximum sizes attained by southern foxes are invariably less than the average sizes of northern foxes.
The tip of the tail is white.
Red foxes will kill both species, and compete for food and den sites.
'''American red fox'''''V.
Coat colour begins to change at three weeks of age, when the black eye streak appears.
In Israel, Blanford's foxes escape competition with red foxes by restricting themselves to rocky cliffs and actively avoiding the open plains inhabited by red foxes.
The tail lacks the usual black basal spot.
Red foxes may kill small mustelids like weasels, stone martens, pine martens, stoats, kolonoks, polecats and young sables.
Red foxes are not present in New Zealand and are classed as a "prohibited new organism" under the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, preventing them from being imported.
v. splendidissima''
'''Steppe fox'''''V.
''melanogaster'' (Bonaparte, 1832)
However, this amount is overshadowed by the total number of fox pelts used for trimming purposes.
The animal's cunning was noted by the authors of the Bible, and applied the word "fox" to false prophets (Ezekiel 13:4) and the hypocrisy of Herod Antipas (Luke 13:32).
In favourable habitats and/or areas with low hunting pressure, subordinate foxes may be present in a range.
Although the red fox tends to kill smaller predators, including other fox species, it is vulnerable to attack from larger predators, such as wolves, coyotes, golden jackals and medium- and large-sized felines.
Their skulls are fairly narrow and elongated, with small braincases.
''diluta'' (Ognev, 1924)
A small subspecies with proportionately small ears
Red foxes colonised the North American continent in two waves: during or before the Illinoian glaciation, and during the Wisconsinan glaciation.
Two additional stripes pass down the shoulder blades, which, together with the spinal stripe, form a cross.
It is generally less common in areas where the dingo is more prevalent, however it has, primarily through its burrowing behaviour, achieved niche differentiation with both the feral dog and the feral cat.
The backs of the ears are black or brownish-reddish, while the inner surface is whitish.
This subspecies is slightly smaller and more lightly coloured than ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;crucigera'', with shorter, coarser fur.
The species first colonised British cities during the 1930s, entering Bristol and London during the 1940s, and later established themselves in Cambridge and Norwich.
Slightly smaller than ''V.
A small subspecies weighing 4&nbsp;kg, its maximum skull length is 132–39&nbsp;mm in males and 121–26&nbsp;mm in females.
Geok Tepe, Aralsk, Kazakhstan
It is, however, not as adapted for a purely carnivorous diet as the Tibetan fox.
Copulation is accompanied by a copulatory tie, which may last for more than an hour.
The lactation period lasts 6–7 weeks.
When two evenly matched foxes confront each other over food, they approach each other sideways and push against each other's flanks, betraying a mixture of fear and aggression through lashing tails and arched backs without crouching and pulling their ears back without flattening them against their skulls.
During lactation, the belly fur of vixens may turn brick red.
Although they typically forage alone, they may aggregate in resource-rich environments.
He originally appeared (then under the name of "Reinardus") as a secondary character in the 1150 poem "Ysengrimus".
Researchers consider lynxes to represent considerably less danger to red foxes than wolves do.
Urban foxes can cause problems for local residents.
Generally similar to ''V.
The possibility was considered that it was caused by an acute form of encephalomyelitis, which was first observed in captive bred silver foxes.
'''Kodiak fox'''''V.
Crossbreeding small, upland ewes with larger, lowland rams can cause difficult and prolonged labour for ewes due to the heaviness of the resulting offspring, thus making the lambs more at risk to fox predation.
Individual cases of foxes infected with ''Yersinia pestis'' are known.
The "''wow wow wow''" call varies according to individual; captive foxes have been recorded to answer pre-recorded calls of their pen-mates, but not those of strangers.
Red foxes are wide ranging animals, whose range covers nearly 70&nbsp;million km2 (27&nbsp;million mi2).
Foxes may harass hyenas, using their smaller size and greater speed to avoid the hyena's attacks.
They may share their dens with woodchucks or badgers.
Red foxes seem to dislike the taste of moles but will nonetheless catch them alive and present them to their kits as playthings.
Large litters are typical in areas where fox mortality is high.
Their woolly coats begin to be coated by shiny guard hairs after 8 weeks.
Peiping, Chihli, northeastern China
Externally similar to ''V.
City-dwelling foxes may have the potential to consistently grow larger than their rural counterparts, as a result of abundant scraps and a relative dearth of predators.
v. fulvus'', it has a short tail, but cranially more like ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;macroura''
Kenai Peninsula, Alaska, US
Most European peltries have coarse-textured fur compared to North American varieties.
The only exceptions are the Nordic and Far Eastern Russian peltries, but they are still inferior to North American peltries in terms of silkiness.
The main passage can reach  in length, standing an average of .
This problem is usually averted by housing them in robust hutches and runs.
During this period, the fathers or barren vixens feed the mothers.
The earliest fossil remains of the modern species date back to the mid-Pleistocene in association with the refuse of early human settlements.
''ferganensis'' (Ognev, 1926)
The interdigital cavities are deep, with a reddish tinge and smell strongly.
The red species is also stronger, is better adapted to hunting in snow deeper than  and is more effective in hunting and catching medium to large-sized rodents.
Dens built among tree roots can last for decades, while those dug on the steppes last only several years.
A stripe of weak, diffuse patterns of many brown-reddish-chestnut hairs occurs along the spine.
This latter theory may explain the subspecies' phenotypic diversity.
Among the true foxes, the red fox represents a more progressive form in the direction of carnivory.
They are principally used as trimming for both cloth coats and fur garments, including evening wraps.
Kandahar, Afghanistan
v. vulpes'' by its smaller size, proportionately smaller skull and teeth, and coarser fur.
Too small to pose a threat to humans, it has successfully colonised many suburban areas.
This has led to the theory that the red fox was hunted by primitive humans as both a source of food and pelts.
Its range has increased alongside human expansion, having been introduced to Australia, where it is considered harmful to native mammals and bird populations.
On very rare occasions, foxes may attack young or small ungulates.
Red foxes have a pair of anal sacs lined by sebaceous glands, both of which open through a single duct.
Adults greet their kits with gruff huffing noises.
The melanistic form of the Eurasian red fox.
When kits are born, the discarded debris is trampled, thus forming a spot where the kits can play and receive food.
The hindquarters are frosted with white and the tail is clear grey in colour.
The most common tapeworm species in foxes are ''Taenia spiralis'' and ''T.&nbsp;pisiformis''.
'''Barbary fox'''''V.
The cunning Fox is commonly found in Native American mythology, where it is portrayed as an almost constant companion to Coyote.
Other endoparasites include ''Demodex folliculorum'', ''Notoderes'', ''Otodectes cynotis'' (which is frequently found in the ear canal), ''Linguatula serrata'' (which infects the nasal passages) and ringworms.
In the Velikoluki district in Russia, red foxes are absent or are seen only occasionally where lynxes establish permanent territories.
Kits make warbling whimpers when nursing, these calls being especially loud when they are dissatisfied.
''Trichinella spiralis'' rarely affects them.
Distinguished by its woolly pelt, which lacks guard hairs
The origin of the Sardinian ''ichnusae'' subspecies is uncertain, as it is absent from Pleistocene deposits in their current homeland.
In the Eurasian desert regions, foxes may use the burrows of wolves, porcupines and other large mammals, as well as those dug by gerbil colonies.
Also, introduced eastern red foxes have colonized southern California, the San Joaquin Valley, and San Francisco Bay Area, but appear to have mixed with the Sacramento Valley red fox ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;patwin'' only in a narrow hybrid zone.
''stepensis'' (Brauner, 1914)
Fleas that feed on red foxes include ''Pulex irritans'', ''Ctenocephalides canis'' and ''Paraceras melis''.
They are distributed across the entire Northern Hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to North Africa, Central America, and Asia.
v. vulpes'', it has smaller teeth and more widely spaced premolars.
When hunting mouse-like prey, they first pinpoint their prey's location by sound, then leap, sailing high above their quarry, steering in mid-air with their tails, before landing on target up to  away.
The forepaws have five digits, while the hind feet have only four and lack dewclaws.
One of the largest North American subspecies, it has softer fur than ''V.&nbsp;v.&nbsp;harrimani''.
Red foxes may on occasions prey on lambs.
A large subspecies measuring 70–90&nbsp;cm in length and weighing 5–10&nbsp;kg, the maximum length of the skull for males is 163.2&nbsp;mm.
The winter fur is dense, soft, silky and relatively long.
The skin usually has an admixture of various amounts of silver.
'''Eastern trans-Caucasian fox'''''V.
Their skulls are distinguished from those of dogs by their narrower muzzles, less crowded premolars, more slender canine teeth, and concave rather than convex profiles.
Although they ranged far south during the Wisconsinan, the onset of warm conditions shrank their range toward the north, and have only recently reclaimed their former American ranges because of human-induced environmental changes.
Their limbs are also longer, and their ears larger.
The word "fox" comes from Old English, which derived from Proto-Germanic *''fuhsaz''.
The bushy tail also forms the basis for the fox's Welsh name, ''llwynog'', literally ‘bushy', from ''llwyn'' ‘bush'.
alopex (Blanford, 1888)
It is likely then that Sardinian fox populations stem from repeated introductions of animals from different localities in the Mediterranean.
