* Sociological developments, pressure within the educational system in and outside Europe and the U.S., together with the background of counter-cultural movements.
In 1972 a law was passed, the Radikalenerlass, which banned radicals or those with a 'questionable' political persuasion from public sector jobs.
Attempted robbery of a security van using another van in a blocking move.
Three Red Army Faction members fired automatic rifles from across the Rhine River at the U.S. Embassy Chancery.
Unsuccessful sniper attack against US Army Nuclear Storage Site NATO-23.
The West German government considered the Red Army Faction to be a terrorist organization.
If one sets hundreds of cars on fire, that is political action."
Their activity peaked in late 1977, which led to a national crisis that became known as the "German Autumn."
Prosecution offered him immunity for the murder of officer Norbert Schmidt in Hamburg (1971), and blamed Baader, Meinhof, Ensslin and Raspe instead.
was accused of being the chief culprit for inciting the shooting.
In 1978 part of the group was exfiltrated through Yugoslavia to communist Poland to avoid manhunt in Germany.
Ongoing events further catalyzed the situation.
The director of Dresdner Bank, Jürgen Ponto, is shot in his home during an attempted kidnapping.
Ströbele and Croissant were remanded and held for 4 weeks and 8 weeks accordingly.
The most prominent and acclaimed film was Uli Edel's 2008 ''The Baader Meinhof Complex'' (German: ''Der Baader Meinhof Komplex'')), based on the best selling book by Stefan Aust.
The events in the autumn of 1977 are frequently referred to as ''Der Deutsche Herbst'' ("German Autumn").
Utrecht, Netherlands
Finally their lawyers (following Ulrike Meinhof's proposal) requested that the accused be officially regarded as prisoners of war.
On 9 May 1976, Ulrike Meinhof was found dead in her prison cell, hanging from a rope made from jail towels.
* Post-war writings on class society and empire as well as contemporary Marxist critiques from many revolutionaries such as Frantz Fanon, Ho Chi Minh, and Che Guevara, as well as early Autonomism.
The French newspaper ''Libération'' received a letter declaring:
It has been questioned how Baader and Raspe managed to obtain a gun in the high-security prison wing specially constructed for the first generation RAF members.
One of the group (Sieglinde Hofmann) produced her weapon from a pram she was pushing down the road.
With ninety-five percent of the Bundestag controlled by the coalition, an Extra-Parliamentary Opposition (APO) was formed with the intent of generating protest and political activity outside of government.
They were allowed to keep only a pencil and a notepad inside the court.
Today we end this project.
In 1969 the Brazilian revolutionary Carlos Marighella published his ''Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla''.
Although Meinhof was not considered to be a leader of the RAF at any time, her involvement in Baader's escape from jail in 1970 and her well-known status as a German journalist led to her name becoming attached to it.
Zimmermann died twelve hours later.
* Philosophers associated with the Frankfurt school (Jürgen Habermas, Herbert Marcuse, and Oskar Negt in particular) and associated Marxian philosophers.
Nevertheless, RAF members did receive intermittent support and sanctuary over the border in East Germany during the 1980s.
The defense lawyers and prisoners were not alone to be affected by measures adopted for the RAF-trial.
Large car-bomb exploded in the HQ USAFE and HQ 4th ATAF parking lot of Ramstein Air Base
All four hijackers were shot; three of them died on the spot.
The crisis dragged on for more than a month, while the ''Bundeskriminalamt'' carried out its biggest investigation to date.
* There were no fingerprints found on either Raspe's or Baader's gun or the kitchen knife Möller used to stab herself four times, according to official statements.
They also discovered an uncontrolled entrance to the seventh floor which led to the roof.
The origins of the group can be traced back to the student protest movement in West Germany.
The assassins of Zimmermann, von Braunmühl, Herrhausen and Rohwedder were never reliably identified.
''Das Kapital'', his mainly economic work, was meant to be one of a series of books which would have included one on society and one on the state, but his death prevented fulfilment of this.
(Adolf Eichmann who was an SS colonel, was held inside a glass cage during his trial in Israel).
A contemporaneous critique of the Red Army Faction's view of the state, published in a pirate edition of ''Le Monde Diplomatique'', ascribed to it 'state-fetishism' – an ideologically obsessive misreading of bourgeois dynamics and the nature and role of the state in post-WWII societies, including West Germany.
* the "first generation" which consisted of Baader and his associates,
The accredited correspondents of the media had to pass the first police road block 400 meters away from the court.
In the course of the night, Baader was found dead with a gunshot wound in the back of his head and Ensslin was found hanged in her cell; Raspe died in the hospital the next day from a gunshot wound to the head.
To weaken the organization further the government declared that some RAF inmates would be released if the RAF refrained from violent attacks in the future.
Matters escalated when, on 13 October 1977, Lufthansa Flight 181 from Palma de Mallorca to Frankfurt was hijacked.
Outside Germany, films include Swiss director Markus Imhoof's ''Die Reise'' (''The Journey'') (1986).
In June 1969, however, they were temporarily paroled under an amnesty for political prisoners, but in November of that year, the Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) demanded that they return to custody.
John Toffton was attacked in Kaiserslautern by Christian Klar and Brigitte Mohnhaupt and unknown third party
BKA's chief, Horst Herold stated that despite the fact that "large-scale operations usually don't bring practical results, the impression of the crowd is always a considerable advantage."
Four hundred police officers along with the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution patrolled the building.
This murder case was brought up again after the 30-year commemoration in April 2007 when information from former RAF member Peter-Jürgen Boock surfaced in media reports.
From their own personal experiences and assessments of the socio-economic situation they soon became more specifically influenced by Leninism and Maoism, calling themselves 'Marxist-Leninist' though they effectively added to or updated this ideological tradition.
The film was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film in both the 81st Academy Awards and 66th Golden Globe Awards.
* The fact that three bullets were found inside Baader's cell is considered suspicious.
Two people killed: Airman First Class Frank Scarton and Becky Bristol, a U.S. civilian employee who also was the spouse of a U.S. Air Force enlisted man.
A diversionary bomb attack on a fuel tank failed to fully ignite the fuel.
On 20 April 1998, an eight-page typewritten letter in German was faxed to the Reuters news agency, signed "RAF" with the submachine-gun red star, declaring that the group had dissolved.
''Der Spiegel'' was wondering whether that atmosphere anticipated "the condemnation of the defendants who were allegedly responsible for the emergency measures."
However, later Mr. Testor who was the head of the investigation team for the events in Stammheim, argued that there was no blood on Raspe's pistol, and stated: "If the weapons had been polished with a cloth before the act, then no usable traces could have remained after only being used once."
22-year-old Fritz Sippel was shot in the head when checking an RAF member's identity papers.
A large amount of blood and broken eyeglasses was found at the scene, none of the blood was from the victim.
Mohnhaupt, the driver and Klar fled the scene in a green VW Fast Back with German plates.
Led to the capture of two RAF members three months later at a train station, and a shoot-out between RAF member Wolfgang Grams and a GSG 9 squad; GSG9 officer Michael Newrzella was killed before Grams allegedly was shot, while Birgit Hogefeld was arrested.
Kaiserslautern, Germany
These extremists beat the protesters.
The last action taken by the RAF took place in 1993 with a bombing of a newly built prison in Weiterstadt by overcoming the officers on duty and planting explosives.
The driver and another passenger were also killed.
Some radicals used the supposed association  of large parts of society with Nazism as an argument against any peaceful approaches:
Gramsci wrote on power, cultural and ideological conflicts in society and institutions—real-time class struggles playing out in rapidly developing industrial nation states through interlinked areas of political behaviour, Marcuse on coercion and hegemony in that cultural indoctrination and ideological manipulation through the means of communication ("repressive tolerance") dispensed with the need for complete brute force in modern 'liberal democracies'.
On 7 May 2007, pardon was denied; regular parole was later granted on 24 November 2008.
Since none of these were on trial for murder, the state agreed, and those inmates (and later Lorenz himself) were released.
The prisoners were transferred there in 1975 (three years after their arrest).
His body was dumped on the runway.
Police officer killed
Many of the radicals felt that Germany's lawmakers were continuing authoritarian policies and the public's apparent acquiescence was seen as a continuation of the indoctrination the Nazis had pioneered in society (Volksgemeinschaft).
The prisoners were not allowed to meet each other inside the prison, until late 1975 when it was established a meeting time (30 minutes, twice per day), during which they were obviously guarded.
However none of the guerrillas was found.
Jan Carl Raspe lived at the Kommune 2; Horst Mahler was an established lawyer, but was also at the center of the anti-Springer revolt from the beginning.
A new section of Stammheim Prison was built especially for the RAF and was considered one of the most secure prison blocks around the world at the time.
Siegfried Buback, the RAF's main trial judge in Stammheim, had been a Nazi Party member.
This horrified many on the left and was viewed as monolithic, political marriage of convenience with pro-NATO, pro-capitalist collusion on the part of the social democratic SPD.
Finally there were helicopters flying around the area.
Minister of Justice Hans-Jochen Vogel stated proudly that no other Western state had such an extensive regulation to exclude defense attorneys from the trial.
When he threatened Meinhof that she would be put into a glass cage she answered caustically, "So you are threatening me with Eichmann's cage, fascist?"
"Almost 28 years ago, on 14 May 1970, the RAF arose in a campaign of liberation.
The 2010 feature documentary ''Children of the Revolution'' tells Ulrike Meinhof's story from the perspective of her daughter, journalist and historian Bettina Röhl, while Andres Veiel's 2011 feature film ''If Not Us, Who?''
Meinhof commented: "If one sets a car on fire, that is a criminal offence.
All four of the defendants charged with arson and endangering human life were convicted, for which they were sentenced to three years in prison.
However, the case received new light in late 2007 when German authorities learned that the Stasi, the former East German secret police, may have played a role in the assassination of Herrhausen, as the bombing method was exactly the same as one that had been developed by the Stasi.
Rohwedder was the chief of the Treuhandanstalt, the agency that privatized the former East German enterprises after the German reunification.
Grams and GSG 9 officer Michael Newrzella died during the mission.
The officer, Karl-Heinz Kurras, was acquitted in a subsequent trial.
It was later revealed that the conversation they had between them as well with their attorneys were recorded.
However, in January 2016, German police identified three RAF members as being the perpetrators of an assault on an armored truck transporting €1 million, thus fueling suspicion that RAF might be active again.
Four civilians (two adults and two children) were killed the next day in an accidental shooting by American troops who had been placed on high alert after the attack.
Theodor Prinzing was accused by defense attorney Otto Schily that he had been appointed arbitrarily displacing other judges.
He is on record as saying that his beliefs have not changed: ''Der Feind ist der Gleiche'' (The enemy is the same).
Their personal items including their identities were held by the authorities during the trial.
The group never used these names to refer to itself, since it viewed itself as co-founded group consisting of numerous members not a group with two figure heads.
The attack caused a four-year delay in the completion of the site that was planned to open in 1993.
After a day of angry protests by exiled Iranian radical Marxists, a group widely supported by German students, the Shah visited the Berlin Opera, where a crowd of German student protesters gathered.
On TV, there was Heinrich Breloer's ''Todesspiel'' (''Death Game'') (1997), a two-part docu-drama, and Volker Schloendorff's ''Die Stille nach dem Schuss'' (''The Legend of Rita'') (2000).
A shootout followed where one policeman (Hans-Wilhelm Hans, 26) was shot dead, and one of the RAF members (Knoll) was wounded so badly that he would later die from his injuries.
USAF Security Police Officer Sgt.
In response to this statement, former BKA President Horst Herold said, "With this statement the Red Army Faction has erected its own tombstone."
The terms "Baader-Meinhof Gang" and "Baader-Meinhof Group" were first used by the media and the government.
This publication was an antecedent to Meinhof's 'The Urban Guerrilla Concept' and has subsequently influenced many guerrilla and insurgent groups around the globe.
The car bomb was discovered and defused.
By the time the Stammheim trial began in early 1975, some of the prisoners had already been in solitary confinement for three years.
On 23 June (1975), Croissant, Ströbele (who had already been expelled) and Mary Becker were arrested, and in the meantime police invaded several defense attorneys' offices and homes, seizing several documents and files.
Unsuccessful rocket propelled grenade attack against the car carrying the US Army's West German Commander Frederick J. Kroesen.
During the night the precinct was illuminated by fifty-four spotlights and twenty-three neon bulbs.
On 2 April 1968 Gudrun Ensslin and Andreas Baader, joined by Thorwald Proll and Horst Söhnlein, set fire to two department stores in Frankfurt as a protest against the Vietnam war.
The Bundestag had earlier changed the Code of Criminal Procedure so that several of the attorneys who were accused of serving as links between the inmates and the RAF's second generation could be excluded.
There were protesters but also hundreds of supporters of the Shah, as well as a group of fake supporters armed with wooden staves, there to disturb the normal course of the visit.
They also expounded the fascistization of West Germany and its role as an imperialistic state (alliance with USA over Vietnam).
Konrad Adenauer, the first Federal Republic chancellor (in office 1949–1963), had even appointed the former Nazi-sympathiser Hans Globke as Director of the Federal Chancellery of West Germany (in office 1953–1963).
Many young people were alienated from both their parents and the institutions of state.
Hanns Martin Schleyer, chairman of the German Employers' Association, is kidnapped and later shot
Baader had gunpowder on his right hand, despite the fact that he was left-handed.
Bombing of the car carrying the chairman of Deutsche Bank Alfred Herrhausen (killed)
This became clear when, on 27 February 1975, Peter Lorenz, the CDU candidate for mayor of Berlin, was kidnapped by the 2 June Movement (allied to the RAF) as part of pressure to secure the release of several other detainees.
Actions were carried out by active units called 'commandos', with trained members being supplied by a quartermaster in order to carry out their mission.
In West Germany there was anger among leftist youth at the post-war denazification in West and East Germany, which was perceived as a failure or as ineffective, as former (actual and supposed) Nazis held positions in government and economy.
On 30 November 1989, Deutsche Bank chairman Alfred Herrhausen was killed with a highly complex bomb when his car triggered a photo sensor, in Bad Homburg.
Attack against US 42nd Field Artillery Brigade at Giessen
Attacks with explosives at the construction site of a new prison
The French revolutionary organization Action Directe is suspected to have collaborated with the RAF on this attack.
Assassination of the federal prosecutor-general Siegfried Buback
After an intense manhunt, Baader, Ensslin, Meinhof, Holger Meins, and Jan-Carl Raspe were eventually caught and arrested in June 1972.
Ruhland himself later reported to ''Stern'' that his deposition was prepared in cooperation with police.
Two former members of RAF, Karl-Heinz Ruhland, and Gerhard Müller, testified under BKA's orders, as revealed later.
The Federal Republic was exporting arms to African dictatorships, which was seen as supporting the war in Southeast Asia and engineering the remilitarization of Germany with the U.S.-led entrenchment against the Warsaw Pact nations.
Müller was reported to "break" during the third hunger strike in the winter 1974/75 which lasted 145 days.
On 11 April 1968 Rudi Dutschke, a leading spokesman for protesting students, was shot in the head in an assassination attempt by the right-wing extremist Josef Bachmann.
Elected and unelected government positions down to the local level were often occupied by ex-Nazis.
Among other things, two years earlier, while being interviewed by Stern magazine, he stated that "Persons like Baader don't deserve a fair trial."
Every journalist could attend the trial only twice (2 days).
Known involved RAF members: Christian Klar.
On 26 November 1974 an unprecedented mobilization by police and GSG-9 units, to arrest 23 suspected RAF members, included invasion of dozens of homes, left-wing bookstores, and meeting places, and arrests were made.
The plane flew on via Larnaca to Dubai, and then to Aden, where flight captain Jürgen Schumann, whom the hijackers deemed not cooperative enough, was brought before an improvised "revolutionary tribunal" and executed on 16 October.
Three shots fired from semi-automatic weapons, but attackers were unable to open the security van's door.
The police noted their data and the number-plate, and photographed their cars.
In 1992, the German government assessed that the RAF's main field of engagement now was missions to release former RAF-members.
Finally Ensslin had written to their lawyers: "I am afraid of being suicided in the same way as Ulrike.
Birgit Hogefeld and Eva Haule have been convicted for their involvement in this event.
Twenty people were also injured.
Newly found youth identity and issues such as racism, women's liberation and anti-imperialism were at the forefront of left-wing politics.
On 4 May (5 days before Meinhof's death) the four defendants requested to provide data about the Vietnam War.
Three RAF members (Angelika Speitel, Werner Lotze, Michael Knoll) were engaged in target practice when they were confronted by police.
The Red Army Faction was formed with the intention of complementing the plethora of revolutionary and radical groups across West Germany and Europe, as a more class conscious and determined force compared with some of its contemporaries.
The roof and the courtyard was covered with steel mesh.
On 1 April 1991, Detlev Karsten Rohwedder, leader of the government ''Treuhand'' organization responsible for the privatization of the East German state economy, was shot and killed.
However, an investigation headed by the Attorney General failed to substantiate such claims.
Killing of Gerold Braunmühl
RAF founder Ulrike Meinhof had a long history in the Communist Party.
a 'fraction' of a whole.
The radicalized were, like many in the New Left, influenced by:
Claimed by 15 July Commando (in honour of Petra Schelm).
Judge Weiss (Mahler's trial) had judged Joachim Raese (president of the Third Reich’s court) as innocent seven times.
Subsequently the RAF announced their intention to "de-escalate" and refrain from significant activity.
The authorities invaded and checked the lawyers' offices for possible incriminating material.
Numerous West German film and TV productions have been made about the RAF.
1966 saw the emergence of the Grand Coalition between the two main parties, the SPD and CDU, with former Nazi Party member Kurt Georg Kiesinger as chancellor.
Croissant had to pay 80,000 Deutschmarks, to report weekly to police station as well as having his transport and identity papers seized.
There have been several documentaries: ''Im Fadenkreuz – Deutschland & die RAF'' (1997, several directors); Gerd Conradt's ''Starbuck Holger Meins'' (2001); Andres Veiel's ''Black Box BRD'' (2001); Klaus Stern's ''Andreas Baader – Der Staatsfeind'' (''Enemy of the State'') (2003); Ben Lewis's ''In Love With Terror'', for BBC Four (2003); and ''Ulrike Meinhof – Wege in den Terror'' (''Ways into Terror'') (2006).
On 21 May 1975, the Stammheim trial of Baader, Ensslin, Meinhof, and Raspe began named after the district in Stuttgart where it took place.
Baader was arrested again in April 1970, but on 14 May 1970 he was freed by Meinhof and others.
* There was no gunpowder traces on Raspe's hands, even though it is considered impossible to fire a gun without leaving gunpowder on ones hands, something that it is always mentioned in autopsy reports.
On 5 September 1977, Schleyer's convoy was stopped by the kidnappers reversing a car into the path of Schleyer's vehicle, causing the Mercedes he was being driven in to crash.
She claims that it was actually an extrajudicial killing, orchestrated by the German government, in response to Red Army Faction demands that the prisoners be released.
Police officer killed
On 18 October 1977, Hanns-Martin Schleyer was shot to death by his captors en route to Mulhouse, France.
Once the convoy was stopped, five masked assailants immediately shot and killed the three policemen and the driver and took Schleyer hostage.
There are arguments that the chair she allegedly used to hang herself was too far away from her body to have been used, and that the cable used to hang herself was such that it would most likely not tolerate the weight of a fallen body.
The Berlin 2 June Movement, a militant-Anarchist group, later took its name to honour the date of Ohnesorg's death.
The historical legacy of Nazism drove a wedge between the generations and increased suspicion of authoritarian structures in society (some analysts see the same  occurring in post-fascism Italy, giving rise to "''Brigate Rosse''").
Axel Springer's populist newspaper ''Bild-Zeitung'', which had run headlines such as "Stop Dutschke now!"
A forest near Dortmund
As a result, Birgit Hogefeld and Wolfgang Grams were to be arrested in Bad Kleinen.
At five past midnight (CET) on 18 October, the plane was stormed in a seven-minute assault by the GSG 9, an elite unit of the German federal police.
Independent investigations showed that the inmates' lawyers were able to smuggle in weapons and equipment despite the high security, something that the lawyers themselves denied, arguing that every meeting with their clients was observed by jailers.
After German reunification in 1990, it was confirmed that the RAF had received financial and logistic support from the Stasi, the security and intelligence organization of East Germany, which had given several members shelter and new identities.
A USAF Security Police Officer was on his way to work from his residence on Malzstrasse near Eisenbahnstrasse and Mozartstrasse riding a bicycle when he was attacked.
Only Horst Söhnlein complied with the order; the rest went underground and made their way to France, where they stayed for a time in a house owned by prominent French journalist and revolutionary, Régis Debray, famous for his friendship with Che Guevara and the ''focus'' theory of guerrilla warfare.
Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany
Thomas presented data about the joint operations of FRG and US secret services in Eastern Europe.
The '''Red Army Faction''' or '''Red Army Fraction''' ('''RAF'''; German: ''Rote Armee Fraktion''), in its early stages commonly known as the '''Baader-Meinhof Group''' or '''Baader-Meinhof Gang''' (), was a West German far-left militant group supported by the Stasi.
This was already generally suspected at the time.
Along with Federal Prosecutor Heinrich Wunder (who served as senior government official in Ministry of Defense), Buback had ordered the arrest of Rudolf Augstein and other journalists regarding the Spiegel scandal in 1962.
Klaus Croissant, Hans-Christian Ströbele, Kurt Groenewold, who had been working preparing for the trial for three years were expelled the second day of the trial.
Their statements were often contradictory, something that was also commented on in the newspapers.
Protests turned into riots on 2 June 1967, when Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, visited West Berlin.
A Volkswagen Passat exploded in the parking lot across from the base commander's building
There were three successive incarnations of the organization:
Irmgard Möller, who had several stab wounds in the chest, survived and was released from prison in 1994.
In 2005, Mahler was sentenced to 6 years in prison for incitement to racial hatred against Jews.
One hundred more GSG-9 units reinforced the police during the trial.
