The ''base'' is the word (or part of the word) that is to be copied.
words, stems, roots).
Adjectives and adverbs employ morphological reduplication for many different reasons such as plurality agreement when the adjective modifies a plural noun, intensification of the adjective or adverb, and sometimes because the prefix forces the adjective to have a reduplicated stem".
For instance, in Sichuan Mandarin, ''bāobāo'' 包包 (handbag) is used whereas Beijing use ''bāor'' 包儿.
Old Prussian ''kelan'' ‘wheel’, Welsh ''pel'' ‘ball’), itself likely a deverbative of *''kʷelh₁-'' ‘to turn’.
Canonical/reduplicated babbling also appears at a time when general rhythmic behavior, such as rhythmic hand movements and rhythmic kicking, appear.
In colloquial speech, almost any arbitrary word can be reduplicated to express a dismissive attitude:
For example, ''Söin jäätelöä ja karkkia, sekä tietysti ruokaruokaa.''
##''jari-jari'' = "spoke; bar; radius; etc."
Japanese also contains a large number of mimetic words formed by reduplication of a syllable.
a plural noun does not have to have a plural article marking it"):
* ''kauas'' "far away", ''kauaskauas'' "unquestionably far away"
*  'red' →  'reddish' &nbsp;
*: ''pillavāḍu naḍustū naḍustū paḍi pōyāḍu''
* * ''sésdomai'' →  ''hézomai'' "I sit down" (present; from sd-, zero-grade of root in *sed-os → ἕδος ''hédos'' "seat, abode")
literal translation:
##''langit-langit = "ceiling; palate; etc."
Another example is , which means "kinds," but the reduplicated form  means "multiple kinds."
*  'water' →  'watery' &nbsp; &nbsp; (Dayley 1985)
Both languages can use a special written iteration mark  to indicate reduplication, although in Chinese the iteration mark is no longer used in standard writing and is often found only in calligraphy.
Siis kipeäkipeä" ("I wasn't at school yesterday because I was sick.
*lutuin cook-inf/object trigger-cook "to cook"
In Romanian and Catalan, reduplication is not uncommon and it has been used for both the creation of new words (including many from onomatopoeia) and expressions, for example,
A few measure words can also be reduplicated to indicate "one or the other":
This can be analyzed as an instance of omission of "一" (originally, e.g., "坐一坐" or "等一等" ) or "一下" (originally, e.g., "坐一下").
*  'boy' →  'boys' &nbsp; &nbsp; (Abraham 1964)
Reduplication is often described phonologically in one of two different ways: either (1) as reduplicated ''segments'' (sequences of consonants/vowels) or (2) as reduplicated ''prosodic units'' (syllables or moras).
As a result, reduplication is interesting theoretically as it involves the interface between phonology and morphology.
*niluluto object trigger infix-reduplication-cook "cook"/"is/was cooking"
*"Ang magandang puno" "the beautiful tree".
Reduplication has been found to be a major part of Salish languages.
Khmer uses reduplication for several purposes, including emphasis and pluralization.
*Simple reduplication:
Reduplication also occurs in the 3th gaṇa (verb class) of the Sanskrit language: ''bibheti'' "he fears", ''bibharti'' "he bears", ''juhoti'' "he offers", ''dadāti'', "he gives".
Many Burmese words, especially adjectives such as  ('beautiful' ), which consist of two syllables (when reduplicated, each syllable is reduplicated separately), when reduplicated ( →  'beautifully' ) become adverbs.
Lithuanian ''kãklas'' ‘neck’, Sanskrit ''cakrá'' ‘wheel’), which doubled *''kʷel-o-'' (cf.
They are formed by repeating a part of a word to form new words, altering the meaning of the original word.
*''vớ vẩn'' → ''vớ va vớ vẩn'' (compound): silly
* (measure word for things) →  (something)
In Tohono O'odham initial reduplication also involves gemination of the first consonant in the distributive plural and in repetitive verbs:
*  (Greek, "I see, I saw"; these Greek examples exhibit ablaut as well as reduplication)
(''anak'' = "child")
*''khó'' → ''khó khăn'' (final L→R): difficult → severely difficult
For Ergative verbs (frequently referred to as "object focus" verbs) reduplication of part the infix and the stem occur:
In Tetum, reduplication is used to turn adjectives into superlatives.
It is often used as a literary device (like alliteration) in poetry and other compositions but is also prevalent in everyday speech.
This occurs in other place names deriving from the Wiradjuri language including Gumly Gumly, Grong Grong and Book Book.
Words called '''''từ láy''''' are found abundantly in Vietnamese.
Triplication occurs in other languages, e.g.
*''khúm núm'' → ''khúm na khúm núm'' (compound): to cower
*''đỏ'' → ''đo đỏ'' (initial full, excluding tone): red → somewhat red
*''mạnh'' → ''mạnh mẽ'' (final L→R): strong → very strong
*niluto object trigger infix-cook (perf-cook) "cooked"
She doesn't let him sleep.
Examples of reduplication increasing intensity:
Canonical babbling is characterized by repetition of identical or nearly identical consonant-vowel combinations, such as 'nanana' or 'didididi'.
* ''dídōmi'' "I give" (present)
Reduplication is found in a wide range of languages and language groups, though its level of linguistic productivity varies.
Its effect is to sometimes either increase or decrease the intensity of the adjective, or to generalize a word's meaning.
("The Spaniards came, cannonaded, and left.
Numerous examples of reduplication in Dutch (and other languages) are discussed by Daniëls (2000).
Likewise, "chiya" or tea (conventionally made with milk and sugar) becomes "chiya siya": tea and snacks (such as biscuits or cookies).
#Conceptual similarity:
From the root ''kHb'' 'pile stones into a wall', since the second radical is not fully specified, what some call "hollow", the antepenultimate reduplication process reduplicates the ''k'', which is by some criteria antepenultimate, and produces ''akakabä'' 'pile stones repeatedly'.
Reduplication is commonly used only with 'suurensuuri' 'big of big', 'pienenpieni' 'small of small' and 'hienonhieno' 'fine of fine' but other adjectives may sometimes be duplicated as well, where a superlative is too strong an expression, somewhat similarly to Slavic languages.
Usually, but not always, this is reduplication of a consonant and ''i'', and contrasts with e-reduplication in the perfect:
*  'hit (unitative)' →  'hit (repetitive)' &nbsp; &nbsp; (Haugen forthcoming)
*  (Greek, "I leave, I left")
The wide use of reduplication is certainly one of the most prominent grammatical features of Indonesian and Malay (as well as of other South-East Asian and Austronesian languages).
One can further categorize the reduplicative words into "True" and "Quasi" ones.
*''đau'' → ''đau đớn'' (final L→R): painful → pain and suffering
It can be thought as compound word formation.
In some cases, the word's tone may be reduplicated in addition to an initial or final sound (see tone sandhi).
Reduplication is particularly common in the city of Shiraz in southwestern Iran.
Quite common in casual conversations are a few more examples like shopping-wopping, khana-wana.
*''học'' → ''học hành'' (final L→R): to study (something) → to study (in general)
This type is used also in formal Turkish, especially in literature.
This combination of reduplication and affixation is commonly referred to as ''fixed-segment reduplication''.
Some nouns are also reduplicated to indicate plurality.
''Reduplication'' is the standard term for this phenomenon in the linguistics literature.
Reduplication is usually rhyming.
The reduplication in the Russian language serves for various kinds of intensifying of the meaning and exists in several forms: a hyphenated or repeated word (either exact or inflected reduplication), and forms similar to shm-reduplication.
#Diversity or non-exhaustive plurality:
*lexical: 'Each-each boy take one-one chair.'
Reduplication can also extend the meaning of a word; for instance ''paki'' "pat" becomes ''papaki'' "slap or clap once" and ''pakipaki'' "applaud"; ''kimo'' "blink" becomes ''kikimo'' "close eyes firmly".
Reduplication in nouns was rare, the best example being Proto-Indo-European '''' ‘wheel’ (cf.
In "Mag- verbs" reduplication of the root after the prefix "mag-" or "nag-" changes the verb from the infinitive form, or perfective aspect, respectively, to the contemplated or imperfective aspect.
Compound verbs are reduplicated as a whole word: ''xiūxixiūxi'' 休息休息 (rest (for a while)).
Reduplication is also used in Dravidian languages like Telugu for the same purpose.
For example, ''tabak'' means "plate(s)", and ''tabak mabak'' then means "plates, dishes and such".
*morphological: मनात हूर हूर दाटून येते
In the older Indo-European languages, many such verbs survive:
*''chỉ'' → ''chỉ trỏ'' (final L→R plus tone): to point → to point about
Semitic languages frequently reduplicate consonants, though often not the vowels that appear next to the consonants in some verb form.
During the period 25–50 weeks after birth, all typically developing infants go through a stage of reduplicated or canonical babbling (Stark 198, Oller, 1980).
In Swiss German, the verbs ''gah'' or ''goh'' "go", ''cho'' "come", ''la'' or ''lo'' "let" and ''aafa'' or ''aafo'' "begin" reduplicate when combined with other verbs.
The English came, cannonaded heavily, and left.
One notable exception is the colloquial use of ''bāobāo'' 包包 by non-Sichuanese speakers to denote a perceived fancy, attractive, or "cute" purse (somewhat equivalent to the English "baggie").
Among the quasi-reduplicative words are ''"Zan-o-man"'' ( = wife); ''"Da'vā-Ma'vā"'' ( = Argument); ''"Talā-malā"'' ( = jewelry); and ''"Raxt-o-Paxt"'' ( = Items of clothing).
Reduplication in Khmer, like many Mon–Khmer languages, can express complex thoughts.
Sometimes gemination (i.e.
*''nói bậy'' → ''nói bậy nói bạ'' (verb phrase): to say vulgarities
Reduplication has a somewhat childish connotation, and may be perceived as annoying.
Noun reduplication, though nearly absent in Standard Chinese, is found in the southwestern dialect of Mandarin.
Simple reduplication of nouns and pronouns can express at least three meanings:
Reduplication can convey emphasis or repetition, for example ''mate'' "die", ''matemate'' "die in numbers"; and de-emphasis, for example ''wera'' "hot" and ''werawera'' "warm".
However, most young women and children do not use reduplication.
As seen above, disyllabic words undergo a complex transformation:    .
**Pragmatic accentuation: ''Kenapa orang tidak datang-datang?''
* ''peli'' "game", ''pelipeli'' "complete game",as opposed to a mod
Reduplication comes after inflection in Finnish.
nad (נד) 'to move, to nod' > nadad (נדד) 'to wander' but also nidned (נדנד) 'to swing, to nag'.
##''Saya bukan anak-anak lagi!''
South Asian languages are also rich in other forms of reduplication: morphological (expressives), lexical (distributives), and phrasal (aspectual).
*"Ang pagka''ga''gandang puno" "The ''most'' beautiful tree (''and there are none more beautiful anywhere'')"
Afrikaans makes use of reduplication to emphasize the meaning of the word repeated and to denote a plural or event happening in more than one place.
*Reduplication with ''me-'' prefixation, depending on the position of the prefix ''me-'':
For example, ''krap'' means "to scratch one's self," while ''krap-krap-krap'' means "to scratch one's self vigorously", whereas "dit het plek-plek gereën", means "it rained here and there".
It is usually used to sound casual, or in a suggestive manner.
Notice that in the first case, the nasalisation of the initial consonant (whereby /p/ becomes /m/) is repeated, while in the second case, it only applies in the repeated word.
'''' &nbsp;'still singing'
*:          ''manaa-t hur-hur daaT.un yete''
Mainly due to the mixed nature of the Persian language, most of the reduplication comes in the form of a phrase consisting of a Persian word -va- ( = and) and an Arabic word, like ''"Taghdir-Maghdir"'' ().
A word can be reduplicated while replacing the initial consonants (not being ''m'', and possibly missing) with ''m''.
= "Don't speak loudly!"
*phrasal: పిల్లవాడు నడుస్తూ నడుస్తూ పడి పోయాడు
*''nhẹ'' → ''nhè nhẹ'' (initial full, excluding tone): gently → as gently as possible
Reduplication in Persian, is sometimes a mockery of words with non-Persian origins.
Another example is a former safe sex campaign slogan in Flanders: ''Eerst bla-bla, dan boem-boem'' (''First talk, then have sex'').
**Repetition or continuation of the action: ''Orang itu memukul-mukul anaknya'': "That man continuously beat his child";
*: 'The child fell down while walking.'
For example, ''zaman zaman'' (time time) meaning "occasionally"; ''uzun uzun'' (long long) meaning "very long or many things long".
In some Salishan languages, reduplication is used to mark both diminution and plurality, one process applying to each end of the word, as in the following example from Shuswap.
This can be applied not only to nouns but to all kinds of words, as in ''yeşil meşil'' meaning "green, greenish, whatever".
Note that the data was transcribed in a way that is not comparable to the IPA, but the reduplication of both initial and final portions of the root is clear: ''ṣōk!Emē'’n'' 'knife' reduplicated as ''ṣuk!ṣuk!Emen'’me’n'' 'plural small knives' (Haeberlin 1918:159).
In Italian reduplication was used both to create new words or words associations (''tran-tran'', ''via via'', ''leccalecca'') and to intensify the meaning (''corri!, corri!''
*''Maganda''ng maganda ang kabayo "the horse is ''very'' pretty"
This can take the shape of reduplicating the antepenultimate consonant (usually the second of three), the last of two consonants, or the last two consonants.
*  'lump of meat' →  'lumps of meat' &nbsp;
**Reciprocity: ''Kedua orang itu pukul-memukul'' = "Those two men would beat each other".
* * ''sísdō'' →  ''hízō'' "I set" (present)
In the language of the Wiradjuri people of southeastern Australia, plurals are formed by doubling a word, hence 'Wagga' meaning crow becomes Wagga Wagga meaning 'place of many crows'.
*''xanh'' → ''xanh xanh'' (full): blue/green → somewhat blue/green
*''đau'' → ''đau điếng'' (final L→R): to hurt → to hurt horribly
##''Burung-burung itu juga diekspor ke luar negeri'' = "All those birds are also exported out of the country".
She comes to adorn our Christmas tree.
*''rực'' → ''rực rỡ'' (final L→R): flaring → blazing
Examples of generalization:
"mix mix") and "tago-tago" "refugee or even illegal immigrant (lit.
It occurs in a small subset of "people" words in most Polynesian languages.
Agreement (optional, plurality, and agreement with a plural noun, is entirely optional in Tagalog (e.g.
While not common in Dutch, reduplication does exist.
Examples of such nouns formed by reduplication are "halo-halo" "ice cream" (lit.
The origin of this usage of ''tautonym'' is uncertain, but it has been suggested that it is of relatively recent derivation.
the doubling of consonants or vowels) is considered to be a form of reduplication.
It can add emphasis: 'pici' (tiny) -> ici-pici (very tiny) and  it can modify meaning: 'néha-néha' ('seldom-seldom': seldom but repeatedly),  'erre-arra' ('this way-that way', meaning movement without a definite direction), 'ezt-azt' ('this-that', meaning 'all sort of things'), Reduplication often evokes a sense of playfulness and it's quite common when talking to small children.
The Khmer script includes a reduplication sign, , indicating that the word or phrase preceding it is to be pronounced twice.
'''' &nbsp;'singing'
*nagluluto actor trigger-reduplication-cook "cook" (as in "I cook all the time) or "is/was cooking"
For example, "rangi changi"* describes an object that is extremely or vividly colorful, like a crazy mix of colors and/or patterns, perhaps dizzying to the eye.
One may say "En ollut eilen koulussa, koska olin kipeä.
In Malay and Indonesian, reduplication is a very productive process.
*: 'Yearning desire floods into my heart.'
*  'ditch' →  'ditches' &nbsp;
The structure may be written also separately as 'genitive' 'nominative', which may create confusion on occasion (f.e.
* ''ruoka'' "food", ''ruokaruoka'' "proper food", as opposed to snacks
Common in Lingua Franca, particularly but not exclusively for onomatopoeic action descriptions:
In quasi-reduplicative words, at least one of the words does not have a meaning.
*''háitan'', ''haíháit'' (Gothic, "to name, I named")
Other terms that are occasionally used include ''cloning'', ''doubling'', ''duplication'', ''repetition'', and ''tautonym'' when it is used in biological taxonomies, such as "Bison bison".
For example, in Hindi, chai-shai (''chai'' means tea, while this phrase means tea or any other supplementary drink or tea along with snacks).
Reduplication of nouns happens in Tagalog, but is far less productive, and more sporadic.
*magluluto inf/actor trigger-rdplc-cook (contemplated) "will cook"
In Burmese, reduplication is used in verbs and adjectives to form adverbs.
All of these Indo-European inherited reduplicating forms are subject to reduction by other phonological laws.
However, there are few nouns that can be reduplicated in Standard Chinese, and reduplication denotes generalisation and uniformity: ''rén'' 人 (human being) and ''rénrén'' 人人 (everybody (in general, in common)), ''jiājiāhùhù''  家家户户 (every household (uniformly)) - in the latter ''jiā'' and ''hù'' additionally duplicate the meaning of ''household'', which is a common way of creating compound words in Chinese.
'''' &nbsp;'to sleep'
*: child walking walking fall went
*''bậy'' → ''bậy bạ'' (initial L→R plus tone): objectionable
A word can be reduplicated totally, giving a related but different meaning or used for emphasizing.
Chinese also uses reduplication:  ''rén'' for "person",  ''rénrén'' for "everybody".
Reduplication is a common feature of Irish and includes the examples ''rírá'', ''ruaille buaille'' both meaning 'commotion' and ''fite fuaite'' meaning 'intertwined'.
Reduplication in Afrikaans has been described extensively in the literature - see for example Botha (1988), Van Huyssteen (2004) and Van Huyssteen & Wissing (2007).
Somali has a similar suffix that is used in forming the plural of some nouns: ''-aC'' (where ''C'' is the last consonant of the base):
< ''jari'' = "finger" etc.
Proto-Indo-European also used reduplication for imperfective aspect.
Pingelapese has both reduplication and triplication.
'suurensuuri jalka' 'big of big foot' vs. 'suuren suuri jalka' 'big foot of a big one')
Most, but not all (e.g., ''pipi'', ''blauwblauw'' (laten), ''taaitaai'' (gingerbread)) reduplications in Dutch are loanwords (e.g., ''koeskoes'', ''bonbon'', (ik hoorde het) ''via via'') or imitative (e.g., ''tamtam'', ''tomtom'').
It is often used when a speaker adopts a tone more "expressive" or figurative than ordinary speech and is also often, but not exclusively, iconic in meaning.
For instance, , means "country," but when reduplicated to , it means "many countries" (as in , "international").
* ''puhelin'' "phone", ''puhelinpuhelin'' "phone for talking", as opposed to a pocket computer
However, in some languages, reduplication can occur more than once, resulting in a tripled form, and not a ''duple'' as in most reduplication.
*''nhỏ'' → ''nho nhỏ'' (initial full, excluding tone): small → somewhat small
*:            mind-in longing choking comes
'''' &nbsp;'to sing'
*''xinh'' → ''xinh xinh'' (full): pretty → cute
Similarly to Standard Chinese, the meaning is not that of a true plural, but collectives that refer to a large, given set of the same object; for example, the formal English equivalent of 人々 would be "people" (collective), rather than "persons" (plural individuals).
In true reduplicative words, both words are actually real words and have meaning in the language in which it is used.
Common uses for reduplication in French are the creation of hypocoristics for names, whereby ''Louise'' becomes ''Loulou'', and Zinedine Zidane becomes ''Zizou''; and in many nursery words, like ''dada'' 'horsie' (vs. ''cheval'' 'horse'), ''tati'' 'auntie' (vs. ''tante'' 'aunt'), or ''tonton'' 'unkie' (vs. ''oncle'' 'uncle').
