It united all non-Reform currents in the country and would gradually develop into the locus of Conservative Judaism.
It is characterized by a lesser stress on ritual and personal observance, regarding Jewish religious law as of basically non-binding nature, and great openness to external influences and progressive values.
The various strands also adopted a policy of embracing the intermarried and their spouses.
When the movement was institutionalized in Germany between in 1898 and 1908, its leaders chose "Liberal" as self-designation, founding the Vereinigung für das Liberale Judentum.
Holdheim shocked the assembled when he proposed his "Second Sabbath" scheme, astonishing even the radical wing, and his motion was rejected offhand.
Second only to Geiger, Rabbi Samuel Holdheim distinguished himself as a radical proponent of change.
In 1907, the former Consistorial rabbi Louis-Germain Lévy, who shared a similar worldview, formed the Union Libérale Israélite de France, a small congregation which numbered barely a hundred families.
Full and complete Jewish emancipation granted to all in the German Empire in 1871 largely diffused interest in harmonizing religion with ''zeitgeist''.
The Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism became an important lobby in service of progressive causes such as the rights of women, minorities, LGBT and the like.
In the coming decade, waves of refugees from Nazi Germany arrived in Britain, bringing with them both the moderation of German Liberal Judaism (few mingled with the radical JRU) and a cadre of trained rabbis.
Cohon valued Jewish particularism over universalist leanings, encouraging the reincorporation of traditional elements long discarded, not as part of a comprehensive legalistic framework but as means to rekindle ethnic cohesion.
Apart from that, the American Reform movement was chiefly a direct German import.
In 1977, the CCAR declared that the biblical ban on male same-sex intercourse referred only to the pagan customs prevalent at the time it was composed, and gradually accepted openly LGBT constituents and clergy.
The first was founded in the Netherlands, where two synagogues formed the Verbond voor Liberaal-Religieuze Joden in Nederland on 18 October 1931.
In 1841, the Hamburg Temple issued a second edition of its prayerbook, the first Reform liturgy since its predecessor of 1818.
Immigration from Eastern Europe also strengthened traditional elements.
While Orthodox protests to Jacobson's initiatives were scant, dozens of rabbis throughout Europe united to ban the Hamburg Temple.
Growing numbers did begin to enter UAHC prayerhouses.
These developments, and the need to bring uniformity to practical reforms implemented piecemeal in the various communities, motivated Geiger and his like-minded supporters into action.
He and Einhorn also quarreled in the matter of liturgy, each issuing his own prayerbook, ''Minhag America'' (American Rite) and ''Olat Tamid'' (Regular Burnt Offering) respectively, which they hoped to make standard issue.
With the advent of Jewish emancipation and acculturation in Central Europe during the late 18th Century, and the breakdown of traditional patterns and norms, the response Judaism must offer to the changed circumstances became a heated question.
At its height, some forty congregations adopted the Sunday Sabbath and UAHC communities had services without most traditional elements in a manner seen in Europe only at the Berlin Reformgemeinde.
Orthodox response was weak and quickly defeated.
The movement ceased stressing principles and core beliefs, focusing more on the personal spiritual experience.
The majority was led by Geiger and Ludwig Philippson, and was keen on moderation and historical continuity.
Challenges of modern culture have made steady belief difficult for some.
"Gates of Prayer" symbolized the movement's adoption of what would be termed "Big Tent Judaism", welcoming all, over theological clarity.
In the new land, there were neither old state-mandated communal structures, nor strong conservative elements among the newcomers.
Reform sought to accentuate and greatly augment the universalist traits in Judaism, turning it into a faith befitting the Enlightenment ideals ubiquitous at the time it emerged.
Montefiore was greatly influenced by the ideas of early German Reformers.
After critical research led him to regard scripture as a human creation, bearing the marks of historical circumstances, he abandoned the belief in the unbroken perpetuity of tradition derived from Sinai and gradually replaced it with the idea of progressive revelation.
''Tikkun Olam'' has become the central venue for active participation for many affiliates, even leading critics to negatively describe Reform as little more than a means employed by Jewish liberals to claim that commitment to their political convictions was also a religious activity and demonstrates fealty to Judaism.
In 1875 he established the movement's rabbinical seminary, Hebrew Union College, at Cincinnati, Ohio.
British Liberals offer "blessing ceremonies" if the child is to be raised Jewish, and the MRJ allows its clergy to participate in celebration of civil marriage, though none allow full an actual Jewish ceremony of ''Chupah'' and the like.
In 1873 Wise founded the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (since 2003, Union for Reform Judaism), the denominational body.
The enraged Leeser disavowed any connection with him.
In American Reform, 17% of synagogue-member households have a converted spouse, and 26% an unconverted one.
This position was originally influenced by Kantian philosophy and the great weight it lent to personal judgement and free will.
In its early stages, when Reform Judaism was more a tendency within unified communities in Central Europe than an independent movement, its advocates had to practice considerable moderation, lest they provoke conservative animosity.
Further to the east, among the unemancipated and unacculturated Jewish masses in Poland, Romania and Russia, the stimulants which gave rise either to Reform or modernist Orthodoxy were virtually unheard of.
Both S. L. Rapoport and Zecharias Frankel strongly condemned Braunschweig.
The tension between universalism and the imperative to maintain uniqueness characterized the movement throughout its entire history.
German prayerbooks often relegated the more contentious issues to the vernacular translation, treating the original text with great care and sometimes having problematic passages in small print and untranslated.
The various regional branches sharing these beliefs, including the American Union for Reform Judaism (URJ), and the British Movement for Reform Judaism and Liberal Judaism, and the Israel Movement for Reform and Progressive Judaism are united within the international World Union for Progressive Judaism.
He told the assembled that the "Talmud must go."
Its greatest center today is in North America.
Growing Antisemitism in Europe led German Liberals on similar paths.
As early as 1846, the Breslau conference announced that women must enjoy identical obligations and prerogatives in worship and communal affairs, though this decision had virtually no effect in practice.
Another key aspect of Reform doctrine is the personal autonomy of each adherent, who may formulate his own understanding and expression of his religiosity.
They had the support of one rabbi, Aaron Chorin of Arad.
While fueled by the condition of immigrant communities, in matters of doctrine, wrote Michael Meyer, "However much a response to its particular social context, the basic principles are those put forth by Geiger and the other German Reformers – progressive revelation, historical-critical approach, the centrality of the Prophetic literature."
The WUPJ claims to represent a total of at least 1.8 million people – these figures do not the 2013 PEW survey into account, and rely on the older URJ estimate of a total of 1.5 million presumed to have affinity, since updated to 2.2 million – both registered synagogue members and non-affiliates who identify with it.
The first considered to have done so was the Ashkenazi congregation "Adath Jessurun" in Amsterdam.
In "Classical" times, personal observance was reduced to little beyond nothing.
In 1842, the power of progressive forces was revealed again: when Geiger's superior Rabbi Solomon Tiktin attempted to dismiss him from the post of preacher in Breslau, 15 of 17 rabbis consulted by the board stated his unorthodox views were congruous with his post.
While this was quite a trivial statement, well grounded in canonical sources, he regarded it as a deliberate breach with tradition.
The first and primary field in which Reform convictions were expressed was that of prayer forms.
But the main focus in American Reform lay elsewhere: in 1946, Rabbi Maurice Eisendrath was appointed President of the UAHC.
It added virtually nothing new to the tenets of Reform, but rather elucidated them, declaring unambiguously that "to-day we accept as binding only the moral laws, and maintain only such ceremonies as elevate and sanctify our lives."
The Union had some 10,000 registered members in the 1920s.
Reform also pioneered family seating, an arrangement which spread throughout American Jewry but was only applied in continental Europe after World War II.
However, practices were seen as a means to elation and a link to the heritage of the past, and Reform generally argued that rituals should be maintained, discarded or modified based on whether they served these higher purposes.
Even the purist Liberals in Britain introduced minor customs which bore sentimental value; Bar Mitzvah replaced confirmation.
Already in 1930, the West London Synagogue affiliated with WUPJ.
Apart from that, Reform had little to no influence in the rest of the continent.
This highly individualistic stance also proved one of the movement's great challenges, for it impeded the creation of clear guidelines and standards for positive participation in religious life and definition of what was expected from members.
The Holocaust and the establishment of the State of Israel reinforced the tendency.
Thinkers such as Eugene Borowitz and J.J. Petuchowski turned mainly to existentialism, portraying humans in a fragile, complex relationship with the divine.
Radical lay societies sprang in Hungary during the 1848 Revolution but soon dispersed.
Here, changes in the rite were eclectic no more and had severe dogmatic implications: prayers for the restoration of sacrifices by the Messiah and Return to Zion were quite systematically omitted.
Quite haphazardly, Wise instituted a major innovation when introducing family pews in 1851, after his Albany congregation purchased a local church building and retained sitting arrangements.
"New Reform", both in the United States and in Britain and the rest of the world, is characterized by larger affinity to traditional forms and diminished emphasis on harmonizing them with prevalent beliefs.
Blessings and passages referring to the coming of the Messiah, Return to Zion, renewal of the sacrificial cult, Resurrection of the Dead, Reward and Punishment and overt particularism of the People Israel were replaced, recast or excised altogether.
Eventually, the Union Prayer Book was adopted in 1895.
In 1836, Gustavus Poznanski was appointed minister.
More profound changes included restoration of the ''Gevorot'' benediction in the 2007 ''Mishkan T'filah'', with the optional "give life to all/revive the dead" formula.
They sharply abridged liturgy and largely discarded practice.
Similar policy was pursued by Claude Montefiore's Jewish Religious Union, established at Britain in 1902.
In Germany, Liberal communities stagnated since mid-century.
He was of little ideological consistency, often willing to compromise.
His other model were the Prophets, whose morals and ethics were to him the only true, permanent core of Judaism.
Opinions ranged from the strictly Orthodox Azriel Hildesheimer, who subjugated research to the predetermined sanctity of the texts and refused to allow it practical implication over received methods; via the Positive-Historical Zecharias Frankel, who did not deny ''Wissenschaft'' a role, but only in deference to tradition, and opposed analysis of the Pentateuch; and up to Abraham Geiger, who rejected any limitations on objective research or its application.
Demanding clear positions, he headed the radical camp as Reform turned into a distinct current.
The CCAR stated this passage did not reflect a belief in Resurrection, but Jewish heritage.
He himself differentiated between his principled stance and quotidian conduct.
While it was gradually adopted even by many Orthodox in America and remained so well into the 20th Century, the same was not applied in Germany until after World War II.
They did vote to eliminate the Second Day of Festivals, noting it was both an irrelevant rabbinic ordinance and scarcely observed anyway.
Thus, prayerbooks from the mid-20th Century onwards incorporated more Hebrew, and restored such elements as blessing on phylacteries.
Its rabbinical arm is the Central Conference of American Rabbis, with some 2,300 member rabbis, mainly trained in Hebrew Union College.
A growing "return to ethnicity" among the young made items such as prayer shawls fashionable again.
The general Jewish public in Germany demonstrated little interest, especially after the 1876 law under which communal affiliation and paying parish taxes were no longer mandatory.
It eventually evolved into the Liberal Jewish Movement of France.
In 1930, the first Liberal congregation, Temple Beth Israel Melbourne, was founded in Australia.
In 1902, Claude Montefiore termed the doctrine espoused by his new Jewish Religious Union as "Liberal Judaism", too, though it belonged to the more radical part of the spectrum in relation to the German one.
British Liberal Judaism affirms the "Jewish conception of God: One and indivisible, transcendent and immanent, Creator and Sustainer".
It enraged critics anyhow.
The massive Orthodox reaction halted the advance of the new trend, confining it to the port city for the next twenty years.
The Sabbath, widely desecrated by the majority of German Jews, was discussed.
The God-Idea as taught in our sacred Scripture" as consecrating the Jewish people to be its priests.
Yet they also managed to antagonize more moderate progressives.
"New Reform" saw the establishment and membership lay greater emphasis on the ceremonial aspects, after the former sterile and minimalist approach was condemned as offering little to engage in religion and encouraging apathy.
Religious divorce was declared redundant and the civil one recognized as sufficient by American Reform in 1869, and in Germany by 1912; the laws concerning dietary and personal purity, the priestly  prerogatives, marital ordinances and so forth were dispensed with, and openly revoked by the 1885 Pittsburgh Platform, which declared all ceremonial acts binding only if they served to enhance religious experience.
Its earliest proponents rejected Deism and the belief that all religions would unite into one, and it later faced the challenges of the Ethical movement and Unitarianism.
They formed the backbone of the nascent Reform rabbinate.
However, Isaac Meyer Wise suggested in 1871 that "Progressive Judaism" was a better epithet.
He was interested in decorum, believing its lack in services was driving the young away.
Meyer noted that while he had original strains, Montefiore was largely dependent on Geiger and his concepts of progressive revelation, instrumentality of ritual et cetera.
Yet Wise's harshest critic was Einhorn, who arrived from Europe in the same year.
The advocates of this approach also stress that their responsa are of non-binding nature, and their recipients may adapt them as they see fit.
Steven M. Cohen deduced there were 756,000 adult Jewish synagogue members – about a quarter of households had an unconverted spouse (according to 2001 findings), adding some 90,000 non-Jews and making the total constituency roughly 850,000 – and further 1,154,000 "Reform-identified non-members" in the United States.
An official rescheduling of Sabbath to Sunday was advocated by Kaufmann Kohler for some time, though he retracted it eventually.
Only then did British Reform emerge as a movement.
Dana Evan Kaplan stated that "Tikkun Olam ''has incorporated only leftist, socialist-like elements.
In 1898, seeking to counter these trends, Rabbi Heinemann Vogelstein established the Union of Liberal Rabbis (Vereinigung der liberalen Rabbiner).
An isolated, yet far more radical step in the same direction as Hamburg's was taken across the ocean in 1824.
Circumcision or Letting of Blood for converts and newborn babies became virtually mandated in the 1980s;  ablution for menstruating women gained great grassroots popularity at the turn of the century, and some synagogues built specialized baths.
The 1999 Pittsburgh Statement of Principles, for example, used the somewhat ambiguous formula "the spirit within us is eternal".
According to this view, all holy scripture of Judaism, including the Pentateuch, were authored by human beings who, though under divine inspiration, inserted their understanding and reflected the spirit of their consecutive ages.
On 3–6 November 1869, the two and their followers met in Philadelphia.
The 1999 Pittsburgh affirmed that the "Jewish people is bound to God by an eternal ''b'rit'', covenant."
Some branches of Reform, while subscribing to its differentiation between ritual and ethics, chose to maintain a considerable degree of practical observance, especially in areas where a conservative Jewish majority had to be accommodated.
On the other extreme, the 1975 ''Gates of Prayer'' substituted "the Eternal One" for "God" in the English translation (though not in the original), a measure which was condemned by several Reform rabbis as a step toward religious humanism.
In 1945, the Associated British Synagogues (later Movement for Reform Judaism) joined as well.
Another measure he offered, rejected almost unanimously by his colleagues in 1846, was the institution of a "Second Sabbath" on Sunday, modeled on Second Passover, as most people desecrated the day of rest.
Rabbi David Einhorn elucidated a further notion, that of the Mission to bring ethical monotheism to all people, commenting that "Exile was once perceived as a disaster, but it was progress.
From its beginning, Reform Judaism attempted to harmonize the language of petitions with modern sensibilities and what the constituents actually believed in.
Only in Germany, commented Steven M. Lowenstein, did the extinction of old Jewish community life lead to the creation of a new, positive religious ideology that advocated principled change.
As of 2013, the Pew Research Center survey calculated it represented about 35% of all 5.3 million Jews in the U.S., making it the single most numerous Jewish religious group in the country.
Highly self-centered affirmations of Jewish exceptionalism were moderated, though the general notion of "a kingdom of priests and a holy nation" retained.
We possess the same power, when we express the spirit of ours."
Similar groups sprang in Breslau and Berlin.
In the "New Reform", Bar Mitzvah largely replaced it as part of the retraditionalization, but many young congregants in the United States still perform one, often at the Feast of Weeks.
Regina Jonas, ordained in 1935 by later chairman of the Vereinigung der liberalen Rabbiner Max Dienemann, was the earliest known female rabbi to officially be granted the title.
Though the prayerbook used in Berlin did introduce several deviations from the received text, it did so without an organizing principle.
Knowing that many in their audience held quite overlapping ideas, the pressure on the CCAR to move toward nontheism grew.
They invited Holdheim to serve as their rabbi, though he was often at odds with board led by Sigismund Stern.
In March 1845, a small group formed a semi-independent congregation in Berlin, the Reformgemeinde.
From 1881 to 1924, over 2,400,000 immigrants from Eastern Europe drastically altered American Jewry, increasing it tenfold.
Between 1844 and 1846, they convened three rabbinical assemblies, in Braunschweig, Frankfurt am Main and Breslau respectively.
Radical, second-generation Berlin ''maskilim'' (Enlightened), like Lazarus Bendavid and David Friedländer, proposed to reduce it to little above Deism or allow it to dissipate.
Concurrently, it is also more inclusive and accommodating, even towards beliefs which are officially rejected by Reform theologians, sometimes allowing alternative differing rites for each congregation to choose from.
Except Berlin, where the term "Reform" was first used as an adjective, the rest referred to themselves as "Liberal".
While eliciting protest from the Orthodox, Frankfurt and Breslau also incensed the radical laity, which regarded them as too acquiescent.
Cohon, born near Minsk, was emblematic of the new generation of East European-descended clergy within American Reform.
While Holdheim administered in a homogeneous group, they had to serve in unified communities.
Reform Judaism emphasizes the ethical facets of the faith as its central attribute, superseding the ceremonial ones.
In 1908, Vogelstein and Rabbi Cäsar Seligmann also founded a congregational arm, the Union for Liberal Judaism in Germany (''Vereinigung für das Liberale Judentum in Deutschland''), finally institutionalizing the current which until then was active as a loose tendency.
Military service exposed recruits to the family-oriented, moderate religiosity of middle-class America.
Another key example is the reinterpretation of the Election of Israel.
A more palatable course was the reform of worship in synagogues, making it more attractive to a Jewish public whose aesthetic and moral taste became attuned with that of Christian surroundings.
Geiger centered his philosophy on the Prophets' teachings (He named his ideology "Prophetic Judaism" already in 1838), regarding morality and ethics as the stable core of a religion in which ritual observance transformed radically through the ages.
This largely overlapped with what researchers termed as the transition from "Classical" to "New" Reform in America, paralleled in the other, smaller branches across the world.
The rabbinate was almost exclusively transplanted – Rabbis Samuel Hirsch, Samuel Adler, Gustav Gottheil, Kaufmann Kohler and others all played a role both in Germany and across the ocean – and led by two individuals: the radical Rabbi David Einhorn, who participated in the 1844-6 conferences and was very much influenced by Holdheim (though utterly rejecting mixed marriage), and the moderate pragmatist Isaac Meyer Wise, who while sharing deeply heterodox views was more an organizer than a thinker.
The senior representative of postwar Reform theology, Eugene Borowitz, regarded theophany in postmodern terms and closely linked it with quotidian human experience and interpersonal contact.
Rabbis Leo Baeck, Max Dienemann and Seligmann himself turned to stressing Jewish peoplehood and tradition.
In the decades around World War II, this rationalistic and optimistic theology was challenged and questioned.
The CCAR soon readopted elements long discarded in order to appeal to them: in the 1910s, inexperienced rabbis in the East Coast were given Ram Horns fitted with a trumpet mouthpiece, seventy years after the Reformgemeinde first held High Holiday prayers without blowing the instrument.
At first traditional, but around 1841 he excised the Resurrection of the Dead and abolished the Second day of festivals, five years before the same was done at the Breslau conference.
So did Solomon Freehof, son to immigrants from Chernihiv, who advocated a selective rapprochement with ''Halakha'', which was to offer "guidance, not governance"; Freehof advocated replacing the sterile mood of community life, allowing isolated practices to emerge spontaneously and reincorporating old ones.
On the other hand, while embracing a less strict interpretation compared to the traditional one, Reform also held to this tenet against those who sought to deny it.
This day is celebrated by Reform Judaism worldwide as its foundation date.
The chief promulgator of this concept was Abraham Geiger, generally considered founder of the movement.
Having concluded the belief in an unbroken tradition back to Sinai or a divinely dictated Torah could not be maintained, he began to articulate a theology of progressive revelation, presenting the Pharisees as reformers who revolutionized the Saducee-dominated religion.
In 1926, British Liberals, American Reform and German Liberals consolidated their worldwide movement – united in affirming tenets such as progressive revelation, supremacy of ethics above ritual and so forth – at a meeting held in London.
Conversely, offspring of a Jewish mother only will not be accepted if they did not demonstrate affinity to the faith.
It has 846 congregations in the U.S. and 27 in Canada, the vast majority of the 1,170 affiliated with the WUPJ which are not Reconstructionist.
In 1840, several British Jews formed the West London Synagogue of British Jews, headed by Reverend David Woolf Marks.
Reform quickly spread even before the Civil War.
In truth, it is political, basically a mirror of the most radically leftist components of the Democratic Party platform, causing many to say that Reform Judaism is simply 'the Democratic Party with Jewish holidays'.''"
Repeating the response of the 1806 Paris Grand Sanhedrin to Napoleon, it declared intermarriage permissible as long as children could be raised Jewish; this measure effectively banned such unions without offending Christians, as no state in Germany allowed mixed-faith couples to have non-Christians education for offsprings.
As in other fields, small WUPJ affiliates are less independent and often have to deal with more conservative Jewish denominations in their countries, such as vis-à-vis the Orthodox rabbinate in Israel or continental Europe.
Its philosophy made Progressive Judaism, in all its variants, much more able to embrace change and new trends than any of the major denominations.
But it was the new scholarly, critical Science of Judaism (''Wissenschaft des Judentums'') which became the focus of controversy.
Reform thinkers often cited the Prophets' condemnations of ceremonial acts, lacking true intention and performed by the morally corrupt, as testimony that rites have no inherent quality.
Jakob Josef Petuchowski, in his extensive survey of Progressive liturgy, listed several key principles which defined it through the years and many transformations it underwent.
In the following year, an attempt to draft a new platform for the CCAR in San Francisco ended with poor results.
Lily Montagu, who served as a driving force behind British Liberal Judaism and WUPJ, was the first woman in recorded history to deliver a sermon at a synagogue in 1918, and set another precedent when she conducted a prayer two years later.
The Hamburg edition is considered the first comprehensive Reform liturgy.
Israel approached its true destiny, with sanctity replacing blood sacrifice.
The notion of autonomy coincided with the gradual abandonment of traditional practice (largely neglected by most members, and the Jewish public in general, before and during the rise of Reform) in the early stages of the movement.
The Society was short-lived, and they merged back into Beth Elohim in 1833.
In 1975, the lack of consensus surfaced during the compilation of a new standard prayer book, "Gates of Prayer."
A similar pattern characterizes the Movement for Reform Judaism in Britain, which attempted to appeal to newcomers from the United Synagogue, or to the IMPJ in Israel.
To accommodate all, ten liturgies for morning service and six for evening were offered for each congregation to choose of, from very traditional to one which retained the Hebrew text for God but translated it as "Eternal Power", condemned by many as de facto humanistic.
While the former stressed continuity with the past and described Judaism as an entity which gradually adopted and discarded elements along time, Holdheim accorded present conditions the highest status, sharply dividing the universalist core from all other aspects that could be unremittingly disposed of.
In 1885, Reform Judaism in America was confronted by challenges from both flanks.
The largest WUPJ constituent by far is the Union for Reform Judaism (until 2003: Union of American Hebrew Congregations) in the United States and Canada.
Some of these  sacred obligations have long been observed by Reform Jews; others, both ancient and modern, demand renewed attention."
While also subject to change and new understanding, this basic premise endures in of Reform thought.
Based on these, the URJ claims to represent 2.2 million people.
Its inherent pluralism and great importance placed on individual autonomy impede any simplistic definition of Reform Judaism; its various strands regard Judaism throughout the ages as derived from a process of constant evolution.
Same-sex marriage were sanctioned by the end of the following decade.
The Americanization and move to the suburbs in the 1950s facilitated a double effect: the secular Jewish ideologies of the immigrants' generation, like Bundism or Labour Zionism, became anachronistic.
A small group of traditionalists also attended, losing all votes.
1942 saw the founding of the Associated British Synagogues, which joined the WUPJ in 1945.
The declining importance of the theoretical foundation in favour of pluralism and equivocalness, did draw large crowds of newcomers.
HUAC membership grew by 23% in 1975-1985, to 1.3 million.
Confirmation for girls eventually developed into the Bat Mitzvah, now popular among all except strictly Orthodox Jews.
Deeply influenced by Ahad Ha'am and  Mordecai Kaplan, he viewed Judaism as a Civilization rather than a religion, though he and other Reform sympathizers of Kaplan fully maintained the notions of Election and revelation which the latter denied.
From the second half of the 20th Century, it employed the old rabbinic notion of ''Tikkun Olam'', "repairing the world", as a slogan under which constituents were encouraged to partake in various initiatives for the betterment of society.
