Modern units use a magnetic door gasket that holds the door sealed but allows it to be pushed open from the inside.
The first cooling systems for food involved using ice.
As a result, it is common for these types of commercial refrigerators to have energy consumption of >4 kWh/day.
In the early 1950s most refrigerators were white, but from the mid-1950s through present day designers and manufacturers put color onto refrigerators.
His new process made possible the use of gases such as ammonia, sulfur dioxide (SO2) and methyl chloride (CH3Cl) as refrigerants and they were widely used for that purpose until the late 1920s.
This ensures that they are able to cope with a large throughput of drinks and frequent door opening.
Other specialised cooling mechanisms may be used for cooling, but have not been applied to domestic refrigerators.
Most household freezers maintain temperatures from , although some freezer-only units can achieve  and lower.
These home units usually required the installation of the mechanical parts, motor and compressor, in the basement or an adjacent room while the cold box was located in the kitchen.
Artificial refrigeration began in the mid-1750s, and developed in the early 1800s.
A similar attempt was made in 1842, by American physician, John Gorrie, who built a working prototype, but it was a commercial failure.
They can be totally silent (if a fan for air circulation is not fitted) but are less energy-efficient than other methods.
These heat sources are much quieter than the compressor motor in a typical refrigerator.
This government incentive picked up old refrigerators, paying their owners for "donating" the refrigerator.
Many refrigerators made in the 1930s and 1940s were far more efficient than most that were made later.
Changing the refrigerator temperature will inadvertently change the freezer temperature in the opposite direction.
*Compressor refrigerators are by far the most common type; they make a noticeable noise.
These models have separate freezer and refrigerator compartments that operate independently of each other, sometimes mounted within a single cabinet.
However, because only enough air is diverted to the refrigerator compartment, the freezer usually re-acquires the set temperature quickly, unless the door is opened.
Maximum storage time for (pre-frozen) food is 1 month
A large domestic refrigerator stands as tall as a person and may be about 1&nbsp;m wide with a capacity of 600&nbsp;L. Some models for small households fit under kitchen work surfaces, usually about 86&nbsp;cm high.
About 82% of the Energy Star qualified refrigerators are Tier 1, with 13% qualifying as Tier 2, and just 5% at Tier 3.
Among the smallest is a 4&nbsp;L Peltier refrigerator advertised as being able to hold 6 cans of beer.
European freezers, and refrigerators with a freezer compartment, have a four star rating system to grade freezers.
Refrigerators generally do not achieve lower than , since the same coolant loop serves both compartments:  Lowering the freezer compartment temperature excessively causes difficulties in maintaining above-freezing temperature in the refrigerator compartment.
Dairy products, meats, fish, poultry and vegetables can be kept refrigerated in the same space within the kitchen (although raw meat should be kept separate from other foodstuffs for reasons of hygiene).
Because of the introduction of new energy efficiency standards, refrigerators made today are much more efficient than those made in the 1930s; they consume the same amount of energy while being three times as large.
Commercial refrigerator and freezer units were in use for almost 40 years prior to the common home models.
Very little power is therefore required if opened infrequently.
Although both the three and four star ratings specify the same storage times and same minimum temperature of , only a four star freezer is intended for freezing fresh food, and may include a "fast freeze" function (runs the compressor continually, down to as low as ) to facilitate this.
Typical solar designs are absorption refrigerators that use ammonia as the working gas, and employ large mirrors to concentrate sufficient sunlight to reach the temperature required to free gaseous ammonia from the solvent.
Tier 3 is the highest qualification, for those refrigerators that are at least 30% more efficient than Federal standards.
It is also removable, and helps to prevent ice-maker clogging.
Also, early units featured freezer compartments located within the larger refrigerator, and accessed by opening the refrigerator door, and then the smaller internal freezer door; units featuring an entirely separate freezer compartment were introduced in the early 1960s, becoming the industry standard by the middle of that decade.
Larger units, especially those with large freezers and icemakers, may use as much as 4&nbsp;kW·h per day (equivalent to 170 W continuously).
Upon returning from Moscow, Post (who resumed her maiden name after divorcing Davies) directed General Foods to market frozen product to upscale restaurants.
This frost buildup required periodic thawing ("defrosting") of the units to maintain their efficiency.
Newer refrigerants are being used instead.
It has been proven that this does very little for improving efficiency, however, the unit should be able to "breathe" with adequate spaces around the front, back, sides and above the unit.
'''Freezer''' units are used in households and in industry and commerce.
There was a 1922 model that consisted of a wooden cold box, water-cooled compressor, an ice cube tray and a  compartment, and cost $714.
Now it is a common food item.
Placed near freshwater lakes or packed with snow and ice during the winter, they were once very common.
Before the invention of the refrigerator, icehouses were used to provide cool storage for most of the year.
In the 1980s, black became fashionable.
This is partly attributable to the addition of new features, such as auto-defrost, that reduced efficiency.
If the defrosting system melts all the ice before the timed defrosting period ends, then a small device (called a defrost limiter) acts like a thermostat and shuts off the heating element to prevent too large a temperature fluctuation, it also prevents hot blasts of air when the system starts again, should it finish defrosting early.
The 1950s and 1960s saw technical advances like automatic defrosting and automatic ice making.
The freezer control knob only controls the amount of air that flows into the refrigerator via a damper system.
Maximum storage time for (pre-frozen) food is 1 week
Among the smallest is a 4&nbsp;L Peltier refrigerator advertised as being able to hold 6 cans of beer.
Water and ice dispensing became available in the 1970s.
In the late 1990s stainless steel came into vogue, and in 2009, one manufacturer introduced multi-color designs.
By 1923, Kelvinator held 80 percent of the market for electric refrigerators.
He built a mechanical ice-making machine in 1851 on the banks of the Barwon River at Rocky Point in Geelong, Victoria, and his first commercial ice-making machine followed in 1854.
The history of artificial refrigeration began when Scottish professor William Cullen designed a small refrigerating machine in 1755.
The refrigerator replaced the icebox, which had been a common household appliance for almost a century and a half.
Maximum storage time for (pre-frozen) food is between 3 and 12 months depending on type (meat, vegetables, fish, etc.)
They used  gas systems such as ammonia (R-717) or sulfur dioxide (R-764), which occasionally leaked, making them unsafe for home use.
These older freezer compartments were the main cooling body of the refrigerator, and only maintained a temperature of around , which is suitable for keeping food for a week.
Refrigeration in transit makes it possible to enjoy foodstuffs from distant places.
The air is drawn in through an inlet duct and passed through the evaporator where it is cooled, the air is then circulated throughout the cabinet via a series of ducts and vents.
Freezers allow people to buy food in bulk and eat it at leisure, and bulk purchases save money.
However, the reduction in efficiency also arose partly from reduction in the amount of insulation to cut costs.
In the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s, earth tone colors were popular, including Harvest Gold, Avocado Green and almond.
A large domestic refrigerator stands as tall as a person and may be about 1&nbsp;m wide with a capacity of 600&nbsp;L. Refrigerators and freezers may be free-standing, or built into a kitchen.
The heat is discarded and the cold is routed to the refrigerator.
This gasket was invented, developed and manufactured by Max Baermann (1903-1984) of Bergisch Gladbach/Germany.
Further, opening the door of one compartment does not affect the temperature of the air or humidity level in the other compartment.
Current US models that are Energy Star qualified use 50% less energy than the average models made in 1974.
Manufacturers of such designs argue that the increased cost is compensated over time due to reduced energy use and less food waste due to reduced spoilage.
On some early frost-free models, the defrost limiter also sends a signal to the defrost timer to start the compressor and fan as soon as it shuts off the heating element before the timed defrost cycle ends.
(On the other hand, refrigerators and freezers can also be stocked with processed, quick-cook foods that are less healthy.)
This difference in categorisation is shown in the design of the 4-star logo, where the "standard" three stars are displayed in a box using "positive" colours, denoting the same normal operation as a 3-star freezer, and the fourth star showing the additional fresh food/fast freeze function is prefixed to the box in "negative" colours or with other distinct formatting.
Disposal of discarded refrigerators is regulated, often mandating the removal of doors; children playing hide-and-seek have been asphyxiated while hiding inside discarded refrigerators, particularly older models with latching doors.
For this reason, a refrigerator is sometimes referred to as an '''icebox''' in American usage.
Absorption units can be designed to get power from any heat source.
This could be called a "fan forced" refrigerator, whereas manual defrost units rely on colder air lying at the bottom, versus the warm air at the top to achieve adequate cooling.
The most energy-efficient unit made in the US consumes about half a kilowatt-hour per day (equivalent to 20 W continuously).
Practical household refrigerators were introduced in 1915 and gained wider acceptance in the United States in the 1930s as prices fell and non-toxic, non-flammable synthetic refrigerants such as Freon-12 (R-12) were introduced.
*Oil, gas (natural gas or propane) and dual power gas/electricity units are also available (typically found in RV's).
In cheaper and/or older models, a defrost cycle is controlled via a mechanical timer.
Refrigerators may be combined with freezers, either stacked with refrigerator or freezer above, below, or side by side.
* '''∗'''∗∗∗ : min temperature = .
Food stored at or below  is safe indefinitely.
The freezer control may also be adjusted to compensate for any refrigerator adjustment.
For US refrigerators, the Consortium on Energy Efficiency (CEE) further differentiates between Energy Star qualified refrigerators.
In 1923 Frigidaire introduced the first self-contained unit.
Most households use the freezer-on-top-and-refrigerator-on-bottom style, which has been the basic style since the 1940s.
Typically, the compressors and condenser coils are mounted at the top of the cabinet, with a single fan to cool them both.
Manual Defrost (referred to as Cyclic) units are still available.
*A status indicator that notifies when it is time to change the water filter
The computer manages fan speed for both compartments, although air is still blown from the freezer.
Natural means are still used to cool foods today.
It also requires much less energy to operate, since each compressor & coolant system can be optimized for a specific temperature range.
The first practical vapor compression refrigeration system was built by James Harrison, a British journalist who had emigrated to Australia.
enters a compressor as low-pressure vapor at or slightly below the temperature of the refrigerator interior.
Freezers may have drawers to store food in, or they may have no divisions (chest freezers).
When a door is opened, either in the refrigerator or the freezer, the fan in some units stops immediately to prevent excessive frost build up on the freezer's evaporator coil, because this coil is cooling two areas.
Modern computerized refrigerators do not use the damper system.
The superheated vapor travels under pressure through coils or tubes that make up the ''condenser''; the coils or tubes are passively cooled by exposure to air in the room.
Although these designs generally use a much larger amount of energy compared to compressor refrigeration, other qualities such as silent operation or the ability to use gas can favor these refrigeration units in small enclosures, a mobile environment or in environments where unit failure would lead to devastating consequences.
When the refrigerator gets too warm, the thermostat starts the cooling process and a fan circulates the air around the freezer.
American engineer Alexander Twining took out a British patent in 1850 for a vapor compression system that used ether.
One example is the Phoenix refrigerator program launched in Australia.
*Cabinet rollers that lets the refrigerator roll out for easier cleaning
Therefore, if a door is left open accidentally (especially the freezer), the defrost system may not remove all frost, in this case, the freezer (or refrigerator) must be defrosted.
The refrigerator was then refurbished, with new door seals, a thorough cleaning and the removal of items, such as the cover that is strapped to the back of many older units.
Separate freezers became common during the 1940s; the popular term at the time for the unit was a ''deep freeze''.
Home freezers as separate compartments (larger than necessary just for ice cubes) were introduced in 1940.
In 1913, refrigerators for home use were invented.
It was a closed-cycle device that could operate continuously.
*A Fast Freeze function to rapidly cool foods by running the compressor for a predetermined amount of time and thus temporarily lowering the freezer temperature below normal operating levels.
The latent heat absorbed by this flash evaporation is drawn mostly from adjacent still-liquid refrigerant, a phenomenon known as ''auto-refrigeration''.
Freezer units are used in households and in industry and commerce.
Refrigerant leaves the evaporator, now fully vaporized and slightly heated, and returns to the compressor inlet to continue the cycle.
If the refrigerator uses a fan to keep the condenser cool, then this must be cleaned, at the very least, yearly.
Some refrigerators must be within certain external temperature parameters to run properly.
In comparison, mechanically-driven refrigeration compressors, such as those in automobile air conditioning, inevitably leak fluid and lubricant past the shaft seals.
In 1820, the British scientist Michael Faraday liquefied ammonia and other gases by using high pressures and low temperatures, and in 1834, an American expatriate to Great Britain, Jacob Perkins, built the first working vapor-compression refrigeration system.
This leads to a requirement for periodic recharging and, if ignored, possible compressor failure.
*Acoustic refrigerators are refrigerators that use resonant linear reciprocating motors/alternators to generate a sound that is converted to heat and cold using compressed helium gas.
The units were just a small timer combined with an electrical heater wire that heated the freezer's walls for a short amount of time to remove all traces of frost/frosting.
The resulting refrigerators, now over 10% more efficient, were then distributed to low income families.
Frozen foods, previously a luxury item, became commonplace.
* Thermoelectric cooling and thermionic cooling
Post, fearful of the USSR's food processing safety standards, fully stocked the freezers with products from General Foods' Birdseye unit.
It is believed that frost free units have a lower tolerance for frost, due to their air-conditioner like evaporator coils.
Each has its own separate compressor, condenser and evaporator coils, insulation, thermostat, and door.
, which is highly flammable, harmful to the eyes, and toxic if inhaled or ingested.
Most refrigerator-freezers—except for manual defrost models or cheaper units—use what appears to be two thermostats.
Domestic freezers are generally upright units resembling refrigerators or chests (upright units laid on their backs).
Ice cream, a popular commodity of the 20th century, could previously only be obtained by traveling to where the product was made and eating it on the spot.
The lower temperature lowers the reproduction rate of bacteria, so the refrigerator reduces the rate of spoilage.
Some upscale models include thermostat displays and controls,  and flatscreen televisions have even been incorporated.
Home freezers as separate compartments (larger than necessary just for ice cubes), or as separate units, were introduced in the United States in 1940.
In 1834, the first working vapor-compression refrigeration system was built.
A fan blows air from the refrigerator or freezer compartment ("box air") across these coils or tubes and the refrigerant completely vaporizes, drawing further latent heat from the box air.
Carl von Linde, an engineering professor at the Technological University Munich in Germany, patented an improved method of liquefying gases in 1876.
Many of these units are still functional today, after requiring little more service than a replacement start relay or thermostat if at all.
Harrison also introduced commercial vapor-compression refrigeration to breweries and meat packing houses, and by 1861, a dozen of his systems were in operation.
When the freezer reaches temperature, the unit cycles off, no matter what the refrigerator temperature is.
Since 2 August 1956, under U.S. federal law, refrigerator doors are no longer permitted to latch so they cannot be opened from the inside.
About this same time porcelain-covered metal cabinets began to appear.
*Chilled water and ice from a dispenser in the door.
Tier 1 refrigerators are those that are 20% to 24.9% more efficient than the Federal minimum standards set by the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act (NAECA).
The condenser cools the vapor, which liquefies.
A '''refrigerator''' (colloquially '''fridge''') is a popular household appliance that consists of a thermally insulated compartment and a heat pump (mechanical, electronic or chemical) that transfers heat from the inside of the fridge to its external environment so that the inside of the fridge is cooled to a temperature below the ambient temperature of the room.
The vapor is compressed and exits the compressor as high-pressure superheated vapor.
Domestic refrigerators and freezers for food storage are made in a range of sizes.
However, R-12 damaged the ozone layer, causing governments to issue a ban on its use in new refrigerators and air-conditioning systems in 1994.
Later advances included automatic ice units and self compartmentalized freezing units.
A fan or pump might be the only mechanical moving parts; reliance on convection is considered impractical.
This liquid refrigerant is forced through a metering or throttling device, also known as an expansion valve (essentially a pin-hole sized constriction in the tubing) to an area of much lower pressure.
*A cooling zone in the refrigerator door shelves.
Advances in automatic defrosting eliminating the thawing task were introduced in the 1950s, but are not universal, due to energy performance and cost.
*An in-door ice caddy, which relocates the ice-maker storage to the freezer door and saves approximately 60 litres (2&nbsp;cu&nbsp;ft) of usable freezer space.
The main refrigerant now used is R-600a, or isobutane.
Also in 1923 Frigidaire introduced the first self-contained unit.
During this time, the refrigerator also gets colder.
A vapor compression cycle is used in most household refrigerators, refrigerator–freezers and freezers.
Other uses of an absorption refrigerator (or "chiller") include large systems used in office buildings or complexes such as hospitals and universities.
* ∗     : min temperature = .
The word "refrigeratory" was used at least as early as the 17th century
These units used a counter that only defrosted the freezer compartment (Freezer Chest) when a specific number of door openings had been made.
* ∗∗∗   : min temperature = .
A common commercial refrigerator is the glass fronted beverage cooler.
Additionally,after World War 2, refrigerator style became more important than efficiency.
Refrigeration units for commercial and industrial applications can be made in various size, shape or style to fit customer needs.
Most European refrigerators include a moist cold refrigerator section (which does require (automatic) defrosting at irregular intervals) and a (rarely frost free) freezer section.
As these units are heavily insulated, cooling load is limited primarily to heat introduced by new items to be refrigerated, and ambient air transfer when the unit is open.
An absorption refrigerator works differently from a compressor refrigerator, using a source of heat, such as combustion of liquefied petroleum gas, solar thermal energy or an electric heating element.
A few manufacturers offer dual compressor models.
This timer is set to shut off the compressor and fan and energize a heating element located near or around the evaporator for about 15 to 30 minutes at every 6 to 12 hours.
The introduction of Freon in the 1920s expanded the refrigerator market during the 1930s and provided a safer, low-toxicity alternative to previously used refrigerants.
The most notable improvement is for meat and other highly perishable wares, which needed to be refined to gain anything resembling shelf life.
These cooling systems cannot legally be recharged with the hazardous original refrigerants if they leak or break down.
Note that the cool air in the refrigerator or freezer is still warmer than the refrigerant in the evaporator.
The first commercial ice-making machine was invented in 1854.
This allows consumers to leave food in the main refrigerator compartment uncovered, and also helps keep vegetables moist.
Thus, it avoids many of the disadvantages of the much more common single compressor designs described above, although at a higher initial cost and increased system noise.
Only the refrigerator compartment is properly temperature controlled.
*Solar refrigerators and Thermal mass refrigerators are designed to reduce electrical consumption.
This cold and partially vaporized refrigerant continues through the coils or tubes of the evaporator unit.
Changing the freezer temperature will have no effect on the refrigerator temperature.
Refrigerators and freezers may be free-standing, or built into a kitchen.
The introduction of Freon in the 1920s expanded the refrigerator market during the 1930s.
The efficiency of older refrigerators can be improved by defrosting (if the unit is manual defrost) and cleaning them regularly, replacing old and worn door seals with new ones, adjusting the thermostat to accommodate the actual contents (a refrigerator needn't be colder than  to store drinks and non-perishable items) and also replacing insulation, where applicable.
Solar refrigerators have the added advantage that they do not use refrigerants that are harmful to the environment or flammable.
Ice on demand not only adds to the enjoyment of cold drinks, but is useful for first-aid, and for cold packs that can be kept frozen for picnics or in case of emergency.
Optimum temperature range for perishable food storage is .
Maximum storage time for pre-frozen or frozen-from-fresh food is between 3 and 12 months
Cullen used a pump to create a partial vacuum over a container of diethyl ether, which then boiled, absorbing heat from the surrounding air.
This can be an issue when placing units in an unfinished area, such as a garage.
Commercial refrigerator and freezer units, which go by many other names, were in use for almost 40 years prior to the common home models.
Refrigeration is an essential food storage technique in developed countries.
This was a result of humidity introduced into the units when the doors to the freezer were opened condensing on the cold parts, then freezing.
Frost-free refrigerators or freezers use electric fans to cool the appropriate compartment.
On mountainsides, runoff from melting snow is a convenient way to cool drinks, and during the winter one can keep milk fresh much longer just by keeping it outdoors.
From the late 1920s fresh vegetables were successfully processed through freezing by the Postum Company (the forerunner of General Foods), which had acquired the technology when it bought the rights to Clarence Birdseye's successful fresh freezing methods.
