By 1953, over 250,000 refugees were still in Europe, most of them old, infirm, crippled, or otherwise disabled.
Its most notable achievement was the Nansen passport, a refugee travel document, for which it was awarded the 1938 Nobel Peace Prize.
The population transfer to Soviet Ukraine occurred from September 1944 to May 1946 (see Repatriation of Ukrainians).
On 31 December 1938, both the Nansen Office and High Commission were dissolved and replaced by the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees under the Protection of the League.
The UN does not consider refugee status to be hereditary for any other group, but may still assist relatives of refugees in some cases.
After the Soviet armed forces captured eastern Poland from the Germans in 1944, the Soviets unilaterally declared a new frontier between the Soviet Union and Poland approximately at the Curzon Line, despite the protestations from the Polish government-in-exile in London and the western Allies at the Teheran Conference and the Yalta Conference of February 1945.
Although similar terms in other languages have described an event marking large scale migration of a specific population from a place of origin, such as the biblical account of Israelites fleeing from Assyrian conquest (''circa'' 740 BCE), in English, the term ''refugee'' derives from the root word ''refuge'', from Old French ''refuge'', meaning "hiding place".
The International Refugee Organization (IRO) was founded on 20 April 1946, and took over the functions of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, which was shut down in 1947.
Over the next several years, the mandate was expanded further to cover Assyrians and Turkish refugees.
All refugees in the world are under UNHCR mandate except Palestinian refugees, who fled the current state of Israel between 1947 and 1949, as a result of the 1948 Palestine War.
Most of the European refugees (principally Jews and Slavs) fleeing Stalin, the Nazis and World War II were barred from going to the United States.
At the end of World War II, there were more than 5 million "displaced persons" from the Soviet Union in Western Europe.
The same form of protection is foreseen for displaced people who, without being refugees, are nevertheless exposed, if returned to their countries of origin, to death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatments.
Refugee status is also given to quota refugees.
Refugee Week is a nationwide festival designed to promote understanding and to celebrate the cultural contributions of refugees, and features many events such as music, dance and theatre.
Parents tended to turn a blind eye because sexual exploitation had become a "mechanism of survival" in these camps.
The definition of a refugee at this time was an individual with either a Nansen passport or a "Certificate of identity" issued by the International Refugee Organization.
Poland and Soviet Ukraine conducted population exchanges following the imposition of a new Poland-Soviet border at the Curzon Line in 1944.
Very rarely, refugees have been used and recruited as refugee warriors, and the humanitarian aid directed at refugee relief has very rarely been utilized to fund the acquisition of arms.
This carries certain rights and obligations according to the legislation of the receiving country.
Although not approved by Allies at Potsdam, hundreds of thousands of ethnic Germans living in Yugoslavia and Romania were deported to slave labour in the Soviet Union, to Allied-occupied Germany, and subsequently to the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), Austria and the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany).
Various groups of people were officially designated refugees beginning in World War I.
UNRRA was involved in returning over seven million refugees, then commonly referred to as displaced persons or DPs, to their country of origin and setting up displaced persons camps for one million refugees who refused to be repatriated.
However, Palestinian Arabs who fled the West Bank and Gaza after 1949 (for example, during the 1967 Six Day war) are under the jurisdiction of the UNHCR.
It refers to "shelter or protection from danger or distress", from Latin ''fugere'', "to flee", and ''refugium'', "a taking of refuge, place to flee back to".
After the establishment of Israel in 1948, Israel accepted more than 650,000 refugees by 1950.
World Refugee Day occurs on 20 June.
It was instituted in 1914 by Pope Pius X.
(See Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–50).)
By the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, nations recognized each other's sovereignty.
As a result, the vast majority of registered refugees within these two groups have not themselves been displaced, but they have inherited the 'refugee status' and hence their eligibility for aid and services, provided they meet certain criteria established by the UN and/or aid agencies.
In Western history, the term was first applied to French Huguenots, after the Edict of Fontainebleau (1540), who again migrated from France after the Edict of Nantes revocation (1685).
In all of these cases, a refugee was defined as a person in a group for which the League of Nations had approved a mandate, as opposed to a person to whom a general definition applied.
According to this study, refugees resettled in Western countries could be about ten times more likely to have PTSD than age-matched general populations in those countries.
Research from the Overseas Development Institute has found that aid programmes for refugees need to move from short-term models of assistance (such as food or cash handouts) to more sustainable long-term programmes that help refugees become more self-reliant.
This entailed the largest population transfer in history.
The participants were 1,000 children aged 12 to 16 years from governmental, private, and United Nations Relief Work Agency UNRWA schools in East Jerusalem and various governorates in the West Bank.
"Convention Travel Document") to refugees lawfully residing in their territory.
Those states that signed the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees are obliged to issue travel documents (i.e.
Non-refoulement is the right not to be returned to a place of persecution and is the foundation for international refugee law, as outlined in the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
Nansen and the Commission were charged with assisting the approximately 1,500,000 people who fled the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the subsequent civil war (1917–1921), most of them aristocrats fleeing the Communist government.
The UN Pinheiro Principles are guided by the idea that people not only have the right to return home, but also the right to the same property.
It seeks to return to the pre-conflict status quo and ensure that no one profits from violence.
PTSD was diagnosed in 34.1% of Palestinian children, most of whom were refugees, males, and working.
This did not impact on Poland's eastern border, and Stalin refused to be removed from these eastern Polish territories.
The lead international agency coordinating refugee protection is the United Nations Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
UNHCR had missions in Colombia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Serbia and Montenegro and Ivory Coast to assist and provide services to IDPs.
Between the end of War and the erection of the Berlin Wall in 1961, more than 563,700 refugees from East Germany traveled to West Germany for asylum from the Soviet occupation.
Resettlement involves the assisted movement of refugees to safe third countries.
As the nature of war has changed in the last few decades, with more and more internal conflicts replacing interstate wars, the number of IDPs has increased significantly.
It was dissolved in 1952 after resettling about one million refugees.
Displacement is a long lasting reality for most refugees.
This is because the term refugee is often used in two different contexts: 1) in everyday usage it refers to a displaced person who flees their home or country of origin, 2) in a more specific context it refers to a displaced person who was given refugee status in the country of asylum.
Similar laws were implemented throughout Europe in the Middle Ages.
In the larger studies, 9% were diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and 5% with major depression, with evidence of much psychiatric co-morbidity.
It protects and supports refugees at the request of a government or the United Nations and assists in providing durable solutions, such as return or resettlement.
It is the third durable solution and it can only be considered once the two other solutions have proved impossible.
Even in a supposedly "post-conflict" environment, it is not a simple process for refugees to return home.
If they do move onward into a second country of asylum this movement is also called ''"irregular movement"'' by the UNHCR (see also asylum shopping).
The mandate of the High Commission was subsequently expanded to include persons from Austria and Sudetenland, which Germany annexed after 1 October 1938 in accordance with the Munich Agreement.
When the Allies met in Potsdam on 17 July 1945 at the Potsdam Conference, a chaotic refugee situation faced the occupying powers.
Another study showed that 28.3% of Bosnian refugee women had symptoms of PTSD three or four years after their arrival in Sweden.
Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights and well-being of refugees.
For depression the odds ratio was 9.50 among Bosnian women.
* ownership is unclear as families have expanded or split and division of the land becomes an issue;
Gesellschaft für deutsche Sprache) as word of the year in 2015.
It only matters that persons fear the persecution of their state."
In contrast, the right to non-refoulement allows states to transfer genuine refugees to third party countries with respectable human rights records.
If application is successful this enables the rest of the family to immigrate to that country as well.
While the handover was originally planned to take place at the beginning of 1947, it did not occur until July 1947.
About 2,100,000 Poles were expelled west of the new border (see Repatriation of Poles), while about 450,000 Ukrainians were expelled to the east of the new border.
* people settled on the land know it is not theirs but have nowhere else to go (as in Colombia, Rwanda and Timor-Leste); and
European Union's minimum standards definition of refugee, underlined by Art.
A significant number, actually more than half, live in urban settings, such as the ~60,000 Iraqi refugees in Damascus (Syria), and the ~30,000 Sudanese refugees in Cairo (Egypt).
Apart from physical wounds or starvation, a large percentage of refugees develop symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or depression.
Beginning in the 19th century, Muslim people emigrated to Turkey from Europe.
In the context of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the State of Israel has guaranteed asylum and citizenship to Jewish refugees.
Many more studies illustrate the problem.
There are also no fixed interpretations of the elements in the Refugee Convention and countries may interpret them differently (see also refugee roulette).
from where the refugee fled.
There can be instances of exploitation at the hands of enforcement officials, citizens of the host country, and even United Nations peacekeepers.
The German word for refugee, which is ''Flüchtling'', was chosen by the Society for the German Language (i.e.
There, refugees are at risk of disease, child soldier and terrorist recruitment, and physical and sexual violence.
The Potsdam Agreement, signed on 2 August 1945, defined the Polish western border as that of 1937, (Article VIII) placing one fourth of Germany's territory under the Provisional Polish administration.
Five surveys of 260 refugee children from three countries yielded a prevalence of 11% for post-traumatic stress disorder.
In 1930, the Nansen International Office for Refugees (Nansen Office) was established as a successor agency to the Commission.
Family reunification (which can also be a form of resettlement) is a recognized reason for immigration in many countries.
When the war ended in May 1945, British and United States civilian authorities ordered their military forces in Europe to deport to the Soviet Union millions of former residents of the USSR, including many persons who had left Russia and established different citizenship decades before.
However, it was not until the advent of romantic nationalism in late 18th-century Europe that nationalism gained sufficient prevalence for the phrase "country of nationality" to become practically meaningful, and for people crossing borders to be required to provide identification.
Rather than only safeguarding the rights and basic well-being of refugees in the camps or in urban settings on a temporary basis the UNHCR's ultimate goal is to find one of the three durable solutions for refugees: integration, repatriation, resettlement.
The repeated waves of pogroms that swept Eastern Europe in the 19th and early 20th centuries prompted mass Jewish emigration (more than 2 million Russian Jews emigrated in the period 1881–1920).
These documents and declarations include the following rights and obligations for refugees:
Depression is also characteristic for PTSD-patients and may also occur without accompanying PTSD.
The residency status in the host country whilst under temporary UNHCR protection is very uncertain as refugees are only granted temporary visas that have have to be regularly renewed.
In many refugee camps in three war-torn West African countries, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia, young girls were found to be exchanging sex for money, a handful of fruit, or even a bar of soap.
Regional conventions in Africa and Latin America  included displaced persons who had fled war or other violence in their home country.
There are estimated to be 700 refugee camp locations worldwide.
They became pregnant around the age of 15 on average.
The rise of Nazism led to such a very large increase in the number of refugees from Germany that in 1933 the League created a High Commission for Refugees Coming from Germany.
However, in April 2000 the then UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, stated "Resettlement can no longer be seen as the least-preferred durable solution; in many cases it is the ''only'' solution for refugees."
Only after the state, territory or the UNHCR, wherever the application was made, has recognised the protection needs, the asylum seeker will be ''officially'' referred to as a refugee in the more specific context and enjoys refugee status.
Over 1.5 million surviving Red Army soldiers imprisoned by the Nazis were sent to the Gulag.
2004/83/EC, essentially reproduces the narrow definition of refugee offered by the UN 1951 Convention; nevertheless, by virtue of articles 2 (e) and 15 of the same Directive, persons who have fled a war-caused generalized violence are, at certain conditions, eligible for a complementary form of protection, called subsidiary protection.
By the end of the War, Europe had more than 40 million refugees.
The agency is mandated to lead and co-ordinate international action to protect refugees and to resolve refugee problems worldwide.
This happened as recently as in 2001.
The UNHCR also protects people in refugee-like situations.
Twenty surveys were analyzed, providing results for 6,743 adult refugees from seven countries.
In all 15 million Germans were affected, and more than two million perished during the expulsions of the German population.
The portable procedural model, proposed by political philosopher Andy Lamey, emphasizes the right to non-refoulement by guaranteeing refugees three procedural rights (to a verbal hearing, to legal counsel, and to judicial review of detention decisions) and ensuring those rights in the constitution.
The Immigration Act of 1924 was aimed at further restricting the Southern and Eastern Europeans, especially Jews, Italians and Slavs, who had begun to enter the country in large numbers beginning in the 1890s.
The United Nations have a second Office for refugees, which is the UNRWA.
However, the right to seek asylum in a church or other holy place was first codified in law by King Æthelberht of Kent in about AD 600.
Mexico naturalised 6,200 Guatemalan refugees in 2001.
Fleeing droughts and hunger, fleeing economic hardship, natural disasters and not even war or terror satisfied the definition of 1951.
According to the Institute for Refugee Assistance, the actual count of refugees from Czechoslovakia on 1 March 1939 stood at almost 150,000.
The Balkan Wars of 1912–1913 caused 800,000 people to leave their homes.
having fled ones country of origin, and being granted refugee status in the country of asylum - even though both are often interchangeably called "refugees".
given refugee or subsidiary protection status, when the country of asylum is a signatory to the 1951 Refugee convention and agrees that the persons circumstances fall into the definition of the country's and international asylum criteria.
In most cases, if the girls had been forced to stay, they would have been forced into marriage.
The interpretation of this Agreement resulted in the forcible repatriation of all Soviets regardless of their wishes.
The first international co-ordination of refugee affairs came with the creation by the League of Nations in 1921 of the High Commission for Refugees and the appointment of Fridtjof Nansen as its head.
This proposal attempts to strike a balance between the interest of national governments and the interests of refugees.
An asylum seeker is not necessarily a refugee, in the legal sense, and may never be granted asylum and thus not given refugee status; likewise a displaced person who would legally be entitled to refugee status may never apply for asylum, or may not be allowed to apply in the country they fled to and thus not be an asylum seeker.
They were also more likely to have worse scores on all the Child Health Questionnaire subscales.
Once refugees or asylum seekers have found a safe place and protection of a state or territory outside their territory of origin they are discouraged from leaving again and seeking protection in another country.
* cannot access what property they have (Colombia, Guatemala, South Africa and Sudan);
The 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey involved about two million people (around 1.5 million Anatolian Greeks and 500,000 Muslims in Greece) most of whom were forcibly repatriated and denaturalized from homelands of centuries or millennia (and guaranteed the nationality of the destination country) by a treaty promoted and overseen by the international community as part of the Treaty of Lausanne.
This lack of a procedural direction could create a situation where political and strategic interests override humanitarian considerations in the RSD process.
This coincided with the flight of several hundred thousand Spanish Republicans to France after their defeat by the Nationalists in 1939 in the Spanish Civil War.
Article XII ordered that the remaining German populations in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary be transferred west in an "orderly and humane" manner.
In order to respect the right to asylum states must not deport genuine refugees.
A study by the Department of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine at the Boston University School of Medicine demonstrated that twenty percent of Sudanese refugee minors living in the United States had a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Two-thirds of all refugees around the world have been displaced for over three years, which is known as being in 'protracted displacement'.
In the last couple of years parts of or even whole refugee populations were able to return to their home countries: e.g.
In 1943, the Allies created the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) to provide aid to areas liberated from Axis powers, including parts of Europe and China.
(See Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950).)
A further 200,000 Ukrainians left southeast Poland more or less voluntarily between 1944 and 1945.
There is no specific method mandated for RSD (apart from the commitment to the 1951 Refugee Convention) and it is subject to the overall efficacy of the country’s internal administrative and judicial system as well as the characteristics of the refugee flow to which the country responds.
The U.S. Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act in 1921, followed by the Immigration Act of 1924.
An asylum seeker is a displaced person or migrant who formally seeks protection or the right to remain in another country and who is waiting for a decision on this formal application, which is also called refugee status determination.
A refugee camp is a place built by governments or NGOs (such as the Red Cross) to receive refugees, internally displaced persons or sometimes also other migrants.
Therefore, the following are of particular importance to the right to return:
The Nansen Office was plagued by problems of financing, an increase in refugee numbers, and a lack of co-operation from some member states, which led to mixed success overall.
Ideally the government of each individual country should conduct RSDs in order to enable the UNHCR to remain independent and impartial.
They are also at high risk for suicide.
Between 1933 and 1939, about 200,000 Jews fleeing Nazism were able to find refuge in France, while at least 55,000 Jews were able to find refuge in Palestine before the British authorities closed that destination in 1939.
Comparison between the number of refugees and IDPs who are supported by the UNHCR between 2014 and 1998.
These refugees and their descendants are assisted by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA).
The idea that a person who sought sanctuary in a holy place could not be harmed without inviting divine retribution was familiar to the ancient Greeks and ancient Egyptians.
It is difficult to quantify the number of refugees who settled and integrated in their first country of asylum and only the number of naturalisations can give an indication.
UNHCR's mandate has gradually been expanded to include protecting and providing humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons (IDPs) and people in IDP-like situations.
Refugee populations consist of people who are terrified and are away from familiar surroundings.
In 2013, the governments of Kenya and Somalia also signed a tripartite agreement facilitating the repatriation of refugees from Somalia.
About 3 million had been forced laborers (Ostarbeiters) in Germany and occupied territories.
Refugees who were resettled to a third country will likely lose the indefinite leave to remain in this country if they return to their country of origin or the country of first asylum.
The Constitution of the International Refugee Organization, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1946, specified the agency's field of operations.
* have competing claims with others, including the state and its foreign or local business partners (as in Aceh, Angola, Colombia, Liberia and Sudan).
Once the decision was made the asylum seeker, will either be given refugee status and can stay, or will be refused asylum and has to leave.
People may stay in these camps for many years, receiving emergency food, education and medical aid until it is safe enough to return to their country of origin.
For example, after the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685 outlawed Protestantism in France, hundreds of thousands of Huguenots fled to England, the Netherlands, Switzerland, South Africa, Germany and Prussia.
Compared to the 19.5 million refugees at the end of 2014, there were 38.2 million (about twice as many) IDPs in the same year.
The related concept of political exile also has a long history: Ovid was sent to Tomis; Voltaire was sent to England.
This excluded from its purview a group that exceeded in number all the other European displaced persons put together.
An asylum seeker will be granted asylum, i.e.
Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was established on 14 December 1950.
It is a valid travel document in place of a passport, however, it cannot be used to travel to the country of origin, i.e.
It strives to ensure that everyone can exercise the right to seek asylum and find safe refuge in another state or territory and to offer "durable solutions" to refugees and refugee hosting countries.
2 (c) of Directive No.
Many countries, such as Syria and Kenya, rule out the integration of refugees in their country.
In the Roman Catholic Church, the World Day of Migrants and Refugees is celebrated in January each year.
Not all refugees who are supported by the UNHCR live in refugee camps.
There is a large difference between being a forcibly displaced person, i.e.
There are many candidates.
The Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa, adopted by the Organization of African Unity in 1969, accepted the definition of the 1951 Refugee Convention and expanded it to include people who left their countries of origin not only because of persecution but also due to acts of external aggression, occupation, domination by foreign powers or serious disturbances of public order.
Divided families have the right to be reunited if a family member with permanent right of residency applies for the reunification and can prove the people on the application were a family unit before arrival and wish to live as a family unit since separation.
Furthermore, not all reasons for seeking asylum in another country satisfy the definition of "refugee" according to article 1A of the 1951 Refugee Convention.
Controversially, this defined "persons of German ethnic origin" who had been expelled, or were to be expelled from their countries of birth into the postwar Germany, as individuals who would "not be the concern of the Organization."
human rights violations, child labor, mental and physical trauma/torture, violence-related trauma, and sexual exploitation, especially of children, are not entirely unknown.
120,000 Congolese refugees returned from the Republic of Congo to the DRC, 30,000 Angolans returned home from the DRC and Botswana, Ivorian refugees returned from Liberia, Afghans from Pakistan, and Iraqis from Syria.
Among other symptoms, post-traumatic stress disorder involves anxiety, over-alertness, sleeplessness, chronic fatigue syndrome, motor difficulties, failing short term memory, amnesia, nightmares and sleep-paralysis.
The forced repatriation operations took place from 1945 to 1947.
They inherited the refugee status from their ancestors who were the ones forced to migrate.
The concept of a refugee was expanded by the Convention's 1967 Protocol.
Of the 5.7 million Soviet prisoners of war captured by the Germans, 3.5 million had died while in German captivity by the end of the war.
The Soviet POWs and the Vlasov men were put under the jurisdiction of SMERSH (Death to Spies).
Palestinian refugees and Sahrawi refugees.
It is usually designed to offer acute and temporary accommodation and services and any more permanent facilities and structures often banned.
The day was created in 2000 by a special United Nations General Assembly Resolution.
In the United Kingdom World Refugee Day is celebrated as part of Refugee week.
* death of owner may leave dependents without clear claim to the land;
IDPs may find it hard to receive any form of assistance as they do not fit the legal definition of a refugee under the 1951 Refugee Convention, 1967 Protocol and the 1969 Organization for African Unity Convention, because they have not left their country.
This can involve tackling difficult legal and economic environments, by improving social services, job opportunities and laws.
Besides other measures by the Nazis which created fear and flight, Jews were stripped of German citizenship by the ''Reich Citizenship Law'' of 1935.
Yet this is a very complex issue and every situation is different; conflict is a highly transformative force and the pre-war status-quo can never be reestablished completely, even if that were desirable (it may have caused the conflict in the first place).
During the same period, millions of former Russian citizens were forcefully repatriated against their will into the USSR.
Many developed countries also have Assisted Voluntary Return (AVR) programmes for asylum seekers who want to go back or were refused asylum.
In 1951, when the text of the Convention was discussed, the parties of the treaty had the idea that slavery was a thing from the past: therefore escaped and fleeing slaves are a group not mentioned in the definition.
50% of refugees - around 10 million people - have been displaced for over ten years.
Quota refugees do not need to apply for asylum on arrival as they were selected for resettlement by third countries and already went through the refugee status determination process in the first country of asylum.
