The emphasis on the "third beat" of the bar also results in a different sense of musical phrasing, with bass lines and melody lines often emphasizing what might be considered "pick up notes" in other genres.
The reggae organ-shuffle is unique to reggae.
Alborosie has lived in Jamaica since the late 1990s and has recorded at Bob Marley's famous Tuff Gong Studios.
However, sometimes punchier, louder phrases are played for a more up-tempo and aggressive sound.
It does not have any specific characteristics other than being sung in Spanish, usually by artists of Latin American origin.
The Puerto Rican band Cultura Profética is also widely recognized in the region.
A wide range of other percussion instrumentation are used in reggae.
It changed the beat again, it used the organ to creep.
Extended chords like the major 7th ("Waiting in Vain" by Bob Marley) and minor 7th are used though suspended chords or diminished chords are rare.
The Specials' leader and keyboardist, Jerry Dammers, founded the 2 Tone record label, which released albums from the aforementioned racially integrated groups and was instrumental in creating a new social and cultural awareness.
So if one is counting in 4/4 time and counting 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 +, one would play a downstroke on the "and" part of the beat.
An example played by Barrett can be heard in the Bob Marley and the Wailers song "One Drop".
Reggae in Africa was boosted by the visit of Bob Marley to Zimbabwe in 1980.
There have been a number of European artists and bands drawing their inspiration directly from Jamaica and the Caribbean community in Europe, whose music and vocal styles are almost identical to contemporary Jamaican music.
The other, ex-partner of the onceunited promoters succeeded in bringing the original Sunsplash package to Germany for the first time.
RVK Soundsystem is the first Icelandic sound system, counting 5 DJ's.
There's a word we used to use in Jamaica called 'streggae'.
In the Philippines, several bands and sound systems play reggae and dancehall music.
The central role of the bass can be particularly heard in dub music — which gives an even bigger role to the drum and bass line, reducing the vocals and other instruments to peripheral roles.
or counted as a half-time feel at twice the tempo so it falls on beats 2 and 4.
Vocal harmony parts are often used, either throughout the melody (as with vocal groups such as the Mighty Diamonds), or as a counterpoint to the main vocal line (as with the backing vocalists, the I-Threes).
The bass sound in reggae is thick and heavy, and equalized so the upper frequencies are removed and the lower frequencies emphasized.
The bass guitar often plays the dominant role in reggae.
Many of the world's most famous reggae artists began their careers in UK.
The best examples might be Alborosie (Italy) and Gentleman (Germany).
Because of this, Caribbean music in the United Kingdom, including reggae, has been popular since the late 1960s, and has evolved into several subgenres and fusions.
In Germany, the three successful Reggae JSnrfti mer Jam open-air fastivals were crucial parts of the renaissance of Caribbean music in Germany but at that year (1990) war broke out between the two main German promoters who had cooperated so well during the previous seasons.
Chris Blackwell, who founded Island Records in Jamaica in 1960, relocated to England in 1962, where he continued to promote Jamaican music.
Other than this high-profile piece, Reggae is confined to a small, emerging scene in India.
For elementary children, reggae songs such as "Give a Little Love," "One Love," or "Three Little Birds," all written by Bob Marley, can be sung and enjoyed for their optimism and cheerful lyrics.
Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding made February 2008 the first annual Reggae Month in Jamaica.
The new toques (drumming patterns) were labeled "samba-reggae" and consisted basically of a pattern in which the surdo bass drums (four of them at the minimum) divided themselves into four or five interlocking parts.
The UK Lovers Rock had a softer  and more commercial sound.Other reggae artists who enjoyed international appeal in the early 1980s include Third World, Black Uhuru and Sugar Minott.
This one morning me and my two friends were playing and I said, 'OK man, let's do the reggay.'
An example is "Exodus" by Bob Marley and the Wailers.
Other common socio-political topics in reggae songs include black nationalism, anti-racism, anti-colonialism, anti-capitalism and criticism of political systems and "Babylon".
Hispanic reggae is related to rap, sharing characteristics that can be found not only in the social conditions in which they developed in the region but also in the characteristics of social sectors and classes that welcome them.
Ska also became popular among mods in Britain.
If a girl is walking and the guys look at her and say 'Man, she's streggae' it means she don't dress well, she look raggedy.
Reggae drumbeats fall into three main categories: ''One drop'', ''Rockers'', and ''Steppers''.
Stylistically, reggae incorporates some of the musical elements  of rhythm and blues, jazz, mento (a celebratory, rural folk form that served its largely rural audience as dance music and an alternative to the hymns and adapted chanteys of local church singing), calypso, African music, as well as other genres.
A standard drum kit is generally used in reggae, but the snare drum is often tuned very high to give it a timbales-type sound.
The Jamaican ghetto themes in the lyrics were replaced with UK inner city themes, and Jamaican patois became intermingled with Cockney slang.
The Grammy Awards introduced the Grammy Award for Best Reggae Album category in 1985.
Caribbean music in the United Kingdom, including reggae, has been popular since the late 1960s, and has evolved into several subgenres and fusions.
Now it's in the Guinness World of Records.
This is in contrast to the way most other popular genres focus on beat one, the "downbeat".
The bass sound in reggae is thick and heavy, and equalized so the upper frequencies are removed and the lower frequencies emphasized.
The American reggae scene is heavily centred in Southern California, with large scenes also in New York City, Washington, D.C., Chicago, Miami, and Honolulu.
The equipment was so powerful and the vibe so strong that we feel it.”
The Pioneers' 1968 track "Long Shot (Bus' Me Bet)" has been identified as the earliest recorded example of the new rhythm sound that became known as reggae.
Birmingham based reggae/pop music band UB40 were main contributors to the British reggae scene throughout the 1980s and 1990s.
With the ''One drop'', the emphasis is entirely on the backbeat (usually on the snare, or as a rim shot combined with bass drum).
The piano part was widely taken over by synthesizers during the 1980s, although synthesizers have been used in a peripheral role since the 1970s to play incidental melodies and countermelodies.
With a lot of infighting and personal quarrels, each of them pursued his own preparations for a big summer festival.
American artist Johnny Nash's 1968 hit "Hold Me Tight" has been credited with first putting reggae in the American listener charts.
In the United States, bands like Rebelution, Slightly Stoopid, and SOJA are considered progressive reggae bands sometimes referred to as Cali Reggae or Pacific Dub.
Some reggae drummers use an additional timbale or high-tuned snare to get this sound.
The prototypical example of the style is found in Sly Dunbar's drumming on "Right Time" by the Mighty Diamonds.
The liner notes of ''To the King'', a compilation of Christian gospel reggae, suggest that the word ''reggae'' was derived from the Latin ''regi'' meaning "to the king".
The Rastafari movement was a significant influence on reggae, with Rasta drummers like Count Ossie taking part in seminal recordings.
They renounced homophobia and agreed to "not make statements or perform songs that incite hatred or violence against anyone from any community".
The reggae offbeat can be counted so that it falls between each count as an "and" (example: 1 and 2 and 3 and 4, etc.)
Cross-stick technique on the snare drum is commonly used, and tom-tom drums are often incorporated into the drumbeat itself.
Samba reggae originated in Brazil as a blend of samba with Jamaican reggae.
The bass line is often a repeated two or four bar riff when simple chord progressions are used.
Ska arose in Jamaican studios in the late 1950s, developing from American R&B, mento and calypso music.
The concept of "call and response" can be found throughout reggae music.
Rototom Sunsplash, a week-long festival which used to take place in Osoppo, Italy, until 2009, is now held in Benicassim, Spain and gathers up to 150,000 visitors every year.
Another Italian famous reggae singer was Rino Gaetano.
The organ bubble can be broken down into 2 basic patterns.
Lyrics are often sung in Australian Aboriginal languages.
Around the same time, reggae influences were starting to surface in rock and pop music, one example being 1968's "Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da" by The Beatles.
Compounding his use of the hazzan style, Matisyahu's lyrics are mostly English with more than occasional use of Hebrew and Yiddish.
They have both recorded and released music in Jamaica for Jamaican labels and producers and are popular artists, likely to appear on many riddims.
An emphasis on the backbeat is found in all reggae drumbeats, but with the ''Rockers'' beat, the emphasis is on all four beats of the bar (usually on bass drum).
Close to the Main River in the little village of Gemaunden deep down in rural southcentral Germany, they staged a two-day festival that drew the bigger crowd.
Minor keys are commonly used especially with the minor chord forms of the subdominant and dominant chord (for example in the key of G minor the progression may be played Gm - Dm - Gm - Dm - Cm - Dm - Cm - Dm).
But Soundsplash Eco-Reggae Festival is the cream of the crop.
These recordings showcased two styles of mento: an acoustic, rural style and a jazzy, popular style.
While sometimes used in a broad sense to refer to most types of popular Jamaican dance music, the term ''reggae'' more properly denotes a particular music style that was strongly influenced by traditional mento as well as American jazz and rhythm and blues, especially the New Orleans R&B practiced by Fats Domino and Allen Toussaint, and evolved out of the earlier genres ska and rocksteady.
Typically, a Hammond organ-style sound is used to play chords with a choppy feel.
Japanese reggae emerged in the early 1980s.
Then Johnny Nash was at #1 for four weeks in November with "I Can See Clearly Now".
It differs from rap mainly in that it is generally melodic, while rap is generally more a spoken form without melodic content.
The immediate origins of reggae were in ska and rock steady; from the latter, reggae took over the use of the bass as a percussion instrument.
However, possibly the best known Australian reggae groups are Blue King Brown and Astronomy Class, who both use English language lyrics.
Reggae's influence bubbled to the top of the U.S. ''Billboard'' Hot 100 charts in late 1972.
In more recent times, real horns are sometimes replaced in reggae by synthesizers or recorded samples.
The shift from rocksteady to reggae was illustrated by the organ shuffle pioneered by Jamaican musicians like Jackie Mittoo and Winston Wright and featured in transitional singles "Say What You're Saying" (1968) by Eric "Monty" Morris and "People Funny Boy" (1968) by Lee "Scratch" Perry.
'''Reggae''' () is a music genre that originated in Jamaica in the late 1960s.
Musically, it was the bloco afro Olodum and its lead percussionist, Neguinho do Samba, that began to combine the basic samba beat of the blocos with merengue, salsa, and reggae rhythms and debuted their experimentations in the carnival of 1986.
Thaikkudam Bridge, a neo-Indian band based in Kerala, India is known for inducing Reggae into Indian regional blues.
Many early reggae bands covered Motown or Atlantic soul and funk songs.
Reggae en Español spread from mainland South American Caribbean from Venezuela and Guyana to the rest of South America.
Reggae also has a presence in Veracruz, Mexico.
Horn sections are frequently used in reggae, often playing introductions and counter-melodies.
In 1951, recordings of mento music began to be released.
Though the film achieved cult status its limited appeal meant that it had a smaller impact than Eric Clapton's 1974 cover of Bob Marley's "I Shot the Sheriff" which made it onto the playlists of mainstream rock and pop radio stations worldwide.
Reggae bands play regularly at community centres such as the Zolani center in Nyanga.
Brazilian samba-reggae utilized themes such as the U.S. African-American civil rights movement and the Black Soul movement, and especially the Jamaican independence movement since the 1960s and its messages in reggae and Rastafarianism.
for ''rege''", as in ''rege-rege'', a word that can mean either "rags, ragged clothing" or "a quarrel, a row".
The music is widely considered a treasured cultural export for Jamaica, so musicians who still desire progress for their island nation have begun focusing on themes of hopefulness, faith, and love.
During the years of Apartheid, the music bonded people from all demographic groups.
Both Gentleman and Alborosie have had a significant chart impact in Jamaica, unlike many European artists.
One of the most easily recognizable elements is offbeat rhythms; staccato chords played by a guitar or piano (or both) on the offbeats of the measure.
The guitar in reggae usually plays on the off beat of the rhythm.
Three reggae-tinged singles from the Police's 1978 debut album, "Outlandos d'Amour," laid down the template for the basic structure of a lot of rock/reggae songwriting moving forward: a reggae-infused verse containing upstrokes on guitar or keyboards and a more aggressive, on-the-beat punk/rock attack during the chorus.
Hispanic reggae includes three elements: the incorporation of the Spanish language; the use of translations and versions based on known riddims and background music; and regional consciousness.
Larry And Alvin’s ‘Nanny Goat’ and the Beltones’ ‘No More Heartaches’ competed for the status of first reggae record.
In addition, Reggae Month included a six-day Global Reggae conference, a reggae film festival, two radio station award functions, and a concert tribute to the late Dennis Brown, who Bob Marley cited as his favorite singer.
Five artists targeted by the anti-homophobia campaign did not sign up to the act, including Elephant Man, TOK, Bounty Killa and Vybz Kartel.
Barrett often used an unusual triplet cross-rhythm on the hi-hat, which can be heard on many recordings by Bob Marley and the Wailers, such as "Running Away" on the ''Kaya'' album.
Although strongly influenced by traditional mento and calypso music, as well as American jazz and rhythm and blues, reggae owes its direct origins to the ska and rocksteady of 1960s Jamaica.
Reggae usually relates news, social gossip, and political comment.
In Sweden, Uppsala Reggae Festival attracts attendees from across Northern Europe, and features Swedish reggae bands such as Rootvälta and Svenska Akademien as well as many popular Jamaican artists.
The songs became more romantic, and a new genre, called rocksteady, was born.
One of the predecessors of reggae drumming is the Nyabinghi rhythm, a style of ritual drumming performed as a communal meditative practice in the Rastafarian life.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the UK punk rock scene flourished, and reggae was a notable influence.
Reggae sometimes uses the dominant chord in its minor form therefore never allowing a perfect cadence to be sounded; this lack of resolution between the tonic and the dominant imparts a sense of movement "without rest" and harmonic ambiguity.
The most notable Jarocho reggae group being Los Aguas Aguas from Xalapa.
In the original version of reggae, the drummer played a reggae groove that was used in the four bar introduction, allowing the piano to serve as a percussion instrument.
The ''Steppers'' beat was adopted (at a much higher tempo) by some 2 Tone ska revival bands of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
There are many different theories as to how the term itself originated.
The UK became the base from which many Jamaican artists toured Europe and due to the large number of Jamaican musicians emigrating there, the UK is the root of the larger European scene that exists today.
First Three Dog Night hit #1 in September with a cover of the Maytones' version of "Black and White".
Ska is characterized by a quarter note walking bass line, guitar and piano offbeats, and a drum pattern with cross-stick snare and bass drum on the backbeat and open hi-hat on the offbeats (with nothing on beats one and three).
The genre has seen many bands like Fat Freddy's Drop, Salmonella Dub, The Black Seeds and Katchafire emerging in more recent times, often involving fusion with electronica.
Another common name for the ''Steppers'' beat is the "four on the floor".
Reggae music is quite popular in Sri Lanka.
The simplest example of this might be Robbie Shakespeare's bass line for the Black Uhuru hit "Shine Eye Gal".
The generic title for Jamaican music recorded between 1961 and 1967, ska emerged from Jamaican R&B, which itself was largely based on American R&B and doo-wop.
Reggae in Australia originated in the 1980s.
The UK was a primary destination for Caribbean people looking to emigrate as early as the 1950s.
A musical figure known as skank or the 'bang" has a very dampened, short and scratchy chop sound, almost like a percussion instrument.
It is common for reggae to be sung in Jamaican Patois, Jamaican English, and Iyaric dialects.
''Reggae'' as a musical term first appeared in print with the 1968 rocksteady hit "Do the Reggay" by The Maytals which named the genre of Reggae for the world.
Harmonically the music is essentially the same as any other modern popular genre with a tendency to make use of simple chord progressions.
Singer and songwriter Alexander Barykin was considered as the father of Russian reggae.
The term also denotes the modern popular music of Jamaica and its diaspora.
The first homegrown Polish reggae bands started in the 1980s with groups like Izrael.
One Love is a colossal free concert held in the capital Wellington, every year the first week of February (summer in the southern hemisphere).
Reggae drummers often involved these three tips for other reggae performers: (1) go for open, ringing tones when playing ska and rocksteady, (2) use any available material to stuff the bass drum so that it tightens up the kick to a deep, punchy thud, and (3) go without a ride cymbal, focusing on the hi-hat for timekeeping and thin crashes with fast decay for accents.
There are many theories as to why Jamaican musicians slowed the ska tempo to create rocksteady; one is that the singer Hopeton Lewis was unable to sing his hit song "Take It Easy" at a ska tempo.
The end of the 1970s featured a ska revival in the UK.
There are many artists who utilize religious themes in their music — whether it be discussing a specific religious topic, or simply giving praise to God (Jah).
The Icelandic reggae scene is expanding and growing at a fast rate.
In Ivory Coast a country where reggae music is extremely popular, Tiken Jah Fakoly fuses reggae with traditional music.
The controversy surrounding anti-gay lyrics has led to the cancellation of UK tours by Beenie Man and Sizzla.
Alpha Blondy from Ivory Coast sings reggae with religious lyrics.
Reggae spread into a commercialized jazz field, being known first as ‘Rudie Blues’, then ‘Ska’, later ‘Blue Beat’, and ‘Rock Steady’.
In 1973, the film ''The Harder They Come'' starring Jimmy Cliff was released and introduced Jamaican music to cinema audiences outside of Jamaica.
The horns are generally played fairly softly, usually resulting in a soothing sound.
An unusual characteristic of reggae drumming is that the drum fills often do not end with a climactic cymbal.
In Uganda musician Papa Cidy is very popular.
Reggae has spread to many countries across the world, often incorporating local instruments and fusing with other genres.
Larger bands may include either an additional keyboardist, to cover or replace horn and melody lines, or the main keyboardist filling these roles on two or more keyboards.
So we just start singing 'Do the reggay, do the reggay' and created a beat.
Before that people had called it blue-beat and all kind of other things.
It is this slower tempo, the guitar/piano offbeats, the emphasis on the third beat, and the use of syncopated, melodic bass lines that differentiate reggae from other music, although other musical styles have incorporated some of these innovations.
Reggae in Africa was much boosted by the visit of Bob Marley to Zimbabwe on Independence Day 18 April 1980.
Sly has stated he was influenced to create this style by listening to American drummer Earl Young as well as other disco and R&B drummers in the early to mid-1970s, as stated in the book "Wailing Blues".
Thus, the sudden popularity of reggae music and musicians in Bahia, Brazil, was not the result of the effects of the transnational music industry, but of the need to establish cultural and political links with black communities across the Americas that had faced and were facing similar sociopolitical situations.
A simple progression borrowed from rhythm 'n blues and soul music is the tonic chord followed by the minor supertonic chord with the two chords repeated continuously to form a complete verse ("Just My Imagination" by The Temptations C - Dm7).
By the end of the '70s, a revival movement had begun in England, with such bands as the Specials, Madness, the (English) Beat, and the Selecter.
Paul Simon's single "Mother And Child Reunion" - a track which he recorded in Kingston, Jamaica with Jimmy Cliff's backing group - was ranked by Billboard as the No.
There is some controversy about whether reggae should be counted so that this beat falls on two and four, or whether it should be counted twice as fast, so it falls on three.
In the first, the 8th beats are played with a space-left-right-left-space-left-right-left pattern, where the spaces represent downbeats not played—that and the left-right-left falls on the ee-and-a, or and-2-and if counted at double time.
It was just something that came out of my mouth.
From the earliest days of Ska recordings, a piano was used to double the rhythm guitar's skank, playing the chords in a ''staccato'' style to add body, and playing occasional extra beats, runs and riffs.
The tempo of reggae is usually slower than ska but faster than rocksteady.
Speaking to the term's origins, reggae artist Derrick Morgan stated:
In recent years, Matisyahu gained prominence by blending traditional Jewish themes with reggae.
Singer and Grammy Award winning reggae artist Maxi Priest began his career with seminal British sound system Saxon Studio International.
Their music is called Pinoy reggae.
Rastafari entered some countries primarily through reggae music; thus, the movement in these places is more particularly stamped by its origins in reggae music and social milieu.
The concept of "call and response" can be found throughout reggae music, in the vocals but also in the way parts are composed and arranged for each instrument.
Reggae has spread to many countries across the world, often incorporating local instruments and fusing with other genres.
In Malawi, Black Missionaries produced nine albums.
To celebrate, the Recording Industry Association of Jamaica (RIAJam) held its first Reggae Academy Awards on February 24, 2008.
The horn section is often arranged around the first horn, playing a simple melody or counter melody.
There are some great festivals down in NZ.
Many Thai artists, such as Job 2 Do, keep the tradition of reggae music and ideals alive in Thailand.
Artist and producer Derrick Harriott says, “What happened was the musical thing was real widespread, but only among a certain sort of people.
He created the sound with the organ and the rhythm guitar.
Other notable dancehall artists who have been accused of homophobia include Elephant Man, Bounty Killer and Beenie Man.
Buju Banton and Beenie Man both gained positive press coverage around the world for publicly renouncing homophobia by signing the Reggae Compassion Act.
For decades, Hawaiian reggae has had a big following on the Hawaiian islands and the West coast of the US.
That same year, the newest Jamaican sound began to spawn big-name imitators in other countries.
Other UK based artists that had international impact include Aswad, Misty In Roots, Steel Pulse, Janet Kay, Tippa Irie, Smiley Culture and more recently Bitty McLean.
An example of this is the Black Uhuru song "Sponji Reggae".
In recent years, Jamaican (and non-Jamaican) reggae musicians have used more positive themes in reggae music.
More complex vocal arrangements can be found in the works of groups like The Abyssinians and British reggae band Steel Pulse.
Bongos are often used to play free, improvised patterns, with heavy use of African-style cross-rhythms.
In Iceland reggae band Hjálmar is well established having released six CDs in Iceland.
The music itself was faster than rocksteady, but tighter and more complex than ska, with obvious debts to both styles, while going beyond them both.
However, it is very common for reggae to be sung in Jamaican Patois, Jamaican English, and Iyaric dialects.
They were the first reggae band in Iceland, but few Icelandic artists had written songs in the reggae style before their showing up at the Icelandic music scene.
Nigerian reggae had developed in the 1970s with artists such as Majek Fashek proving popular.
Clapton's "I Shot The Sheriff" used modern rock production and recording techniques and faithfully retained most of the original reggae elements; it was a breakthrough pastiche devoid of any parody and played an important part in bringing the music of Bob Marley to a wider rock audience.
