Reindeer herders are eligible for national and EU agricultural subsidies, which constituted 15% of their income.
t. groenlandicus'', barren-ground caribou, in west Greenland in 2013.
A regular mail run in Wales, Alaska, used a sleigh drawn by reindeer.
In numerous instances, populations of the same subspecies have evolved different demographic and behavioural adaptations, while populations from separate subspecies have evolved similar demographic and behavioural patterns... "Understanding ecotype in relation to existing ecological constraints and releases may be more important than the taxonomic relationships between populations."
island subspecies make local movements
The reindeer from Svalbard are also relatively short-legged and may have a shoulder height of as little as , thereby following Allen's rule.
ICR represents over 20 indigenous reindeer peoples and about 100,000 reindeer herders in 9 different national states.
Normally travelling about  a day while migrating, the caribou can run at speeds of .
In the winter, the pads shrink and tighten, exposing the rim of the hoof, which cuts into the ice and crusted snow to keep it from slipping.
Some populations of the North American caribou, for example many herds in the subspecies barren-ground caribou and some woodland caribou in Ungava and Labrador, migrate the farthest of any terrestrial mammal, travelling up to  a year, and covering .
Some of the ''Rangifer tarandus'' subspecies may be further divided by ecotype depending on several behavioural factors – predominant habitat use (northern, tundra, mountain, forest, boreal forest, forest-dwelling, woodland, woodland (mountain), woodland (boreal), woodland (migratory), spacing (dispersed or aggregated), and migration (sedentary or migratory).
The South Georgian reindeer total some 2,600 animals in two distinct herds separated by glaciers.
Although a sled drawn by 20 reindeer will cover no more than 20–25&nbsp;km a day (compared to 7–10&nbsp;km on foot, 70–80&nbsp;km by a dog sled loaded with cargo, and 150–180&nbsp;km by a dog sled without cargo), it has the advantage that the reindeer will discover their own food, while a pack of 5-7 sled dogs requires 10–14&nbsp;kg of fresh fish a day.
Reindeer antler is powdered and sold as an aphrodisiac, nutritional or medicinal supplement to Asian markets.
A study by researchers from University College London in 2011 revealed that reindeer can see light with wavelengths as short as 320&nbsp;nm (i.e.
tarandus osborni''** (J.
Alaska's reindeer herding industry has been concentrated on Seward Peninsula ever since the first shipment of reindeer was imported from eastern Siberia in 1892 as part of the Reindeer Project, an initiative to replace whale meat in the diet of the indigenous people of the region.
The name ''Rangifer'', which Carl Linnaeus chose for the reindeer genus, was used by Albertus Magnus in his ''De animalibus'', fol.
Kamchatka and regions bordering the Sea of Okhotsk, Russia
Reindeer are well known due to Santa Claus' sleigh being pulled by flying reindeer in Christmas folklore.
The word ''deer'' was originally broader in meaning, but became more specific over time.
The International Centre for Reindeer Husbandry (ICR), a circumpolar organization, was established in 2005 by the Norwegian government.
tarandus osborni'' (Osborn's caribou – from British Columbia) and ''R.
Wild caribou are still hunted in North America and Greenland.
Mallory and Hillis argued that, "Although the taxonomic designations reflect evolutionary events, they do not appear to reflect current ecological conditions.
Reindeer meat is popular in the Scandinavian countries.
t. pearyi'' or Peary caribou
Woodland caribou have disappeared from most of their original southern range.
The WACH reached a peak of 490,000 in 2003 and then declined to 325,000 in 2011.
Dunder was later changed to Donder and—in other works—Donner (in German, "thunder"), and Blixem was later changed to Bliksem, then Blitzen (''blitz'' being German for "lightning").
Most herders were Nenets, who were mobilized from the Nenets Autonomous Okrug, but reindeer herders from Murmansk, Arkhangelsk and Komi also participated.
The migratory George River caribou herd (GRCH), in the Ungava region of Quebec and Labrador in eastern Canada was once the world's largest herd with 800,000–900,000 animals.
In 2011 there were approximately 34,000 boreal caribou in 51 ranges remaining in Canada.
They are also relatively short-legged and may have a shoulder height of as little as , thereby following Allen's rule.
t. groenlandicus'').
Grubb (2005) noted that subspecies and divisions below** are considered valid based on Banfield (1961) and considerably modified by Geist (1998):
Around the world, public interest in reindeer peaks in the Christmas period.
The table above includes ''R.
Because of its importance to many cultures, ''Rangifer tarandus'' and some of its subspecies have names in many languages.
t. sibiricus'' (Murray, 1866)
Cognates of Old English ''dēor'' in other dead Germanic languages have the general sense of ''animal'', such as Old High German ''tior'', Old Norse ''djúr'' or ''dýr'', Gothic ''dius'', Old Saxon ''dier'', and Old Frisian ''diar''.
Wolverines will take newborn calves or birthing cows, as well as (less commonly) infirm adults.
In Europe populations have a shorter migration.
It can be prepared fresh, but also dried, salted, hot- and cold-smoked.
The last remaining wild tundra reindeer in Europe are found in portions of southern Norway.
The "second largest, Akia-Maniitsoq decreased from an estimated 46,000 in 2001 to about 17,400 in 2010.
They recovered after a severe decline in 1986, to only 32,200 individuals, but their numbers fell again.
In 1996, the population of the Ahiak herd was approximately 250,000 animals.
It resembles another subspecies, barren-ground caribou (''R.
Sautéed reindeer is the best-known dish in Lapland.
Reindeer are ruminants, having a four-chambered stomach.
Norway is now preparing to apply for nomination as a World Heritage Site for areas with traces and traditions of reindeer hunting in Dovrefjell-Sunndalsfjella National Park, Reinheimen National Park and Rondane National Park in Central Sør-Norge (Southern Norway).
They prefer lichen-rich mature forests and mainly live in marshes, bogs, lakes, and river regions.
They have the largest antlers relative to body size among living deer species.
Infections create an effect known as culling: infected migrating animals are less likely to complete the migration.
In any case, the ''tarandos'' name goes back to Aristotle and Theophrastus – see 'In history' below.
This can be seen well in North America, where the northernmost subspecies, the Peary caribou, is the whitest and smallest subspecies of the continent, while the southernmost subspecies, the woodland caribou, is the darkest and largest.
The colour of the fur varies considerably, both between individuals and depending on season and subspecies.
tarandus fennicus''), is found in the wild in only two areas of the Fennoscandia peninsula of Northern Europe, in Finnish/Russian Karelia, and a small population in central south Finland.
Males are approximately  long, and weigh around  in the spring and  in the autumn.
Caribou and reindeer numbers have fluctuated historically, but many herds are in decline across their range.
In 1986 Kurtén reported that the oldest reindeer fossil was an "antler of tundra reindeer type from the sands of Süssenborn" in the Pleistocene (Günz) period (680,000 to 620,000 BP).
While overall widespread and numerous, some subspecies are rare and at least one has already gone extinct.
According to the Grubb (2005), ''Rangifer tarandus'' is "circumboreal in the tundra and taiga" from "Svalbard, Norway, Finland, Russia, Alaska (USA) and Canada including most Arctic islands, and Greenland, south to northern Mongolia, China (Inner Mongolia; now only domesticated or feral?
70% of the meat is sold to slaughterhouses.
DNA analysis indicates that reindeer were independently domesticated in Fennoscandia and Western Russia (and possibly Eastern Russia).
Today, wild reindeer have disappeared from these areas, especially from the southern parts, where it vanished almost everywhere.
tarandus caribou''.
As an adaptation to their Arctic environment, they have lost their circadian rhythm.
Currently, many reindeer herders are heavily dependent on diesel fuel to provide for electric generators and snow mobile transportation, although solar photovoltaic systems can be used to reduce diesel dependency.
t. platyrhynchus'' (Vrolik, 1829)
'' R. t. dawsoni'' (Thompson-Seton, 1900)
In the 19th century, it was apparently still present in southern Idaho.
'''Woodland caribou division:'''
The frequency of the knee-clicks is one of a range of signals that establish relative positions on a dominance scale among reindeer.
Reindeer occurred in
There is strong regional variation in ''Rangifer'' herd size.
†Queen Charlotte Islands caribou
The numbers of Russian herders have been drastically reduced since the fall of the Soviet Union.
In Inuktitut, spoken in eastern Arctic North America, the caribou is known by the name ''tuktu''.
In traditional nomadic herding, reindeer herders migrate with their herds between coast and inland areas according to an annual migration route and herds are keenly tended.
Furthermore, ''Lapin Poron liha'', fresh reindeer meat completely produced and packed in Finnish Lapland, is protected in Europe with PDO classification.
'''Platyrhynchus division'''
However, they also eat the leaves of willows and birches, as well as sedges and grasses.
t. tarandus'') in Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia and Eurasian forest reindeer ''R.
By 2012 it was estimated to be about 27,600 animals, down from 385,000 in 2001 and 74,131 in 2010."
The Svalbard reindeer subspecies ''R.
Two males will lock each other's antlers together and try to push each other away.
t. terraenovae'' (Newfoundland caribou) were considered invalid and included in ''R.
Reindeer are not considered fully domesticated, as they generally roam free on pasture grounds.
In the non-forested mountains of central Norway, such as Jotunheimen, it is still possible to find remains of stone-built trapping pits, guiding fences, and bow rests, built especially for hunting reindeer.
The caribou is the official provincial animal of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, and appears on the coat of arms of Nunavut.
Some consider Rudolph as part of the group as well, though he was not part of the original named work referenced previously.
It is unlike most woodland caribou in that it is not sedentary.
These can, with some certainty, be dated to the Migration Period, although it is not unlikely that they have been in use since the Stone Age.
The Kangerlussuaq-Sisimiut caribou herd, the largest had a population of around 98,000 animals in 2007.
t. pearsoni'' (Lydekker, 1903)
Originally, the reindeer was found in Scandinavia, eastern Europe, Greenland, Russia, Mongolia, and northern China north of the 50th latitude.
There are four herds in Alaska, the Western Arctic herd, Teshekpuk Lake herd, the Central Arctic herd and the Porcupine herd.
The knees of many species of reindeer are adapted to produce a clicking sound as they walk.
The most dominant males can collect as many as 15–20 females to mate with.
Iceland (increasing or are stable at high numbers 2013) Iceland: Reindeer were introduced to Iceland (17) in the late 1700s cited in.
Males battle for access to females.
The Bluenose East caribou herd began a recovery with a population of approximately 122,000 in 2010. which is being credited to the establishment of Tuktut Nogait National Park.
30: De Tarando (1621).
Svalbard reindeer has peculiarities in its metabolism.
In most populations, both sexes grow antlers annually, but females lack antlers in a few.
Like moose, reindeer have specialized noses featuring nasal turbinate bones that dramatically increase the surface area within the nostrils.
The ''Porcupine caribou'' or ''Grant's caribou'' (''Rangifer tarandus granti'') is a subspecies with a vast range that includes northeastern Alaska and the Yukon, and is therefore cooperatively managed by government agencies and aboriginal peoples from both countries.
The historic range of the boreal woodland caribou covered over half of present-day Canada, stretching from Alaska to Newfoundland and Labrador and as far south as New England, Idaho, and Washington.
In 1971, there were 587,000 animals.
(2013) there were four main populations of wild ''R.
According to Geist, the "woodland caribou is highly endangered throughout its distribution right into Ontario."
The largest of all herds (Taimyr, Russia) has varied between 400,000 and 1,000,000; the second largest herd (George River, Canada) has varied between 28,000 and 385,000.
a year land migration between their winter range and calving grounds on the Beaufort Sea, is the longest of any land mammal on earth.
Siberian deer owners also use the reindeer to ride on (Siberian reindeer are larger than their Scandinavian relatives).
A 2011 survey confirms a continuing decline of the George River migratory caribou herd population.
There are large population differences among individual herds, and the size of individual herds has varied greatly since 1970.
The last remaining wild tundra reindeer in Europe are found in portions of southern Norway.
The name ''rein'' (-deer) is of Norse origin (Old Norse ''hreinn'', which again goes back to Proto-Germanic *hrainaz and Proto-Indo-European *kroinos meaning "horned animal").
Reindeer herders on the Seward Peninsula have experienced significant losses to their herds from animals (such as wolves) following the wild caribou during their migrations.
Incoming cold air is warmed by the animal's body heat before entering the lungs, and water is condensed from the expired air and captured before the deer's breath is exhaled, used to moisten dry incoming air and possibly absorbed into the blood through the mucous membranes.
After 45 days, the calves are able to graze and forage but continue suckling until the following autumn when they become independent from their mothers.
As carrion, reindeer are fed on opportunistically by foxes, hawks, and ravens.
Blood-sucking insects, such as black flies and mosquitoes, are a plague to reindeer during the summer and can cause enough stress to inhibit feeding and calving behaviors.
There are three large herds of migratory tundra wild reindeer in central Siberia's Yakutia region: Lena-Olenek, Yana-Indigirka and Sundrun herds.
Both Aristotle and Theophrastus have short accounts – probably based on the same source – of an ox-sized deer species, named ''tarandos'', living in the land of the Bodines in Scythia, which was able to change the colour of its fur to obtain camouflage.
"The Beverly herd’s crossing of the Thelon River to its traditional calving grounds near Beverly Lake was part of the lives of the Dene aboriginal people for 8000 years, as revealed by an unbroken archaeological record of deep layers of caribou bones and stone tools in the banks of the Thelon River (Gordon 2005)."
They are the traditional food of the Gwich'in, a First Nations/Alaska Native people, the Inupiat, Inuvialuit, Hän, and Northern Tutchone.
smallest in North America
As of 2015, the IUCN has classified the reindeer as Vulnerable due to an observed population decline of 40% over the last ~25 years.
The Western Arctic Caribou Herd is the largest of the three.
Even in historical times, it probably occurred naturally in Ireland.
), Sakhalin Islands, and USA (Northern Idaho and the Great Lakes region).
tarandus dawsoni'') from the Queen Charlotte Islands was believed to represent a distinct subspecies.
The Canadian 25-cent coin, or "quarter" features a depiction of a caribou on one face.
A deer-like animal described by Julius Caesar in his ''Commentarii de Bello Gallico'' (chapter 6.26) from the Hercynian Forest in the year 53 BC is most certainly to be interpreted as reindeer:
In Lapland, reindeer pull pulks.
t. groenlandicus,'', a long-distance migrant, includes large herds in the Northwest Territories and in Nunavut, for example the Beverly, the Ahiak and Qamanirjuaq herds.
Unlike many other ''Rangifer tarandus'' subspecies and their ecotypes, the Porcupine herd is stable at relatively high numbers, but the 2013 photo-census was not counted by January 2014.
They are raised for their meat, hides, and antlers and, to a lesser extent, for milk and transportation.
East Iceland has a small herd of about 2500–3000 animals.
The logo for Umeå University features three reindeer.
The antlers typically have two separate groups of points, lower and upper.
Many Gwich'in people, who depend on the Porcupine caribou, still follow traditional caribou management practices that include a prohibition against selling caribou meat and limits on the number of caribou to be taken per hunting trip.
'''Tarandus division, barren-ground caribou or reindeer'''
Golden eagles prey on calves and are the most prolific hunter on calving grounds.
The subspecies taxonomic name, ''Rangifer tarandus caribou'' was defined by Gmelin in 1788.
Two municipalities in Finland have reindeer motifs in their coats-of-arms: Kuusamo has a running reindeer and Inari a fish with reindeer antlers.
Arctic tundra of Fennoscandia peninsula in Norway
In 2005, an analysis of mtDNA found differences between the caribou from Newfoundland, Labrador, south-western Canada and south-eastern Canada, but maintained all in ''R.
Novaya Zemlya reindeer
The present Västerbotten County has very different borders and uses the reindeer combined with other symbols in its coat-of-arms.
t. tarandus'' (Linnaeus, 1758) – caribou
t. eogroenlandicus''
"Across the range of a species, individuals may display considerable morphological, genetic, and behavioural variability reflective of both plasticity and adaptation to local environments."
In Canada, the national meta-population of the sedentary boreal ecotype spans the boreal forest from the Northwest Territories to Labrador.
Svalbard islands of Norway
they are rather small and spindly in the northernmost subspecies), but on average the bull reindeer's antlers are the second largest of any extant deer, after the moose.
t. fennicus'' in Finland and Russia.
tarandus terraenovae'' (Newfoundland caribou).
On Baffin Island, the largest Arctic island, the population of Peary caribou peaked in the early 1990s to approximately 60,000 to 180,000.
By 2011 the herd had decreased to 430&thinsp;000 caribou.
In their book entitled ''Mammal Species of the World'', American zoologist Don E. Wilson and DeeAnn Reeder agree with Valerius Geist, specialist on large North American mammals, that this range actually includes several subspecies.
Populations—caribou that do not migrate—or herds—those that do migrate—may not fit into narrow ecotypes.
During World War II, the Soviet Army used reindeer as pack animals to transport food, ammunition and post from Murmansk to the Karelian front and bring wounded soldiers, pilots and equipment back to the base.
Some wolf packs as well as individual grizzly bears in Canada may follow and live off of a particular reindeer herd year round.
Migratory caribou herds are named after their birthing grounds, in this case the Porcupine River, which runs through a large part of the range of the Porcupine herd.
In one case, the entire body of a reindeer was found in the stomach of a Greenland shark, a species found in the far northern Atlantic, although this was possibly a case of scavenging, considering the dissimilarity of habitats between the ungulate and the large, slow-moving fish.
t. granti'' (Porcupine caribou), ''R.
It was suggested the Ahiak and Beverly herds switched calving grounds and the Beverly may have moved "near the western Queen Maud Gulf coast to the north of the herd’s "traditional" calving ground in the Gary Lakes area north of Baker Lake."
t. caribou'' subdivided into ecotypes: woodland (boreal), woodland (migratory), woodland (montane), ''R.
The Finnish name ''poro'' may also stem from the same.
By 2011 there were approximately 124,000 caribou in the combined Beverly/Ahiak herd which represents a "50% or a 75% decline from the 1994 population estimate for the Beverly Herd."
The Beverly herd, whose range spans the tundra from northern Manitoba and Saskatchewan and well into the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, had a peak population in 1994 of 276,000 or 294,000, but by 2011 there were approximately 124,000 caribou in the Beverly herd and 83,300 in the Ahiak herd.
The latter is probably a misunderstanding of the seasonal change in reindeer fur colour.
t. caribou'' commonly known as woodland caribou, is divided into ecotypes: boreal woodland caribou (also known as forest-dwelling), woodland caribou (boreal), mountain woodland caribou, and migratory woodland caribou.
t. phylarchus'' (Hollister, 1912)
The Svalbard reindeer is special in several ways.
The females usually measure  in length and weigh .
They remain at low numbers after severe declines.
During winter, reindeer travel to forested areas to forage under the snow.
The skeleton shows a remarkable relative shortening of the legs, thus parallelling many extinct insular deer species.
The species taxonomic name ''Rangifer tarandus'' was defined by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.
According to Kolpashikov, by 2009 there were less than 70,000.
However, recent DNA analysis from mitochondrial DNA of the remains from those reindeer suggest that the animals from the Queen Charlotte Islands were not genetically distinct from the Canadian mainland reindeer subspecies.
In the traditional lifestyle of the Inuit people, Northern First Nations people, Alaska Natives, and the Kalaallit of Greenland, the caribou is an important source of food, clothing, shelter, and tools.
Caribou are classified by ecotype depending on several behavioural factors – predominant habitat use (northern, tundra, mountain, forest, boreal forest, forest-dwelling), spacing (dispersed or aggregated) and migration (sedentary or migratory).
In 2008, the Teshekpuk Lake herd had 64,107 animals and the Central Arctic herd had 67,000.
These were first named in the 1823 poem "A Visit from St. Nicholas", where they are called Dasher, Dancer, Prancer, Vixen, Comet, Cupid, Dunder, and Blixem.
The population numbers of some of these predators is influenced by the migration of reindeer.
The descriptions have been interpreted as being of reindeer living in the southern Ural Mountains in c. 350 BC
In Alaska, reindeer herders use satellite telemetry to track their herds, using online maps and databases to chart the herd's progress.
The name caribou comes, through French, from Mi'kmaq ''qalipu'', meaning "snow shoveler", referring to its habit of pawing through the snow for food.
Populations transitional between caribou and tarandus divisions includes ''osborni''.
"In spite of the great variation, all the Pleistocene and living reindeer belong to the same species."
The males (or "bulls") are typically larger (to an extent which varies between the different subspecies), measuring  in length and usually weighing .
There is currently controversy over whether possible future oil drilling on the coastal plains of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, encompassing much of the Porcupine caribou calving grounds, will have a severe negative impact on the caribou population or whether the caribou population will grow.
The Finnish forest reindeer (''R.
Mountain reindeer – caribou
