There are four other soul components and different nations of the world possess different forms of souls with different purposes.
There are internal differences within Hindu traditions on reincarnation and the state of moksha.
The four ''gatis'' have four corresponding realms or habitation levels in the vertically tiered Jain universe: demi-gods occupy the higher levels where the heavens are situated; humans, plants and animals occupy the middle levels; and hellish beings occupy the lower levels where seven hells are situated.
Sometimes it acquires the body of a demon; all this happens on account of its karma.
Wicca is a neo-pagan religion focused on nature, guided by the philosophy of Wiccan Rede that advocates Harm None, Do As Ye Will.
The 2010 Thai film, ''Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives'', won the Palme d'Or at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival.
Single-sensed souls, however, called ''nigoda'', and element-bodied souls pervade all tiers of this universe.
There is no permanent heaven or hell in Hinduism.
Each Jewish soul is reincarnated in order to fulfil each of the 613 Mosaic commandments that elevate a particular spark of holiness associated with each commandment.
However, some Muslim minority sects such as those found among Sufis, and some Muslims in South Asia and Indonesia have retained their pre-Islamic Hindu and Buddhist beliefs in reincarnation.
The word has come to mean 'to be born again in different life forms' whereas its actual definition is 'to be born again into the flesh of another body.'
Contemporary films, books, and popular songs frequently mention reincarnation.
Furthermore, a male Druze can only be reincarnated as another male Druze and a female Druze can only be reincarnated as another female Druze.
Typically souls who have died violent deaths in their previous incarnation will be able to recall memories.
The spirit that returns does so in the form of a Guardian Ori.
Reincarnation is discussed in the ancient Sanskrit texts of Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism, with many alternate terms such as ''punarāvṛtti'' (पुनरावृत्ति), ''punarājāti'' (पुनराजाति), ''punarjīvātu'' (पुनर्जीवातु), ''punarbhava'' (पुनर्भव), ''āgati-gati'' (आगति-गति, common in Buddhist Pali text), ''nibbattin'' (निब्बत्तिन्), ''upapatti'' (उपपत्ति), and ''uppajjana'' (उप्पज्जन).
Between generally virtuous lives, some are more virtuous; while evil too has degrees, and the texts assert that it would be unfair for people, with varying degrees of virtue or vices, to end up in heaven or hell, in "either or" and disproportionate manner irrespective of how virtuous or vicious their lives were.
The four ''gatis'' are: ''deva'' (demi-gods), ''manuṣya'' (humans), ''nāraki'' (hell beings) and ''tiryañca'' (animals, plants and micro-organisms).
Awareness of past lives, dreams, and soul travel are spiritual disciplines practiced by students of Eckankar.
During the Renaissance translations of Plato, the Hermetica and other works fostered new European interest in reincarnation.
''(see also Neoplatonism and Gnosticism and Buddhism and Gnosticism)''
This is not to be confused with one’s spiritual Ori, which contains personal destiny, but instead refers to the coming back to The Marketplace of one's personal blood Ori through one's new life and experiences.
The authors reported that surveys have found about one fifth to one quarter of Europeans have some level of belief in reincarnation, with similar results found in the USA.
There is an eternal duality of the body and the soul and it is impossible for the soul to exist without the body.
It is also a common belief of various ancient and modern religions such as Spiritism, Theosophy, and Eckankar and is found as well in many tribal societies around the world, in places such as Australia, East Asia, Siberia, and South America.
It remains extant as ''De Principiis'' in fragments faithfully translated into Latin by St. Jerome and in "the not very reliable Latin translation of Rufinus."
Authorities have not agreed on how the notion arose in Greece: sometimes Pythagoras is said to have been Pherecydes' pupil, sometimes to have introduced it with the doctrine of Orphism, a Thracian religion that was to be important in the diffusion of reincarnation, or else to have brought the teaching from India.
The Buddha introduced the concept that there is no permanent self (soul), and this central concept in Buddhism is called ''anattā''.
Hence a soul may transmigrate from one life form to another for countless of years, taking with it the karma that it has earned, until it finds conditions that bring about the required fruits.
However Hazrat Inayat Khan has criticized the idea as unhelpful to the spiritual seeker.
Such beliefs are inappropriate and dangerous, stated Buddha, because such annihilationism views encourage moral irresponsibility and material hedonism; he tied moral responsibility to rebirth.
Psychiatrist Ian Stevenson, from the University of Virginia, investigated many reports of young children who claimed to remember a past life.
Before the birth of Buddha, ancient Indian scholars had developed competing theories of afterlife, including the materialistic school such as Charvaka, which posited that death is the end, there is no afterlife, no soul, no rebirth, no karma, and they described death to be a state where a living being is completely annihilated, dissolved.
In certain philosophies, heavens and hells are often viewed as places for eternal salvation or eternal damnation for good and bad deeds.
Noting Mani's early travels to the Kushan Empire and other Buddhist influences in Manichaeism, Richard Foltz attributes Mani's teaching of reincarnation to Buddhist influence.
He speculated that such cases may represent a scheme to obtain money from the family of the alleged former incarnation.
In the interviewed group, the belief in the existence of this phenomenon appeared independent of their age, or the type of religion that these people belonged to, with most being Christians.
Sikhism teaches reincarnation theory similar to those in Hinduism, but with some differences from its traditional doctrines.
The major Buddhist traditions accept that the reincarnation of a being depends on the past karma and merit (demerit) accumulated, and that there are six realms of existence in which the rebirth may occur after each death.
Helgi and Sigrún's love story is the matter of a part of the ''Völsunga saga'' and the lays ''Helgakviða Hundingsbana I and II''.
The rebirth cycles continue endlessly, states Buddhism, and it is a source of ''Dukkha'' (suffering, pain), but this reincarnation and ''Dukkha'' cycle can be stopped through nirvana.
Reincarnation refers to the belief that an aspect of every human being (or all living beings in some cultures) continues to exist after death, this aspect may be the soul or mind or consciousness or something transcendent which is reborn in an interconnected cycle of existence; the transmigration belief varies by culture, and is envisioned to be in the form of a newly born human being, or animal, or plant, or spirit, or as a being in some other non-human realm of existence.
The beliefs of this group also did not appear to contain any more than usual of "new age" ideas (broadly defined) and the authors interpreted their ideas on reincarnation as "one way of tackling issues of suffering", but noted that this seemed to have little effect on their private lives.
The original text of ''On First Principles'' has almost completely disappeared.
Non-Jewish observance of the 7 Laws of Noah assists the Jewish people, though Biblical adversaries of Israel reincarnate to oppose.
For example, the dualistic devotional traditions such as Madhvacharya's Dvaita Vedanta tradition of Hinduism champion a theistic premise, assert that human soul and Brahman are different, loving devotion to Brahman (god Vishnu in Madhvacharya's theology) is the means to release from Samsara, it is the grace of God which leads to moksha, and spiritual liberation is achievable only in after-life (''videhamukti'').
Reincarnation is the natural method of the perfection process through which the Spirit faces countless different situations, problems and obstacles, and needs to learn how to deal with them.
Detailed descriptions first appear around the mid 1st millennium BCE in diverse traditions, including Buddhism, Jainism and various schools of Hindu philosophy, each of which gave unique expression to the general principle.
In the afterlife, based on one's karma, the soul is reborn as another being in heaven, hell, or a living being on earth (human, animal).
Violent deeds, killing of creatures having five sense organs, eating fish, and so on, lead to rebirth in hell.
Skeptic Carl Sagan asked the Dalai Lama what he would do if a fundamental tenet of his religion (reincarnation) were definitively disproved by science.
He conducted more than 2,500 case studies over a period of 40 years and published twelve books, including ''Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation'' and ''Where Reincarnation and Biology Intersect''.
Spiritism is a Christian philosophy codified in the 19th century by the French educator Allan Kardec.
''Gilgul'', ''Gilgul neshamot'' or ''Gilgulei Ha Neshamot'' (Heb.
However Xenophon does not mention Socrates as believing in reincarnation and Plato may have systematised Socrates' thought with concepts he took directly from Pythagoreanism or Orphism.
Recent studies have indicated that some Westerners accept the idea of reincarnation including certain contemporary people who were to Catholic families, modern Neopagans, followers of Spiritism, Theosophists and students of esoteric philosophies such as Kabbalah, and Gnostic and Esoteric Christianity as well as of Indian religions.
Some schools conclude that karma continues to exist and adhere to the person until it works out its consequences.
Ian Stevenson reported that belief in reincarnation is held (with variations in details) by adherents of almost all major religions except Christianity and Islam.
The philosopher Keith Augustine has written "the vast majority of Stevenson's cases come from countries where a religious belief in reincarnation is strong, and rarely elsewhere, seems to indicate that cultural conditioning (rather than reincarnation) generates claims of spontaneous past-life memories."
It is in the early Upanishads, which are pre-Buddha and pre-Mahavira, where these ideas are more explicitly developed in a general way.
From the early stages of Jainism on, a human being was considered the highest mortal being, with the potential to achieve liberation, particularly through asceticism.
Different traditions within Buddhism have offered different theories on what reincarnates and how reincarnation happens.
The term has been used by modern philosophers such as Kurt Gödel and has entered the English language.
Although the majority of sects within the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam do not believe that individuals reincarnate, particular groups within these religions do refer to reincarnation; these groups include the mainstream historical and contemporary followers of Kabbalah, the Cathars, Alawites, the Druze, and the Rosicrucians.
Among the many rabbis who accepted reincarnation are Nahmanides (the Ramban) and Rabbenu Bahya ben Asher, Levi ibn Habib (the Ralbah), Shelomoh Alkabez, Moses Cordovero, Moses Chaim Luzzatto, the Baal Shem Tov and later Hasidic masters,  DovBer Pinson and the Mitnagdic Vilna Gaon and Chaim Volozhin and their school, Ben Ish Chai of Baghdad and the Baba Sali.
It is also called rebirth or transmigration, and is a part of the Saṃsāra doctrine of cyclic existence.
''Gilgul'' means "cycle"   and ''neshamot'' is "souls".
These teachings assert there is rebirth, there is no permanent self and no irreducible ātman (soul) moving from life to another and tying these lives together, there is impermanence, that all compounded things such as living beings are aggregates dissolve at death, but every being reincarnates.
Past reincarnation, usually termed "past lives", is a key part of the principles and practices of the Church of Scientology.
The way out of the reincarnation cycle, asserts Sikhism, is to live an ethical life, devote oneself to God and constantly remember God's name.
Actions are seen to have consequences: some immediate, some delayed, even into future incarnations.
This basically distinguishes Spiritism from Spiritualism.
There is no simple guarantee that your grandfather or great uncle will "come back" in the birth of your child, however.
This idea appears in ancient and medieval texts, as the cycle of life, death, rebirth and redeath, such as section 6:31 of the Mahabharata and section 6.10 of Devi Bhagavata Purana.
There is birth, there is death, there is issuing forth, there is entering in."
The root cause of rebirth, states Buddhism, is the abiding of consciousness in ignorance (Pali: ''avijja'', Sanskrit: ''avidya'') about the nature of reality, and when this ignorance is uprooted, rebirth ceases.
Buddha also asserted that there is karma, which influences the rebirth, and that the cycles of repeated births and deaths are endless.
Buddha rejected this theory, adopted the alternate existing theories on rebirth, criticizing the materialistic schools that denied rebirth and karma, states Damien Keown.
Notable astrologers who advanced this development included Alan Leo, Charles E. O. Carter, Marc Edmund Jones, and Dane Rudhyar.
Everything and all existence is believed to be connected and cyclical in Hinduism, all living beings composed of two things, the soul and the body or matter.
The early Buddhist texts discuss rebirth as part of the doctrine of ''Saṃsāra''.
Afterwards there is a withdrawal from the physical plane to successively higher levels of reality, in death, a purification and assimilation of the past life.
Ian Wilson argued that a large number of Stevenson’s cases consisted of poor children remembering wealthy lives or belonging to a higher caste.
The 18th century Lithuanian master scholar and kabbalist, Rabbi Elijah, known as the Vilna Gaon (Elijah of Vilna), authored a commentary on the biblical Book of Jonah as an allegory of reincarnation.
While in the Hindu and Buddhist belief system a soul can be transmitted to any living creature, in the Druze belief system this is not possible and a human soul will only transfer to a human body.
It has been suggested that some of the early Church Fathers, especially Origen still entertained a belief in the possibility of reincarnation, but evidence is tenuous, and the writings of Origen as they have come down to us speak explicitly against it.
The doctrines of Sikhism teach that the soul exists, and is passed from one body to another in endless cycles of Saṃsāra, until liberation.
There are myths and theories to the same effect in other dialogues, in the Chariot allegory of the Phaedrus, in the Meno, Timaeus and Laws.
Objections to claims of reincarnation include the facts that the vast majority of people do not remember previous lives and there is no mechanism known to modern science that would enable a personality to survive death and travel to another body, barring the idea of biocentrism.
The most comprehensive kabbalistic work on reincarnation, ''Shaar HaGilgulim'', was written by Rabbi Chaim Vital, based on the teachings of his mentor, the 16th century kabbalist Rabbi Isaac Luria, who was said to know the past lives of each person through his semi-prophetic abilities.
Tibetan Buddhism stresses the state of mind at the time of death.
The idea of reincarnation is found in many ancient cultures, and a belief in rebirth that was held by such historic figures as Pythagoras, Plato, and Socrates.
It descends from sublime, free, spiritual realms and gathers experience through its effort to express itself in the world.
Depending on its karma, a soul transmigrates and reincarnates within the scope of this cosmology of destinies.
Having cast off all instruments of personal experience it stands again in its spiritual and formless nature, ready to begin its next rhythmic manifestation, every lifetime bringing it closer to complete self-knowledge and self-expression.
The names Babatunde (Father returns), Yetunde (Mother returns), Babatunji (Father wakes once again) and Sotunde (The wise man returns) all offer vivid evidence of the Ifa concept of familial or lineal rebirth.
The Sethians and followers of Valentinus believed in it.
9) laughs at this, it is referred to also by Lucretius and Horace.
While Nirvana is taught as the ultimate goal in Buddhism, the vast majority of contemporary lay Buddhists focus on accumulating good karma and acquiring merit to achieve a better reincarnation in the next life.
The nondualistic traditions such as Adi Shankara's Advaita Vedanta tradition of Hinduism champion a monistic premise, asserting that the individual human soul and Brahman are identical, only ignorance, impulsiveness and inertia leads to suffering through Saṃsāra, in reality they are no dualities, meditation and self-knowledge is the path to liberation, the realization that one's soul is identical to Brahman is moksha, and spiritual liberation is achievable in this life (''jivanmukti'').
The reincarnation concept is considered in Indian religions as a step that starts each "cycle of aimless drifting, wandering or mundane existence", but one that is an opportunity to seek spiritual liberation through ethical living and a variety of meditative, yogic (''marga''), or other spiritual practices.
The Jain texts postulate four ''gatis'', that is states-of-existence or birth-categories, within which the soul transmigrates.
The concept of karmic return in Wicca states that our deeds return to us threefold, or multiple times to teach us lessons (The Threefold Law), whether in this lifetime or the next.
Liberation from this cycle of existence, ''Nirvana'', is the foundation and the most important purpose of Buddhism.
As there is no known Manichaean mythology or terminology in the writings of these groups there has been some dispute among historians as to whether these groups truly were descendants of Manichaeism.
Buddhist traditions also vary in their mechanistic details on rebirth.
In addition, between 20 and 30 percent of persons in western countries who may be nominal Christians also believe in reincarnation.
In countries like Brazil the movement had spread and became widely accepted, mostly due to Chico Xavier's works.
In Judaism, the Zohar, first publicized in the 13th century, discusses reincarnation at length, especially in the Torah portion "Balak."
In recent decades, many Europeans and North Americans have developed an interest in reincarnation.
They introduced the idea of an afterlife in heaven or hell in proportion to one's merit, and when this runs out, one returns and is reborn.
The earliest layers of Vedic text incorporate the concept of life, followed by an afterlife in heaven and hell based on cumulative virtues (merit) or vices (demerit).
Folk Zen generally accepts the various supernatural elements of Buddhism such as rebirth.
Philosophical Zen, however, places more emphasis on the present moment.
Marsilio Ficino argued that Plato's references to reincarnation were intended allegorically, Shakespeare made fun but Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake by authorities after being found guilty of heresy by the Roman Inquisition for his teachings.
The Upanishads, part of the scriptures of the Hindu traditions, primarily focus on the liberation from reincarnation.
A new synthesis of East and West resulted as Hindu and Buddhist concepts of reincarnation were fused with Western astrology's deep roots in Hermeticism and Neoplatonism.
Islamic scriptures reject any idea of reincarnation of human beings or God.
On the other hand, a person who has indulged in immoral deeds, or with a cruel disposition, indicates a latent desire to experience cruel themes of life.
As a natural consequence, he will attract karma which will ensure that he is reincarnated in hell, or in lower life forms, to enable his soul to experience the cruel themes of life.
Heaven is the ultimate happiness received when soul escapes the cycle of rebirths and reunites with the Creator.
Whenever the time arrives for a spirit to return to Earth (otherwise known as The Marketplace) through the conception of a new life in the direct bloodline of the family, one of the component entities of a person's being returns, while the other remains in Heaven (Ikole Orun).
They are so tiny and undifferentiated, that they lack even individual bodies, living in colonies.
Baker has written the recalling of past lives is a mixture of cryptomnesia and confabulation.
T. C.'s Account of His Two Reincarnations:
In the 1974 movie ''Sonar Kella'', directed by Satyajit Ray, the character of Mukul is believed to be a reincarnation, and this becomes the main theme of the plot.
The idea of reincarnation is accepted by a few Muslim sects, particularly of the Ghulat, and by other sects in the Muslim world.
Carl Gustav Jung, like Flournoy based in Switzerland, also emulated him in his thesis based on a study of cryptomnesia in psychism.
At this time popular awareness of the idea of reincarnation was boosted by the Theosophical Society's dissemination of systematised and universalised Indian concepts and also by the influence of magical societies like The Golden Dawn.
Among the Geonim, Hai Gaon argued in favour of ''gilgulim''.
The 16th century mystical renaissance in communal Safed replaced scholastic Rationalism as mainstream traditional Jewish theology, both in scholarly circles and in the popular imagination.
Karma forms a central and fundamental part of Jain faith, being intricately connected to other of its philosophical concepts like transmigration, reincarnation, liberation, non-violence (''ahiṃsā'') and non-attachment, among others.
Orpheus proclaimed the need of the grace of the gods, Dionysus in particular, and of self-purification until the soul has completed the spiral ascent of destiny to live for ever.
Within Japanese Zen, reincarnation is accepted by some, but rejected by others.
Tibetan Buddhism discusses death, bardo (an intermediate state), and rebirth in texts such as the ''The Tibetan Book of the Dead''.
The effect of communist anti-religious ideas on the beliefs of the populations of Eastern Europe seems to have been rather slight, if any, except apparently in East Germany.
Other, Non-Hasidic, Orthodox Jewish groups while not placing a heavy emphasis on reincarnation, do acknowledge it as a valid teaching.
Waterhouse also published a detailed discussion of beliefs expressed in the interviews.
Once all the Sparks are redeemed to their spiritual source, the Messianic Era begins.
The followers of Bardaisan of Mesopotamia, a sect of the 2nd century deemed heretical by the Catholic Church, drew upon Chaldean astrology, to which Bardaisan's son Harmonius, educated in Athens, added Greek ideas including a sort of metempsychosis.
גלגול הנשמות) refers to the concept of reincarnation in Kabbalistic Judaism, found in much Yiddish literature among Ashkenazi Jews.
Additionally, souls cannot be divided and the number of souls existing is finite.
Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism disagree in their assumptions and theories about rebirth.
This release is believed to be a state of utter bliss, which Hindu traditions believe is either related or identical to Brahman, the unchanging reality that existed before the creation of universe, continues to exist, and shall exist after the universe ends.
The idea is, according to a recent Theosophical writer, "the master-key to modern problems", including heredity.
The ego is believed to transmute transient soul experiences into universals that form the basis for an individuality that can endure after death.
Continuity without a starting point is Time.
Early Greek discussion of the concept likewise dates to the 6th century BCE.
Taoist documents from as early as the Han Dynasty claimed that Lao Tzu appeared on earth as different persons in different times beginning in the legendary era of Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors.
The true essence of anything is the divine spark within that gives it existence.
Eckankar teaches that each person is Soul, which transcends time and space.
Recent surveys by the Barna Group, a Christian research nonprofit organization, have found that a quarter of U.S. Christians, including 10 percent of all born-again Christians, embrace the idea.
Reincarnation is a paramount tenet in the Druze faith.
Sarah Thomason, a linguist at the University of Michigan, reanalyzed these cases, concluding that "the linguistic evidence is too weak to provide support for the claims of xenoglossy."
To die with a peaceful mind will stimulate a virtuous seed and a fortunate rebirth; a disturbed mind will stimulate a non-virtuous seed and an unfortunate rebirth.
In early Buddhist traditions, ''Saṃsāra'' cosmology consisted of five realms through which the wheel of existence cycled.
Waterhouse analyzed the influences of second-hand accounts of reincarnation, writing that most of the people in the survey had heard other people's accounts of past-lives from regression hypnosis and dreams and found these fascinating, feeling that there "must be something in it" if other people were having such experiences.
The precepts of Sikhism encourage the bhakti of One Lord for ''mukti'' (liberation).
CE/AD), known to us through the criticisms of Irenaeus and the work of Clement of Alexandria.
One theory suggests that it occurs through consciousness (Pali: ''samvattanika-viññana'') or stream of consciousness (Pali: ''viññana-sotam'', Sanskrit:  ''vijñāna-srotām, vijñāna-santāna'', or ''citta-santāna'') upon death, which reincarnates into a new aggregation.
''Punarjanman'' (Sanskrit: पुनर्जन्मन्) means "rebirth, transmigration".
References to ''gilgul'' in former Kabbalah became systemised as part of the metaphysical purpose of creation.
Orpheus, its legendary founder, is said to have taught that the immortal soul aspires to freedom while the body holds it prisoner.
No bodily form is permanent: everyone dies and reincarnates further.
Wiccans also believe in death and afterlife as important experiences for the soul to transform and prepare for future lifetimes.
So the doctrine of karma is not considered simply in relation to one life-time, but also in relation to both future incarnations and past lives.
He also matched birthmarks and birth defects to wounds and scars on the deceased, verified by medical records such as autopsy photographs, in ''Reincarnation and Biology''.
Stevenson claimed there were a handful of cases that suggested evidence of xenoglossy.
Later Jung would emphasise the importance of the persistence of memory and ego in psychological study of reincarnation: "This concept of rebirth necessarily implies the continuity of personality... (that) one is able, at least potentially, to remember that one has lived through previous existences, and that these existences were one's own...." Hypnosis, used in psychoanalysis for retrieving  forgotten memories, was eventually tried as a means of studying the phenomenon of past life recall.
Scientology auditing is intended to free the person of these past-life traumas and recover past-life memory, leading to a higher state of spiritual awareness.
Reincarnation is the process where the spirit, once free in the spiritual world, comes back to the world for further learning.
There is existence without limitation; there is continuity without a starting-point.
''Gilgul'' is contrasted with the other processes in Kabbalah of Ibbur ("pregnancy"), the attachment of a second soul to an individual for (or by) good means, and Dybuk ("possession"), the attachment of a spirit, demon, etc.
Another such teacher was Basilides (132–?
The idea of reincarnation has early roots in the Vedic period (c. 1500 – c. 500 BCE), predating the Buddha and the Mahavira.
Jewish mystical texts (the Kabbalah), from their classic Medieval canon onwards, teach a belief in ''Gilgul Neshamot'' (Hebrew for metempsychosis of souls: literally "soul cycle", plural ''"gilgulim"'').
This ''jīva'' sometimes takes birth as a worm, as an insect or as an ant."
The ideas associated with reincarnation may have arisen independently in different regions, or they might have spread as a result of cultural contact.
Existence without limitation is Space.
In Jainism, God has no role to play in an individual's destiny; one's personal destiny is not seen as a consequence of any system of reward or punishment, but rather as a result of its own personal karma.
In a survey by the Pew Forum in 2009, 24% of American Christians expressed a belief in reincarnation.
It is a central tenet of all major Indian religions, namely Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism.
Julius Caesar recorded that the druids of Gaul, Britain and Ireland had metempsychosis as one of their core doctrines:
The historical relations between these sects and the beliefs about reincarnation that were characteristic of Neoplatonism, Orphism, Hermeticism, Manicheanism, and Gnosticism of the Roman era as well as the Indian religions have been the subject of recent scholarly research.
Stevenson searched for disconfirming evidence and alternative explanations for the reports, and believed that his strict methods ruled out all possible "normal" explanations for the child’s memories.
Skeptics such as Paul Edwards have analyzed many of these accounts, and called them anecdotal, while also suggesting that claims of evidence for reincarnation originate from selective thinking and from the false memories that often result from one's own belief system and basic fears, and thus cannot be counted as empirical evidence.
For example, a good and virtuous life indicates a latent desire to experience good and virtuous themes of life.
The central tenet of Spiritist doctrine is the belief in spiritual life.
Hinduism relies on its foundational assumption that "soul, Self exists" (Atman, attā), in contrast to Buddhist assumption that there is "no soul, no Self" (Anatta, anatman).
The following is a story of human-to-human reincarnation as told by Thunder Cloud, a Winnebago (Ho-Chunk tribe) shaman referred to as T. C. in the narrative.
The philosopher Paul Edwards noted that reincarnation invokes assumptions and is inconsistent with modern science.
The text further states (32.7): "Karma is the root of birth and death.
'''Reincarnation''' is the philosophical or religious concept that an aspect of a living being starts a new life in a different physical body or form after each biological death.
Reincarnation was also accepted by some streams of Sufism.
The Bhagavad Gita states:
These included two where a subject under hypnosis could allegedly converse with people speaking the foreign language, instead of merely being able to recite foreign words.
Liberation (''kevalya'') from reincarnation is possible, however, through removing and ending karmic accumulations to one's soul.
They can be reincarnated as Christians or others through sin and as animals if they become infidels.
Manichaean monasteries existed in Rome in 312 AD.
Demographic survey data from 1999–2002 shows a significant minority of people from Europe and America, where there is reasonable freedom of thought and access to ideas but no outstanding recent reincarnationist tradition, believe we had a life before we were born, will survive death and be born again physically.
