However, inductive loads can cause more destructive make arcs.
Modern microprocessor-based timing relays provide precision timing over a great range.
However, they have relatively low switching current and voltage ratings.
Because the delay occurs in the direction of coil energization, this type of contact is alternatively known as a normally open, on-delay:
If the overload senses excess current in the load, the coil is de-energized.
The contact life is affected by the type of load switched.
When the current to the coil is switched off, the armature is returned by a force, approximately half as strong as the magnetic force, to its relaxed position.
Normally open (NO) contacts connect the circuit when the relay is activated; the circuit is disconnected when the relay is inactive.
* Isolation between coil contacts
"Sensitive" relays operate on a few milliamperes
It is held in place by a spring so that when the relay is de-energized there is an air gap in the magnetic circuit.
When an electric current is passed through the coil it generates a magnetic field that activates the armature, and the consequent movement of the movable contact(s) either makes or breaks (depending upon construction) a connection with a fixed contact.
A sensitive relay having its contacts mounted in a highly evacuated glass housing, to permit handling radio-frequency voltages as high as 20,000 volts without flashover between contacts even though contact spacing is but a few hundredths of an inch when open.
In this condition, one of the two sets of contacts in the relay pictured is closed, and the other set is open.
Such relays are used to switch low-voltage signals (one volt or less) where the mercury reduces the contact resistance and associated voltage drop, for low-current signals where surface contamination may make for a poor contact, or for high-speed applications where the mercury eliminates contact bounce.
Continuous current ratings for common contactors range from 10 amps to several hundred amps.
For example, with standard electric motors, the start-up (inrush) current tends to be much greater than the running current.
These considerations include factors such as speed of operation, sensitivity, and hysteresis.
This type may be found in certain cars, for headlamp dipping and other functions where alternating operation on each switch actuation is needed.
Force-guided contact relays are made with different main contact sets, either NO, NC or changeover, and one or more auxiliary contact sets, often of reduced current or voltage rating, used for the monitoring system.
It is not possible to reliably ensure that any particular contact is closed, except by potentially intrusive and safety-degrading sensing of its circuit conditions, however in safety systems it is usually the NO state that is most important, and as explained above, this is reliably verifiable by detecting the closure of a contact of opposite sense.
The contact resistance is not stable immediately after contact closure, and drifts, mostly downwards, for several seconds after closure, the change perhaps being 0.5 ohm.
Larger relays often handle higher voltage and current than smaller relays.
Also DC biased and AC immune.
Timing relays are arranged for an intentional delay in operating their contacts.
A contactor is controlled by a circuit which has a much lower power level than the switched circuit.
The relay may be less expensive than other types, but this is partly offset by the increased costs in the external circuit.
These are 120&nbsp;mm high, 180&nbsp;mm deep and 56&nbsp;mm wide and weigh about 1400&nbsp;g, and can have up to 16 separate contacts, for example, 12 make and 4 break contacts.
A common terminal connects to either of two others.
Repeated pulses from the same input have no effect.
Not all relay circuits can be proved so there is reliance on construction features such as carbon to silver contacts to resist lightning induced contact welding and to provide AC immunity.
These auxiliary contacts are in series with the coil.
This translates into enormous make arcs.
The principle of relay logic is based on relays which energize and de-energize associated contacts.
* Contact protection – suppress arcing in very inductive circuits
Contacts are widely spaced to prevent flashovers and short circuits over a lifetime that may exceed fifty years.
This type of contact is normally open when the coil is unpowered (de-energized).
Although typical control relays operate in the 5 ms to 20 ms range, relays with switching speeds as fast as 100 us are available.
The following is a description of the four basic types of time-delay relay contacts.
The mechanism described acted as a digital amplifier, repeating the telegraph signal, and thus allowing signals to be propagated as far as desired.
In many situations, the break arc is more energetic and thus more destructive, in particular with resistive-type loads.
* Accessories such as timers, auxiliary contacts, pilot lamps, and test buttons
Reed relays can switch faster than larger relays and require very little power from the control circuit.
Mercury wetted relays are position-sensitive and must be mounted vertically to work properly.
High-current contacts are made with alloys containing silver.
Other relays may have more or fewer sets of contacts depending on their function.
* Size - smaller relays often resist mechanical vibration and shock better than larger relays, because of the lower inertia of the moving parts and the higher natural frequencies of smaller parts.
When the circuit is broken, the current cannot change instantaneously, which creates a potentially damaging arc across the separating contacts.
A simple electromagnetic relay consists of a coil of wire wrapped around a soft iron core, an iron yoke which provides a low reluctance path for magnetic flux, a movable iron armature, and one or more sets of contacts (there are two contacts in the relay pictured).
* QL1 Latched - see above
There are no moving parts to wear out and there is no contact bounce due to vibration.
High-voltage or high-current devices can be controlled with small, low voltage wiring and pilots switches.
The extremely high temperature of the arc cracks the surrounding gas molecules creating ozone, carbon monoxide, and other compounds.
Contactors range from those having a breaking current of several amperes to thousands of amperes and 24 V DC to many kilovolts.
* QNN1 Twin Neutral 2x4-4 or 2x6-2
A '''relay''' is an electrically operated switch.
Relay logic is the predecessor of ladder logic, which is commonly used in programmable logic controllers.
The first application of relays was in long telegraph lines, where the weak signal received at an intermediate station could control a contact, regenerating the signal for further transmission.
Solid-state relays control power circuits with no moving parts, instead using a semiconductor device to perform switching.
Time-delay relays can be constructed to delay armature motion on coil energization, de-energization, or both.
On a dual coil device, when polarized voltage is applied to the reset coil the contacts will transition.
Some early computers used ordinary relays as a kind of latch—they store bits in ordinary wire spring relays or reed relays by feeding an output wire back as an input, resulting in a feedback loop or sequential circuit.
Because relays are much more resistant than semiconductors to nuclear radiation, they are widely used in safety-critical logic, such as the control panels of radioactive waste-handling machinery.
In high-inductance circuits such as motors, other issues must be addressed.
A mercury relay is a relay that uses mercury as the switching element.
* '''SPDT''' – Single Pole Double Throw.
Relays are used where it is necessary to control a circuit by a separate low-power signal, or where several circuits must be controlled by one signal.
Inversion of a logical input can be done with a normally closed contact.
A '''contactor''' is a heavy-duty (in many cases more than 15 amps) relay used for switching electric motors and lighting loads, but contactors are not generally called relays.
Some automotive relays include a diode inside the relay case.
Electromechanical switching systems including Strowger and Crossbar telephone exchanges made extensive use of relays in ancillary control circuits.
For longer time periods, a mechanical clockwork timer is installed.
This is often done to extend the operating life of a control relay.
* 85 = relay coil -
If the relay is driving a large, or especially a reactive load, there may be a similar problem of surge currents around the relay output contacts.
Breaking load current causes undesired arcing between the contacts, eventually leading to contacts that weld shut or contacts that fail due erosion by the arc.
* Assembly – Some relays feature a sticker that keeps the enclosure sealed to allow PCB post soldering cleaning, which is removed once assembly is complete.
This contact degradation drastically limits the overall life of a relay to a range of about 10,000 to 100,000 operations, a level far below the mechanical life of the same device, which can be in excess of 20 million operations.
A simple device, which is now called a relay, was included in the original 1840 telegraph patent of Samuel Morse.
For a slightly longer (up to a minute) delay, a dashpot is used.
Equivalent to two SPDT switches or relays actuated by a single coil.
Control relays should not be operated above rated temperature because of resulting increased degradation and fatigue.
Unlike a circuit breaker, a contactor is not intended to interrupt a short circuit current.
Every time a relay transitions either from a closed to an open state (break arc) or from an open to a closed state (make arc & bounce arc), under load, an electrical arc can occur between the two contact points (electrodes) of the relay.
The thermal and magnetic overload detections are typically used together in a motor protection relay.
A very short (a fraction of a second) delay would use a copper disk between the armature and moving blade assembly.
* Stray magnetic linkage between coils of adjacent relays on a printed circuit board.
The make rating may be several times larger than the continuous rating, which is itself larger than the break rating.
It is ambiguous whether the pole is normally open or normally closed.
This type is widely used where control is from simple switches or single-ended outputs of a control system, and such relays are found in avionics and numerous industrial applications.
Typically this is done with a small copper "shading ring" crimped around a portion of the core that creates the delayed, out-of-phase component, which holds the contacts during the zero crossings of the control voltage.
These have two pairs of terminals.
Control relay life cycle varies from 50,000 to over one million cycles depending on the electrical loads on the contacts, duty cycle, application, and the extent to which the relay is derated.
* Switching time – where high speed is required
Relays with calibrated operating characteristics and sometimes multiple operating coils are used to protect electrical circuits from overload or faults; in modern electric power systems these functions are performed by digital instruments still called "protective relays".
A 'force-guided contacts relay' has relay contacts that are mechanically linked together, so that when the relay coil is energized or de-energized, all of the linked contacts move together.
In one mechanism, two opposing coils with an over-center spring or permanent magnet hold the contacts in position after the coil is de-energized.
The same coalescence process causes another effect, which is a nuisance in some applications.
* Coil protection – suppress the surge voltage produced when switching the coil current
Where radio transmitters and receivers share one antenna, often a coaxial relay is used as a TR (transmit-receive) relay, which switches the antenna from the receiver to the transmitter.
First we have the normally open, timed-closed (NOTC) contact.
Contactors come in many forms with varying capacities and features.
These have two terminals which can be connected or disconnected.
This overcame the problem of limited range of earlier telegraphy schemes.
Relays were used for control of automated systems for machine tools and production lines.
Change-over (CO), or double-throw (DT), contacts control two circuits: one normally open contact and one normally closed contact with a common terminal.
Electronic overload protection relays measure motor current and can estimate motor winding temperature using a "thermal model" of the motor armature system that can be set to provide more accurate motor protection.
If the set of contacts was closed when the relay was de-energized, then the movement opens the contacts and breaks the connection, and vice versa if the contacts were open.
BR930 series plug-in relays are widely used on railways following British practice.
Early electro-mechanical computers such as the ARRA, Harvard Mark II, Zuse Z2, and Zuse Z3 used relays for logic and working registers.
The poles may be Form A or Form B (or one of each).
Time-delay relay contacts must be specified not only as either normally open or normally closed, but whether the delay operates in the direction of closing or in the direction of opening.
It is also called a "Form B" contact or "break" contact.
The Ladder programming language is often used for designing relay logic networks.
Otherwise, a relay with several normally open (NO) contacts may stick when energised, with some contacts closed and others still slightly open, due to mechanical tolerances.
Consequently, for relays used to control inductive loads, we must specify the maximum current that may flow through the relay contacts when it actuates, the ''make rating''; the continuous rating; and the ''break rating''.
Reed relays which are actuated by low currents and switch fast are suitable for controlling small currents.
Sealed contacts with mercury-wetted contacts have longer operating lives and less contact chatter than any other kind of relay.
The "S" or "D" may be replaced with a number, indicating multiple switches connected to a single actuator.
This is similar to a control relay but requires a rather high fault current to operate the contacts.
The first public relay based telephone exchange in the  UK was installed in Fleetwood on 15 July 1922 and remained in service until 1959.
The arc energy slowly destroys the contact metal, causing some material to escape into the air as fine particulate matter.
* Coil voltage – machine-tool relays usually 24 VDC, 120 or 250 VAC, relays for switchgear may have 125 V or 250 VDC coils,
This thermal protection operates relatively slowly allowing the motor to draw higher starting currents before the protection relay will trip.
'''Multi-voltage relays''' are devices designed to work for wide voltage ranges such as 24 to 240 VAC/VDC and wide frequency ranges such as 0 to 300&nbsp;Hz.
Such an electrically latching relay requires continuous power to maintain state, unlike magnetically latching relays or mechanically racheting relays.
A solid-state relay uses a thyristor, TRIAC or other solid-state switching device, activated by the control signal, to switch the controlled load, instead of a solenoid.
A '''Buchholz relay''' is a safety device sensing the accumulation of gas in large oil-filled transformers, which will alarm on slow accumulation of gas or shut down the transformer if gas is produced rapidly in the transformer oil.
Magnetic latching relays are useful in applications where interrupted power should not be able to transition the contacts.
Compared to electromagnetic relays, they may be falsely triggered by transients and in general may be susceptible to damage by extreme cosmic ray and EMP episodes.
As every solid-state device has a small voltage drop across it, this voltage drop limits the amount of current a given SSR can handle.
Including two for the coil, such a relay has six terminals in total.
come in a number of schools, including the United States, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.
A polarity controlled relay needs changeover switches or an H bridge drive circuit to control it.
Magnetic latching relays require one pulse of coil power to move their contacts in one direction, and another, redirected pulse to move them back.
A number of relays could be used together to carry out complex functions (relay logic).
Normally closed (NC) contacts disconnect the circuit when the relay is activated; the circuit is connected when the relay is inactive.
* "Dry" contacts – when switching very low level signals, special contact materials may be needed such as gold-plated contacts
* Coil current - Minimum current required for reliable operation and minimum holding current, as well as, effects of power dissipation on coil temperature, at various duty cycles.
The first relays were used in long distance telegraph circuits as amplifiers: they repeated the signal coming in from one circuit and re-transmitted it on another circuit.
These rules for the safety design are the one that are defined in type B standards such as EN 13849-2 as Basic safety principles and Well-tried safety principles for machinery that applies to all machines.
A ''latching relay'' (also called "impulse", "keep", or "stay" relays) maintains either contact position indefinitely without power applied to the coil.
Magnetic latching relays can have either single or dual coils.
Relays were used extensively in telephone exchanges and early computers to perform logical operations.
Contactors with overload protection devices are often used to start motors.
The overload sensing devices are a form of heat operated relay where a coil heats a bimetallic strip, or where a solder pot melts, releasing a spring to operate auxiliary contacts.
Low power devices such as microprocessors can drive relays to control electrical loads beyond their direct drive capability.
'''Safety relays''' are devices which generally implement safety functions.
Including two for the coil, such a relay has four terminals in total.
Relays can perform the basic operations of Boolean combinatorial logic.
To protect against false feeds,  double switching relay contacts are often used on both the positive and negative side of a circuit, so that two false feeds are needed to cause a false signal.
A '''polarized relay''' places the armature between the poles of a permanent magnet to increase sensitivity.
Relays may be arranged for a fixed timing period, or may be field adjustable, or remotely set from a control panel.
The other common overload protection system uses an electromagnet coil in series with the motor circuit that directly operates contacts.
* Mounting – sockets, plug board, rail mount, panel mount, through-panel mount, enclosure for mounting on walls or equipment
Some motor protection relays include temperature detector inputs for direct measurement from a thermocouple or resistance thermometer sensor embedded in the winding.
To prevent short over current spikes from causing nuisance triggering the armature movement is damped with a dashpot.
Usually this force is provided by a spring, but gravity is also used commonly in industrial motor starters.
Electric motors need overcurrent protection to prevent damage from over-loading the motor, or to protect against short circuits in connecting cables or internal faults in the motor windings.
* QTD4 - Slow to release timer
* 87a = normally closed contact
Such diodes were not widely used before the application of transistors as relay drivers, but soon became ubiquitous as early germanium transistors were easily destroyed by this surge.
It was quite common, before the restrictions on the use of mercury, to use a mercury-wetted relay in the laboratory as a convenient means of generating fast rise time pulses, however although the rise time may be picoseconds, the exact timing of the event is, like all other types of relay, subject to considerable jitter, possibly milliseconds, due to mechanical imperfections.
Polarized relays were used in middle 20th Century telephone exchanges to detect faint pulses and correct telegraphic distortion.
These have two rows of change-over terminals.
Safety relays are used as part of an engineered safety system.
The relay in the picture also has a wire connecting the armature to the yoke.
Common practice is to derate 20 degrees Celsius from the maximum rated temperature limit.
A dashpot is a piston filled with fluid that is allowed to escape slowly; both air-filled and oil-filled dashpots are used.
When a control relay is operating at its derated value, it is controlling a smaller value of current than its maximum make and break ratings.
Another latching type has a remanent core that retains the contacts in the operated position by the remanent magnetism in the core.
* Regulatory approvals
* QBA1 Biased AC-immune - see above
The time period can be varied by increasing or decreasing the flow rate.
This action causes the material in the contacts to degrade quickly, resulting in device failure.
The advantage is that one coil consumes power only for an instant while the relay is being switched, and the relay contacts retain this setting across a power outage.
As with any switch, the contact current (unrelated to the coil current) must not exceed a given value to avoid damage.
The BR Q-type relay are available in a number of different configurations:
This protects the receiver from the high power of the transmitter.
* Expected mechanical loads due to acceleration – some relays used in aerospace applications are designed to function in shock loads of 50 ''g'' or more
The function of force-guided contacts is to enable the safety circuit to check the status of the relay.
By introducing both NO and NC contacts, or more commonly, changeover contacts, on the same relay, it then becomes possible to guarantee that if any NC contact is closed, all NO contacts are open, and conversely, if any NO contact is closed, all NC contacts are open.
Signalling relays, typical circuits, drawing symbols, abbreviations & nomenclature, etc.
A type of relay that can handle the high power required to directly control an electric motor or other loads is called a contactor.
A '''mercury-wetted reed relay''' is a form of reed relay in which the contacts are wetted with mercury.
The characteristic impedance of the relay is matched to the transmission line impedance of the system, for example, 50 ohms.
If one set of contacts in the relay becomes immobilized, no other contact of the same relay will be able to move.
When an inductance is connected to a power source, an input surge current or electromotor starting current larger than the steady-state current exists.
Railway signalling relays are large considering the mostly small voltages (less than 120 V) and currents (perhaps 100 mA) that they switch.
For many years relays were the standard method of controlling industrial electronic systems.
* 87 = common contact
The minimum voltage drop for such a relay is a function of the material used to make the device.
It is also called a "Form A" contact or "make" contact.
The table lists the relay derating factors for typical industrial control applications.
Similarly, a relay with several normally closed (NC) contacts may stick to the unenergised position, so that when energised, the circuit through one set of contacts is broken, with a marginal gap, while the other remains closed.
If the coil is designed to be energized with alternating current (AC), some method is used to split the flux into two out-of-phase components which add together, increasing the minimum pull on the armature during the AC cycle.
Though rare, the reeds can become magnetized over time, which makes them stick 'on' even when no current is present; changing the orientation of the reeds with respect to the solenoid's magnetic field can resolve this problem.
* '''DPST''' – Double Pole Single Throw.
AC controlled magnetic latch relays have single coils that employ steering diodes to differentiate between operate and reset commands.
Without adequate contact protection, the occurrence of electric current arcing causes significant degradation of the contacts, which suffer significant and visible damage.
