Adherents of one religion sometimes think of other religions as superstition.
The MacMIllan Encyclopedia of Religions states:
According to a 2003 survey conducted in the United States by The Barna Group, those who described themselves as believers were less likely than those describing themselves as atheists or agnostics to consider the following behaviors morally acceptable: cohabitating with someone of the opposite sex outside of marriage, enjoying sexual fantasies, having an abortion, sexual relationships outside of marriage, gambling, looking at pictures of nudity or explicit sexual behavior, getting drunk, and "having a sexual relationship with someone of the same sex."
In north Africa, these religions have included traditional Berber religion, ancient Egyptian religion, and Waaq.
Many religions have value frameworks regarding personal behavior meant to guide adherents in determining between right and wrong.
An increasing number of scholars have expressed reservations about ever defining the "essence" of religion.
In most '''European countries''', however, religion has a much smaller influence on politics although it used to be much more important.
One modern academic theory of religion, social constructionism, says that religion is a modern concept that suggests all spiritual practice and worship follows a model similar to the Abrahamic religions as an orientation system that helps to interpret reality and define human beings.
By sacred things he meant things "set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them".
The sociologist Durkheim, in his seminal book ''The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life'', defined religion as a "unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things".
Instead, the symbolism of the death of an old "life" and the start of a new "life" is what is most significant.
Within Judaism there are a variety of movements, most of which emerged from Rabbinic Judaism, which holds that God revealed his laws and commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai in the form of both the Written and Oral Torah; historically, this assertion was challenged by various groups.
In general the scientific method gains knowledge by testing hypotheses to develop theories through elucidation of facts or evaluation by experiments and thus only answers cosmological questions about the universe that can be observed and measured.
Charismatic individuals have emerged at many times and places in the world.
Recent interfaith initiatives include "A Common Word", launched in 2007 and focused on bringing Muslim and Christian leaders together, the "C1 World Dialogue", the "Common Ground" initiative between Islam and Buddhism, and a United Nations sponsored "World Interfaith Harmony Week".
* Vajrayana Buddhism first appeared in India in the 3rd century CE.
The main divisions of Christianity are, according to the number of adherents:
The study revealed that forty percent of worship service attending Americans volunteer regularly to help the poor and elderly as opposed to 15% of Americans who never attend services.
Scholars in the field are not only focused on strictly legal issues about religious freedom or non-establishment, but also study religions as they are qualified through judicial discourses or legal understanding of religious phenomena.
One important way in which religious beliefs accomplish this is by providing a set of ideas about how and why the world is put together that allows people to accommodate anxieties and deal with misfortune."
Echoes of James' and Durkheim's definitions are to be found in the writings of, for example, Frederick Ferré who defined religion as "one's way of valuing most comprehensively and intensively".
Buddhists generally agree that Gotama aimed to help sentient beings end their suffering (dukkha) by understanding the true nature of phenomena, thereby escaping the cycle of suffering and rebirth (saṃsāra), that is, achieving nirvana.
The use of other terms, such as obedience to God or Islam are likewise grounded in particular histories and vocabularies.
As the religion of Byzantine Empire in the first millennium and of Western Europe during the time of colonization, Christianity has been propagated throughout the world.
Religious believers may or may not accept such symbolic interpretations.
Southern African traditions include Akamba mythology, Masai mythology, Malagasy mythology, San religion, Lozi mythology, Tumbuka mythology, and Zulu mythology.
It was in the 17th century that the concept of "religion" received its modern shape despite the fact that ancient texts like the Bible, the Quran, and other ancient sacred texts did not have a concept of religion in the original languages and neither did the people or the cultures in which these sacred texts were written.
There, ''myth'' is defined as a story that is important for the group whether or not it is objectively or provably true.
Throughout classical South Asia, the study of law consisted of concepts such as penance through piety and ceremonial as well as practical traditions.
Bantu mythology is found throughout central, southeast, and southern Africa.
Some countries even define themselves in religious terms, such as ''The Islamic Republic of Iran''.
Because religion continues to be recognized in Western thought as a universal impulse, many religious practitioners have aimed to band together in interfaith dialogue, cooperation, and religious peacebuilding.
* Folk religions of the Americas: Native American religions
In terms of Christian theology and ultimate truths, people rely on reason, experience, scripture, and tradition to test and gauge what they experience and what they should believe.
One of its divisions is the Orthodox Bahá'í Faith.
Almost all Christians believe in the Trinity, which teaches the unity of Father, Son (Jesus Christ), and Holy Spirit as three persons in one Godhead.
Anthropologist Jack David Eller asserts that religion is not inherently violent, arguing "religion and violence are clearly compatible, but they are not identical."
* Sunni Islam is the largest denomination within Islam and follows the Quran, the hadiths which record the sunnah, whilst placing emphasis on the sahabah.
In Zoroastrianism good and evil have distinct sources, with evil trying to destroy the creation of Mazda, and good trying to sustain it.
Mahayana Buddhism includes such disparate teachings as Zen, Pure Land, and Soka Gakkai.
Religion and morality are not synonymous.
The Romans called such fear of the gods ''superstitio''.
Sometimes these are labeled Yazdânism.
When religion is seen in terms of "sacred", "divine", intensive "valuing", or "ultimate concern", then it is possible to understand why scientific findings and philosophical criticisms (e.g.
With the onset of the modernisation of and the scientific revolution in the western world, some aspects of religion have cumulatively been criticized.
The medieval usage alternates with ''order'' in designating bonded communities like those of monastic orders: "we hear of the 'religion' of the Golden Fleece, of a knight 'of the religion of Avys'".
Even in the 1st century AD, Josephus had used the Greek term ''ioudaismos'', which some translate as "Judaism" today, even though he used it as an ethnic term, not one linked to modern abstract concepts of religion as a set of beliefs.
According to anthropologists John Monaghan and Peter Just, "Many of the great world religions appear to have begun as revitalization movements of some sort, as the vision of a charismatic prophet fires the imaginations of people seeking a more comprehensive answer to their problems than they feel is provided by everyday beliefs.
It is the fifth-largest organized religion in the world, with approximately 30 million Sikhs.
It is currently most prominent in the Himalaya regions and extends across all of Asia (cf.
A religion is a cultural system of behaviors and practices, world views, sacred texts, holy places, ethics, and societal organisation that relate humanity to an order of existence.
There are also notable African diasporic religions practiced in the Americas, such as Santeria, Candomble, Vodun, Lucumi, Umbanda, and Macumba.
Islam is the most widely practiced religion of Southeast Asia, North Africa, Western Asia, and Central Asia, while Muslim-majority countries also exist in parts of South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Europe.
* Two notable new Buddhist sects are Hòa Hảo and the Dalit Buddhist movement, which were developed separately in the 20th century.
However, religion also affects political decisions in many western countries.
''re'' (again) + ''ligare'' or "to reconnect", which was made prominent by St. Augustine, following the interpretation of Lactantius.
It teaches unity of all religious philosophies and accepts all of the prophets of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam as well as additional prophets including its founder Bahá'u'lláh.
''re'' (again) with ''lego'' in the sense of "choose", "go over again" or "consider carefully".
Folk religions are often omitted as a category in surveys even in countries where they are widely practiced, e.g.
Religious practices may include rituals, sermons, commemoration or veneration (of God or deities), sacrifices, festivals, feasts, trances, initiations, funerary services, matrimonial services, meditation, prayer, music, art, dance, public service, or other aspects of human culture.
Notably, most '''Muslim-majority countries''' adopt various aspects of sharia, the Islamic law.
Frazer; the psycho-analytic approach of Sigmund Freud; and further Emile Durkheim, Karl Marx, Max Weber, Mircea Eliade, E.E.
Traditionally, faith, in addition to reason, has been considered a source of religious beliefs.
Abrahamic religions are monotheistic religions which believe they descend from Abraham.
He argued that narrowing the definition to mean the belief in a supreme deity or judgment after death or idolatry and so on, would exclude many peoples from the category of religious, and thus "has the fault of identifying religion rather with particular developments than with the deeper motive which underlies them".
"Superstition," it says, "is a deviation of religious feeling and of the practices this feeling imposes.
The true opposite of "religious" is the word "irreligious".
Throughout its long history, Japan had no concept of "religion" since there was no corresponding Japanese word, nor anything close to its meaning, but when American warships appeared off the coast of Japan in 1853 and forced the Japanese government to sign treaties demanding, among other things, freedom of religion, the country had to contend with this Western idea.
Several European leaders are atheists (e.g.
Islam is based on the Quran, one of the holy books considered by Muslims to be revealed by God, and on the teachings (hadith) of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, a major political and religious figure of the 7th century CE.
Exponents look at canon law, natural law, and state law, often in a comparative perspective.
The principal beliefs of Sikhi are faith in ''Waheguru''—represented by the phrase ''ik ōaṅkār'', meaning one God, who prevails in everything, along with a praxis in which the Sikh is enjoined to engage in social reform through the pursuit of justice for all human beings.
In many places religion has been associated with public institutions such as education, hospitals, the family, government, and political hierarchies.
Scientific theories that have an overwhelming preponderance of favorable evidence are often treated as ''de facto'' verities in general parlance, such as the theories of general relativity and natural selection to explain respectively the mechanisms of gravity and evolution.
A global poll in 2012 surveyed 57 countries and reported that 59% of the world's population identified as religious, 23% as not religious, 13% as "convinced atheists", and also a 9% decrease in identification as "religious" when compared to the 2005 average from 39 countries.
The concepts of "science" and "religion" are a recent invention: "religion" emerged in the 17th century in the midst of colonization and globalization and the Protestant Reformation, "science" emerged in the 19th century in the midst of attempts to narrowly define those who studied nature, and the phrase "religion and science" emerged in the 19th century due to the reification of both concepts.
It has been banned in India.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that superstition "in some sense represents a perverse excess of religion" (para.
Ancient greek historian Polybius described ''superstition'' in Ancient Rome as an ''instrumentum regni'', an instrument of maintaining the cohesion of the Empire.
It seems that the key to long-term success – and many movements come and go with little long-term effect – has relatively little to do with the prophets, who appear with surprising regularity, but more to do with the development of a group of supporters who are able to institutionalize the movement."
In the ancient and medieval world, the etymological Latin roots of both science (''scientia'') and religion (''religio'') were understood as inner qualities of the individual or virtues, never as doctrines, practices, or actual sources of knowledge.
The first major dialogue was the Parliament of the World's Religions at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair, which affirmed "universal values" and recognition of the diversity of practices among different cultures.
Survey research suggests that believers do tend to hold different views than non-believers on a variety of social, ethical and moral questions.
* Australian Aboriginal religions.
It develops theories of the world which best fit physically observed evidence.
Edward Burnett Tylor defined religion in 1871 as "the belief in spiritual beings".
''Religion'' (from O.Fr.
Some religions focus on the subjective experience of the religious individual, while others consider the activities of the religious community to be most important.
* Protestantism, separated from the Catholic Church in the 16th-century Reformation and is split into many denominations.
Traditionally, faith, in addition to reason, has been considered a source of religious beliefs.
Others reject the distinction, pointing out that all religious practices, whatever their philosophical origin, are ethnic because they come from a particular culture.
The interplay between faith and reason, and their use as actual or perceived support for religious beliefs, have been a subject of interest to philosophers and theologians.
The modern concept of "religion" as an abstraction which entails distinct sets of beliefs or doctrines is a recent invention in the English language since such usage began with texts from the 17th century due to the splitting of Christendom during the Protestant Reformation and more prevalent  colonization or globalization in the age of exploration which involved contact with numerous foreign and indigenous cultures with non-European languages.
* Ahmadiyya adherents believe that the awaited Imam Mahdi and the Promised Messiah has arrived, believed to be Mirza Ghulam Ahmad by Ahmadis.
Studies have focused on secularization.
By the term "divine" James meant "any object that is god''like'', whether it be a concrete deity or not" to which the individual feels impelled to respond with solemnity and gravity.
The sharia thus affects up to 23% of the global population, or 1.57&nbsp;billion people who are Muslims.
These are religions that are closely associated with a particular group of people, ethnicity or tribe; they often have no formal creeds or sacred texts.
Richard Dawkins) do not necessarily disturb its adherents.
* Latter Day Saint movement, founded by Joseph Smith in the late 1820s.
Buddhism was founded by Siddhattha Gotama in the 6th century BCE.
''religio'') "respect for what is sacred, reverence for the gods", "obligation, the bond between man and the gods") is derived from the Latin ''religiō'', the ultimate origins of which are obscure.
The word ''religion'' is sometimes used interchangeably with ''faith'' or ''set of duties''; however, in the words of Émile Durkheim, religion differs from private belief in that it is "something eminently social".
Jains are found mostly in India.
All scientific knowledge is subject to later refinement, or even rejection, in the face of additional evidence.
Furthermore, religious models, understanding, and metaphors are also revisable, as are scientific models.
Greek and Roman pagans, who saw their relations with the gods in political and social terms, scorned the man who constantly trembled with fear at the thought of the gods (''deisidaimonia''), as a slave might fear a cruel and capricious master.
The results suggested "that it may not be appropriate to generalize findings about the relationship between spirituality/religiosity and health from one form of spirituality/religiosity to another, across denominations, or to assume effects are uniform for men and women.
Religion does not have a method per se partly because religions emerge through time from diverse cultures and it is an attempt to find meaning in the world, and to explain humanity's place in it and relationship to it and to any posited entities.
One of its central concepts is "halakha", meaning the "walk" or "path" sometimes translated as "law", which guides religious practice and belief and many aspects of daily life.
Michael Stausberg gives an overview of contemporary theories of religion, including cognitive and biological approaches.
Even for people who were nonreligious, those who said they attended religious services in the past week exhibited more generous behaviors.
African traditional religion encompasses the traditional religious beliefs of people in Africa.
Smaller regional Abrahamic groups also exist, including Samaritanism (primarily in Israel and the West Bank), the Rastafari movement (primarily in Jamaica), and Druze (primarily in Syria and Lebanon).
* Jehovah's Witnesses, founded in the late 1870s by Charles Taze Russell.
The Torah is its foundational text, and is part of the larger text known as the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible.
There is no precise equivalent of "religion" in Hebrew, and Judaism does not distinguish clearly between religious, national, racial, or ethnic identities.
Done by some (but not all) religions, animal sacrifice is the ritual killing and offering of an animal to appease or maintain favour with a deity.
For instance, India is still one of the most religious countries and religion still has a strong impact on politics, given that Hindu nationalists have been targeting minorities like the Muslims and the Christians, who historically belonged to the lower castes.
The largest Jewish religious movements are Orthodox Judaism (Haredi Judaism and Modern Orthodox Judaism), Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism.
Christian, Jewish, and Muslim) religious teachings, do not by definition mean the opposite of "religious".
According to the same study it was found that adherents under the classification Irreligion or other religions hold about 34.8% of the total global wealth.
While religion is difficult to define, one standard model of religion, used in religious studies courses, was proposed by Clifford Geertz, who simply called it a "cultural system".
According to a study from 2015, Christians hold the largest amount of wealth (55% of the total world wealth), followed by Muslims (5.8%), Hindus (3.3%) and Jewish (1.1%).
For example, the Sanskrit word dharma, sometimes translated as "religion", also means law.
Moreover, religious individuals are more likely than non-religious individuals to volunteer for school and youth programs (36% vs. 15%), a neighborhood or civic group (26% vs. 13%), and for health care (21% vs. 13%).
Some religions place an emphasis on belief, while others emphasize practice.
Conceptually and in principle, morality and a religious value system are two distinct kinds of value systems or action guides."
A comprehensive study by Harvard University professor Robert Putnam found that religious people are more charitable than their irreligious counterparts.
But some religions may include superstitions or make use of magical thinking.
The study of law and religion is a relatively new field, with several thousand scholars involved in law schools, and academic departments including political science, religion, and history since 1980.
Kurdish religions include the traditional beliefs of the Yazidi, Alevi, and Ahl-e Haqq.
Sikhism is a monotheistic religion founded on the teachings of Guru Nanak and ten successive Sikh gurus in 15th century Punjab.
He also argued that the belief in spiritual beings exists in all known societies.
A 2007 study by the The Barna Group found that "active-faith" individuals (those who had attended a church service in the past week) reported that they had given on average $1,500 in 2006, while "no-faith" individuals reported that they had given on average $200.
'''Secularization''' is the transformation of a society from close identification with religious values and institutions toward nonreligious values and secular institutions.
Matthew 23:16-22" (para.
Religions may contain symbolic stories, which are sometimes said by followers to be true, that have the side purpose of explaining the origin of life, the Universe, and other things.
There are also smaller groups, including:
At the same time, while 23% of U.S. adults are religiously unaffiliated, only one member of Congress (Kyrsten Sinema, D-Arizona), or 0.2% of that body, claims no religious affiliation.
They were also more likely to report that they were registered to vote, that they volunteered, that they personally helped someone who was homeless, and to describe themselves as "active in the community."
The development of religion has taken different forms in different cultures.
Hinduism is not a monolithic religion but a religious category containing dozens of separate philosophies amalgamated as Sanātana Dharma, which is the name by which Hinduism has been known throughout history by its followers.
These include the Triple Jems of Jainism, Judaism's Halacha, Islam's Sharia, Catholicism's Canon Law, Buddhism's Eightfold Path, and Zoroastrianism's "good thoughts, good words, and good deeds" concept, among others.
Though the religiously unaffiliated, including atheism (the rejection of belief in the existence of deities) and agnosticism (the belief that the truth of certain claims – especially metaphysical and religious claims such as whether God, the divine or the supernatural exist – are unknown and perhaps unknowable), have grown globally, many of the unaffiliated still have various religious beliefs.
By contrast, countries such as China or Japan are largely secular and thus religion has a much smaller impact on politics.
Judaism is the oldest Abrahamic religion, originating in the people of ancient Israel and Judea.
According to ''The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Ethics'', religion and morality "are to be defined differently and have no definitional connections with each other.
A critique of Geertz's model by Talal Asad categorized religion as "an anthropological category".
Some people follow multiple religions or multiple religious principles at the same time, regardless of whether or not the religious principles they follow traditionally allow for syncretism.
Zoroastrians worship the creator Ahura Mazda.
It was in the 19th century that the terms "Buddhism", "Hinduism", "Taoism", and "Confucianism" first emerged.
What is called ancient religion today, they would have only called "law".
Some scientific studies show that the degree of religiosity is generally found to be associated with higher ethical attitudes — for example, surveys suggesting a positive connection between faith and altruism.
Hinduism is a synecdoche describing the similar philosophies of Vaishnavism, Shaivism, and related groups practiced or founded in the Indian subcontinent.
The practices of a religion may include rituals, sermons, commemoration or veneration (of a deity, gods, or goddesses), sacrifices, festivals, feasts, trances, initiations, funerary services, matrimonial services, meditation, prayer, music, art, dance, public service, or other aspects of human culture.
The study of religion encompasses a wide variety of academic disciplines, including theology, comparative religion and social scientific studies.
But from a mythological outlook, whether or not the event actually occurred is unimportant.
In sociology, however, the term ''myth'' has a non-pejorative meaning.
Common topics of interest include marriage and the family and human rights.
* Shia Islam is the second largest denomination of Islam and its adherents believe that Ali succeeded Muhammad and further places emphasis on Muhammad's family.
For instance, same-sex marriage and abortion were illegal in many European countries until recently, following Christian (usually Catholic) doctrine.
In '''Asia''', the role of religion differs widely between countries.
The 20th century has been especially fruitful in use of interfaith dialogue as a means of solving ethnic, political, or even religious conflict, with Christian–Jewish reconciliation representing a complete reverse in the attitudes of many Christian communities towards Jews.
Judaism includes a wide corpus of texts, practices, theological positions, and forms of organization.
Wahhabism is the dominant Muslim schools of thought in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Religions have sacred histories, narratives, and  mythologies which may be preserved in sacred scriptures, and symbols and holy places, that aim to explain the meaning of life, the origin of life, or the Universe.
Zoroastrianism is based on the teachings of prophet Zoroaster in the 6th century BC.
Jainism, taught primarily by Parsva (9th century BCE) and Mahavira (6th century BCE), is an ancient Indian religion that prescribes a path of non-violence for all forms of living beings in this world.
Religious individuals are also more likely to volunteer time, donate blood, and give back money when accidentally given too much change.
Religion is the substance, the ground, and the depth of man's spiritual life."
Outside of Christianity, scholars have looked at law and religion links in the Muslim Middle East and pagan Rome.
Similarly, for the theologian Paul Tillich, faith is "the state of being ultimately concerned", which "is itself religion.
There are an estimated 10,000 distinct religions worldwide.
On average, women are "more religious" than men.
Christians make up 92% of members of the US Congress, compared with 71% of the general public (as of 2014).
Richard Niebuhr's (1894-1962) five-fold classification of the relationship between Christ and culture, however, indicates that religion and culture can be seen as two separate systems, though not without some interplay.
The term secularization is also used in the context of the lifting of the monastic restrictions from a member of the clergy.
Modern scholars such as Tom Harpur and Joseph Campbell favor the derivation from '''' "bind, connect", probably from a prefixed '''', i.e.
Among the main proponents of this theory of religion are Daniel Dubuisson, Timothy Fitzgerald,  Talal Asad, and Jason Ānanda Josephson.
* Mahayana Buddhism (or the "Great Vehicle") under which are a multitude of doctrines that became prominent in China and are still relevant in Vietnam, Korea, Japan and to a lesser extent in Europe and the United States.
Most Christians can describe their faith with the Nicene Creed.
It was in the 19th century that the terms "Buddhism", "Hinduism", "Taoism", and "Confucianism" first emerged.
It is supplemented by oral tradition, set down in written form in later texts such as the Midrash and the Talmud.
Irreligion describes an absence of any religion; antireligion describes an active opposition or aversion toward religions in general.
Religions have sacred histories and narratives, which may be preserved in sacred scriptures, and symbols and holy places, that aim mostly to give a meaning to life.
The list of still-active religious movements given here is an attempt to summarize the most important regional and philosophical influences on local communities, but it is by no means a complete description of every religious community, nor does it explain the most important elements of individual religiousness.
* Restorationism, the belief that Christianity should be restored (as opposed to reformed) along the lines of what is known about the apostolic early church.
According to the philologist Max Müller in the 19th century, the root of the English word "religion", the Latin ''religio'', was originally used to mean only "reverence for God or the gods, careful pondering of divine things, piety" (which Cicero further derived to mean "diligence").
Religion has a significant impact on the political system in many countries.
In particular the issue of wearing religious symbols in public, such as headscarves that are banned in French schools, have received scholarly attention in the context of human rights and feminism.
* Eastern Christianity, which include Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Church of the East.
The Jewish people were scattered after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE.
About 84% of the world's population is affiliated with one of the five largest religions, namely Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism or forms of folk religion.
In the Quran, the Arabic word ''din'' is often translated as "religion" in modern translations, but up to the mid-1600s translators expressed ''din'' as "law".
France’s president Francois Hollande or Greece's prime minister Alexis Tsipras).
In his book ''The Varieties of Religious Experience'', the psychologist William James defined religion as "the feelings, acts, and experiences of individual men in their solitude, so far as they apprehend themselves to stand in relation to whatever they may consider the divine".
Religious belief appears to be the strongest predictor of charitable giving.
Joseph Campbell remarked, "Mythology is often thought of as ''other people's'' religions, and religion can be defined as mis-interpreted mythology."
Some scholars classify religions as either ''universal religions'' that seek worldwide acceptance and actively look for new converts, or ''ethnic religions'' that are identified with a particular ethnic group and do not seek converts.
