The Reformation spread peacefully throughout the country (giving rise to the Polish Brethren), while living conditions improved, cities grew, and exports of agricultural products enriched the population, especially the nobility (''szlachta'') who gained dominance in the new political system of Golden Liberty.
The Renaissance first began in Florence, in the 14th century.
The Renaissance was a cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern period.
The Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818–1897) in his ''The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy'' (1860), by contrast, defined the Renaissance as the period between Giotto and Michelangelo in Italy, that is, the 14th to mid-16th centuries.
Artists depended entirely on patrons while the patrons needed money to foster artistic talent.
Renaissance scholars employed the humanist method in study, and searched for realism and human emotion in art.
The multi-national Polish state experienced a substantial period of cultural growth thanks in part to a century without major wars – aside from conflicts in the sparsely populated eastern and southern borderlands.
In architecture, the huge profits of the spice trade financed a sumptuous composite style in the first decades of the 16th century, the Manueline, incorporating maritime elements.
The purpose of humanism was to create a universal man whose person combined intellectual and physical excellence and who was capable of functioning honorably in virtually any situation.
Many of its cities stood among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings; it seems likely that the classical nature of the Renaissance was linked to its origin in the Roman Empire's heartland.
In the early Protestant areas of the country humanism became closely linked to the turmoil of the Protestant Reformation, and the art and writing of the German Renaissance frequently reflected this dispute.
Another technology, that according to one hypothesis originally was brought from Europe by the Italians, resulted in the development of vodka, the national beverage of Russia.
While the schism was resolved by the Council of Constance (1414), a resulting reform movement known as Conciliarism sought to limit the power of the pope.
András Hess set up a printing press in Buda in 1472.
Works by Neri di Bicci, Botticelli, da Vinci and Filippino Lippi had been commissioned additionally by the convent di San Donato agli Scopeti of the Augustinians order in Florence.
In the revival of neo-Platonism Renaissance humanists did not reject Christianity; quite the contrary, many of the Renaissance's greatest works were devoted to it, and the Church patronized many works of Renaissance art.
The most important humanists living in Matthias' court were Antonio Bonfini and the famous Hungarian poet Janus Pannonius.
Some historians have postulated that Florence was the birthplace of the Renaissance as a result of luck, i.e.
Although Italian Renaissance had a modest impact in Portuguese arts, Portugal was influential in broadening the European worldview, stimulating humanist inquiry.
Jules Michelet defined the 16th-century Renaissance in France as a period in Europe's cultural history that represented a break from the Middle Ages, creating a modern understanding of humanity and its place in the world.
The relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement.
The intense international exchange produced several cosmopolitan humanist scholars, including Francisco de Holanda, André de Resende and Damião de Góis, a friend of Erasmus who wrote with rare independence on the reign of King Manuel I. Diogo and André de Gouveia made relevant teaching reforms via France.
Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337) is credited with first treating a painting as a window into space, but it was not until the demonstrations of architect Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) and the subsequent writings of Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) that perspective was formalized as an artistic technique.
Da Vinci set up controlled experiments in water flow, medical dissection, and systematic study of movement and aerodynamics, and he devised principles of research method that led Fritjof Capra to classify him as the "father of modern science".
Children were hit the hardest because many diseases such as typhus and syphilis target the immune system and left young children without a fighting chance.
Significantly, though, the artists, writers, and patrons involved in the cultural movements in question believed they were living in a new era that was a clean break from the Middle Ages.
Emperor Maximilian I of Habsburg (ruling 1493–1519) was the first truly Renaissance monarch of the Holy Roman Empire.
Later Spanish Renaissance tended towards religious themes and mysticism, with poets such as fray Luis de León, Teresa of Ávila and John of the Cross, and treated issues related to the exploration of the New World, with chroniclers and writers such as Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Bartolomé de las Casas, giving rise to a body of work, now known as Spanish Renaissance literature.
Foreign news and products in the Portuguese factory in Antwerp attracted the interest of Thomas More and Dürer to the wider world.
He asserted that it spanned the period from Columbus to Copernicus to Galileo; that is, from the end of the 15th century to the middle of the 17th century.
Italian Renaissance artists were among the first to paint secular scenes, breaking away from the purely religious art of medieval painters.
Even cities and states beyond central Italy, such as the Republic of Florence at this time, were also notable for their merchant Republics, especially the Republic of Venice.
By the early 15th century, the bulk of such Latin literature had been recovered; the Greek phase of Renaissance humanism was under way, as Western European scholars turned to recovering ancient Greek literary, historical, oratorical and theological texts.
However, only in the 19th century did the French word ''Renaissance'' achieve popularity in describing the self-conscious cultural movement based on revival of Roman models that began in the late-13th century.
Despite a significant number of deaths among members of the ruling classes, the government of Florence continued to function during this period.
The Renaissance was certainly underway before Lorenzo de' Medici came to power – indeed, before the Medici family itself achieved hegemony in Florentine society.
In the 17th century printing became widespread, and woodcuts became especially popular.
Corvinus's library is part of UNESCO World Heritage.
The Roman orders types of columns are used: Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Composite.
In all, the Renaissance could be viewed as an attempt by intellectuals to study and improve the secular and worldly, both through the revival of ideas from antiquity, and through novel approaches to thought.
Various theories have been proposed to account for its origins and characteristics, focusing on a variety of factors including the social and civic peculiarities of Florence at the time: its political structure; the patronage of its dominant family, the Medici; and the migration of Greek scholars and texts to Italy following the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks.
1278) imitated classical forms by portraying scenes from the Bible.
The Renaissance style came directly from Italy during the Quattrocento to Hungary first in the Central European region, thanks to the development of early Hungarian-Italian relationships – not only in dynastic connections, but also in cultural, humanistic and commercial relations – growing in strength from the 14th century.
Italy was particularly badly hit by the plague, and it has been speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their lives on Earth, rather than on spirituality and the afterlife.
Many argue that the ideas characterizing the Renaissance had their origin in late 13th-century Florence, in particular with the writings of Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) and Petrarch (1304–1374), as well as the paintings of Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337).
Travel literature especially flourished: João de Barros, Castanheda, António Galvão, Gaspar Correia, Duarte Barbosa, and Fernão Mendes Pinto, among others, described new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press.
In architecture, Filippo Brunelleschi, the most inventive and gifted designer of all time, was foremost in studying the remains of ancient classical buildings.
Other writers, such as Jorge Manrique, Fernando de Rojas, Juan del Encina, Juan Boscán Almogáver and Garcilaso de la Vega, kept a close resemblance to the Italian canon.
Well after the first artistic return to classicism had been exemplified in the sculpture of Nicola Pisano, Florentine painters led by Masaccio strove to portray the human form realistically, developing techniques to render perspective and light more naturally.
The Renaissance has a long and complex historiography, and, in line with general scepticism of discrete periodizations, there has been much debate among historians reacting to the 19th-century glorification of the "Renaissance" and individual culture heroes as "Renaissance men", questioning the usefulness of ''Renaissance'' as a term and as a historical delineation.
1450) and early Renaissance artists such as the painters Jan van Eyck (1395–1441) and Hieronymus Bosch (1450–1516) and the composers Johannes Ockeghem (1410–1497), Jacob Obrecht (1457–1505) and Josquin des Prez (1455–1521) predated the influence from Italy.
The Black Death was a pandemic that affected all of Europe in the ways described, not only Italy.
Though she became famous and infamous for her role in France's religious wars, she made a direct contribution in bringing arts, sciences and music (including the origins of ballet) to the French court from her native Florence.
Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Spain and Sicily, which became important centers for this transmission of ideas.
Significant scientific advances were made during this time by Galileo Galilei, Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler.
Alberti was one of the first to use the arch on a monumental.
Later, the works of Pieter Bruegel influenced artists to paint scenes of daily life rather than religious or classical themes.
In literature, Sá de Miranda introduced Italian forms of verse.
Above all, humanists asserted "the genius of man&nbsp;... the unique and extraordinary ability of the human mind".
This work of translation from Islamic culture, though largely unplanned and disorganized, constituted one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history.
In the Netherlands, a particularly vibrant artistic culture developed.
The paintings of the Italian Renaissance differed from those of the Northern Renaissance.
Holding both Church and Empire at bay, these city republics were devoted to notions of liberty.
Culture in the Netherlands at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance through trade via Bruges, which made Flanders wealthy.
Flavio Biondo used a similar framework in ''Decades of History from the Deterioration of the Roman Empire'' (1439–1453).
After joining the Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500, Amerigo Vespucci coined the term New World, in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici.
French historian Jules Michelet (1798–1874) defined "The Renaissance" in his 1855 work ''Histoire de France'' as an entire historical period, whereas previously it had been used in a more limited sense.
It is in their new focus on literary and historical texts that Renaissance scholars differed so markedly from the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century, who had focused on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural sciences, philosophy and mathematics, rather than on such cultural texts.
He built 12 churches for Ivan III, including the Cathedral of the Archangel, a building remarkable for the successful blending of Russian tradition, Orthodox requirements and Renaissance style.
As the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation clashed, the Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristotelean natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine).
It was also during the Northern Renaissance that Flemish brothers Hubert and Jan van Eyck perfected the oil painting technique, which enabled artists to produce strong colors on a hard surface that could survive for centuries.
Both Michelet and Burckhardt were keen to describe the progress made in the Renaissance towards the modern age.
This legacy was continued by a number of expatriate Greek scholars, from Basilios Bessarion to Leo Allatius.
Another building demonstrating this style is the church of St. Andrew in Mantua, built by Alberti.
In 1475 the Bolognese architect Aristotele Fioravanti came to rebuild the Cathedral of the Dormition in the Moscow Kremlin, which had been damaged in an earthquake.
Many have emphasized the role played by the Medici, a banking family and later ducal ruling house, in patronizing and stimulating the arts.
Renaissance humanism flourished in the early 16th century, with influential writers such as philosopher Juan Luis Vives, grammarian Antonio de Nebrija and natural historian Pedro de Mexía.
The culmination of the Netherlandish school was in the music of the Italian composer Palestrina.
The invention of the printing press by German printer Johannes Gutenberg allowed the rapid transmission of these new ideas.
The late Middle Ages was a period of political intrigue surrounding the Papacy, culminating in the Western Schism, in which three men simultaneously claimed to be true Bishop of Rome.
After Italy, Hungary was the first European country where the renaissance appeared.
As the pioneer headquarters of European exploration, Lisbon flourished in the late 15th century, attracting experts who made several breakthroughs in mathematics, astronomy and naval technology, including Pedro Nunes, João de Castro, Abraham Zacuto and Martin Behaim.
The development of perspective was part of a wider trend towards realism in the arts.
The historian Randolph Starn, of the University of California Berkeley, stated in 1998:
The humanists believed that it is important to transcend to the afterlife with a perfect mind and body, which could be attained with education.
Scholars have noted several features unique to Florentine cultural life that may have caused such a cultural movement.
Finally, Joan Kelly argued that the Renaissance led to greater gender dichotomy, lessening the agency women had had during the Middle Ages.
Arches, semi-circular or (in the Mannerist style) segmental, are often used in arcades, supported on piers or columns with capitals.
Pope Paul III came to the papal throne (1534–1549) after the sack of Rome in 1527, with uncertainties prevalent in the Catholic Church following the Protestant Reformation.
However, this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in Italy in the 14th century.
An early Italian humanist who came to Poland in the mid-15th century was Filippo Buonaccorsi.
The small banquet hall of the Russian Tsars, called the Palace of Facets because of its facetted upper story, is the work of two Italians, Marco Ruffo and Pietro Solario, and shows a more Italian style.
Humanist education was based on the programme of 'Studia Humanitatis', the study of five humanities: poetry, grammar, history, moral philosophy and rhetoric.
In 1489, Bartolomeo della Fonte of Florence wrote that Lorenzo de' Medici founded his own Greek-Latin library encouraged by the example of the Hungarian king.
A number of technologies from the European Renaissance period were adopted by Russia rather early and subsequently perfected to become a part of a strong domestic tradition.
The works of Ptolemy (in geography) and Galen (in medicine) were found to not always match everyday observations.
The rediscovery of ancient texts and the invention of printing democratized learning and allowed a faster propagation of ideas.
Venice was Europe's gateway to trade with the East, and a producer of fine glass, while Florence was a capital of textiles.
The Polish Renaissance architecture has three periods of development.
More recently, some historians have been much less keen to define the Renaissance as a historical age, or even as a coherent cultural movement.
Ruled by the Jagiellon dynasty, the Kingdom of Poland (from 1569 known as the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth) actively participated in the broad European Renaissance.
The Renaissance in Northern Europe has been termed the "Northern Renaissance".
The new Italian trend combined with existing national traditions to create a particular local Renaissance art.
This new engagement with Greek Christian works, and particularly the return to the original Greek of the New Testament promoted by humanists Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus, would help pave the way for the Protestant Reformation.
Although historians have sometimes struggled to define humanism precisely, most have settled on "a middle of the road definition... the movement to recover, interpret, and assimilate the language, literature, learning and values of ancient Greece and Rome".
His major feat of engineering was building the dome of the Florence Cathedral.
The plague was carried by fleas on sailing vessels returning from the ports of Asia, spreading quickly due to lack of proper sanitation: the population of England, then about 4.2 million, lost 1.4 million people to the bubonic plague.
Large-scale building schemes provided ample and long term work for the artists, for example, the building of the Friss (New) Castle in Buda, the castles of Visegrád, Tata and Várpalota.
In October 1517 Luther published the 95 Theses, challenging papal authority and criticizing its perceived corruption, particularly with regard to instances of sold indulgences.
The outstanding architectural work of the High Renaissance was the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica, combining the skills of Bramante, Michelangelo, Raphael, Sangallo and Maderno.
The term first appears in Latin in 1469 as ''media tempestas'' (middle times).
The Genoese likely developed this beverage with the help of the alchemists of Provence, who used an Arab-invented distillation apparatus to convert grape must into alcohol.
Demand for music as entertainment and as an activity for educated amateurs increased with the emergence of a bourgeois class.
From this changing society emerged a common, unifying musical language, in particular the polyphonic style of the Franco-Flemish school.
By the 15th century, writers, artists, and architects in Italy were well aware of the transformations that were taking place and were using phrases such as ''modi antichi'' (in the antique manner) or ''alle romana et alla antica'' (in the manner of the Romans and the ancients) to describe their work.
Others such as Roger Osborne have come to consider the Italian Renaissance as a repository of the myths and ideals of western history in general, and instead of rebirth of ancient ideas as a period of great innovation.
However, the gothic style and medieval scholastic philosophy remained exclusively until the turn of the 16th century.
Historian and political philosopher Quentin Skinner points out that Otto of Freising (c. 1114–1158), a German bishop visiting north Italy during the 12th century, noticed a widespread new form of political and social organization, observing that Italy appeared to have exited from Feudalism so that its society was based on merchants and commerce.
However, a subtle shift took place in the way that intellectuals approached religion that was reflected in many other areas of cultural life.
After the marriage in 1476 of King Matthias to Beatrice of Naples, Buda became one of the most important artistic centres of the Renaissance north of the Alps.
Skinner reports that there were many defences of liberty such as the Matteo Palmieri (1406–1475) celebration of Florentine genius not only in art, sculpture and architecture, but "the remarkable efflorescence of moral, social and political philosophy that occurred in Florence at the same time".
Perhaps the most succinct expression of his perspective on humanism is in a 1465 poetic work ''La città di vita'', but an earlier work, ''Della vita civile'' (On Civic Life), is more wide-ranging.
Burckhardt likened the change to a veil being removed from man's eyes, allowing him to see clearly.
Bruni's first two periods were based on those of Petrarch, but he added a third period because he believed that Italy was no longer in a state of decline.
The greatest monument of this style in the territory of former Duchy of Pomerania is Ducal Castle in Szczecin.
This movement to reintegrate the regular study of Greek literary, historical, oratorical and theological texts back into the Western European curriculum is usually dated to the 1396 invitation from Coluccio Salutati to the Byzantine diplomat and scholar Manuel Chrysoloras (c.1355–1415) to teach Greek in Florence.
Dissemination of chansons, motets, and masses throughout Europe coincided with the unification of polyphonic practice into the fluid style that culminated in the second half of the sixteenth century in the work of composers such as Palestrina, Lassus, Victoria and William Byrd.
Other important figures of Hungarian Renaissance: Bálint Balassi (poet), Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos (poet), Bálint Bakfark (composer and lutenist) and Master MS (fresco painter).
The Italian artist and critic Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574) first used the term ''rinascita'' retrospectively in his book ''The Lives of the Artists'' (published 1550).
Applied innovation extended to commerce.
The dialogues include ideas about how children develop mentally and physically, how citizens can conduct themselves morally, how citizens and states can ensure probity in public life, and an important debate on the difference between that which is pragmatically useful and that which is honest.
The wealth such business brought to Italy meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned and individuals had more leisure time for study.
The Polish Renaissance lasted from the late 15th to the late 16th century and was the Golden Age of Polish culture.
Other notable artists include Sandro Botticelli, working for the Medici in Florence, Donatello, another Florentine, and Titian in Venice, among others.
Plagues were easily spread by lice, unsanitary drinking water, armies, or by poor sanitation.
It has also been argued that the Black Death prompted a new wave of piety, manifested in the sponsorship of religious works of art.
Moreover, Michelet distinguished between what he called, "the bizarre and monstrous" quality of the Middle Ages and the democratic values that he, as a vocal Republican, chose to see in its character.
During the Renaissance, money and art went hand in hand.
In his book ''The Waning of the Middle Ages'', he argued that the Renaissance was a period of decline from the High Middle Ages, destroying much that was important.
Vasari divides the age into three phases: the first phase contains Cimabue, Giotto, and Arnolfo di Cambio; the second phase contains Masaccio, Brunelleschi, and Donatello; the third centers on Leonardo da Vinci and culminates with Michelangelo.
Nicola Pisano (c. 1220–c.
The work of Hugo van der Goes and Jan van Eyck was particularly influential on the development of painting in Italy, both technically with the introduction of oil paint and canvas, and stylistically in terms of naturalism in representation (see ''Renaissance in the Netherlands'').
Humanist historians argued that contemporary scholarship restored direct links to the classical period, thus bypassing the Medieval period, which they then named for the first time the "Middle Ages".
Although the invention of metal movable type sped the dissemination of ideas from the later 15th century, the changes of the Renaissance were not uniformly experienced across Europe.
This new thinking became manifest in art, architecture, politics, science and literature.
In science, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius led the way; in cartography, Gerardus Mercator's map assisted explorers and navigators.
His library was second only in size to the Vatican Library.
Early and influential proponents of these ideas included Copernicus, Galileo, and Francis Bacon.
Miguel de Cervantes's masterpiece Don Quixote is credited as the first Western novel.
Political philosophers, most famously Niccolò Machiavelli, sought to describe political life as it really was, that is to understand it rationally.
Some writers date the Renaissance quite precisely; one proposed starting point is 1401, when the rival geniuses Lorenzo Ghiberti and Filippo Brunelleschi competed for the contract to build the bronze doors for the Baptistery of the Florence Cathedral (Ghiberti won).
That led to the development of a special form of folk art known as lubok printing, which persisted in Russia well into the 19th century.
This ideology was referred to as the ''uomo universale'', an ancient Greco-Roman ideal.
Broadly speaking, this began in the 14th century with a Latin phase, when Renaissance scholars such as Petrarch, Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406), Niccolò de' Niccoli (1364–1437) and Poggio Bracciolini (1380–1459) scoured the libraries of Europe in search of works by such Latin authors as Cicero, Lucretius, Livy and Seneca.
In Sigismund's court there were patrons such as Pipo Spano, a descendant of the Scolari family of Florence, who invited Manetto Ammanatini and Masolino da Pannicale to Hungary.
One of the greatest achievements of Renaissance scholars was to bring this entire class of Greek cultural works back into Western Europe for the first time since late antiquity.
Science and art were intermingled in the early Renaissance, with polymath artists such as Leonardo da Vinci making observational drawings of anatomy and nature.
(However, the Vatican Library mainly contained Bibles and religious materials.)
The word ''Renaissance'', literally meaning "Rebirth" in French, first appeared in English in the 1830s.
Accordingly, several theories have been put forward to explain its origins.
Yet it remains much debated why the Renaissance began in Italy, and why it began when it did.
Another important development was in the ''process'' for discovery, the scientific method, focusing on empirical evidence and the importance of mathematics, while discarding Aristotelian science.
Gradually the new type of secular portrait painting appeared, called ''parsúna'' (from "persona" – person), which was transitional style between abstract iconographics and real paintings.
The survivors of the plague found not only that the prices of food were cheaper but also that lands were more abundant, and many of them inherited property from their dead relatives.
In 1505, an Italian known in Russia as Aleviz Novyi or Aleviz Fryazin arrived in Moscow.
Italy did not exist as a political entity in the early modern period.
The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil.
The art historian Erwin Panofsky observed of this resistance to the concept of "Renaissance":
His ''Annunciation'', from the Baptistry at Pisa, demonstrates that classical models influenced Italian art before the Renaissance took root as a literary movement
In the Kingdom of Castile, the early Renaissance was heavily influenced by the Italian humanism, starting with writers and poets such as the Marquis of Santillana, who introduced the new Italian poetry to Spain in the early 15th century.
Although the papacy eventually emerged supreme in ecclesiastical matters by the Fifth Council of the Lateran (1511), it was dogged by continued accusations of corruption, most famously in the person of Pope Alexander VI, who was accused variously of simony, nepotism and fathering four children (most of whom were married off, presumably for the consolidation of power) while a cardinal.
In the 15th century, the Renaissance spread rapidly from its birthplace in Florence to the rest of Italy and soon to the rest of Europe.
Bernardim Ribeiro developed pastoral romance, plays by Gil Vicente fused it with popular culture, reporting the changing times, and Luís de Camões inscribed the Portuguese feats overseas in the epic poem Os Lusíadas.
By the 17th century the influence of Renaissance painting resulted in Russian icons becoming slightly more realistic, while still following most of the old icon painting canons, as seen in the works of Bogdan Saltanov, Simon Ushakov, Gury Nikitin, Karp Zolotaryov and other Russian artists of the era.
Some scholars, such as Rodney Stark, play down the Renaissance in favor of the earlier innovations of the Italian city-states in the High Middle Ages, which married responsive government, Christianity and the birth of capitalism.
In England, the sixteenth century marked the beginning of the English Renaissance with the work of writers William Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, Sir Thomas More, Francis Bacon, Sir Philip Sidney, as well as great artists, architects (such as Inigo Jones who introduced Italianate architecture to England), and composers such as Thomas Tallis, John Taverner, and William Byrd.
Children in city dwellings were more affected by the spread of disease than the children of the wealthy.
The new ideals of humanism, although more secular in some aspects, developed against a Christian backdrop, especially in the Northern Renaissance.
Some observers have called into question whether the Renaissance was a cultural "advance" from the Middle Ages, instead seeing it as a period of pessimism and nostalgia for classical antiquity, while social and economic historians, especially of the ''longue durée'', have instead focused on the continuity between the two eras, which are linked, as Panofsky observed, "by a thousand ties".
Meanwhile, George Sarton and Lynn Thorndike have both argued that scientific progress was perhaps less original than has traditionally been supposed.
The intellectual basis of the Renaissance was its own invented version of humanism, derived from the rediscovery of classical Greek philosophy, such as that of Protagoras, who said that "Man is the measure of all things."
Some view this as a "scientific revolution", heralding the beginning of the modern age, others as an acceleration of a continuous process stretching from the ancient world to the present day.
Robert S. Lopez has contended that it was a period of deep economic recession.
Political philosophers such as Niccolò Machiavelli and Thomas More revived the ideas of Greek and Roman thinkers and applied them in critiques of contemporary government.
Beginning in Italy, and spreading to the rest of Europe by the 16th century, its influence was felt in literature, philosophy, art, music, politics, science, religion, and other aspects of intellectual inquiry.
The Black Death caused greater upheaval to Florence's social and political structure than later epidemics.
Johan Huizinga (1872–1945) acknowledged the existence of the Renaissance but questioned whether it was a positive change.
A factor that promoted the spread of secularism was the inability of the Church to offer assistance against the Black Death.
A suitable environment had developed to question scientific doctrine.
Painters developed other techniques, studying light, shadow, and, famously in the case of Leonardo da Vinci, human anatomy.
Leonardo Bruni was the first to use tripartite periodization in his ''History of the Florentine People'' (1442).
Wealth was brought to Italy in the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries by expanding trade into Asia and Europe.
Later, the work of Pieter Brueghel the Elder would inspire artists to depict themes of everyday life.
The new scientific method led to great contributions in the fields of astronomy, physics, biology, and anatomy.
This analysis argues that, whereas the great European states (France and Spain) were absolutist monarchies, and others were under direct Church control, the independent city republics of Italy took over the principles of capitalism invented on monastic estates and set off a vast unprecedented commercial revolution that preceded and financed the Renaissance.
Florence's population was nearly halved in the year 1347.
In the 1330s Petrarch referred to pre-Christian times as ''antiqua'' (ancient) and to the Christian period as ''nova'' (new).
Copernicus, in ''De Revolutionibus'', posited that the Earth moved around the Sun.
Apothecary Tomé Pires and physicians Garcia de Orta and Cristóvão da Costa collected and published works on plants and medicines, soon translated by Flemish pioneer botanist Carolus Clusius.
In contrast to the medieval scholastic mode, which focused on resolving contradictions between authors, humanists would study ancient texts in the original and appraise them through a combination of reasoning and empirical evidence.
