Early in the period, the modern reptiles, or crown-group reptiles, evolved and split into two main lineages: the Archosauromorpha (forebears of turtles, crocodiles, and dinosaurs) and the Lepidosauromorpha (predecessors of modern lizards and tuataras).
All squamates and turtles have a three-chambered heart consisting of two atria, one variably partitioned ventricle, and two aortas that lead to the systemic circulation.
Reptiles are generally considered less intelligent than mammals and birds.
The discoveries of synapsid-like openings (see below) in the skull roof of the skulls of several members of Parareptilia (the clade containing most of the amniotes traditionally referred to as "anapsids"), including lanthanosuchoids, millerettids, bolosaurids, some nycteroleterids, some procolophonoids and at least some mesosaurs made it more ambiguous and it's currently uncertain whether the ancestral amniote had an anapsid-like or synapsid-like skull.
Unlike amphibians, reptiles do not have an aquatic larval stage.
Such heat-sensitive pits are particularly well developed in the pit vipers, but are also found in boas and pythons.
Box turtles have also been observed to breathe while completely sealed up inside their shells.
While primitive, terrestrial reptiliomorphs still existed, the synapsid amniotes evolved the first truly terrestrial megafauna (giant animals) in the form of pelycosaurs, such as ''Edaphosaurus'' and the carnivorous ''Dimetrodon''.
Parapsida was later discarded as a group for the most part (ichthyosaurs being classified as ''incertae sedis'' or with Euryapsida).
All molecular studies have strongly upheld the placement of turtles within diapsids, most commonly as a sister group to extant archosaurs.
Modesto and Anderson reviewed the many previous definitions and proposed a modified definition, which they intended to retain most traditional content of the group while keeping it stable and monophyletic.
The reptiles as historically defined are paraphyletic, since they exclude both birds and mammals.
The cytotoxic effect of snake venom is being researched as a potential treatment for cancers.
In large reptiles, like leatherback turtles, the low surface-to-volume ratio allows this metabolically produced heat to keep the animals warmer than their environment even though they do not have a warm-blooded metabolism.
The sister group to Archosauromorpha is Lepidosauromorpha, containing lizards and tuataras, as well as their fossil relatives.
In many species the tails are of a separate and dramatically more intense color than the rest of the body so as to encourage potential predators to strike for the tail first.
All reptiles breathe using lungs.
Those four subclasses were:
The most commonly farmed species are the saltwater and Nile crocodiles.
Because the actual relationship of turtles to other reptiles was not yet well understood at this time, Gauthier's definition came to be considered inadequate.
When the turtle protracts its limbs, the pressure inside the lungs is reduced, and the turtle can suck air in.
Salt water crocodiles also use gastroliths as ballast, stabilizing them in the water or helping them to dive.
This is because they lack a specialized structure called a loop of Henle, which is present in the nephrons of birds and mammals.
Ichthyosaurs were, at times, considered to have arisen independently of the other euryapsids, and given the older name Parapsida.
In the annual Hindu festival of Nag Panchami, snakes are venerated and prayed to.
As soon as 1854, the Crystal Palace Dinosaurs were on display to the public in south London.
Today, the two groups are still commonly treated under the same heading as herptiles.
But the traditional class Reptilia is not a clade.
Most of the earlier parareptile and synapsid megafauna disappeared, being replaced by the true reptiles, particularly archosauromorphs.
There are no larval stages of development.
Most reptiles have copulatory organs, which are usually retracted or inverted and stored inside the body.
Thus avoidance is the most common form of defense in reptiles.
The size of their brain relative to their body is much less than that of mammals, the encephalization quotient being about one tenth of that of mammals, though larger reptiles can show more complex brain development.
Mammalia and Aves are, in fact, subclades within the grand clade of the Amniota.
By using temperature variations in their surroundings, or by remaining cold when they do not need to move, reptiles can save considerable amounts of energy compared to endothermic animals of the same size.
It is used in leather-wares for decorative purposes for shoes, belts and handbags, particularly crocodile skin.
Crocodiles have relatively larger brains and show a fairly complex social structure.
The eggshell (1) protects the crocodile embryo (11) and keeps it from drying out, but it is flexible to allow gas exchange.
tyrannosaurids and dromaeosaurids), crocodyliforms, and squamates (e.g.
These are the "mammal-like amniotes", or stem-mammals, that later gave rise to the true mammals.
This sudden collapse affected several large groups.
The allantois (8) is a sac that collects the metabolic waste produced by the embryo.
These pits allow the snakes to sense the body heat of birds and mammals, enabling pit vipers to hunt rodents in the dark.
Both groups remained lizard-like and relatively small and inconspicuous during the Permian.
Archosaurs developed into the well-known dinosaurs and pterosaurs, as well as the ancestors of crocodiles.
One study found that wood turtles were better than white rats at learning to navigate mazes.
Herbivorous reptiles face the same problems of mastication as herbivorous mammals but, lacking the complex teeth of mammals, many species swallow rocks and pebbles (so called gastroliths) to aid in digestion: The rocks are washed around in the stomach, helping to grind up plant matter.
Birds are more closely related to crocodilians than the latter are to the rest of extant reptiles.
Other examples include ''Westlothiana'' (for the moment considered a reptiliomorph rather than a true amniote) and ''Paleothyris'', both of similar build and presumably similar habit.
Some reptiles exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination (TDSD), in which the incubation temperature determines whether a particular egg hatches as male or female.
When caught out, snake species will adopt different defensive tactics and use a complicated set of behaviors when attacked.
Varanids, and a few other lizard species, employ buccal pumping as a complement to their normal "axial breathing".
The pareiasaurian parareptiles reached giant proportions in the late Permian, eventually disappearing at the close of the period (the turtles being possible survivors).
The degree of mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the three-chambered heart varies depending on the species and physiological state.
These were characterized by elongated hind legs and an erect pose, the early forms looking somewhat like long-legged crocodiles.
"In states of ecstasy, lords dance a serpent dance; great descending snakes adorn and support buildings from Chichen Itza to Tenochtitlan, and the Nahuatl word ''coatl'' meaning serpent or twin, forms part of primary deities such as Mixcoatl, Quetzalcoatl, and Coatlicue."
This stem-based definition is equivalent to the more common definition of Sauropsida, which Modesto and Anderson synonymized with Reptilia, since the latter is better known and more frequently used.
After the extinction of most archosaur and marine reptile lines by the end of the Cretaceous, reptile diversification continued throughout the Cenozoic.
The cobra is seen on the neck of Shiva, while Vishnu is depicted often as sleeping on a seven-headed snake or within the coils of a serpent.
They defined Reptilia as all amniotes closer to ''Lacerta agilis'' and ''Crocodylus niloticus'' than to ''Homo sapiens''.
Due to a less stable core temperature than birds and mammals, reptilian biochemistry requires enzymes capable of maintaining efficiency over a greater range of temperatures than in the case for warm-blooded animals.
Of the large marine reptiles, only sea turtles were left; and of the non-marine large reptiles, only the semi-aquatic crocodiles and broadly similar choristoderes survived the extinction, with the latter becoming extinct in the Miocene.
Mammals and birds filled the empty niches left behind by the reptilian megafauna and, while reptile diversification slowed, bird and mammal diversification took an exponential turn.
By using a series of special muscles (roughly equivalent to a diaphragm), turtles are capable of pushing their viscera up and down, resulting in effective respiration, since many of these muscles have attachment points in conjunction with their forelimbs (indeed, many of the muscles expand into the limb pockets during contraction).
When Sauropsida was used, it often had the same content or even the same definition as Reptilia.
In Christianity and Judaism, a serpent appears in Genesis to tempt Adam and Eve with the forbidden fruit from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.
The parareptiles, whose massive skull roofs had no postorbital holes, continued and flourished throughout the Permian.
The cladogram presented here illustrates the "family tree" of reptiles, and follows a simplified version of the relationships found by M.S.
These same displays are used in territorial disputes and during courtship.
The difficulty is that most turtle shells are rigid and do not allow for the type of expansion and contraction that other amniotes use to ventilate their lungs.
Most reptiles lack a secondary palate, meaning that they must hold their breath while swallowing.
Larger lizards, like the monitors, are known to exhibit complex behavior, including cooperation.
These respectively evolved from dinosaurs and from early therapsids, which were both traditionally called reptiles.
All reproductive activity occurs through the cloaca, the single exit/entrance at the base of the tail where waste is also eliminated.
* Synapsida&nbsp;– one low fenestra&nbsp;– pelycosaurs and therapsids (the 'mammal-like reptiles')
Excess salts are also excreted by nasal and lingual salt glands in some reptiles.
It was traditionally assumed that the first reptiles retained an anapsid skull inherited from their ancestors.
A series of footprints from the fossil strata of Nova Scotia dated to  show typical reptilian toes and imprints of scales.
This variation in blood flow has been hypothesized to allow more effective thermoregulation and longer diving times for aquatic species, but has not been shown to be a fitness advantage.
If absolutely necessary it may decide to attack an enemy.
Two major groups of reptile predators are birds and other reptiles, both of which have well developed color vision.
Some turtles, such as the Indian flapshell (''Lissemys punctata''), have a sheet of muscle that envelops the lungs.
Even with these adaptations, breathing is never fully accomplished without lungs.
The amnion (5) aids in osmoregulation and serves as a saltwater reservoir.
The dinosaurs also developed smaller forms, including the feather-bearing smaller theropods.
In some species of squamates, a population of females is able to produce a unisexual diploid clone of the mother.
This was not the only possible classification scheme: In the Hunterian lectures delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1863, Huxley grouped the vertebrates into mammals, sauroids, and ichthyoids (the latter containing the fishes and amphibians).
This is made possible by a muscular ridge that subdivides the ventricle during ventricular diastole and completely divides it during ventricular systole.
It has largely been abandoned by recent researchers: in particular, the anapsid condition has been found to occur so variably among unrelated groups that it is not now considered a useful distinction.
Several groups of Mesozoic marine reptiles also exhibited viviparity, such as mosasaurs, ichthyosaurs, and Sauropterygia, a group that include pachypleurosaurs and Plesiosauria.
In the shingleback skink and some species of geckos, the tail is short and broad and resemble the head, so that the predators may attack it rather than the more vulnerable front part.
Amniotes acquired new niches at a faster rate than before the collapse and at a much faster rate than primitive tetrapods.
This type of diaphragmatic setup has been referred to as the "hepatic piston".
A variety of other definitions were proposed by other scientists in the years following Gauthier's paper.
The dinosaurs featured in books, films, television programs, artwork, and other media have been used for both education and entertainment.
The rationale for this classification has been disputed, with some arguing that turtles are diapsids that evolved anapsid skulls in order to improve their armor.
Energetic studies on some reptiles have shown active capacities equal to or greater than similar sized warm-blooded animals.
Some early examples include the lizard-like ''Hylonomus'' and ''Casineria''.
Thus the skins of many reptiles have cryptic coloration of plain or mottled gray, green, and brown to allow them to blend into the background of their natural environment.
If this doesn't work, the crocodilian gets a little more agitated and typically begins to make hissing sounds.
When at rest, the turtle can retract the limbs into the body cavity and force air out of the lungs.
Watson observed that the first two groups diverged very early in reptilian history, so he divided Goodrich's Protosauria between them.
The Komodo dragon is even known to engage in play, as are turtles, which are also considered to be social creatures and sometimes switch between monogamy and promiscuity in their sexual behavior.
The nine-headed Lernaean Hydra that Hercules defeated and the three Gorgon sisters are children of Gaia, the earth.
Crocodilians have evolved a bony secondary palate that allows them to continue breathing while remaining submerged (and protect their brains against damage by struggling prey).
Very shortly after the first amniotes appeared, a lineage called Synapsida split off; this group was characterized by a temporal opening in the skull behind each eye to give room for the jaw muscle to move.
An amnion, chorion, and allantois are present during embryonic life.
If danger arises so suddenly that flight is useless, crocodiles, turtles, some lizards, and some snakes hiss loudly when confronted by an enemy.
In contrast to the normal drab coloration of most reptiles, the lizards of the genus ''Heloderma'' (the Gila monster and the beaded lizard) and many of the coral snakes have high-contrast warning coloration, warning potential predators they are venomous.
Failure of this strategy may lead to other measures practiced particularly by cobras, vipers, and closely related species, who use venom to attack.
Later morphological phylogenetic studies with this in mind placed turtles firmly within Diapsida.
However, investigation of correlations between active capacity and thermophysiology show a weak relationship.
The cladogram below used a combination of genetic (molecular) and fossil (morphological) data to obtain its results.
Because of this constraint, most squamates are forced to hold their breath during intense runs.
It was a small, lizard-like animal, about  long, with numerous sharp teeth indicating an insectivorous diet.
Different authors linked these groups either to lepidosauromorphs or to archosauromorphs, and ichthyopterygians were also argued to be diapsids that did not belong to the least inclusive clade containing lepidosauromorphs and archosauromorphs.
The detached tail will continue to wiggle, creating a deceptive sense of continued struggle and distracting the predator's attention from the fleeing prey animal.
After killing her, Perseus gave her head to Athena who fixed it to her shield called the Aegis.
The air space (7) provides the embryo with oxygen while it is hatching.
There are twelve pairs of cranial nerves.
The British anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley made Latreille's definition popular and, together with Richard Owen, expanded Reptilia to include the various fossil "antediluvian monsters", including dinosaurs and the mammal-like (synapsid) ''Dicynodon'' he helped describe.
The close of the Cretaceous period saw the demise of the Mesozoic era reptilian megafauna (see the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event).
Snakebite can be treated with antivenom made from the venom of the snake.
The venom is modified saliva, delivered through fangs from a venom gland.
In captivity, Komodo dragons (Varanidae) have reproduced by parthenogenesis.
Snakes took a different approach and extended their trachea instead.
There are temples in India solely for cobras sometimes called ''Nagraj'' (King of Snakes), and it is believed that snakes are symbols of fertility.
Molecular work has usually placed turtles within the diapsids.
While the optimum temperature is often encountered when the animal is active, the low basal metabolism makes body temperature drop rapidly when the animal is inactive.
It is generally assumed that reptiles are unable to produce the sustained high energy output necessary for long distance chases or flying.
This form of asexual reproduction, called parthenogenesis, occurs in several species of gecko, and is particularly widespread in the teiids (especially ''Aspidocelis'') and lacertids (''Lacerta'').
Primitive tetrapods, like modern amphibians, need to return to water to lay eggs; in contrast, amniotes, like modern reptiles&nbsp;– whose eggs possess a shell that allows them to be laid on land&nbsp;– were better adapted to the new conditions.
The results place turtles as a sister clade to the archosaurs, the group that includes crocodiles, dinosaurs, and birds.
Some will use their heads as sledgehammers and literally smash an opponent, some will rush or swim toward the threat from a distance, even chasing the opponent onto land or galloping after it.
When camouflage fail to protect them, blue-tongued skinks will try to ward off attackers by displaying their blue tongues, and the frill-necked lizard will display its brightly colored frill.
Thus his Sauropsida included Procolophonia, Eosuchia, Millerosauria, Chelonia (turtles), Squamata (lizards and snakes), Rhynchocephalia, Crocodilia, "thecodonts" (paraphyletic basal Archosauria), non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs, ichthyosaurs, and sauropterygians.
This allows the animals to completely fill their lungs during intense locomotion, and thus remain aerobically active for a long time.
Aquatic turtles have developed more permeable skin, and some species have modified their cloaca to increase the area for gas exchange.
The animals singled out by these formulations, the amniotes other than the mammals and the birds, are still those considered reptiles today.
Asexual reproduction has been identified in squamates in six families of lizards and one snake.
The chorion (6) aids in gas exchange between the inside and outside of the egg.
In the mid-Permian period, the climate became drier, resulting in a change of fauna: The pelycosaurs were replaced by the therapsids.
This is also the same musculature that is used during locomotion.
The albumin (9) further protects the embryo and serves as a reservoir for water and protein.
The traits listed by Lydekker in 1896, for example, include a single occipital condyle, a jaw joint formed by the quadrate and articular bones, and certain characteristics of the vertebrae.
This dramatic extinction pattern at the end of the Mesozoic led into the Cenozoic.
The terms "reptile" and "amphibian" were largely interchangeable, "reptile" (from Latin ''repere'', "to creep") being preferred by the French.
According to Goodrich, both lineages evolved from an earlier stem group, Protosauria ("first lizards") in which he included some animals today considered reptile-like amphibians, as well as early reptiles.
The vision is typically adapted to daylight conditions, with color vision and more advanced visual depth perception than in amphibians and most mammals.
Fossil gastroliths have been found associated with both ornithopods and sauropods, though whether they actually functioned as a gastric mill in the latter is disputed.
This form of homeothermy is called gigantothermy; it has been suggested as having been common in large dinosaurs and other extinct large-bodied reptiles.
The depictions range from the realistic, as in the television documentaries of the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, or the fantastic, as in the monster movies of the 1950s and 1960s.
The close of the Permian saw the greatest mass extinction known (see the Permian–Triassic extinction event), a prolonged event due to the accumulation of at least two distinct extinction pulses.
Aided by the reptiles' capacity for remaining motionless for long periods, the camouflage of many snakes is so effective most people or domestic animals most typically are bitten because they accidentally step on them.
The terms "Sauropsida" ("lizard faces") and "Theropsida" ("beast faces") were used again in 1916 by E.S.
Some will first elevate their head and spread out the skin of their neck in an effort to look large and threatening.
Many of the viviparous species feed their fetuses through various forms of placenta analogous to those of mammals, with some providing initial care for their hatchlings.
Lepidosauromorpha contained at least one major group of the Mesozoic sea reptiles: the mosasaurs, which lived during the Cretaceous period.
Camouflage will not always fool a predator.
How turtles and tortoises breathe has been the subject of much study.
Skinks (family Scincidae) also have evolved a bony secondary palate, to varying degrees.
Approximately 10,000 extant species of traditional reptiles are known, with birds adding about 10,000 more, almost twice the number of mammals, represented by about 5,700 living species (excluding domesticated species).
The snake or serpent has played a powerful symbolic role in different cultures.
These are used primarily for seizing prey, but are also used in fighting and display.
After this, the crocodilian will start to change its posture dramatically to make itself look more intimidating.
It cannot be defined by synapomorphies, as is the proper way.
Geckos, skinks, and other lizards that are captured by the tail will shed part of the tail structure through a process called autotomy and thus be able to flee.
Viviparity and ovoviviparity have evolved in many extinct clades of reptiles and in squamates.
When it contracts, the turtle can exhale.
The scales found in turtles and crocodiles are of dermal, rather than epidermal, origin and are properly termed scutes .
Reptiles tend to avoid confrontation through camouflage.
Dinosaurs have been widely depicted in culture since the English palaeontologist Richard Owen coined the name ''dinosaur'' in 1842.
In Hinduism, snakes are worshipped as gods, with many women pouring milk on snake pits.
The yolk sac (2) surrounding the yolk (3) contains protein and fat rich nutrients that are absorbed by the embryo via vessels (4) that allow the embryo to grow and metabolize.
So far three turtle genomes have been sequenced.
When a crocodilian is concerned about its safety, it will gape to expose the teeth and yellow tongue.
The benefit of a low resting metabolism is that it requires far less fuel to sustain bodily functions.
To date, there has been no confirmation of whether TDSD occurs in snakes.
The last species to have been studied is the red-eared slider, which also breathes during locomotion, but takes smaller breaths during locomotion than during small pauses between locomotor bouts, indicating that there may be mechanical interference between the limb movements and the breathing apparatus.
However, four (or three if Euryapsida is sunk into Diapsida) subclasses remained more or less universal for non-specialist work throughout the 20th century.
In 1988, Jacques Gauthier proposed a cladistic definition of Reptilia as a monophyletic node-based crown group containing turtles, lizards and snakes, crocodilians, and birds, their common ancestor and all its descendants.
Parthenogenetic species are suspected to occur among chameleons, agamids, xantusiids, and typhlopids.
Tegu lizards are known to possess a proto-diaphragm, which separates the pulmonary cavity from the visceral cavity.
Some are also able to take up water stored in the bladder.
Classically, turtles were considered to be related to the primitive anapsid reptiles.
Many species also possess canine-like teeth.
Crocodilians have an anatomically four-chambered heart, similar to birds, but also have two systemic aortas and are therefore capable of bypassing their pulmonary circulation.
Most extant reptiles are carnivores with a sit-and-wait feeding strategy; whether reptiles are cold blooded due to their ecology  is not clear.
In 1866, Haeckel demonstrated that vertebrates could be divided based on their reproductive strategies, and that reptiles, birds, and mammals were united by the amniotic egg.
The optimum body temperature range varies with species, but is typically below that of warm-blooded animals; for many lizards, it falls in the 24°–35&nbsp;°C (75°–95&nbsp;°F) range, while extreme heat-adapted species, like the American desert iguana ''Dipsosaurus dorsalis'', can have optimal physiological temperatures in the mammalian range, between 35° and 40&nbsp;°C (95° and 104&nbsp;°F).
The main weapon in all crocodiles is the bite, which can generate very high bite force.
The earliest known proto-reptiles originated around 312 million years ago during the Carboniferous period, having evolved from advanced reptiliomorph tetrapods that became increasingly adapted to life on dry land.
Crocodile oil has been used for various purposes.
A similar system is found in birds, monitor lizards and iguanas.
This is because they use their abdominal muscles to breathe during locomotion.
A number of non-venomous North American snake species have colorful markings similar those of the coral snake, an oft cited examples of Batesian mimicry.
However, reptiles were still important components of the megafauna, particularly in the form of giant tortoises.
Reptiles generally reproduce sexually, though some are capable of asexual reproduction.
They acquired new feeding strategies including herbivory and carnivory, previously only having been insectivores and piscivores.
The body is inflated to increase apparent size.
