Since the signing of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the Irish government and Northern Ireland Executive have co-operated on a number of policy areas under the North-South Ministerial Council created by the Agreement.
Operations include Coolmore Stud and Ballydoyle, the base of Aidan O'Brien arguably one of the world's most successful horse trainers.
However, due to a temperate oceanic climate, temperatures are seldom lower than  in winter or higher than  in summer.
Ireland has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since 1965.
However, as the Irish economy was the fastest growing in the EU in 2015  Ireland is again quickly ascending league tables comparing wealth and prosperity internationally.
The 1948 Act does not ''name'' the state as "Republic of Ireland", because to have done so would have put it in conflict with the Constitution.
Gaelic football and hurling are the traditional sports of Ireland as well as most popular spectator sports.
In 2015 Ireland became the second country in the world to introduce plain cigarette packaging.
The '''' (Prime Minister) serves as the head of government and is appointed by the President upon the nomination of the .
Saint Patrick is the only one commonly recognised as the patron saint.
The prohibition on divorce in the 1937 Constitution was repealed in 1995 under the Fifteenth Amendment.
The Republic of Ireland national football team plays at international level and is administered by the Football Association of Ireland.
That could provide for Ireland's entire energy needs for up to 13 years, when it is developed in 2015/16.
Ireland has three levels of education: primary, secondary and higher education.
In some circumstances this fee is not payable or may be waived.
Ireland's special forces include the Army Ranger Wing, which trains and operates with international special operations units.
Southwestern areas experience the most rainfall as a result of south westerly winds, while Dublin receives the least.
The EU is by far the country's largest trading partner, accounting for 57.9% of exports and 60.7% of imports.
Every resident of Ireland is entitled to receive health care through the public health care system, which is managed by the Health Service Executive and funded by general taxation.
Today, they are the personal arms of the President of Ireland whilst he or she is in office and are flown as the presidential standard.
In an Irish republican context it is often referred to as "the Free State" or "the 26 Counties".
Although many schools are run by religious organisations, a secularist trend is occurring among younger generations.
Irish set dances are quadrilles, danced by 4 couples arranged in a square, while céilí dances are danced by varied formations of couples of 2 to 16 people.
Ireland has long been associated with thatched roof cottages, though these are nowadays considered quaint.
Most '''' have served as the leader of the political party that gains the most seats in national elections.
Section 2 of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 states, "It is hereby declared that the description of the State shall be the Republic of Ireland."
The minority government is held in place by a confidence and supply deal with Fianna Fáil.
It has become customary for coalitions to form a government, as there has not been a single-party government since 1989.
Other Gaelic games organised by the association include Gaelic handball and rounders.
However, some identification is required at airports and seaports.
Emergency care is provided to patients who present to a hospital Emergency Department.
The first four bars of the chorus followed by the last five comprise the presidential salute.
In the genre of the short story, which is a form favoured by many Irish writers, the most prominent figures include Seán Ó Faoláin, Frank O'Connor and William Trevor.
Many Irish economists and politicians realised that economic policy reform was necessary.
This commenced on 24 April 1916 with the declaration of independence.
There are also many stylistic differences between these two forms.
With the erection of buildings such as The Custom House, Four Courts, General Post Office and King's Inns, the neoclassical and Georgian styles flourished, especially in Dublin.
However, the founding EEC members remained skeptical regarding Ireland's economic capacity, neutrality, and unattractive protectionist policy.
Since 1999, Ireland has been a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) program and NATO's Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), which is aimed at creating trust between NATO and other states in Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Numerous Irish novelists emerged during the 19th century, including Maria Edgeworth, John Banim, Gerald Griffin, Charles Kickham, William Carleton, George Moore, and Somerville and Ross.
To the east, the Irish Sea connects to the Atlantic Ocean via St George's Channel and the Celtic Sea to the southwest.
The road network is primarily focused on the capital, but motorways have been extended to other cities as part of the ''Transport 21'' capital investment programme, as a result motorways have been completed between Dublin and a number of other major Irish cities including Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Galway.
Saint Patrick's Day is celebrated on 17 March in Ireland and abroad as the Irish national day, with parades and other celebrations.
The remainder of the Irish Volunteers, who opposed any support of Britain, launched an armed insurrection against British rule in the 1916 Easter Rising, together with the Irish Citizen Army.
Ireland's patron saints are Saint Patrick, Saint Bridget and Saint Columba.
Under the leadership of the Dublin-born Sir Edward Carson of the Irish Unionist Party and the Ulsterman Sir James Craig of the Ulster Unionist Party, unionists became strongly militant in order to oppose "the Coercion of Ulster".
Except in exceptional circumstances, court hearings must occur in public.
It is otherwise surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the Celtic Sea to the south, Saint George's Channel to the south-east and the Irish Sea to the east.
The growth of blanket bog and the extensive clearing of woodland to facilitate farming are believed to be the main causes of deforestation during the following centuries.
The airport had previously been used for the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, as well as the First Gulf War.
Although multinational corporations dominate Ireland's export sector, exports from other sources also contribute significantly to the national income.
It is based on the unofficial green ensign of Ireland used in the 18th and 19th centuries and the traditional green flag of Ireland dating from the 16th century.
These events, together with the Conscription Crisis of 1918, had a profound effect on changing public opinion in Ireland.
Local authorities are responsible for matters such as planning, local roads, sanitation, and libraries.
Ireland has a wealth of structures, surviving in various states of preservation, from the Neolithic period, such as ''Brú na Bóinne'', Poulnabrone dolmen, Castlestrange stone, Turoe stone, and Drombeg stone circle.
All maternity services are provided free of charge and children up to the age of 6 months.
Ireland's exports also relate to the activities of large Irish companies (such as Ryanair, Kerry Group and Smurfit Kappa Group) and exports of mineral resources: Ireland is the seventh largest producer of zinc concentrates, and the twelfth largest producer of lead concentrates.
These led to "grass-roots" control of national affairs, under the Local Government Act 1898, that had been in the hands of landlord-dominated grand juries of the Protestant Ascendancy.
The song was officially adopted as the anthem of the Irish Free State in 1926 and continues as the national anthem of the state.
The government of the United Kingdom used the name "Eire" (without the diacritic), and, from 1949, "Republic of Ireland", for the state; it was not until the 1998 Good Friday Agreement that it used the name "Ireland".
These episodes of planned settlement account for the majority of present-day towns throughout the country.
'''Ireland''' (;  ), also described as the '''Republic of Ireland''' (''''), is a sovereign state in north-western Europe occupying about five-sixths of the island of Ireland.
Following Catholic Emancipation, cathedrals and churches influenced by the French Gothic Revival emerged, such as St Colman's and St Finbarre's.
The Irish Elite League is a domestic competition for rugby league teams in Ireland.
Ireland's major imports include data processing equipment, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum products, textiles, and clothing.
This replaced the Constitution of the Irish Free State and called the state ''Ireland'', or ''Éire'' in Irish.John T. Koch, Celtic culture: a historical encyclopedia, ABC-CLIO: Santa Barbara, 2006.
Ireland is famous for the full Irish breakfast, which involves a fried or grilled meal generally consisting of bacon, egg, sausage, pudding, and fried tomato.
The  has 158 members ('''') elected to represent multi-seat constituencies under the system of proportional representation and by means of the single transferable vote.
The office has absolute discretion in some areas, such as referring a bill to the Supreme Court for a judgment on its constitutionality.
Edith Somerville continued writing after the death of her partner Martin Ross in 1915.
Ireland became a member of the United Nations in December 1955.
It is small but well equipped, with almost 10,000 full-time military personnel and over 2,000 in reserve.
After joining the EEC, Ireland enacted a series of liberal economic policies that resulted in rapid economic growth.
The Irish round tower originated during the Early Medieval period.
RTÉ Radio operates four national stations, Radio 1, 2fm, Lyric fm, and RnaG.
Significant Protestant denominations are the Presbyterian Church and Methodist Church.
The annual Dublin Marathon and Dublin Women's Mini Marathon are two of the most popular athletics events in the country.
It was the first country in Europe to ban incandescent lightbulbs in 2008 and the first EU country to ban in-store tobacco advertising and product display in 2009.
Surviving Norman founded planned towns include Drogheda and Youghal; plantation towns include Portlaoise and Portarlington; well-preserved 18th century planned towns include Westport and Ballinasloe.
Garda Síochána na hÉireann (''Guardians of the Peace of Ireland''), more commonly referred to as the Gardaí, is the state's civilian police force.
The central lowlands are extensively covered with glacial deposits of clay and sand, as well as significant areas of bogland and several lakes.
Pro-treaty forces, led by Michael Collins, argued that the treaty gave "not the ultimate freedom that all nations aspire to and develop, but the freedom to achieve it".
The majority were imprisoned but fifteen of the prisoners (including most of the leaders) were executed as traitors to Britain.
The study of Irish is compulsory for Leaving Certificate students, but some may qualify for an exemption in some circumstances, such as learning difficulties or entering the country after age 11.
Ryanair is Europe's largest low-cost carrier, the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world's largest in terms of international passenger numbers.
In March 2016 the unemployment rate was reported by the Central Statistics Office (Ireland) to be 8.6%, down from a peak unemployment rate of 15.1% in February 2012.
Other writers of importance during the 18th century and their most notable works include Laurence Sterne with the publication of ''The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman'' and Oliver Goldsmith's ''The Vicar of Wakefield''.
Enda Kenny assumed the office of Taoiseach on 9 March 2011.
The colours represent the Gaelic tradition (green) and the followers of William of Orange in Ireland (orange), with white representing the aspiration for peace between them.
A naval jack, a green flag with a yellow harp, is set out in Defence Forces Regulations and flown from the mast head of ships in addition to the national flag in limited circumstances (e.g.
The new Irish Republic was recognised internationally only by the Russian Soviet Republic.
Dublin has been the focus of major projects such as the East-Link and West-Link toll-bridges, as well as the Dublin Port Tunnel.
The Irish delegates set up headquarters at Hans Place in Knightsbridge and it was here in private discussions that the decision was taken on 5 December to recommend the treaty to Dáil Éireann.
#Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown
Recent developments include the regeneration of Ballymun and an urban extension of Dublin at Adamstown.
In the 18th century, Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were two of the most successful playwrights on the London stage at that time.
Counties with greater populations have multiple constituencies, some of more than one county, but generally do not cross county boundaries.
As a result of immigration, Polish is the most widely spoken language in Ireland after English, with Irish as the third most spoken.
A ''Sunday Times'' poll carried out in March 2011 showed that 73% of people believe that same-sex couples should be allowed to marry, while 60% believe that same-sex couples should be allowed to adopt children.
In addition, the Protestant population was more prominent in Ulster, with a majority in four counties.
Following the Restoration, palladianism and rococo, particularly country houses, swept through Ireland under the initiative of Edward Lovett Pearce, with the Houses of Parliament being the most significant.
Ideal soil conditions, high rainfall and a mild climate give Ireland the highest growth rates for forests in Europe.
In 2011, it was reported that weekly Mass attendance in Dublin was just 18%, with it being even lower among younger generations.
Articles 2 and 3 of the constitution asserted a nominal territorial claim over the whole island, considering the partition of Ireland under the 1922 Anglo-Irish Treaty illegitimate.
The Irish diaspora, one of the world's largest and most dispersed, has contributed to the globalisation of Irish culture, producing many prominent figures in art, music, and science.
In 1983, the Eighth Amendment recognised "the right to life of the unborn", subject to qualifications concerning the "equal right to life" of the mother.
It was feared that any tariff barriers would heavily affect that region.
Private health insurance is available to the population for those who want to avail of it.
Article 44 remains in the Constitution: "The State acknowledges that the homage of public worship is due to Almighty God.
The former Irish Free State government had taken steps to abolish the Office of Governor-General some months before the new Constitution came into force.
There were significant policy changes from 1989 onwards, with economic reform, tax cuts, welfare reform, an increase in competition, and a ban on borrowing to fund current spending.
It joined the European Economic Community (EEC), the predecessor of the European Union, in 1973.
Later, the Crown of Ireland Act was repealed in Ireland by the Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act, 1962.
The Minister for Health has responsibility for setting overall health service policy.
However, the majority of patients on median incomes or above are required to pay subsidised hospital charges.
The profile of Australian rules football has increased in Ireland due to the International rules series that take place annually between Australia and Ireland.
Railway services are provided by Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail), which operates all internal intercity, commuter and freight railway services in the country.
As the United Kingdom intended on EEC membership, Ireland applied for membership in July 1961 due to the substantial economic linkages with the United Kingdom.
Anti-treaty forces, led by Éamon de Valera, objected to the fact that acceptance of the treaty ''abolished'' the Irish Republic of 1919 to which they had sworn loyalty, arguing in the face of public support for the settlement that the "people have no right to do wrong".
A survey showed that a consistent 85% of adults listen to a mixture of national, regional and local stations on a daily basis.
Completed in 2008, the Elysian tower in Cork is the tallest storeyed building in the Republic of Ireland (the Obel Tower in Belfast, Northern Ireland being the tallest in Ireland), at a height of , surpassing Cork County Hall.
The Jack Lynch Tunnel, under the River Lee in Cork, and the Limerick Tunnel, under the River Shannon, were two major projects outside Dublin.
Although the constitution established the office of President of Ireland, the question over whether Ireland was a republic remained open.
Other wartime roles include control of prisoners of war and refugees.
The Irish government has followed a policy of military neutrality through non-alignment since immediately prior to World War II and the country is consequently not a member of NATO, although it is a member in Partnership for Peace.
Eurostat reported that 82% of Irish households had Internet access in 2013 compared to the EU average of 79% but only 67% had broadband access.
The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Ireland as having the fourth highest reading score, ninth highest science score and thirteenth highest mathematics score, among OECD countries, in its 2012 assessment In 2012, Irish students aged 15 years had the second highest levels of reading literacy in the EU.
The country has produced several internationally successful golfers, such as Pádraig Harrington and Paul McGinley.
Religious schools cannot discriminate against pupils concerning religion.
Golf is another popular sport in Ireland, with over 300 courses countrywide.
The legislation which outlawed homosexual acts was repealed in 1993.
James Joyce (1882–1941) published his most famous work ''Ulysses'' in 1922, which is an interpretation of the ''Odyssey'' set in Dublin.
Georgian townhouses produced streets of singular distinction, particularly in Dublin, Limerick and Cork.
The 1922 state, comprising 26 of the 32 counties of Ireland, was "styled and known as the Irish Free State".
Ireland officially entered a recession in 2008 following consecutive months of economic contraction.
The average life expectancy in Ireland in 2012 is 81 years (OECD average life expectancy in 2012 was 80 years), with 78.2 years for men and 83.6 years for women.
Dáil constituencies are required to follow county boundaries as much as possible.
Despite Irish neutrality during World War II, Ireland had more than 50,000 participants in the war through enlistment in the British armed forces.
Baseball and basketball are also emerging sports in Ireland, both of which have an international team representing the island of Ireland.
The west coast is more rugged than the east, with numerous islands, peninsulas, headlands and bays.
It was adopted as the flag of the Irish Free State in 1922 and continues to be used as the sole flag and ensign of the state.
The Local Government Act 1898 is the founding document of the present system of local government, while the Twentieth Amendment to the constitution of 1999 provided for its constitutional recognition.
Ireland's citizenship laws relate to "the island of Ireland", including islands and seas, thereby extending them to Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom.
The London and Dublin route is the second busiest international air route in Europe, with 3.6 million people flying between the two cities in 2013 down from the 4.4 million who flew in 2003.
Instead, they set up an Irish parliament called Dáil Éireann.
Financial services provided by multinational corporations based at the Irish Financial Services Centre also contribute to Irish exports.The difference between exports (€89.4 billion) and imports (€45.5 billion) resulted an annual trade surplus of €43.9 billion in 2010, which is the highest trade surplus relative to GDP achieved by any EU member state.
Traditional breads include soda bread and wheaten bread.
Christianity introduced simple monastic houses, such as Clonmacnoise, Skellig Michael and Scattery Island.
Ireland became the first country in the world to introduce an environmental levy for plastic shopping bags in 2002 and a public smoking ban in 2004.
A peace settlement for Northern Ireland, known as the Good Friday Agreement, was approved in 1998 in referendums north and south of the border.
The solo dances can either be in "soft shoe" or "hard shoe".
The case of ''Attorney General v. X'' subsequently prompted passage of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments, guaranteeing the right to have an abortion performed abroad, and the right to learn about "services" that are illegal in Ireland but legal abroad.
Irish dance can broadly be divided into social dance and performance dance.
While the state is officially bilingual, Citizens can often struggle to access state services in Irish and most Government publications are not available in both languages, even though citizens have the right to deal with the state in Irish.
GDP is significantly greater than GNP due to the large number of multinational corporations based in Ireland.
Barmbrack is a yeasted bread with added sultanas and raisins.
During the final decades of the 20th century, Edna O'Brien, John McGahern, Maeve Binchy, Joseph O'Connor, Roddy Doyle, Colm Tóibín, and John Banville came to the fore as novelists.
ESB, Ervia and Airtricity are the three main electricity and gas suppliers in Ireland.
On 23 May 2015, Ireland became the first country to legalise same-sex marriage by popular vote.
GNP contracted by 11.3% in 2009 alone, the largest annual decline in GNP since 1950.
It is supported by a number of Independents including Shane Ross and former Senator Katherine Zappone.
Diplomats were accredited to the king, but the president exercised the internal functions of a head of state.
The Irish Republic's '''' (Ministry) sent a delegation under '''' (Head of Council, or Speaker, of the Daíl) Seán T. O'Kelly to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but it was not admitted.
Having implemented budget cuts, reforms and sold assets, Ireland was again able to access debt markets.
Other Irish playwrights of the 20th century include Denis Johnston, Thomas Kilroy, Tom Murphy, Hugh Leonard, Frank McGuinness, and John B. Keane.
Ireland has made a significant contribution to world literature in both the English and Irish languages.
The flag of Ireland is a tricolour of green, white and orange.
The country is heavily reliant on Foreign Direct Investment and has attracted several multinational corporations due to a highly educated workforce and a low corporation tax rate.
The Declaration was mainly a restatement of the 1916 Proclamation with the additional provision that Ireland was no longer a part of the United Kingdom.
Modern Irish fiction began with the publishing of the 1726 novel ''Gulliver's Travels'' by Jonathan Swift.
Gothic cathedrals, such as St Patrick's, were also introduced by the Normans.
December is the dullest month, with an average daily sunshine ranging from about 1 hour in the north to almost 2 hours in the extreme southeast.
The strength of the British press is a unique feature of the Irish print media scene, with the availability of a wide selection of British published newspapers and magazines.
The unemployment rate was 14.7% in 2012, including 18.5% among recent immigrants.
Agriculture accounts for about 64% of the total land area.
The Constitution describes Irish as the "national language", but English is the dominant language.
The High Court and the Supreme Court have authority, by means of judicial review, to determine the compatibility of laws and activities of other institutions of the state with the constitution and the law.
Primary, secondary and higher (University/College) level education are all free in Ireland for all EU citizens.
After the Home Rule Bill passed parliament in May 1914, to avoid rebellion with Ulster, the British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith introduced an Amending Bill reluctantly conceded to by the Irish Party leadership.
All these channels are available on Saorview, the national free-to-air digital terrestrial television service.
This set the pattern of emigration for the century to come, resulting in a constant population decline up to the 1960s.
Well known Irish poets include Patrick Kavanagh, Thomas McCarthy, Dermot Bolger, and Nobel Prize in Literature laureates William Butler Yeats and Seamus Heaney (born in Northern Ireland but resided in Dublin).
Ireland has produced champion horses such as Galileo, Montjeu, and Sea the Stars.
Performance dance is traditionally referred to as stepdance.
Boxing is Ireland's most successful sport at an Olympic level.
Northern Ireland exercised its right under the treaty to leave the new dominion and rejoined the United Kingdom on 8 December 1922.
By 1996, over 40,000 Irish service personnel had served in international UN peacekeeping missions.
Ireland is ranked as the ninth most economically free economy in the world, according to the Index of Economic Freedom.
The pro-treaty IRA disbanded and joined the new National Army.
No more than two members can be selected from the , and the , '''' (Deputy Prime Minister) and Minister for Finance must be members of the .
Racing takes place at courses at The Curragh Racecourse in County Kildare and at Leopardstown Racecourse, racing taking place since the 1860s, but racing taking place as early as the early 1700s.
Contraception was controlled in Ireland until 1979, however, the receding influence of the Catholic Church has led to an increasingly secularised society.
In wartime, additional tasks include the provision of a traffic control organisation to allow rapid movement of military formations to their mission areas.
Though it received the Royal Assent and was placed on the statute books in 1914, the implementation of the Third Home Rule Act was suspended until after the First World War which defused the threat of civil war in Ireland.
The Dáil must be dissolved within five years after its first meeting following the previous election, and a general election for members of the Dáil must take place no later than thirty days after the dissolution.
In 2011, Ireland was ranked the most charitable country in Europe, and second most charitable in the world.
Temperatures differ regionally, with central and eastern areas tending to be more extreme.
They objected most to the fact that the state would remain part of the British Empire and that members of the Free State Parliament would have to swear what the Anti-treaty side saw as an oath of fidelity to the British King.
In its early history, theatrical productions in Ireland tended to serve political purposes, but as more theatres opened and the popular audience grew, a more diverse range of entertainments were staged.
Third-level education awards are conferred by at least 38 Higher Education Institutions - this includes the constituent or linked colleges of seven universities, plus other designated institutions of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council.
