Each republic had its parliament, government, institute of citizenship, constitution, etc... but certain functions were delegated to the federation (army, monetary matters).
None of these states are typically referred to as republics.
The rules for appointing the president and the leader of the government, in some republics permit the appointment of a president and a prime minister who have opposing political convictions: in France, when the members of the ruling cabinet and the president come from opposing political factions, this situation is called cohabitation.
Two short-lived republics were proclaimed in East Asia, the Republic of Formosa and the First Philippine Republic.
This, combined with pressure from the Norwegian king Haakon IV for the Icelanders to re-join the Norwegian "family", led the Icelandic chieftains to accept Haakon IV as king by the signing of the ''Gamli sáttmáli'' ("Old Covenant") in 1262.
These states are thus sometimes referred to as crowned republics.
The founding fathers of the country intended most domestic laws to be handled by the states.
Typically in presidential and semi-presidential systems the president is directly elected by the people, or is indirectly elected as done in the United States.
European states in 1914.
Presently, the term "republic"  commonly means a system of government which derives its power from the people rather than from another basis, such as heredity or divine right.
In that country the president is officially elected by an electoral college, chosen by the States, all of which do so by direct election of the electors.
The Roman Republic itself then became the Roman Empire.
Notably, during The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell the word ''commonwealth'' was the most common term to call the new monarchless state, but the word ''republic'' was also in common use.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Montesquieu praised republics, and looked on the city-states of Greece as a model.
This ideology is based on the Roman Republic and the city states of Ancient Greece and focuses on ideals such as civic virtue, rule of law, and mixed government.
These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states, like the Italian city-states and the Hanseatic League, in which the merchant class had risen to prominence.
The first republic to adopt the title was the United States of America.
These combined with native Confucian inspired political philosophy that had long argued that the populace had the right to reject unjust government that had lost the Mandate of Heaven.
In some countries, like Switzerland, Bosnia and Herzegovina and San Marino, the head of state is not a single person but a committee (council) of several persons holding that office.
Republican ideas were spreading, especially in Asia.
These ideas of how a government and society should be structured is the basis for an ideology known as classical republicanism or civic humanism.
In Vietnam, communist republicans pushed aside the Nguyễn Dynasty, and monarchies in neighbouring Laos and Cambodia were overthrown by communist movements in the 1970s.
The Constitution of the United States, ratified in 1789, created a relatively strong federal republic to replace the relatively weak confederation under the first attempt at a national government with the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union ratified in 1783.
Thus philosophers like Voltaire opposed absolutism while at the same time being strongly pro-monarchy.
Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism.
219; Minor v. Happersett, 88 U.S. (21 Wall.)
A '''republic''' (from ) is a sovereign state or country which is organized with a form of government in which power resides in elected individuals representing the citizen body and government leaders exercise power according to the rule of law.
These independent states initially formed a loose confederation called the United States and then later formed the current United States by ratifying the current U.S. Constitution, creating a union of sovereign states with the union or federal government also being a republic.
This was the first republic established under Marxist-Leninist ideology.
The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder had become a ''de facto'' monarch.
John Calvin did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the duty to overthrow irreligious monarchs.
In Africa the Axum Empire was organized as a confederation ruled similarly to a royal republic.
Completely free of feudal control, the Italian city-states expanded, gaining control of the rural hinterland.
Several monarchies remain, and the Middle East is the only part of the world where several large states are ruled by monarchs with almost complete political control.
Arwad has been cited as one of the earliest known examples of a republic, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign.
Each republic also had a right of self-determination according to the conclusions of the second session of the AVNOJ and according to the federal constitution.
Paul Rahe, for instance, argues that the classical republics had a form of government with few links to those in any modern country.
This was required because the states were intended to create and enforce most domestic laws, with the exception of areas delegated to the federal government and prohibited to the states.
The idea that direct election is required for legitimacy also contradicts the spirit of the Great Compromise, whose actual result was manifest in the clause that provides voters in smaller states with slightly more representation in presidential selection than those in large states.
These states are parliamentary republics and operate similarly to constitutional monarchies with parliamentary systems where the power of the monarch is also greatly circumscribed.
Britain followed a different model in the Middle East; it installed local monarchies in several colonies and mandates including Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Yemen and Libya.
This understanding of the term was originally developed by James Madison, and notably employed in Federalist Paper No.
A distinct set of definitions for the word ''republic'' evolved in the United States.
The Roman Republic expanded dramatically conquering the other states of the Mediterranean that could be considered republics, such as Carthage.
The era of absolute monarchy replaced the limited and decentralized monarchies that had existed in most of the Middle Ages.
Similar revolts occurred in Italy, notably the Ciompi Revolt in Florence.
These writers, such as Machiavelli, also wrote important prescriptive works describing how such governments should function.
The Russian Provisional Government was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic, but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks who went on to establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The constitutional monarchies of the former British Empire and Western Europe today have almost all real political power vested in the elected representatives, with the monarchs only holding either theoretical powers, no powers or rarely used reserve powers.
John Adams had notably written a book on republics throughout history.
In the late Middle Ages, writers, such as Giovanni Villani, began writing about the nature of these states and the differences from other types of regime.
The Supreme Court, in ''Luther v. Borden'' (1849), declared that the definition of ''republic'' was a "political question" in which it would not intervene.
The proponents of this system looked to classical examples, and the writings of the Italian Renaissance, and called their elective monarchy a ''rzeczpospolita'', based on ''res publica.''
Traditionally scholars believed this American republicanism was a derivation of the classical liberal ideologies of John Locke and others developed in Europe.
Most important was Calvinist theology, which developed in the Swiss Confederacy, one of the largest and most powerful of the medieval republics.
The system, known as the Golden Liberty, had developed as a method for powerful landowners to control the crown.
Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots during the French Wars of Religion.
The French Second Republic was created in 1848, but abolished by Napoleon III who proclaimed himself Emperor in 1852.
There are no surviving constitutions or works of political philosophy from this period in Indian history, but surviving religious texts do refer to a number of states having ''Gaṇa sangha'', or council-based, as opposed to monarchical, governments.
In the more loosely governed Holy Roman Empire, 51 of the largest towns became free imperial cities.
The term ''republic'' does not appear in the Declaration of Independence, but does appear in Article IV of the Constitution which "guarantees to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government."
Semi-presidential systems have a president as an active head of state, but also have a head of government with important powers.
One form Aristotle named ''politeia'', which consisted of a mixture of the other forms.
There is no constitutional requirement that power be passed down within one family, but it has occurred in practice.
In other states the legislature is dominant and the presidential role is almost purely ceremonial and apolitical, such as in Germany and India.
The most important leader of these efforts was Sun Yat-sen, whose Three Principles of the People combined American, European, and Chinese ideas.
In those areas that held elections, property qualifications or guild membership limited both who could vote and who could run.
Only after the Flight to Varennes removed most of the remaining sympathy for the king was a republic declared and Louis XVI sent to the guillotine.
Most of the Greek republics were annexed to the Macedonian Empire of Alexander.
While the structure and governance of these states was very different from that of any modern republic, there is debate about the extent to which classical, medieval, and modern republics form a historical continuum.
The towns and villages of alpine Switzerland had, courtesy of geography, also been largely excluded from central control.
There are a number of forms of presidential government.
In liberal democracies presidents are elected, either directly by the people or indirectly by a parliament or council.
The more centralized states, such as France and England, granted limited city charters.
It was most often used by Roman writers to refer to the state and government, even during the period of the Roman Empire.
Any state joining the union later was also required to be a republic.
The Italian medieval and Renaissance political tradition, today referred to as "civic humanism", is sometimes considered to derive directly from Roman republicans such as Sallust and Tacitus.
However, this concept of legitimacy differs from that expressed in the United States Constitution which established the legitimacy of the United States president as resulting from the signing of the Constitution by nine states.
For instance, Article IV of the United States Constitution "guarantees to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government".
Originally used to refer to the presiding officer of a committee or governing body in Great Britain the usage was also applied to political leaders, including the leaders of some of the Thirteen Colonies (originally Virginia in 1608); in full, the "President of the Council."
In modern republics the executive is legitimized both by a constitution and by popular suffrage.
In common parlance, a republic is a state that does not practice direct democracy but rather has a government indirectly controlled by the people.
This effectively brought the Commonwealth to an end.
In many states no direct elections were held and council members were hereditary or appointed by the existing council.
The Republic of China was proclaimed on January 1, 1912.
The Swiss were victorious, and the Swiss Confederacy was proclaimed, and Switzerland has retained a republican form of government to the present.
This grew out of the work of J. G. A. Pocock who in 1975 argued that a series of scholars had expressed a consistent set of republican ideals.
In Iran, the 1979 revolution overthrew the monarchy and created an Islamic republic based on the ideas of Islamic democracy.
The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains, and the Althing was a combination of parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled, laws were decided, and decisions of national importance were taken.
If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government, this is called a presidential system.
A current example of such a state is Malaysia where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is elected every five years by the Conference of Rulers composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states, and the Vatican City-State, where the pope is selected by cardinal-electors, currently all cardinals under a specific age.
Neither of these states are officially monarchies.
These writers included Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu, and the founders of the United States of America.
However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government immediately: in the formal declaration of independence (Act of Abjuration, 1581), the throne of king Philip was only declared vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou, queen Elizabeth of England and prince William of Orange, one after another, to replace Philip.
The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway who had fled the unification of that country under King Harald Fairhair.
However, Greek-influenced Roman authors, such as Polybius and Cicero, sometimes also used the term as a translation for the Greek ''politeia'' which could mean regime generally, but could also be applied to certain specific types of regime which did not exactly correspond to that of the Roman Republic.
This indirect election subordinates the president to the parliament, and also gives the president limited legitimacy and turns most presidential powers into reserve powers that can only be exercised under rare circumstance.
Following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22), the monarchy was briefly replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic (1924–1935).
While still under the dominion of the Holy Roman Emperor most power was held locally and many adopted republican forms of government.
Keeping its usage as the head of a committee the President of the Continental Congress was the leader of the original congress.
The same rights to imperial immediacy were secured by the major trading cities of Switzerland.
In 1641 the English Civil War began.
Over time, the classical republics were either conquered by empires or became ones themselves.
In modern times, the definition of a republic is commonly limited to a government which excludes a monarch.
The current usage of republic in Muslim countries is borrowed from the western meaning, adopted into the language in the late 19th century.
In subsequent centuries, the English word ''commonwealth'' came to be used as a translation of ''res publica'', and its use in English was comparable to how the Romans used the term ''res publica''.
They were eventually transformed into monarchies or absorbed into neighbouring monarchies.
In 1931, the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939) resulted in the Spanish Civil War that would be the prelude of World War II.
Despite their wealth they had little power in the feudal system dominated by the rural land owners, and across Europe began to advocate for their own privileges and powers.
Communism also intermingled with other ideologies.
In England James Harrington, Algernon Sidney, and John Milton became some of the first writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government.
There are also self-proclaimed republics that act similarly to monarchies with absolute power vested in the leader and passed down from father to son.
Beyond these basic definitions the word ''republic'' has a number of other connotations.
A full-presidential system has a president with substantial authority and a central political role.
He argued that this was one of the ideal forms of government.
The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia, and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924.
It was a novel meaning to the term; representative democracy was not an idea mentioned by Machiavelli and did not exist in the classical republics.
W. Paul Adams observes that ''republic'' is most often used in the United States as a synonym for state or government, but with more positive connotations than either of those terms.
In the classical and medieval period of Europe, many states were fashioned on the Roman Republic, which referred to the governance of the city of Rome, between it having kings and emperors.
The late Middle Ages saw more than 200 such risings in the towns of the Holy Roman Empire.
It took until 1588 before the Estates (the ''Staten'', the representative assembly at the time) decided to vest the sovereignty of the country in themselves.
In re Duncan, 139 U.S. 449, 11 S.Ct.
Some Indian scholars, such as K.P.
In the ancient Near East, a number of cities of the Eastern Mediterranean achieved collective rule.
While the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy, in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation would be used as justification for establishing new republics.
In ''United States v. Cruikshank'' (1875), the court ruled that the "equal rights of citizens" were inherent to the idea of a republic.
Islamic political philosophy has a long history of opposition to absolute monarchy, notably in the work of Al-Farabi.
There are also elective monarchies where ultimate power is vested in a monarch, but the monarch is chosen by some manner of election.
Requiring the states to be a republic in form was seen as protecting the citizens' rights and preventing a state from becoming a dictatorship or monarchy, and reflected unwillingness on the part of the original 13 states (all independent republics) to unite with other states that were not republics.
In contrast, the Soviet Union was constitutionally described as a "federal multinational state", composed of 15 republics, two of which – Ukraine and Belarus – had their own seats at the United Nations.
European states in 1815.
Mahajanapadas consisted of sixteen oligarchic republics that existed during the sixth centuries BCE to fourth centuries BCE.
The two most powerful were the Republic of Venice and its rival the Republic of Genoa.
Two Russian cities with powerful merchant class—Novgorod and Pskov—also adopted republican forms of government in 12th and 13th centuries, respectively, which ended when the republics were conquered by Muscovy/Russia at the end 15th – beginning of 16th century.
Philosophers and politicians advocating for republics, such as Machiavelli, Montesquieu, Adams, and Madison, relied heavily on classical Greek and Roman sources which described various types of regimes.
After the classical period, during the Middle Ages, many free cities developed again, such as Venice.
While most of the settler colonies and the smaller states of the Caribbean retained this system, it was rejected by the newly independent countries in Africa and Asia, which revised their constitutions and became republics.
States of the United States are required, like the federal government, to be republican in form, with final authority resting with the people.
Writers such as Bartholomew of Lucca, Brunetto Latini, Marsilius of Padua, and Leonardo Bruni saw the medieval city-states as heirs to the legacy of Greece and Rome.
The American Revolution began as a rejection only of the authority of the British Parliament over the colonies, not of the monarchy.
Arab socialism contributed to a series of revolts and coups that saw the monarchies of Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Yemen ousted.
Pocock argued that this was an ideology with a history and principles distinct from liberalism.
It was embraced by many national liberation movements during decolonization.
In Africa Marxist-Leninism and African socialism led to the end of monarchy and the proclamation of republics in states such as Burundi and Ethiopia.
With no monarch, most modern republics use the title president for the head of state.
However, apart from the title, in modern translations of ''The Republic'', alternative translations of ''politeia'' are also used.)
Republican France encouraged the establishment of republics in its former colonies.
Simón Bolívar, both the main instigator of the revolts and one of its most important theorists, was sympathetic to liberal ideals but felt that Latin America lacked the social cohesion for such a system to function and advocated autocracy as necessary.
The French Third Republic was established in 1870, when a civil revolutionary committee refused to accept Napoleon III's surrender during the Franco-Prussian War.
Each were large trading ports, and further expanded by using naval power to control large parts of the Mediterranean.
With the United States Declaration of Independence the leaders of the revolt firmly rejected the monarchy and embraced republicanism.
The United States began to have considerable influence in East Asia in the later part of the 19th century, with Protestant missionaries playing a central role.
This understanding of a republic as a distinct form of government from a liberal democracy is one of the main theses of the Cambridge School of historical analysis.
Most often a republic is a single sovereign state, but there are also sub-sovereign state entities that are referred to as republics, or which have governments that are described as 'republican' in nature.
Montesquieu felt that a city-state should ideally be a republic, but maintained that a limited monarchy was better suited to a large nation.
This meaning was widely adopted early in the history of the United States, including in Noah Webster's dictionary of 1828.
This includes ancient Athens, Sparta and the Roman Republic.
In the 1960s and 1970s a revisionist school  led by the likes of Bernard Bailyn began to argue that republicanism was just as or even more important than liberalism in the creation of the United States.
Polybius expanded on many of these ideas, again focusing on the idea of mixed government.
The term can quite literally be translated as "public matter".
These subsequent writers have further explored the history of the idea, and also outlined how a modern republic should function.
Across Europe a wealthy merchant class developed in the important trading cities.
Real legitimacy for political decisions comes from the elected representatives and is derived from the will of the people.
It also saw a reaction against the total control of the monarch as a series of writers created the ideology known as liberalism.
The term ''politeia'' can be translated as ''form of government'', ''polity'', or ''regime'', and is therefore not always a word for a specific type of regime as the modern word republic is.
Italy was the most densely populated area of Europe, and also one with the weakest central government.
The indirect election of the president through the electoral college conforms to the concept of republic as one with a system of indirect election.
European states in 2015.
In medieval Northern Italy, a number of city states had commune or signoria based governments.
Republicanism is often referred to as the founding ideology of the United States.
J. G. A. Pocock has argued that a distinct republican tradition stretches from the classical world to the present.
Outside Europe another group of republics was created as the Napoleonic Wars allowed the states of Latin America to gain their independence.
When the Habsburgs tried to reassert control over the region both rural farmers and town merchants joined the rebellion.
Most of these Enlightenment thinkers were far more interested in ideas of constitutional monarchy than in republics.
The Althing, however, is still Iceland's parliament, almost 800 years later.
In the opinion of some, direct election confers legitimacy upon the president and gives the office much of its political power.
Currently, 147 of the world's 206 sovereign states use the word "republic" as part of their official names; not all of these are republics in the sense of having elected governments, nor do all nations with elected governments use the word "republic" in their names.
Knud Haakonssen has noted that, by the Renaissance, Europe was divided with those states controlled by a landed elite being monarchies and those controlled by a commercial elite being republics.
However, in Book III of his ''Politics'' (1279a), Aristotle was apparently the first classical writer to state that the term ''politeia'' can be used to refer more specifically to one type of ''politeia'': "When the citizens at large govern for the public good, it is called by the name common to all governments (''to koinon onoma pasōn tōn politeiōn''), government (''politeia'')".
Unlike Italy and Germany, much of the rural area was thus not controlled by feudal barons, but by independent farmers who also used communal forms of government.
North Korea and Syria are two notable examples where a son has inherited political control.
The 20th century saw republicanism become an important idea in much of the Middle East, as monarchies were removed in many states of the region.
One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland in 1000, where the Althing decreed, in order to prevent an invasion, that all Icelanders must be baptized, and forbade celebration of pagan rituals.
Republics became more common in the Western world starting in the late 18th century, eventually displacing absolute monarchy as the most common form of government in Europe.
By the start of the 20th century France, Switzerland and San Marino remained the only republics in Europe.
European states in 1930.
Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.
In parliamentary systems the head of government, most often titled prime minister, exercises the most real political power.
The stunning success of France in the French Revolutionary Wars saw republics spread by force of arms across much of Europe as a series of client republics were set up across the continent.
In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs, the Commonwealth began to suffer from long conflicts between warring clans.
This changed when, after the 1908 Lisbon Regicide, the 5 October 1910 revolution established the Portuguese Republic.
Like the city-states of Italy and the Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World.
the United Kingdom attempted to follow the model it had for its earlier settler colonies of creating independent Commonwealth realms still linked under the same monarchy.
What exactly the writers of the constitution felt this should mean is uncertain.
Additionally, this requirement ensured that only other republics could join the union.
The liberal and republican writers of the west also exerted influence.
In the example of the United States, the original 13 British colonies became independent states after the American Revolution, each having a republican form of government.
In the aftermath of the Second World War the communists gradually gained control of Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary and Albania, ensuring that the states were reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies.
Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands.
While the early caliphate maintained the principles of an elected ruler, later states became hereditary or military dictatorships though many maintained some pretense of a consultative shura.
