One of the most important cities in this region is Duisburg with the largest river port in Europe (Duisport).
With its outstanding architectural monuments, the slopes full of vines, settlements crowded on the narrow river banks and scores of castles lined up along the top of the steep slopes, the Middle Rhine Valley can be considered the epitome of the Rhine romanticism.
The Seerhein is only four km long.
In the centre of Basel, the first major city in the course of the stream, is located the "Rhine knee"; this is a major bend, where the overall direction of the Rhine changes from West to North.
It is located at approximately .
Near Tamins-Reichenau the Anterior Rhine and the Posterior Rhine join and form the Rhine.
Today, the Upper Rhine area hosts many important manufacturing and service industries, particularly in the centers Basel, Strasbourg and Mannheim-Ludwigshafen.
The Rhine carries its name without distinctive accessories only from the confluence of the Vorderrhein and Hinterrhein near Tamins-Reichenau.
Most of Luxembourg and a very small part of Belgium also drain to the Rhine via the Moselle.
Near Sankt Goarshausen, the Rhine flows around the famous rock Lorelei.
This decreed that it would be occupied by the allies, until 1935 and after that, it would be a demilitarised zone, with the German army forbidden to enter.
Here, too, the river water is hardly mixed with the lake water.
As it approaches the Dutch border, the Rhine has an annual mean discharge of  and an average width of .
The Dutch name for Rhine is "Rijn".
Between about AD&nbsp;14 and 180, the assignment of legions was as follows: for the army of Germania Inferior, two legions at Vetera (Xanten), I Germanica and XX Valeria (Pannonian troops); two legions at oppidum Ubiorum ("town of the Ubii"), which was renamed to Colonia Agrippina, descending to Cologne, V Alaudae, a Celtic legion recruited from Gallia Narbonensis and XXI, possibly a Galatian legion from the other side of the empire.
After this number was placed into the authoritative Brockhaus Enzyklopädie, it became generally accepted and found its way into numerous textbooks and official publications.
The '''Vorderrhein''' (English: ''Anterior Rhine'') arises from numerous source streams in the upper Surselva and flows in an easterly direction.
The mouth of the Rhine into Lake Constance forms an inland delta.
''Seven Days to the River Rhine'' was a Warsaw Pact war plan for an invasion of Western Europe during the Cold War.
Into it flow tributaries from the south, some longer, some equal in length, such as the ''Reno di Medel'', the ''Rein da Maighels'', and the ''Rein da Curnera''.
Here the Rhine flows through the largest conurbation in Germany, the Rhine-Ruhr region.
The High Rhine begins in Stein am Rhein at the western end of the Untersee.
Two thirds of the water flow volume of the Rhine flows farther west, through the Waal and then, via the Merwede and Nieuwe Merwede (De Biesbosch), merging with the Meuse, through the Hollands Diep and Haringvliet estuaries, into the North Sea.
This system of numerous bays, estuary-like extended rivers, many islands and constant changes of the coastline, is hard to imagine today.
In northwest Europe, it saw two very cold phases, peaking around 70,000&nbsp;BP and around 29,000–24,000&nbsp;BP.
About 11000 yr ago, the Rhine estuary was in the Strait of Dover.
A curiosity of this border line is that the parts of the city of Mainz on the right bank of the Rhine were given to Hesse by the occupying forces in 1945.
The northwestern part of the estuary (around Hook of Holland), is still called ''Maasmond'' ("Meuse Mouth"), ignoring the fact that it now carries only water from the Rhine.
The northern parts of the Untersee (Lake Zell and Gnadensee) remain virtually unaffected by the flow.
Since the Rhine contributes most of the water, the shorter term ''Rhine Delta'' is commonly used.
This discharge distribution has been maintained since 1709 by river engineering works including the digging of the Pannerdens canal and the installaton, in the 20th&nbsp;century, of a series of weirs on the Nederrijn river.
Rates of sea-level rise had dropped so far that natural sedimentation by the Rhine and coastal processes could together compensate for the transgression by the sea; in the last 7000&nbsp;years, the coastline was roughly at the same location.
Direct human impact in the delta began with the mining of peat for salt and fuel from Roman times onward.
but in the 10th century, it was fully within the Holy Roman Empire, flowing through Swabia, Franconia and Lower Lorraine.
Since ~3000 yr BP (= years Before Present), human impact is seen in the delta.
As northwest Europe slowly began to warm up from 22,000 years ago onward, frozen subsoil and expanded alpine glaciers began to thaw and fall-winter snow covers melted in spring.
Its banks are usually heavily populated and industrialized, in particular the agglomerations Cologne, Düsseldorf and Ruhr area.
The Dornbirner Ach had to be diverted, too, and it now flows parallel to the canalized Rhine into the lake.
The Romans kept eight legions in five bases along the Rhine.
In some places, there are large compensation pools, for example the huge ''Bassin de compensation de Plobsheim'' in Alsace.
This caused the Rhine's course to be diverted through the English Channel.
They join the Rhine near Koblenz, for the right and left respectively.
In Mainz, the Rhine leaves the Upper Rhine Valley and flows through the Mainz Basin.
Three countries border the Obersee, namely Switzerland in the south, Austria in the southeast and the German states of Bavaria in the northeast and Baden-Württemberg in the north and northwest.
Beyond these rivers she held only the fertile plain of Frankfurt, opposite the Roman border fortress of Moguntiacum (Mainz), the southernmost slopes of the Black Forest and a few scattered bridge-heads.
By the early Pleistocene period, the Rhine had captured most of its current Alpine watershed from the Rhône, including the Aar.
Later an artificial ditch of about two km was dug.
This has already happened to the former Lake Tuggenersee.
The large sediment loads are partly due to the extensive land improvements upstreams.
In 1932 the German encyclopedia Knaurs Lexikon stated the length as 1,320 kilometres (820 miles), presumably a typographical error.
The Avers Rhine joins from the South.
For example, the upper Germanic peoples combined into the Alemanni.
Though they retained the name, these streams no longer carry water from the Rhine, but are used for draining the surrounding land and polders.
* Albula-Landwasser area: In the Dischma valley, near Davos, far east of the Rhine, there's a place called ''Am Rin'' ("Upon Rhine").
Here a number of river islands occur, locally known as "Rheinauen".
The cut off Old Rhine at first formed a swamp landscape.
The Germanic populations of these lands seem in Roman times to have been scanty, and Roman subjects from the modern Alsace-Lorraine had drifted across the river eastwards.
As an effect of human work it empties into Lake Constance on Austrian territory and not on the border that follows its old natural river bed.
The Albula draws its water mainly from the Landwasser with the Dischmabach as the largest source stream, but almost as much from the Gelgia, which comes down from the Julier Pass.
The southern half of the Upper Rhine forms the border between France (Alsace) and Germany (Baden-Württemberg).
With an average discharge of 557&nbsp;m³/s, the Aar is more voluminous than the Rhine, which has an average discharge of 439&nbsp;m³/s.
Unlike the Alpine Rhine and Upper Rhine, it flows to the west.
It flows farther west, to rejoin the Noord River into the Nieuwe Maas and to the North Sea.
Between Bingen and Bonn, the Middle Rhine flows through the Rhine Gorge, a formation which was created by erosion.
Until the early 1980s, industry was a major source of water pollution.
In the Early Pleistocene, the Rhine followed a course to the northwest, through the present North Sea.
In the geologically recent past the main process distributing sediment across the delta has been the shifting of river channels to new locations on the floodplain (termed avulsion).
However, this name is also used for the river delta where the Rhine flows into Lake Constance, so it is clearer to call the larger one ''Rhine-Meuse delta'', or even ''Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta'', as the Scheldt ends in the same delta.
The river spot has a reputation for being a challenge for inexperienced navigators.
The present Mediterranean Sea descends from this somewhat larger Tethys sea.
Distance markers along the Rhine measure the distance from the bridge in the old city centre of Constance.
The Rhine Falls are situated below Schaffhausen.
Nevertheless, the Alpine Rhine is considered the main branch, because it is longer.
Many local fields have an official name containing this element.
This section is nearly 86&nbsp;km long, and descends from a height of 599 m to 396 m. It flows through a wide glacial alpine valley known as the Rhine Valley ().
From the Eocene onwards, the ongoing Alpine orogeny caused a N–S rift system to develop in this zone.
The middle flow begins as Nederrijn, then changes into Lek, then joins the Noord, thereby forming Nieuwe Maas.
In addition, were a double legion, XIV and XVI, at Moguntiacum (Mainz).
Legally, the Central Bridge is the boundary between High and Upper Rhine.
Man was already resident in the area when these events happened.
The most important tributaries in this area are the Ill below of Strasbourg, the Neckar in Mannheim and the Main across from Mainz.
However, at Wijk bij Duurstede, the Nederrijn changes its name and becomes the Lek.
The last phase slightly predates the global last ice age maximum (Last Glacial Maximum).
Since that time, the Rhine has added the watershed above Lake Constance (Vorderrhein, Hinterrhein, Alpenrhein; captured from the Rhône), the upper reaches of the Main, beyond Schweinfurt and the Vosges Mountains, captured from the Meuse, to its watershed.
The river now flows North as Upper Rhine through the Upper Rhine Plain, which is about 300&nbsp;km long and up to 40&nbsp;km wide.
The Aare more than doubles the Rhine's water discharge, to an average of nearly , and provides more than a fifth of the discharge at the Dutch border.
The many castles and fortifications along the Rhine testify to its importance as a waterway in the Holy Roman Empire.
Between Eglisau and Basel, the High Rhine consistently forms the border.
The rate of flow was increased and the ground water level fell significantly.
About 7000–5000 BP, a general warming encouraged migration up the Danube and down the Rhine by peoples to the east, perhaps encouraged by the sudden massive expansion of the Black Sea, as the Mediterranean Sea burst into it through the Bosporus, about 7500&nbsp;BP.
The Rhine then had the Sieg as a tributary, but not yet the Moselle (river).
The Ruhr, which joins the Rhine in Duisburg, is nowadays a clean river, thanks to a combination of stricter environmental controls, a transition from heavy industry to light industry and cleanup measures, such as the reforestation of Slag and brownfields.
Rapid warming and changes of vegetation, to open forest, began about 13,000&nbsp;BP.
Near Sils the Hinterrhein is joined by the Albula, from the East, from the Albula Pass region.
The region downstream of Duisburg is more agricultural.
The Rhine became an important symbol in German nationalism during the formation of the German state in the 19th century (see Rhine romanticism).
The Rhine-Meuse Delta, the most important natural region of the Netherlands begins near Millingen aan de Rijn, close to the Dutch-German border with the division of the Rhine into Waal and Nederrijn.
Nearby, on the other side of the Sertig, is the ''Rinerhorn''.
The Aare also contains the waters from the  summit of Finsteraarhorn, the highest point of the Rhine basin.
After three main valleys separated by the two gorges, Roflaschlucht and Viamala, it reaches Reichenau.
Such was the case during the Last Glacial Maximum, ca.
Through stream capture, the Rhine extended its watershed southward.
Although many plants and factories can be found along the Rhine up into Switzerland, it is along the Lower Rhine that the bulk of them are concentrated, as the river passes the major cities of Cologne, Düsseldorf and Duisburg.
Like in the Obersee, the flow the Rhine can be traced in the Untersee.
The Radolfzeller Aach adds large amounts of water from the Danube system to the Untersee.
The valleys are separated by the ''Rofla Gorge'' and ''Viamala Gorge''.
The upper Rhine and upper Danube are easily crossed.
Its sources are located in the Adula Alps (Rheinwaldhorn, Rheinquellhorn and Güferhorn).
The bridges at Nijmegen, over the Waal distributary of the Rhine, were also an objective of Operation Market Garden.
The High Rhine is characterized by numerous dams.
The actual number of legions present at any base or in all, depended on whether a state or threat of war existed.
The rate of erosion equaled the uplift in the region, such that the river was left at about its original level while the surrounding lands raised.
French leaders, such as Louis XIV and Napoleon Bonaparte, tried with varying degrees of success to annex lands west of the Rhine.
The Cadlimo Valley in the Canton of Ticino is drained by the ''Reno di Medel'', which crosses the geomorphologic Alpine main ridge from the south.
The Alsace on the left banks of the Upper Rhine was sold to Burgundy by Archduke Sigismund of Austria in 1469 and eventually fell to France in the Thirty Years' War.
At the end of World War I, the Rhineland was subject to the Treaty of Versailles.
Other factors of importance to the shape of the delta are the local tectonic activities of the Peel Boundary Fault, the substrate and geomorphology, as inherited from the Last Glacial and the coastal-marine dynamics, such as barrier and tidal inlet formations.
The Old English river name was variously inflected as masculine or feminine; and its Old Icelandic adoption was inflected as feminine.
At about 180&nbsp;MBP, in the Jurassic Period, the two plates reversed direction and began to compress the Tethys floor, causing it to be subducted under Eurasia and pushing up the edge of the latter plate in the Alpine Orogeny of the Oligocene and Miocene Periods.
The Rhine-Meuse Delta is a tidal delta, shaped not only by the sedimentation of the rivers, but also by tidal currents.
The Rhine emerges from Lake Constance, flows generally westward, as the ''Hochrhein'', passes the Rhine Falls, and is joined by its major tributary, the river Aare.
The name ''Rijn'', from here on, is used only for smaller streams farther to the north, which together formed the main river Rhine in Roman times.
Near Sargans a natural dam, only a few metres high, prevents it from flowing into the open Seeztal valley and then through Lake Walen and Lake Zurich into the river Aare.
At the Waal, for example, the most landward tidal influence can be detected between Brakel and Zaltbommel.
Coeval absolute sea-level rise and tectonic subsidence have strongly influenced delta evolution.
One source is ''Lai da Tuma'' (2345 m) with the ''Rein da Tuma'', which is usually indicated as source of the Rhine, flowing through it.
During periods of lower sea levels within the various ice ages, the Rhine took a left turn, creating the Channel River, the course of which now lies below the English Channel.
At the begin of the Holocene (~11,700 years ago), the Rhine occupied its Late-Glacial valley.
All streams in the source area are partially, sometimes completely, captured and sent to storage reservoirs for the local hydro-electric power plants.
Northeastern France drains to the Rhine via the Moselle; smaller rivers drain the Vosges and Jura Mountains uplands.
The river IJssel branch flows to the north and enters the IJsselmeer (formerly the Zuider Zee), initially a brackish lagoon but a freshwater lake since 1932.
For most of its length, the Seerhein forms the border between Germany and Switzerland.
* Hinterrhein basin: Hinterrhein/Rein Posteriur, ''Reno di Lei'', ''Madrischer Rhein'', ''Avers Rhine'', ''Jufer Rhein''
This might explain the confusing naming of the various branches.
The Confederation of the Rhine was established by Napoleon, as a French client state, in 1806 and lasted until 1814, during which time it served as a significant source of resources and military manpower for the First French Empire.
The English Channel, the Irish Channel and most of the North Sea were dry land, mainly because sea level was approximately  lower than today.
During the so-called Anglian glaciation (~450,000&nbsp;yr&nbsp;BP, marine oxygen isotope stage&nbsp;12), the northern part of the present North Sea was blocked by the ice and a large lake developed, that overflowed through the English Channel.
Depending on the water level, this flow of the Rhine water is clearly visible along the entire length of the lake.
In World War II, it was recognised that the Rhine would present a formidable natural obstacle to the invasion of Germany, by the Western Allies.
There remained some dry land in the southern North Sea, known as Doggerland, connecting mainland Europe to Britain.
According to geologists, the characteristic narrow valley form was created by erosion by the river while the surrounding landscape was lifted (see water gap).
Until 1932 the generally accepted length of the Rhine was 1,230 kilometres (764 miles).
* The song ''Die Wacht am Rhein'', which became almost a national anthem.
The mouths of the Rhine, in the county of Holland, fell to the Burgundian Netherlands in the 15th century; Holland remained contentious territory throughout the European wars of religion and the eventual collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, when the length of the Rhine fell to the First French Empire and its client states.
It has an average water flow of 373&nbsp;m³/s (mean summer discharge 700&nbsp;m³/s) and is the second largest waterfall in Europe in terms of potential energy, after Dettifoss in Iceland.
The northern Alps were then drained by the Danube.
It was made navigable to the Swiss town of Rheineck.
In 1840, the Rhine crisis, prompted by French prime minister Adolphe Thiers desire to reinstate the Rhine as a natural border, led to a diplomatic crisis and a wave of nationalism in Germany.
The dominant economic sectors in the Middle Rhine area are viniculture and tourism.
Dead branches dried up and the amount of forests on the flood plains decreased sharply.
From here, the situation becomes more complicated, as the Dutch name ''Rijn'' no longer coincides with the main flow of water.
Three more flows carry significant amounts of water: the Nieuwe Merwede ("New Merwede"), which branches off from the southern branch where it changes from Boven to Beneden Merwede; the Oude Maas ("Old Meuse"), which branches off from the southern branch where it changes from Beneden Merwede into Noord, and Dordtse Kil, which branches off from Oude Maas.
Before the St. Elizabeth's flood (1421), the Meuse flowed just south of today's line Merwede-Oude Maas to the North Sea and formed an archipelago-like estuary with Waal and Lek.
Numerous larger and smaller tributary rivers bear the name of the ''Rhine'' or equivalent in various Romansh idioms like ''Rein'' or ''Ragn''.
For the army of Germania Superior: one legion, II Augusta, at Argentoratum (Strasbourg); and one, XIII Gemina, at Vindonissa (Windisch).
It connects the Obersee with the 30&nbsp;cm lower Untersee.
The watershed of the Rhine reaches into the Alps today, but it did not start out that way.
The cold water flows near the surface and at first doesn't mix with the warmer, green waters of Upper Lake.
As a meandering river, it reworked its ice-age floodplain.
The main elements of this rift are the Upper Rhine Graben, in southwest Germany and eastern France and the Lower Rhine Embayment, in northwest Germany and the southeastern Netherlands.
Most of the water flows via the ''Constance hopper'' into the ''Rheinrinne'' ("Rhine Gutter") and Seerhein.
This branch once formed the line along which the Limes Germanicus were built.
From Wijk bij Duurstede, the old north branch of the Rhine is called Kromme Rijn ("Bent Rhine") past Utrecht, first Leidse Rijn ("Rhine of Leiden") and then, Oude Rijn ("Old Rhine").
Since the Peace of Westphalia, the Upper Rhine formed a contentious border between France and Germany.
The natural Rhine originally branched into at least two arms and formed small islands by precipitating sediments.
Lake Constance consists of three bodies of water: the Obersee ("upper lake"), the Untersee ("lower lake"), and a connecting stretch of the Rhine, called the Seerhein ("Lake Rhine").
Since 7500 yr ago, a situation with tides and currents has existed, very similar to the present.
At present, the branches Waal and Nederrijn-Lek discharge to the North Sea through the former Meuse estuary, near Rotterdam.
Around 2.5&nbsp;million years ago (ending 11,600 years ago) was the geological period of the Ice Ages.
Other rivers in the Ruhr Area, above all, the Emscher, still carry a considerable degree of pollution.
The allies left the Rhineland, in 1930 and the German army re-occupied it in 1936, which was enormously popular in Germany.
The hydrography of the current delta is characterized by the delta's main arms, disconnected arms (Hollandse IJssel, Linge, Vecht, etc.)
The Alpine Rhine begins in the most western part of the Swiss canton of Graubünden, and later forms the border between Switzerland to the West and Liechtenstein and later Austria to the East.
With globally shrinking ice-cover, ocean water levels rose and the English Channel and North Sea re-inundated.
The river traverses the southern, which, in isolation, is sometimes called ''Rhinesee'' ("Lake Rhine").
During interglacials, when sea level rose to approximately the present level, the Rhine built deltas, in what is now the Netherlands.
Establishing "natural borders" on the Rhine was a long-term goal of French foreign policy, since the Middle Ages, though the language border was – and is – far more to the west.
On other stretches, both sides are Swiss; in fact most of the Canton of Schaffhausen is on the North bank.
The northern Alps were then drained by the Rhone.
As sea-level rise continued in the Netherlands, the formation of the Holocene Rhine-Meuse delta began (~8,000&nbsp;years ago).
The section of the Upper Rhine downstream from Mainz is also known as the "Island Rhine".
The IJssel branch carries one ninth of the water flow of the ''Rhine'' north into the IJsselmeer (a former bay), while the Nederrijn carries approximately two ninths of the flow west along a route parallel to the Waal.
Here the High Rhine ends.
The gorge is quite deep and is the stretch of the river which is known for its many castles and vineyards.
Much of the discharge was routed to the Rhine and its downstream extension.
The delta is delimited in the West by the ''Alter Rhein'' ("Old Rhine") and in the East by a modern canalized section.
In northern Europe, the North Sea Basin had formed during the Triassic and Jurassic periods and continued to be a sediment receiving basin since.
Most of the Rhine's current course was not under the ice during the last Ice Age; although, its source must still have been a glacier.
This meant that high tide formed a serious risk because strong tidal currents could tear huge areas of land into the sea.
* Vorderrhine area: Vorderrhein/Rein Anteriur, ''Rein da Medel'',''Rein da Tuma'', ''Rein da Curnera'', ''Rein da Maighels'', ''Rein da Cristallina'',  ''Rein da Nalps'', ''Rein da Plattas'', ''Rein da Sumvitg'', ''Rein da Vigliuts'', ''Valser Rhine''
It falls from 395&nbsp;m to 252&nbsp;m.
The Rhine turns west and enters the Netherlands, where, together with the rivers Meuse and Scheldt, it forms the extensive Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta, one of the larger river deltas in western Europe.
The Rhine Gorge between Rüdesheim am Rhein and Koblenz is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Some stretches of the High Rhine between Stein am Rhein and Eglisau form the border between Switzerland on the South bank and Germany in the North.
In the modern era, it has become a symbol of German nationalism.
The Mainz Basin ends in Bingen am Rhein; the Rhine continues as "Middle Rhine" into the Rhine Gorge in the Rhenish Slate Mountains.
Like the Upper Rhine, the Lower Rhine used to meander until engineering created a solid river bed.
Since approximately 600,000&nbsp;years ago, six major Ice Ages have occurred, in which sea level dropped  and much of the continental margins became exposed.
The exception is the old city centre of Constance, on the Swiss side of the river.
In the mouth region, it is therefore necessary to permanently remove gravel by dredging.
