As in colonial times, johnnycakes are made with corn meal and water, then pan-fried much like pancakes.
The last 16 presidential elections in Rhode Island have resulted in the Democratic Party winning the Ocean State's Electoral College votes 12 times.
The state's most populous ethnic group, non-Hispanic white, has declined from 96.1% in 1970 to 76.5% in 2011.
At approximately 2&nbsp;a.m. on June 10, 1772, a band of Providence residents attacked the grounded revenue schooner ''Gaspee'', burning it to the waterline for enforcing unpopular trade regulations within Narragansett Bay.
From 2000 through 2008, RIPTA offered seasonal ferry service linking Providence and Newport (already connected by highway) funded by grant money from the United States Department of Transportation.
Monthly average temperatures range from a high of  to a low of .
There are more than 30 islands within the bay.
Portsmouth was the site of the first African-American military unit, the 1st Rhode Island Regiment, to fight for the U.S. in the Battle of Rhode Island of August 29, 1778.
The Fortune 500 companies CVS Caremark and Textron are based in Woonsocket and Providence, respectively.
The first period of rainy weather in mid-March caused localized flooding and, two weeks later, more rain caused more widespread flooding in many towns, especially south of Providence.
The arrival of a French fleet forced the British to scuttle their own ships rather than surrender them to the French.
This unique syrup was invented in the state and is sold in almost all Rhode Island supermarkets, as well as border states.
Per the 2013 American Communities Survey, Rhode Island has the highest paid elementary school teachers in the country, with an average salary of $75,028 (adjusted to inflation).
Rhode Island has two professional sports teams, both of which are top-level minor league affiliates for teams in Boston.
Rhode Island elected the first delegates (Stephen Hopkins and Samuel Ward) to the Continental Congress on June 15, 1774.
A foot-long, overstuffed sandwich (of whatever kind) is called a "grinder."
The Pawtucket Red Sox baseball team of the Triple-A International League are an affiliate of the Boston Red Sox.
* A second theory concerns the fact that Adriaen Block passed by Aquidneck during his expeditions in the 1610s, described in a 1625 account of his travels as "an island of reddish appearance" (in 17th-century Dutch, "''een rodlich Eylande''").
Rhode Island's most one-sided Presidential election result was in 1964, with over 80% of Rhode Island's votes going for Lyndon B. Johnson.
Rhode Island is on the borderline between humid subtropical and humid continental climates with warm, rainy summers and chilly winters.
The Rhode Island General Assembly created the first standing army in the colonies (1,500 men) on April 22, 1775.
Linguiça or chouriço (a spicy Portuguese sausage) and peppers is also popular among the state's large Portuguese community, eaten with hearty bread (though this is also popular in other areas of New England).
File:National-atlas-rhode-island.png|Map of Rhode Island, showing major cities and roads
In recent years, the presence of the word ''plantation'' in the state's name became a sufficiently contested issue that, on June 25, 2009, the General Assembly voted to hold a general referendum determining whether "and Providence Plantations" would be dropped from the official name.
The state also shares a short maritime border with New York.
There are four NCAA Division I schools in Rhode Island.
(The word ''quahog'' comes from the Narragansett Indian word "poquauhock"; see ''A Key into the Language of America'' by Roger Williams 1643.)
Since the Great Depression, the Rhode Island Democratic Party has dominated local politics.
All four of the Division I schools in the state compete in an intrastate all-sports competition known as the Ocean State Cup, with Bryant winning the most recent cup in 2011–12 academic year.
Interstate 295 functions as a partial beltway encircling Providence to the west.
Peter is seen working at the Pawtucket brewery, and other state locations are mentioned.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Rhode Island was 1,056,298 on July 1, 2015, a 0.35% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
In 2014, Rhode Island received grants from the Environmental Protection Agency in the amount of $2,711,685 to clean up Brownfield sites in eight locations.
A rare type of rock called Cumberlandite is found only in Rhode Island (specifically in the town of Cumberland) and is the state rock.
Rhode Island has the lowest level of energy consumption per capita of any state.
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, 84% of the population aged 5 and older spoke only American English, while 8.07% spoke Spanish at home, 3.80% Portuguese, 1.96% French, 1.39% Italian and 0.78% speak other languages at home accordingly.
The colony was amalgamated into the Dominion of New England in 1686, as King James II attempted to enforce royal authority over the autonomous colonies in British North America.
Party pizza is a box of these pizza strips.
Scornful New Englanders called this modified version "Manhattan-style" clam chowder because, in their view, calling someone a New Yorker was an insult.
(New Shoreham on Block Island is not served).
The Reds played at the Rhode Island Auditorium, located on North Main Street in Providence, Rhode Island from 1926 through 1972, when the team affiliated with the New York Rangers and moved into the newly built Providence Civic Center.
Eventually, it became a place of religious freedom.
The exceptions were East Greenwich, West Greenwich, and Scituate.
In the 1980 presidential election, Rhode Island was one of six states to vote against Republican Ronald Reagan.
Narragansett Bay is a major feature of the state's topography.
Rhode Island furnished 25,236 fighting men, of whom 1,685 died.
Rhode Islanders refer to a drinking fountain as a "bubbler" (sometimes pronounced "bubahluh") and sometimes call milkshakes "cabinets".
The state was notorious for organized crime activity from the 1950s into the 1990s when the Patriarca crime family held sway over most of New England from its Providence headquarters.
In the early 19th century, Rhode Island was subject to a tuberculosis outbreak which led to public hysteria about vampirism.
Historians have theorized that this "reddish appearance" resulted from either red autumn foliage or red clay on portions of the shore.
Federally, Rhode Island is a reliably Democratic state during presidential elections, usually supporting the Democratic Presidential nominee.
Watch Hill has the nation's oldest carousel that has been in continuous operation since 1850.
RI-403 links RI-4 with Quonset Point.
Irish Americans have a strong presence in Newport and Kent counties.
Providence won three straight games to become the first champions in major league baseball history.
Hispanics in the state make up 12.8% of the population, predominantly Dominican, Puerto Rican, and Guatemalan populations.
Slater Mill in Pawtucket was the first commercially successful cotton-spinning mill with a fully mechanized power system in America and was the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution in the US.
Though the service was popular with residents and tourists, RIPTA was unable to continue on after the federal funding ended.
Although Rhode Island has the smallest land area of all 50 states, it has the second highest population density of any state in the Union, second to that of New Jersey.
The quintessential summer meal in Rhode Island is chowder and clam cakes.
The Chicago (now Arizona) Cardinals defeated the Providence Steam Roller 16–0.
The Brown University Bears compete in the Ivy League, the Bryant University Bulldogs compete in the Northeast Conference, the Providence College Friars compete in the Big East Conference, and the University of Rhode Island Rams compete in the Atlantic-10 Conference.
The charter apportioned legislative seats equally among the state's towns, over-representing rural areas and under-representing the growing industrial centers.
Additionally, Rhode Island is rated as the 5th most energy efficient state in the country.
Rhode Island is also home to the headquarters of the governing body for youth rugby league in the United States, the American Youth Rugby League Association or AYRLA.
Famous to Rhode Island is Snail Salad, which is served at numerous restaurants throughout the state.
In December 2012, the state's unemployment rate was 10.2%.
After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the colony regained its independence under the Royal Charter.
Second is tourism, supporting 39,000 jobs, with tourism-related sales at $4.56 billion (adjusted to inflation) in the year 2000.
Rhode Island is nicknamed "The Ocean State", and the nautical nature of Rhode Island's geography pervades its culture.
In 2004, Rhode Island gave John Kerry more than a 20-percentage-point margin of victory (the third-highest of any state), with 59.4% of its vote.
The income tax overhaul has now made Rhode Island competitive with other New England states by lowering its maximum tax rate to 5.99% and reducing the number of tax brackets to three.
Italian Americans make up a plurality in central and southern Providence County and French Canadians form a large part of northern Providence County.
The team played their home games at the old Messer Street Field in Providence.
RI-4 is a major north-south freeway linking Providence and Warwick (via I-95) with suburban and beach communities along Narragansett Bay.
The center of population of Rhode Island is located in Providence County, in the city of Cranston.
The idea of a Continental Congress was first proposed at a town meeting in Providence on May 17, 1774.
During fairs and carnivals, Rhode Islanders enjoy dough boys, plate-sized disks of fried dough sprinkled with powdered sugar (or pizza sauce).
It was in Pawtucket that Samuel Slater set up Slater Mill in 1793, using the waterpower of the Blackstone River to power his cotton mill.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) was called in to help flood victims.
The state's current governor is Gina Raimondo (D), and the lieutenant governor is Daniel McKee (D).
Both houses of the bicameral body are currently dominated by the Democratic Party; the presence of the Republican Party is almost non-existent in the state government, with Republicans holding a handful of seats in both the Senate and House of Representatives.
Rhode Island has some of the highest taxes in the country, particularly its property taxes, ranking seventh in local and state taxes, and sixth in real estate taxes.
They played in a 10,000 person stadium called the Cycledrome.
Bousquet has also collaborated with humorist and ''Providence Journal'' columnist Mark Patinkin on two books: ''The Rhode Island Dictionary'' and ''The Rhode Island Handbook''.
Rhode Island's official nickname is "The Ocean State", a reference to the fact that the state has several large bays and inlets that amount to about 14% of its total area.
The first fully automated post office in the country is located in Providence.
Native Hawaiian andother Pacific Islander
State officials made Rhode Island one of the few states to allow the owner to transfer license plate(s) to other family members in their will.
The show premiered on March 29, 2011.
RI-99 links Woonsocket with Providence (via RI-146).
In March 2010, areas of the state received record flooding due to rising rivers from heavy rain.
On June 15, 1775, the first naval engagement of the American Revolution occurred between a Colonial Sloop commanded by Capt.
The Pilgrims who later colonized the area assumed that Verrazzano's "Rhodes" was Aquidneck.
Both the white New England variety and the red Manhattan variety are popular, but there is also a unique clear-broth chowder known as ''Rhode Island Clam Chowder'' available in many restaurants.
''Body of Proof'''s first season was filmed entirely in Rhode Island.
The AYRLA has started the first-ever Rugby League youth competition in Providence Middle Schools, a program at the RI Training School, in addition to starting the first High School Competition in the USA in Providence Public High School.
12.4% of the total population was of Hispanic or Latino origin (they may be of any race).
Hot wieners are sometimes called gaggers, weinies, or New York System wieners, and they are smaller than a standard hot dog, served covered in a meat sauce, chopped onions, mustard, and celery salt.
Cartoonist Don Bousquet, a state icon, has made a career out of Rhode Island culture, drawing Rhode Island-themed gags in ''The Providence Journal'' and ''Yankee'' magazine.
Rhode Island was the first of the thirteen colonies to renounce its allegiance to the British Crown on May 4, 1776.
The name "Isle of Rodes" is used in a legal document as late as 1646.
The first automobile race on a track was held in Cranston on September 7, 1896.
They are rectangular strips of pizza without cheese.
Rhode Islanders developed a unique style of architecture in the 17th century called the stone-ender.
The mean elevation of the state is .
From 1930 to 1983, America's Cup races were sailed off Newport, and the extreme-sport X Games and Gravity Games were founded and hosted in the state's capital city.
During the Revolution, the British occupied Newport.
In 2011, Rhode Island completed work on a marked on-road bicycle path through Pawtucket and Providence, connecting the East Bay Bike Path with the Blackstone River Bikeway, completing a  bicycle route through the eastern side of the state.
Their reception was held at Hammersmith Farm, the Bouvier summer home in Newport.
RI-37 is an important east-west freeway through Cranston and Warwick and links I-95 with I-295.
It houses the Rhode Island Charter granted by King Charles II in 1663, the Brown University charter, and other state treasures.
Additionally, the Rhode Island General Assembly passed civil unions, and it was signed into law by Governor Lincoln Chafee on July 2, 2011.
During the American Civil War, Rhode Island was the first Union state to send troops in response to President Lincoln's request for help from the states.
''See List of Rhode Island Governors.''
The state's first income tax was enacted in 1971.
Green Airport with Boston.
Also located there is the Touro Synagogue, dedicated on December 2, 1763, considered by locals to be the first synagogue within the United States (see below for information on New York City's claim), and still serving.
He helped to produce the Beverly Cotton Manufactory, in which Moses Brown of Providence took an interest.
In 1980, Rhode Island became the first state to decriminalize prostitution indoors, but indoor prostitution was outlawed again in 2009; see Prostitution in Rhode Island.
They moved to New York in 1977 and, after multiple name changes, are now called the Hartford Wolf Pack.
On top is the world's fourth largest self-supported marble dome.
Eastern Rhode Island contains the lowlands of the Narragansett Bay, while Western Rhode Island forms part of the New England Upland.
Zeppoles are Italian doughnut-like pastries traditionally eaten on Saint Joseph's Day, often made with exposed centers of vanilla pudding, cream filling, or ricotta cream, and sometimes topped with a cherry.
It is mostly flat with no real mountains, and the state's highest natural point is Jerimoth Hill,  above sea level.
Rhode Island also has three of the nation's tallest bridges.
The other professional minor league team is the Providence Bruins ice hockey team of the American Hockey League, who are an affiliate of the Boston Bruins.
The referendum election was held on November 2, 2010, and the people voted overwhelmingly (78% to 22%) to retain the entire original name.
Voting rights were restricted to landowners holding at least $134 in property, disenfranchising well over half of the state's male citizens.
Amtrak service was also suspended between New York and Boston during this period.
The Providence Reds were a hockey team that played in the Canadian-American Hockey League (CAHL) between 1926 and 1936 and the American Hockey League (AHL) from 1936 to 1977, the last season of which they played as the Rhode Island Reds.
as well as explore the possibility of extending Connecticut's Shore Line East to T.F.
Spinach pies are similar to a calzone but filled with seasoned spinach instead of meat, sauce, and cheese.
The Reds are the oldest continuously operating minor-league hockey franchise in North America, having fielded a team in one form or another since 1926 in the CAHL.
The intent of the grants was to provide communities with the funding necessary to assess, clean up, and redevelop contaminated properties, boost local economies, and leverage jobs while protecting public health and the environment.
Block Island lies about  off the southern coast of the mainland and separates Block Island Sound and the Atlantic Ocean proper.
The second-largest island is Conanicut; the third-largest is Prudence.
They are sold by the half-dozen or dozen in most seafood restaurants around the state.
The third-largest industry is manufacturing.
Its United States Senators are Jack Reed (D) and Sheldon Whitehouse (D).
Rhode Island was heavily involved in the slave trade during the post-revolution era.
Rhode Island became the eighth state to fully recognize either same-sex marriage or civil unions.
Rain totals on March 29–30, 2010 exceeded 14&nbsp;inches (35.5&nbsp;cm) in many locales, resulting in the inundation of area rivers—especially the Pawtuxet River which runs through central Rhode Island.
The official name of the state is ''State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations'', which is derived from the merger of two colonies.
In 1636, Roger Williams was banished from the Massachusetts Bay Colony for his religious views, and he settled at the tip of Narragansett Bay on land granted to him by the Narragansett and Pequot tribes.
"Lots of Hope" supported by a $100,000 grant will partner with the City of Providence, the Soutside Community Land Trust and the Rhode Island Foundation to convert city-owned vacant lots into productive urban farms.
The team won the Calder Cup in 1938, 1940, 1949, and 1956.
Until November 2009 Rhode Island law made prostitution legal provided it took place indoors.
Despite its name, most of Rhode Island is located on the mainland of the United States.
Additionally, an official license plate lottery was implemented in 1995 through the Governor's Office for "preferred plates".
It is unclear how Aquidneck Island came to be known as Rhode Island, although there are two popular theories.
In a 2009 study Rhode Island was listed as the 9th safest state in the country.
Service was discontinued .
Three of the schools' football teams compete in the Football Championship Subdivision, the second-highest level of college football in the United States.
The state is underlain by the Avalon terrane and was once part of the micro-continent Avalonia before the Iapetus ocean closed.
It is known locally as "VJ Day" or simply "Victory Day".
Advocates for retaining the name argued that ''plantation'' was simply an archaic English synonym for ''colony'' and bore no relation to slavery.
Ann Smith Franklin of the Newport Mercury was the first female newspaper editor in America (August 22, 1762).
All but three of Rhode Island's 39 cities and towns voted for the Democratic candidate.
Samuel Gorton purchased lands at Shawomet in 1642 from the Narragansetts, precipitating a military dispute with the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
The Providence Steamrollers played in the Basketball Association of America which became the National Basketball Association.
Slaves were introduced at this time, although there is no record of any law legalizing slave-holding.
Rhode Island was the second to last state to make prostitution illegal.
Brown plays FCS football in the Ivy League, Bryant plays FCS football in the Northeast Conference, and Rhode Island plays FCS football in the Colonial Athletic Association.
In 1842, the charter government and Dorr's supporters held separate elections, and two rival governments claimed sovereignty over the state.
They play in the Dunkin' Donuts Center in Providence and won the AHL's Calder Cup during the 1998–99 AHL season.
RI-146 travels through the Blackstone Valley, linking Providence and I-95 with Worcester, Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Turnpike.
The goal of the plan is to reduce greenhouse gas and smog-causing emissions.
There are many historic mansions in the seaside city of Newport, including The Breakers, Marble House, and Belcourt Castle.
The sunset scene with the entire family on the beach takes place at Napatree Point.
According to the 2010 Census, 81.4% of the population was White (76.4% non-Hispanic white), 5.7% was Black or African American, 0.6% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.9% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 3.3% from two or more races.
On May 29, 1790, Rhode Island became the 13th and last state to ratify the Constitution.
All four schools compete in different conferences.
Shellfish is extremely popular, with clams being used in multiple ways.
Rhode Island abolished the death penalty very early, just after Michigan, the first state to abolish it, and carried out its last execution in the 1840s.
The privately run Block Island Ferry links Block Island with Newport and Narragansett with traditional and fast-ferry service, while the Prudence Island Ferry connects Bristol with Prudence Island.
Before the great expansion of athletic teams all over the country, Providence and Rhode Island in general played a great role in supporting teams.
The dish is normally prepared "family style" with over five pounds of snails mixed in with other ingredients commonly found in seafood dishes.
In 2011, 40.3% of Rhode Island's children under the age of one belonged to racial or ethnic minority groups, meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white.
Rhode Island's two United States Representatives are David Cicilline (D-1) and Jim Langevin (D-2).
Some Rhode Islanders speak with the distinctive, non-rhotic, traditional Rhode Island accent that many compare to a cross between the New York City and Boston accents (e.g., "water" sounds like "watuh").
The Grays played in the National League from 1878 to 1885.
Rhode Island was the first Colony to declare independence from Britain on May 4, 1776.
The tender was chased aground and captured.
FM Global, GTECH Corporation, Hasbro, American Power Conversion, Nortek, and Amica Mutual Insurance are all Fortune 1000 companies that are based in Rhode Island.
This settlement was called Portsmouth and was governed by the Portsmouth Compact.
Moses Brown teamed up with Samuel Slater and helped to create the second cotton mill in America, a water-powered textile mill.
''See congressional districts map.''
* Explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano noted the presence of an island near the mouth of Narragansett Bay in 1524, which he likened to the island of Rhodes (part of modern Greece).
The film adaptation of The Great Gatsby from 1974 was also filmed in Newport.
Rhode Island has a higher percentage of Americans of Portuguese ancestry, including Portuguese Americans and Cape Verdean Americans than any other state in the nation.
The Newport Casino is a National Historic Landmark building complex that presently houses the International Tennis Hall of Fame and features an active grass-court tennis club.
On May 4, 1776, Rhode Island became the first of the Thirteen Colonies to renounce its allegiance to the British Crown, and was the fourth among the newly sovereign states to ratify the Articles of Confederation on February 9, 1778.
Rhode Island is also home to a top semi-professional soccer club, the Rhode Island Reds, which compete in the National premier soccer league, in the fourth division of U.S. Soccer.
"Providence" referred to the concept of divine providence, and "plantations" was an English term for a colony.
The William C. O'Neill Bike Path (commonly known as the South County Bike Path) is a 8-mile (13&nbsp;km) path through South Kingstown and Narragansett.
Calamari (squid) is sliced into rings and fried and is served as an appetizer in most Italian restaurants, typically Sicilian-style (i.e., tossed with sliced banana peppers and with marinara sauce on the side).
The line was later extended southward to Wickford Junction, with service beginning April 23, 2012.
The celebrated march to Yorktown, Virginia, in 1781 ended with the defeat of the British at the Siege of Yorktown and the Battle of the Chesapeake.
Dorr's supporters led an armed rebellion against the charter government, and Dorr was arrested and imprisoned for treason against the state.
