For example, ZAPU tended to follow Soviet thinking, placing an emphasis on sophisticated weaponry in the hopes of winning a conventional battle like the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu.
Until after World War II, the landlocked British possession of Southern Rhodesia was not developed as an indigenous African territory, but rather as a unique state which reflected its multiracial character.
It passed legislation to become simply Rhodesia, but the British government refused to approve this on the grounds that the country's name was defined by British legislation and so could not be altered by the colonial government.
Other observers perceived South Africa's distancing itself from Rhodesia as being an early move in the process that led to majority rule in South Africa itself.
After the declaration of independence, and indeed for the entire duration of its existence, Rhodesia did not receive official recognition from any state, although it did maintain diplomatic relations with South Africa, which was then under apartheid.
Over the next nine years Rhodesian companies, spiting the freezing of their assets and blocking of overseas accounts, also perfected cunning techniques of sanctions evasion through both local and foreign subsidiaries, which operated on a clandestine trade network.
To protect civilians, emergency laws were imposed, broadening the legal definition of unlawful gatherings and giving the police greater powers to crack down on agitators or subversives.
ZANU preferred to politicise populations in areas which they intended to seize.
While often extraordinarily successful in inflicting heavy guerrilla casualties, such raids also on occasion failed to achieve their objectives.
The government adopted a 'strategic hamlets' policy of the kind used in Malaya and Vietnam to restrict the influence of insurgents over the population of rural areas.
In spite of offers from Ian Smith, the latter parties declined to participate in an election in which their political position would be insecure and under a proposed constitution which they had played no part in drafting and which was perceived as retaining strong white minority privilege.
An office was also established in Paris, but this was closed down by the French government in 1977.
Government ministers simply ignored his notices, pointing out that UDI made his office obsolete.
Similarly, the United States recalled its consul-general from Salisbury, and reduced consular staff, but did not move to close its consulate until the declaration of a republic in 1970.
Despite the poor showing of sanctions, Rhodesia found it nearly impossible to obtain diplomatic recognition abroad.
International business groups involved in the country (e.g.
However, a provisional government subsequently headed by Smith and his moderate colleague Abel Muzorewa failed in appeasing international critics or halting the bloodshed.
After 1965, there were those who continued to claim that they were collectively upholders of principle and defenders of such values against the twin threats of communism, manifested through the militant black nationalists, and – ironically – the decadence of Britain herself.
South Africa openly refused to observe the UN sanctions.
Initially, the state retained its pledged loyalty to Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, recognising her as Queen of Rhodesia.
The Rhodesian authorities responded by banning ZAPU and driving its supporters underground.
This altered immediately after the ascension of Edward Heath, who reopened negotiations.
Often repeated appeals to the Christian heritage of their pioneer ancestors in "defending the free world" reflected these beliefs.
Nevertheless, the new settlement, if approved, would also implement an immediate improvement in black political status, offer a means to terminate racial discrimination, and provide a solid guarantee against retrogressive constitutional amendments.
He ruled out acceptance for all five of the proposed principles as they stood, implying instead that Rhodesia was already legally entitled to independence—a claim which was overwhelmingly endorsed by registered voters in a referendum.
In April 1979 special forces carried out a raid on Joshua Nkomo's residence in Lusaka (Zambia) with the stated intention of assassinating him.
Portugal pursued a middle path with Rhodesia.
Its electoral register had property and education qualifications.
Following the UDI, however, Rhodesia began to demonstrate that she had the potential to develop a greater degree of economic self-sufficiency.
For their part, the Portuguese authorities sought a compromise whereby they would accept Reedman as an independent representative but deny him diplomatic status.
After UDI was proclaimed, UN officials branded Ian Smith's government as an "illegal racist minority regime" and called on member states to sever economic ties with Rhodesia, recommending sanctions on petroleum products and military hardware.
Bishop Muzorewa's government did not receive international recognition.
Ian Smith had dismissed his intransigent Defence Minister, P. K. van der Byl, as early as 1976.
However, few seemed to initially realise that Rhodesia was no longer within the Commonwealth's direct sphere of influence and British rule was now a constitutional fiction; Salisbury remained virtually immune to credible metropolitan leverage.
Salisbury went on using the shortened name in an official manner nevertheless, while the British government continued referring to the country as Southern Rhodesia.
The constitution prohibited Zimbabwe authorities from altering the Constitution for seven years without unanimous consent and required a three-quarters vote in Parliament for a further three years.
After Zimbabwe's independence, the new government closed its missions in Pretoria and Cape Town, only maintaining a trade mission in Johannesburg, while the South African Diplomatic Mission in Salisbury was also closed.
In 2009, Zimbabwe abandoned its currency, relying instead on foreign currencies such as the South African rand, the US dollar, the Botswana pula, the euro and the British pound, among others.
The 1961 Constitution governed Southern Rhodesia and independent Rhodesia up until 1969, using the Westminster Parliamentary System modified by a system of separate voter rolls with differing property and education qualifications, without regard to race.
The British government maintained this stance regarding the June–December 1979 successor state of Zimbabwe Rhodesia, and when Zimbabwe Rhodesia returned to colonial status from December 1979 to April 1980, it was as "Southern Rhodesia".
By colonial standards, public services were well-organised and praised for their efficiency.
Rhodesian Security Forces consisted of the Rhodesian Army, Royal Rhodesian Air Force, British South Africa Police, Rhodesian Ministry of Internal Affairs (INTAF) and the Guard Force.
The Bush War continued unabated and sanctions were not lifted.
+'''Numbers of white and black inhabitants before and during the Central African Federation'''
Some contemporary accounts claim that this interference in the lives of local residents induced many of them who had previously been neutral to support the guerrillas.
When Rhodesia set up an information office in Washington, D.C., OAS nations loudly protested.
After the Rhodesian Front began introducing incentives accorded to domestic production, industrial output expanded dramatically.
Because Rhodesian exports were generally competitive and had previously been entitled to preferential treatment on the British market, the former colony did not recognise the need for escalating the pace of diversification before independence.
With the agreement of the British Governor of Rhodesia, South African troops had entered the country to secure the road approaches to the Beit Bridge border crossing point.
It was essentially a power-sharing arrangement between whites and blacks which, in the eyes of many, particularly the insurgents, did not amount to majority rule.
This situation certainly made it very different from other lands which existed under colonial rule, as many Europeans had arrived to make permanent homes, populating the towns as traders or settling to farm the most productive soils.
In the months leading to the run-off, instances of extreme violence between the two major parties (ZANU PF and MDC) led Tsvangirai to withdraw from the election.
The Southern Rhodesian colonial government in Salisbury felt that in the absence of a "Northern" Rhodesia, the continued use of "Southern" was superfluous.
In 1970, the US government had made it clear that the UDI would not be recognised "under any circumstances".
Implementation of the proposed settlement hinged on popular acceptance, but the Rhodesian government consistently refused to submit it to a universal referendum.
In that same period, nationalists were implicated in arson targeting 18 schools and 10 churches.
In 1980, the post-independence government of Zimbabwe inherited a US$500 million national debt.
Broadly, ZANLA recruited mainly from Mashonaland and Manicaland provinces, whilst the ZIPRA recruited from Mashonaland West, Midlands and Matabeleland provinces of Zimbabwe.
The warships were to deter "by force, if necessary, vessels reasonably believed to be carrying oil destined for (Southern) Rhodesia".
Following a brutal guerrilla war fought with two African nationalist organisations (Robert Mugabe's ZANU and Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU), Rhodesian premier Ian Smith conceded to bi-racial democracy in 1978.
Although Southern Rhodesia never gained full dominion status within the Commonwealth of Nations, Southern Rhodesians ruled themselves from the attainment of 'Responsible Government' in 1923.
Britain, having already adopted extensive sanctions of its own, dispatched a Royal Navy squadron to monitor oil deliveries in the port of Beira, from which a strategic pipeline ran to Umtali.
Continuing civil war and a lack of international support eventually led the Rhodesian government to submit to an agreement with the UK in 1979.
Their faulty demolitions were uncovered by the Rhodesian Security Forces and the men easily tracked to a nearby ranch on 28 April, where they were shot resisting capture.
The storage tanks burned for five days, giving off a column of smoke that could be seen  away.
However, the United States Senate voted to end economic sanctions against Zimbabwe Rhodesia on 12 June.
The protected villages were compared by the guerrillas to concentration camps.
South Africa, however, retained  its "Accredited Diplomatic Representative" after UDI, which allowed it to continue to recognise British sovereignty as well as to deal with the ''de facto'' authority of the government of Ian Smith.
In 1978, there were 270,000 Rhodesians of European descent and more than six million Africans.
", Mugabe however, would reverse his commitment to these agreements some years later; the regime began confiscating white owned farm lands.
Even so, Gibbs continued to occupy his residence in Salisbury until 1970, when he vacated the premises and left Rhodesia following the declaration of a republic.
ZANU also attracted business supporters who saw the course that future events were likely to take.
Such an exodus had been prepared for by the South African government.
Even Smith's ideological allies in Pretoria, although sympathetic, failed to recognise the new country on an equal level.
ZANU also attracted professionals, students, and feminists to its ranks.
Japan continued to accept more Rhodesian exports than any other nation, and Iran provided oil.
The plan was eventually scuttled, as it was obvious that Mugabe enjoyed widespread support from the black majority despite voter intimidation, as well as the fact that the coup would gain no external support, and a conflagration which would engulf the country was seen as inevitable.
Business leaders and politicians feted Nkomo on his visits to Europe.
In February 2009, a power-sharing accord was reached which resulted in the Zimbabwe Government of National Unity of 2009.
The authorities were also disturbed by the post-independence chaos which was plaguing other African nations at the time.
Prior to its closure, the mission flew the newly adopted Flag of Rhodesia, considered illegal by the Foreign Office, prompting calls by Labour MP Willie Hamilton for its removal.
Native whites who are more accepting of the new order are known as "Zimbos."
The shortened name was used by many people including the British government in the House of Commons.
This event is considered to have been the first engagement of what came to be known as the "Bush War" in Rhodesia and the "Second " (or ''rebellion'' in Shona) by supporters of the guerrillas.
Until 1972, containing the guerrillas was little more than a police action.
The state was named after Cecil Rhodes, whose British South Africa Company acquired the land in the late 19th century.
Talks quickly broke down, and final efforts in October to achieve a settlement floundered; the Rhodesian Front remained unwilling to accept what were regarded as unacceptably drastic terms and the British would settle for nothing less – it was a formula doomed to failure.
By 1979 there were also 30 black commissioned officers in the regular army.
In September 1968, the Appellate Division of the Rhodesian High Court ruled that Ian Smith's administration had become the ''de jure'' government of the country, not merely the ''de facto'' one.
The campaign proper is generally considered to have started in 1972 with the Attack on Altena Farm, despite the minor threat already represented by the nationalist movements in the 1960s.
In a CBS news interview, Mugabe claimed that Rhodesian whites "...are still in control of the economy, the majority being commercial farmers.
The 1969 republican constitution established a bicameral Parliament consisting of an indirectly elected Senate and a directly elected House of Assembly, effectively reserving the majority of seats for whites.
Whites ended up with the majority of Assembly seats.
The office of President had only ceremonial significance with the Prime Minister holding executive power.
From 1968 until 1970, there was virtually no further dialogue between Rhodesia and the UK.
Ndabaningi Sithole and avowed Marxist Robert Mugabe, its most prominent leaders, demanded a one party Zimbabwean state with total black rule and a public monopoly on land.
Nevertheless, few could doubt that Mugabe's support within his majority Shona tribal group was extremely strong.
But such confidence was rudely shaken by Whitehall's refusal to grant independence on their terms.
While ZAPU theoretically continued to command the allegiance of most Ndebele and Shona activists, Sithole and Mugabe drew their support from the Mashonaland countryside.
African parties displayed initial horror at Smith's declaration, with one ZANU official stating, "...for all those who cherish freedom and a meaningful life, UDI has set a collision course which cannot be altered.
11 November 1965 has marked the turning point of the struggle for freedom in that land from a constitutional and political one to primarily a military struggle."
The war degenerated into rounds of increasing brutality from all three parties involved (ZANU and ZAPU, and the Rhodesian Army fighting off their attacks).
Rhodesia declared itself a republic on 2 March 1970.
Some in Rhodesian government had hoped in vain that the declaration of a republic would finally prompt other nations to grant recognition.
Talks aimed at easing the differences between Rhodesia and the United Kingdom were carried out aboard Royal Navy vessels once in December 1966 and again in October 1968.
While not officially recognising Rhodesia under Ian Smith, the government of António Salazar did permit Rhodesia to establish a representative mission in Lisbon, and permitted Rhodesian exports and imports through their colony of Mozambique.
After the federal break-up in 1963, then-Prime Minister Alec Douglas-Home insisted that preconditions on independence talks hinge on what he termed the "five principles" – unimpeded progress to majority rule, assurance against any future legislation decidedly detrimental to black interests, "improvement in the political status" of local Africans, moves towards ending racial discrimination, and agreement on a settlement which could be "acceptable to the whole population".
In 2008 elections, Mugabe garnered 41%, Simba Makoni 10% and Morgan Tsvangirai 48% of the votes cast for president forcing a runoff election called by the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC).
In 1973, the Labor government of Gough Whitlam cut post and telephone links to the Centre, but this was ruled illegal by the High Court.
While there was never any suggestion of disloyalty among the soldiers from predominantly black units (in particular within the Selous Scouts or the Rhodesian African Rifles – RAR), some argue that, by the time of the 1980 election, many of the RAR soldiers voted for Robert Mugabe.
The US, despite voting in favor of the sanctions at the UNSC, violated them to buy chrome ore from Rhodesia.
However, the requirement excluded a majority of native blacks from the electorate.
Rhodesia wished to retain its economic prosperity and also feared communist elements in the rebel forces, and thus felt their policy of a gradual progression to black majority rule was justified.
However, after a meeting with Robert Mugabe and the central committee of ZANU (PF), Ian Smith was reassured that whites could, and should stay in the new Zimbabwe.
South Africa, itself under international pressure as a white minority government, pursued a policy of détente with the black African states at the time.
The three-month-long conference almost failed to reach conclusion, due to disagreements on land reform, but resulted in the Lancaster House Agreement.
The accord was, essentially, to create the position of "Prime Minister" for Tsvangirai, who served in that role from 2009 to 2013.
of petroleum product (comprising Rhodesia's strategic oil reserve) were lost.
The Rhodesian Labour Party held seats in the Assembly and in municipal councils throughout the 1920s and 1930s.
The Portuguese government in power at that time, authoritarian and ardently anti-communist, gave active behind-the-scenes support in Rhodesia's fight against the guerrilla groups.
During this period, it adopted a foreign policy called NIBMAR, or No Independence Before Majority African Rule, mandating democratic reforms that placed governance in the hands of the majority black Africans.
Harold Wilson and his incoming Labour government took an even harder line on demanding that these points be legitimately addressed before an independence agenda could be set.
Although militarily insignificant, the loss of this aircraft (and a second Viscount, the ''Umniati'', in 1979) demonstrated the reach of resistance movements extended to Rhodesian civil society.
This is widely blamed for leading to the deterioration of the Zimbabwean economy which plagues the country today.
By 1978–79, up to 70% of the regular army was composed of black soldiers (though both the army and police reserves remained overwhelmingly white).
The observers and the newly installed governor Lord Soames were accused of looking the other way, and Mugabe's victory was certified.
The shooting down on 3 September 1978 of the civilian Vickers Viscount airliner ''Hunyani'', Air Rhodesia Flight RH825, in the Kariba area by ZIPRA fighters using a surface-to-air missile, with the subsequent massacre of its survivors, is widely considered to be the event that finally destroyed the Rhodesians' will to continue the war.
This attitude was part of the larger decolonisation context, during which Western powers such as the United Kingdom, France, and Belgium hastened to grant independence to their colonies in Africa.
Guerrillas began to launch operations deep inside Rhodesia, attacking roads, railways, economic targets and isolated security force positions, in 1976.
Throughout the period of its Unilateral Declaration of Independence (1965 to 1979), Rhodesia pursued a foreign policy of attempting to secure recognition as an independent country, and insisting that its political system would include 'gradual steps to majority rule.'
A rigid system of countermeasures enacted to combat sanctions succeeded in blunting their impact for at least a decade.
Zambia, formerly Northern Rhodesia, took a pragmatic approach towards Rhodesia.
While as Rhodesia, the country was once considered the breadbasket of Africa.
In April 1966, two Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA – the military wing of ZANU) units, having received prior training at Nanjing Military College, crossed into Rhodesia from Zambia.
Even as late as August 1975 when Rhodesian government and black nationalist leaders met at Victoria Falls for negotiations brokered by South Africa and Zambia, the talks never got beyond the procedural phase.
On the day the election results became known, most white families had prepared contingency plans for flight, including the packing of cars and suitcases.
As it began to appear that decolonisation was inevitable and indigenous black populations were pressing heavily for change, the federation was dissolved in 1963.
Following amendments to the country's constitution in 1987, parliamentary seats reserved for whites were abolished, and an executive presidency was created, held by Mugabe.
In view of the outcome of the referendum, the territory was annexed by the United Kingdom on 12 September 1923.
The government's defence spending increased from R$30 million, 8.5% of the national budget in 1971 to 1972, to R$400 m in 1978 to 1979, 47% of the national budget.
Some former officers of the Rhodesian Security Forces stated that anthrax was covertly used by Rhodesian psy-ops units during the late 1970s, though not produced in Rhodesia; they stressed that Rhodesia did not have the capacity to produce such weapons, and that the cholera and anthrax had come from the South African government's top-secret chemical and biological weapons programme, Project Coast, which was using Rhodesia as a "laboratory".
The Rhodesians' means to continue the war were also eroding fast.
Nkomo and his family left hastily a few hours before the raid – having clearly been warned that the raid was coming.
This policy caused the inflation rate to soar from 32% in 1998 (considered extremely high by most economic standards) to an astonishing 11,200,000% by 2007.
The government amended the Constitution in 1987 to abolish the seats reserved for whites, and replace the office of Prime Minister with an executive President.
Among the news magazines published in Rhodesia under UDI were the ''Illustrated Life Rhodesia'', while ''The Valiant Years'' by Beryl Salt told the history of Rhodesia from 1890 to 1978 entirely through the medium of facsimile reproduction of articles and headlines from Rhodesian newspapers.
Six months' continuous residence was also required for qualifications (b) and (c)."
Rhodesia was originally a British colony.
The independence constitution agreed at Lancaster House watered those provisions down and reserved 20 out of 100 seats for whites in the House of Assembly and 8 out of 40 seats in the Senate.
Refugee camps had been prepared in the Transvaal.
Following the country's independence as Zimbabwe, Towsey became chargé d'affaires at the new Embassy.
Waley, although insistent that "Europeans must surrender any belief in permanent European domination", also testified that majority rule was not desirable immediately.
A 1971 amendment passed in the United States permitted American firms to go on importing Rhodesian chromium and nickel as normal.
Rhodesia began to lose vital economic and military support from South Africa, which, while sympathetic to the white minority government, never accorded it diplomatic recognition.
Harold Wilson countered by warning that such an irregular procedure would be considered treasonous, although he specifically rejected using armed force against the English "kith and kin" in Africa.
The Rhodesian authorities provided compensation when the government nationalised enterprises such as the country's railroads, consistently refused to radically alleviate unemployment, and shied from filling civil service posts with partisan appointees.
This situation continued throughout the UDI period.
:"voters to be British subjects, male, 21 years of age and older, able to write their address and occupation, and then to fulfil the following financial requirements: (a) ownership of a registered mining claim in Southern Rhodesia, or (b) occupying immovable property worth £75, or (c) receiving wages or salary of £50 per annum in Southern Rhodesia.
South Africa did not recognise Rhodesia to preserve its fragile positions with other nations, but frequently assisted the republic.
After being forced from Rhodesia, they continued to operate in exile, creating occupation groups representing urban workers, miners, and peasant farmers.
He received the lightest sentence possible, a caution, but he continued to fight his conviction and eventually resigned his commission and left the Army.
These negotiations took place in London in late 1979.
Mugabe retained the title of President.
Van der Byl eventually retired to his country estate outside Cape Town, but there were elements in Rhodesia, mainly embittered former security force personnel, who forcibly opposed majority rule up to and well beyond the establishment of majority rule.
By December 1979, Muzorewa had replaced Smith as Prime Minister and secured an agreement with the militant nationalists, allowing Rhodesia to briefly revert to colonial status pending elections under a universal franchise.
While the 1979 election was described by the Rhodesian government as non-racial and democratic, it did not include the main nationalist parties ZANU and ZAPU.
According to every published finding, whites were in favour of the settlement, and Rhodesians of mixed or Asian background generally pleased, while black reaction was resoundingly negative.
The Rhodesian military seriously considered mounting a coup against a perceived stolen election ("Operation Quartz") to prevent ZANU from taking over the country.
The British Government (then led by the recently elected Margaret Thatcher) issued invitations to all parties to attend a peace conference at Lancaster House.
Recently the agriculture sector has started to do well since the availability of expertise and machines has improved supported mainly by China.
ZANU led by Robert Mugabe won this election, some alleged, by terrorising its political opposition, including supporters of ZAPU, through former insurgents that had not confined themselves to the designated guerrilla assembly points, as stipulated by the Lancaster House Agreement.
In 1979, some special forces units were accused of using counterinsurgent operations as cover for ivory poaching and smuggling.
By this time, the need to cut a deal was apparent to most Rhodesians, but not to all.
A crisis of confidence soon resulted across ZAPU, which was already suffering from poor morale, compounded by tribal and ideological factionalism.
The country's name was changed to Zimbabwe Rhodesia.
Rhodesia received little international recognition during its existence; recognition only occurred after elections in 1980 and a transition to majority rule.
Today, Zimbabwe is a net importer of foodstuffs, with the European Union and United States providing emergency food relief as humanitarian aid on a regular basis.
Although prepared to grant formal independence to Southern Rhodesia (now Rhodesia), the British government had adopted a policy of ''no independence before majority rule'', dictating that colonies with a substantial population of European settlers would not receive independence except under conditions of majority rule.
Even the South African Apartheid regime considered sustaining white minority rule in a nation in which blacks outnumbered whites by 22:1 as untenable.
They also withdrew the personnel and equipment that they had previously provided to aid the war effort, though covert military support continued.
It would, however, be several years before even the most radical nationalists chose to develop a coherent strategy revolving around armed resistance, preferring instead to create opportunities for external intervention.
The United States, like all other Western nations, refused to recognise Rhodesia, but unlike others allowed its Consulate-General to function as a communications conduit between the American government in Washington, D.C., and the Rhodesian government in Salisbury.
Many white Rhodesians had seen themselves as nothing less than fully fledged members of the British Empire, carrying on the same rugged values and frontier spirit of the early Englishmen who had settled in 1890.
A Salisbury commission chaired by prominent lawyer W.R. Waley was appointed to study constitutional options open to the Rhodesian authorities as of April 1968, but reaching a further settlement with the British was ruled out early on.
This was immediately denounced as an "act of rebellion against the Crown" in the United Kingdom, and Wilson promised that the illegal action would be short-lived.
Eventually, the Smith government abandoned attempts to remain loyal to the Crown, and in 1969, a majority of the electorate voted in referendum to declare Rhodesia a republic.
Neither force, however, had acquired basic knowledge of guerrilla warfare.
This move made life difficult for Rhodesian citizens who wished to travel internationally as passports issued by Rhodesia's UDI administration were not recognised as valid; in January 1966, the British issued a statement accepting as valid any passport issued before the declaration of independence and allowing six-month United Kingdom passports to be granted when they expired – provided that the bearer declared they did not intend to aid the UDI Rhodesian government.
A group of ZANLA fighters killed Lord Richard on 20 April 1978 when he was accompanying Rhodesian airborne unit employed in Fire Force Operations.
The internal settlement left control of the country's police, security forces, civil service and judiciary in white hands, for the moment.
The international community refused to accept the validity of any agreement which did not incorporate the main nationalist parties.
These states wanted South Africa to pressure Ian Smith to accept a faster transition to majority rule in Rhodesia, in return for pledges of non-interference in South Africa's internal affairs.
Many expatriates and some of the whites who stayed in Zimbabwe became deeply nostalgic for Rhodesia.
The Lancaster House Agreement further provided for a ceasefire followed by the holding an internationally supervised general election which was held in February 1980.
Smith remained optimistic that Heath would do his utmost to remedy Anglo-Rhodesian relations, although disappointed that he continued to adhere publicly to the original "five principles" proposed by Alec Douglas-Home, now foreign secretary.
At least five guerrillas were simply arrested before getting very far.
The Rhodesian Air Force operated an assortment of both Canberra light bombers, Hawker Hunter fighter bombers, older de Havilland Vampire jets as well as a somewhat antiquated, but still potent, helicopter arm.
Some nations, such as Switzerland, and West Germany, which were not UN members, conducted business legally with Rhodesia – the latter remained the Smith government's largest trading partner in Western Europe until 1973, when Bonn joined the UN.
This naming dispute dated back to October 1964, when Northern Rhodesia became independent from Britain and concurrently changed its name to Zambia.
Politically within Zimbabwe, the consolidation of power by Robert Mugabe continued through the 1980s.
