The parboil process causes a gelatinisation of the starch in the grains.
It was known to Greece (where it is still cultivated in Macedonia and Thrace) by returning soldiers from Alexander the Great's military expedition to Asia.
In addition, in 2013 the Japanese National Institute for Agrobiological Sciences led a team which successfully inserted the DEEPER ROOTING 1 (DRO1) gene, from the Philippine upland rice variety Kinandang Patong, into the popular commercial rice variety IR64, giving rise to a far deeper root system in the resulting plants.
These must be sprouted, or prepared and cooked for human consumption.
With the rapid-boil method, rice may be cooked in a large quantity of water which is drained before serving.
Although some rice strains produce beta-carotene in the hull, no non-genetically engineered strains have been found that produce beta-carotene in the kernel, despite the testing of thousands of strains.
Rice cultivars also fall into groups according to environmental conditions, season of planting, and season of harvest, called ecotypes.
In some areas such as the Far East or Spain, there is a preference for softer and stickier varieties.
Their 15,000-year-old age challenges the accepted view that rice cultivation originated in China about 12,000 years ago.
The Native Americans of what is now the Eastern United States may have practiced extensive agriculture with forms of wild rice (Zizania palustris) , which looks similar to but it not directly related to rice.
Harvesting is followed by threshing, either immediately or within a day or two.
Although there was no shortage of rice on world markets this general upward trend in grain prices led to panic buying by consumers, government rice export bans (in particular, by Vietnam and India) and inflated import orders by the Philippines marketing board, the National Food Authority.
Mutants of popular rice varieties are regularly screened by plant breeders to discover new sources of durable resistance.
The Australian rice industry is somewhat opportunistic, with the area planted varying significantly from season to season depending on water allocations in the Murray and Murrumbidgee irrigation regions.
While there are numerous importers of rice, the exporters of rice are limited.
Electric rice cookers, popular in Asia and Latin America, simplify the process of cooking rice.
In late 2007 to May 2008, the price of grains rose greatly due to droughts in major producing countries (particularly Australia), increased use of grains for animal feed and US subsidies for bio-fuel production.
In a recent study, scientist have found a link for differences in human culture based on either wheat or rice cultivating races since ancient times.
Both these farmers claim to have employed newly developed rice breeds and System of Rice Intensification (SRI), a recent innovation in rice farming.
Even where talc is not used, glucose, starch, or other coatings may be used to improve the appearance of the grains.
The International Rice Research Institute conducts research into developing drought-tolerant rice varieties, including the varieties 5411 and Sookha dhan, currently being employed by farmers in the Philippines and Nepal respectively.
Scientists have identified and cloned many genes involved in the gibberellin signaling pathway, including GAI1 (Gibberellin Insensitive) and SLR1 (Slender Rice).
Many countries consider rice as a strategic food staple, and various governments subject its trade to a wide range of controls and interventions.
Rice may be rinsed repeatedly until the rinse water is clear to improve the texture and taste.
At this point in the process, the product is called brown rice.
Rice may also be made into congee (also called rice porridge, fawrclaab, okayu, Xifan, jook, or rice gruel) by adding more water than usual, so that the cooked rice is saturated with water, usually to the point that it disintegrates.
Further puffing is sometimes accomplished by processing puffed pellets in a low-pressure chamber.
Although rice growing in Australia is highly profitable due to the cheapness of land, several recent years of severe drought have led many to call for its elimination because of its effects on extremely fragile aquatic ecosystems.
The grains become less brittle, and the color of the milled grain changes from white to yellow.
'', the rest of the husk and the germ, thereby creating white rice.
This facilitates an improved ability for the rice plant to derive its required nutrients in times of drought via accessing deeper layers of soil, a feature demonstrated by trials which saw the IR64 + DRO1 rice yields drop by 10% under moderate drought conditions, compared to 60% for the unmodified IR64 variety.
SRI is claimed to have set new national records in rice yields, within the last 10 years, in many countries.
An illustrative comparison between white and brown rice of protein quality, mineral and vitamin quality, carbohydrate and fat quality suggests that neither is a complete nutrition source.
When combined with milk, sugar, and honey, it is used to make desserts.
Previously, archaeological evidence had suggested that rice was domesticated in the Yangtze River valley region in China.
One of the earliest known examples of companion planting is the growing of rice with Azolla, the mosquito fern, which covers the top of a fresh rice paddy's water, blocking out any competing plants, as well as fixing nitrogen from the atmosphere for the rice to use.
Above-average rainfall from the 1950s to the middle 1990s encouraged the expansion of the Riverina rice industry, but its prodigious water use in a practically waterless region began to attract the attention of environmental scientists.
IRRI also conducted two campaigns in 1994 and 2003, respectively, which discouraged insecticide misuse and smarter pest management in Vietnam.
Jasmine rice from Thailand and Basmati rice from Pakistan and India contain the least arsenic among rice varieties in one study.
Rice is not native to the Americas but was introduced to Latin America and the Caribbean by European colonizers at an early date.
Major importers usually include Nigeria, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Malaysia, the Philippines, Brazil and some African and Persian Gulf countries.
Morphological studies of rice phytoliths from the Diaotonghuan archaeological site clearly show the transition from the collection of wild rice to the cultivation of domesticated rice.
It also depends on nutrient quality of the soil rice is grown in, whether and how the rice is polished or processed, the manner it is enriched, and how it is prepared before consumption.
China has set a limit of 150 ppb for arsenic in rice.
Progress has been made, however, in developing rice varieties capable of tolerating such conditions; the hybrid created from the cross between the commercial rice variety IR56 and the wild rice species ''Oryza coarctata'' is one example.
While most rice is bred for crop quality and productivity, there are varieties selected for characteristics such as texture, smell, and firmness.
Processed rice seeds must be boiled or steamed before eating.
Rice plants produce their own chemical defenses to protect themselves from pest attacks.
Botanicals, so-called "natural pesticides", are used by some farmers in an attempt to control rice pests.
Rice bran, called ''nuka'' in Japan, is a valuable commodity in Asia and is used for many daily needs.
Large deposits of rice from the first century AD have been found in Roman camps in Germany.
There is no safe level of arsenic, but, as of 2012, a limit of 10 parts per billion has been established in the United States for drinking water, twice the level of 5 parts per billion originally proposed by the EPA.
In most Asian countries, where rice is almost entirely the product of smallholder agriculture, harvesting is carried out manually, although there is a growing interest in mechanical harvesting.
Nonpreference (or antixenosis) describes host plants which insects prefer to avoid; antibiosis is where insect survival is reduced after the ingestion of host tissue; and tolerance is the capacity of a plant to produce high yield or retain high quality despite insect infestation.
Flooding is an issue that many rice growers face, especially in South and South East Asia where flooding annually affects 20 million hectares.
Some upland rice farmers in Cambodia spread chopped leaves of the bitter bush (''Chromolaena odorata'') over the surface of fields after planting.
Agriculture in Madesh mainly depends on the rice cultivation during rainy season in trai areas of Nepal.
Crop protection scientists are trying to develop rice pest management techniques which are sustainable.
Short-grain rice is often used for rice pudding.
Asian farmers still account for 87% of the world's total rice production.
Between 1500 and 800 BC, ''Oryza glaberrima'' propagated from its original centre, the Niger River delta, and extended to Senegal.
The principal cultivation season, known as "Maha", is from October to March and the subsidiary cultivation season, known as "Yala", is from April to September.
The rice is planted when it is tall enough to poke out above the azolla.
Bulk raw rice density is about 0.9 g/cm³.
The grains of long-grain rice (high in amylose) tend to remain intact after cooking; medium-grain rice (high in amylopectin) becomes more sticky.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is studying this issue, but has not established a limit.
Rice produced in the US is usually fortified with vitamins and minerals, and rinsing will result in a loss of nutrients.
Studies of rice gene OsRAD51C showed that this gene is necessary for homologous recombinational repair of DNA, particularly the accurate repair of DNA double-strand breaks during meiosis.
From East Asia, rice was spread to South and Southeast Asia.
Draft genomes for the two most common rice cultivars, ''indica'' and ''japonica'', were published in April 2002.
However, other writers have warned against dramatic assessments of post-harvest food losses, arguing that "worst-case scenarios" tend to be used rather than realistic averages and that in many cases the cost of avoiding losses exceeds the value of the food saved.
In the late 3rd millennium BC, there was a rapid expansion of rice cultivation into mainland Southeast Asia and westwards across India and Nepal.
Major rice insect pests include: the brown planthopper (BPH), several spp.
In the past, this has led to massive losses in yields, such as in the Philippines, where in 2006, rice crops worth $65 million were lost to flooding.
Wild rice, from which the crop was developed, may have its native range in Australia.
Most farmers grow Jao rice.
More than 100 varieties of rice are commercially produced primarily in six states (Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and California) in the U.S.
Light wind transports CO2 to the leaf canopy but strong wind causes severe damage and may lead to sterility (due to pollen dehydration, spikelet sterility, and abortive endosperms).
African rice helped Africa conquer its famine of 1203.
This method is a result of research carried out for the United Nations International Year of Rice.
However, Krishnamurti disagrees with the notion that Old Tamil ''arici'' is the source of the Greek term, and proposes that it was borrowed from descendants of Proto-Dravidian *''wariñci'' instead.
Milled parboiled rice is nutritionally superior to standard milled rice, because the process causes nutrients from the outer husk (especially thiamine) to move into the endosperm, so that less is subsequently lost when the husk is polished off during milling.
The Japanese table rice is a sticky, short-grain rice.
Over time, the use of pest-resistant rice varieties selects for pests that are able to overcome these mechanisms of resistance.
However, this ranking has been rapidly changing in recent years.
The declaration was sponsored by more than 40 countries.
The three largest producers of rice in 2009 were China (197 million tonnes), India (131 Mt), and Indonesia (64 Mt).
Rice may be soaked to decrease cooking time, conserve fuel, minimize exposure to high temperature, and reduce stickiness.
In economic terms, the global rice trade was a small fraction of 1% of world mercantile trade.
It decreases to less than one-tenth that when puffed.
Due to the varying levels that water can reach in regions of cultivation, flood tolerant varieties have long been developed and used.
In each region of the country there are different rice seed types.
During Ropai period,  there is usually enough water to sustain the cultivation of all rice fields, nevertheless in Berna-Bue Charne period, there is only enough water for cultivation of few of the land extent.
In recent years rice production has risen in North America, especially in the Mississippi embayment in the states of Arkansas and Mississippi (see also Arkansas Delta and Mississippi Delta).
For example, rice gall midge and army worm outbreaks tend to follow periods of high rainfall early in the wet season, while thrips outbreaks are associated with drought.
After the 15th century, rice spread throughout Italy and then France, later propagating to all the continents during the age of European exploration.
In 2011, a combined effort by the Stanford University, New York University, Washington University in St. Louis, and Purdue University has provided the strongest evidence yet that there is only one single origin of domesticated rice, in the Yangtze Valley of China.
Photosynthetic investment in the stem is reduced dramatically as the shorter plants are inherently more stable mechanically.
The NERICA have appeared in ''The New York Times'' (October 10, 2007) and ''International Herald Tribune'' (October 9, 2007), trumpeted as miracle crops that will dramatically increase rice yield in Africa and enable an economic resurgence.
Together, Thailand, Vietnam and India accounted for nearly 70% of the world rice exports.
For some varieties, soaking improves the texture of the cooked rice by increasing expansion of the grains.
In the Russian Far East several ''japonica'' cultivars are grown in Primorye around the Khanka lake.
U.S. rice consumption has risen sharply over the past 25 years, fueled in part by commercial applications such as beer production.
are most dangerous in upland rice of all parts of the world.
There have been plenty of debates on the origins of the domesticated rice.
Parboiled rice has an additional benefit in that it does not stick to the pan during cooking, as happens when cooking regular white rice.
Since a large portion of maize crops are grown for purposes other than human consumption, rice is the most important grain with regard to human nutrition and caloric intake, providing more than one-fifth of the calories consumed worldwide by humans.
Soil salinity poses a major threat to rice crop productivity, particularly along low-lying coastal areas during the dry season.
An important way this can happen is the production of "New Rices for Africa" (NERICA).
This rice has a characteristic fragrance of Mango blossom.
This rice is naturally protected from leaf disease, and its paddy (unmilled rice) () has a brown color.
However, commercial production began only in 1912 in the town of Richvale in Butte County.
These rices, selected to tolerate the low input and harsh growing conditions of African agriculture, are produced by the African Rice Center, and billed as technology "from Africa, for Africa".
At first the rice was laboriously milled by hand using large mortars and pestles made of wood, then winnowed in sweetgrass baskets (the making of which was another skill brought by slaves from Africa).
Parboiled rice is particularly popular in Nigeria.
Rice was known to the Classical world, being imported from Egypt, and perhaps west Asia.
In European Russia, a short-grain, starchy rice similar to the Italian varieties, has been grown in the Krasnodar Krai, and known in Russia as "Kuban Rice" or "Krasnodar Rice".
The cultivar has been preserved and there are current attempts to reintroduce it as a commercially grown crop.
BULOG and NFA monopolise rice imports into their countries while VINAFOOD controls all exports from Vietnam.
The Banaue Rice Terraces () are 2,000-year-old terraces that were carved into the mountains of Ifugao in the Philippines by ancestors of the indigenous people.
These findings were received by academia with strong skepticism, and the results and their publicizing has been cited as being driven by a combination of nationalist and regional interests.
According to estimates for the 2006 crop year, rice production in the U.S. is valued at $1.88 billion, approximately half of which is expected to be exported.
Chinese legends attribute the domestication of rice to Shennong, the legendary emperor of China and inventor of Chinese agriculture.
Rice requires high temperature above  but not more than .
High-yield cultivars of rice suitable for cultivation in Africa and other dry ecosystems, called the new rice for Africa (NERICA) cultivars, have been developed.
In Palestine, rice came to be grown in the Jordan Valley.
Rice is the major food amongst all the ethnic groups in Nepal.
Rice flour and starch often are used in batters and breadings to increase crispiness.
Today, the majority of all rice produced comes from China, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Thailand, Myanmar, Pakistan, Philippines, Korea and Japan.
The name wild rice is usually used for species of the genera ''Zizania'' and ''Porteresia'', both wild and domesticated, although the term may also be used for primitive or uncultivated varieties of ''Oryza''.
Some sources claim the post-harvest losses to exceed 40%.
Developing countries are the main players in the world rice trade, accounting for 83% of exports and 85% of imports.
Ongoing research in China to develop perennial rice could result in enhanced sustainability and food security.
In Majorca, rice cultivation seems to have stopped after the Christian conquest, although historians are not certain.
# '''Upland rice''' is also known as '''Ghaiya rice''', well known for its drought tolerance
In some countries, a popular form, parboiled rice (also known as '''converted rice''') is subjected to a steaming or parboiling process while still a brown rice grain.
The genetically based ability of a rice variety to withstand pest attacks is called resistance.
Weather conditions also contribute to pest outbreaks.
Some varieties of long-grain rice that are high in amylopectin, known as Thai Sticky rice, are usually steamed.
In common with other West African countries, Nigeria is actively promoting domestic production.
Rice culture in the southeastern U.S. became less profitable with the loss of slave labor after the American Civil War, and it finally died out just after the turn of the 20th century.
Rice is a good source of protein and a staple food in many parts of the world, but it is not a complete protein: it does not contain all of the essential amino acids in sufficient amounts for good health, and should be combined with other sources of protein, such as nuts, seeds, beans, fish, or meat.
The Rice Terraces are commonly referred to as the "Eighth Wonder of the World".
Several nematode species infect rice crops, causing diseases such as Ufra (Ditylenchus dipsaci), White tip disease (Aphelenchoide bessei), and root knot disease (Meloidogyne graminicola).
High water vapor content (in humid tropics) subjects unusual stress which favors the spread of fungal and bacterial diseases.
These smaller mills often do not buy paddy and sell rice but only service farmers who want to mill their paddy for their own consumption.
Changes in the morphology of Diaotonghuan phytoliths dating from 10,000–8,000 BP show that rice had by this time been domesticated.
The amount of solar radiation received during the 45 days leading up to harvest determines final crop output.
This project enabled labor markets in Asia to shift away from agriculture, and into industrial sectors.
Unlike the Arkansas–Mississippi Delta region, California's production is dominated by short- and medium-grain ''japonica'' varieties, including cultivars developed for the local climate such as Calrose, which makes up as much as 85% of the state's crop.
Sustainable pest management is based on four principles: biodiversity, host plant resistance (HPR), landscape ecology, and hierarchies in a landscape – from biological to social.
The 2013 price of rice originating from other southeast Asian countries was a comparably low  per metric ton.
With the rise of Islam it moved north to Nisibin, the southern shores of the Caspian Sea (in Gilan and Mazanderan provinces of Iran) and then beyond the Muslim world into the valley of the Volga.
Long-term flooding of rice fields cuts the soil off from atmospheric oxygen and causes anaerobic fermentation of organic matter in the soil.
Their use depends on weather, atmosphere, and topography.
In the presence of nitrogen fertilizers, and intensive crop management, these varieties increase their yield two to three times.
As their source of life and art, the rice terraces have sustained and shaped the lives of the community members.
Recent scholarship suggests that enslaved Africans played an active role in the establishment of rice in the New World and that African rice was an important crop from an early period.
Most rituals involving Dewi Sri are associated with the mythical origin attributed to the rice plant, the staple food of the region.
While flooding is not mandatory for the cultivation of rice, all other methods of irrigation require higher effort in weed and pest control during growth periods and a different approach for fertilizing the soil.
The varieties of rice are typically classified as long-, medium-, and short-grained.
Although its parent species are native to Asia and certain parts of Africa, centuries of trade and exportation have made it commonplace in many cultures worldwide.
It is hoped that their cultivation will improve food security in West Africa.
This caused significant rises in rice prices.
Yuan Longping of China National Hybrid Rice Research and Development Center, China, set a world record for rice yield in 2010 at 19 tonnes per hectare on a demonstration plot.
Boiled rice may be further fried in cooking oil or butter (known as fried rice), or beaten in a tub to make ''mochi''.
Among rice cultivars, there are differences in the responses to, and recovery from, pest damage.
Subsequently, paddy needs to be dried to bring down the moisture content to no more than 20% for milling.
During Maha season, there is usually enough water to sustain the cultivation of all rice fields, nevertheless in Yala season there is only enough water for cultivation of half of the land extent.
Other major rice diseases include: sheath blight, rice ragged stunt (vector: BPH), and tungro (vector: ''Nephotettix'' spp).
Japanese sake rice is another kind as well.
Rice cultivation is well-suited to countries and regions with low labor costs and high rainfall, as it is labor-intensive to cultivate and requires ample water.
Its paddy has the color of thatch and it can be processed to make noodles.
White jasmine rice was developed in Chonburi Province first and after that grown in many areas in the country, but the rice from this region has a high quality, because it's softer, whiter, and more fragrant.
Instant rice differs from parboiled rice in that it is fully cooked and then dried, though there is a significant degradation in taste and texture.
Its paddy has the color of thatch and the cooked rice has fragrant grains also.
Rice cultivation began in California during the California Gold Rush, when an estimated 40,000 Chinese laborers immigrated to the state and grew small amounts of the grain for their own consumption.
Rice is cooked by boiling or steaming, and absorbs water during cooking.
The central region is mostly composed of plains.
Rice cultivation on wetland rice fields is thought to be responsible for 11% of the anthropogenic methane emissions.
Disruption of gibberellin signaling can lead to significantly reduced stem growth leading to a dwarf phenotype.
Rice was the first crop with a complete genome sequence.
White rice grown in Arkansas, Louisiana, Missouri, and Texas, which account for 76 percent of American-produced rice had higher levels of arsenic than other regions of the world studied, possibly because of past use of arsenic-based pesticides to control cotton weevils.
Rice provides 20% of the world’s dietary energy supply, while wheat supplies 19% and maize (corn) 5%.
This process takes advantage of the grains' water content and typically involves heating grains in a special chamber.
Brown rice may be soaked in warm water for 20 hours to stimulate germination.
Methane production from rice cultivation contributes ~1.5% of anthropogenic greenhouse gases.
Almost one in five adult Americans now report eating at least half a serving of white or brown rice per day.
It is also used to stuff vegetables or is wrapped in grape leaves (dolma).
Records indicate it was grown in Valencia and Majorca.
Chinese people use sticky rice which is properly known as "glutinous rice" (note: glutinous refer to the glue-like characteristic of rice; does not refer to "gluten") to make zongzi.
The International Rice Research Institute is currently further developing and evaluating Golden Rice as a potential new way to help address vitamin A deficiency.
It depends on the strain of rice, that is between white, brown, red, and black (or purple) varieties of rice – each prevalent in different parts of the world.
The rice plant can grow to  tall, occasionally more depending on the variety and soil fertility.
Rice is the staple food of over half the world's population.
In sprouted and cooked form, the relative nutritional and anti-nutritional contents of each of these grains is remarkably different from that of raw form of these grains reported in this table.
Many rice grain producing countries have significant losses post-harvest at the farm and because of poor roads, inadequate storage technologies, inefficient supply chains and farmer's inability to bring the produce into retail markets dominated by small shopkeepers.
Because of the importance of rice to human nutrition and food security in Asia, the domestic rice markets tend to be subject to considerable state involvement.
of rice bugs – notably in the genus ''Leptocorisa'', the rice leafroller, rice weevils and the Chinese rice grasshopper.
For example, Thai Jasmine rice is long-grain and relatively less sticky, as some long-grain rice contains less amylopectin than short-grain cultivars.
