The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, and public sympathy for Nixon grew.
The visit ushered in a new era of Sino-American relations.
A minor confrontation ensued, which was concluded with an understanding that the Soviets would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles.
In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference".
Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the ''Omaha World-Herald'' depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly.
Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan.
In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis.
Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and greeted Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai.
He subsequently served on active duty in the U.S. Navy Reserve during World War II.
Over 100&nbsp;television journalists accompanied the president.
Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness.
Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being "driven" though also "uneasy with himself in some ways".
Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy.
When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3, placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war.
She advised South Vietnamese president Thieu not to go to Paris to join the talks, hinting that Nixon would give him a better deal if elected.
Nixon had pledged, when announcing his California campaign, not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson.
In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that an audio tape of conversations, held in the White House on June 20, 1972, featured an 18½ minute gap.
On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke to his plans for the country, leaving the negative campaigning to his running mate.
His responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970.
Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral.
Nixon and Kissinger met for an hour with Mao and Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues.
Nixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and to the Senate in 1950.
Nixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it.
He was reelected in one of the largest electoral landslides in U.S. history in 1972, when he defeated George McGovern.
The interviews garnered 45–50&nbsp;million viewers—becoming the most-watched program of their kind in television history.
He defeated McGovern with over 60&nbsp;percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.
The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.
Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.
McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received treatment for depression.
Those activities included "dirty tricks," or bugging the offices of political opponents and the harassment of activist groups and political figures.
In light of his loss of political support and the near-certainty of impeachment, Nixon resigned the office of the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening.
On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty.
Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in California.
The address, later termed the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60 million Americans—including the largest television audience up to that point.
Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d'état on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende.
The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy.
His parents permitted Richard to transfer to Whittier High School for his junior year, beginning in September 1928.
He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, as well as by former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson.
Nixon ended American involvement in the war in Vietnam in 1973 and brought the American POWs home, and ended the military draft.
His application to enlist was successful, and was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the U.S Naval Reserve (U.S. Navy Reserve) on June 15, 1942.
North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975.
Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency:
General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952.
Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power.
His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day.
The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April 1974 Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides.
The two broke up in 1935.
Former President Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a moving tribute to her inside the library building.
Nixon admitted that he had "let down the country" and that "I brought myself down.
Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev.
The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as "this portrait is a little more complicated than most".
He retired in the U.S.
As part of the Nixon Doctrine that the U.S. would avoid direct combat assistance to allies where possible, instead giving them assistance to defend themselves, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East—particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia—during the Nixon administration.
In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate.
Conversely, Black argues that Nixon sincerely believed he could intimidate North Vietnam through the "Madman theory".
As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971 and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972.
Throughout his career, he was instrumental in moving his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a congressman was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.
Nixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994 in Yorba Linda, California.
The process had not yet been completed when the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970.
He was taken to New York Hospital–Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg.
Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because unmanned spy satellites were shown to be a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective.
On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress.
In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as "a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts".
Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the Civil Rights era.
Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century.
I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.
The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China, and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification.
With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David.
He had no strong preference for a vice presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a "smoke-filled room" and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator's selection.
He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society.
They had two daughters, Tricia (born 1946) and Julie (born 1948).
In retirement, Nixon's work writing several books and undertaking of many foreign trips helped to rehabilitate his image.
Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace.
Nixon journeyed to the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping.
He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence.
Americans received their first glimpse into Chinese life through the cameras which accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.
On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander.
Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides—Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman—and ''The Washington Post'', disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the "wrong foot".
By early 1975, Nixon's health was improving.
However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them.
He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Nixon also presided over the Apollo 11 moon landing, which signaled the end of the moon race.
Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy.
On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination.
He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive.
Under suit for defamation filed by Hiss, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations.
The year 1973 saw an Arab oil embargo, gasoline rationing, and a continuing series of revelations about the Watergate scandal.
Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, "To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman."
''Newsweek'' ran a story on "Nixon's comeback" with the headline "He's back".
On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.
Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials.
The Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South.
According to Ambrose, "Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished.
And they twisted it with relish.
Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas' liberal voting record.
Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week.
In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system that recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office.
A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973.
The Nixon family traveled to Europe in 1963, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited.
On July 24, while touring the exhibits with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the "Kitchen Debate".
In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of ''The Dark Tower''.
These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term.
In 1968 he ran again for the presidency and was elected when he defeated Hubert Humphrey.
Nixon then released a statement:
Ford eventually agreed, and on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a "full, free, and absolute pardon", which ended any possibility of an indictment.
In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing.
Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee.
Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible."
The book was a bestseller and attracted a generally positive critical response.
It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations.
Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries.
Assisting him in this venture was his National Security Advisor and future Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, with whom the President worked closely, bypassing Cabinet officials.
Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 43&nbsp;seats in the House and three in the Senate.
Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft, New Jersey Governor Alfred Driscoll and Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen.
An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced.
Nixon later remembered Sheller's words, "Remember, speaking is conversation&nbsp;... don't shout at people.
Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer.
The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, and was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.
The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations.
At Whittier High, Nixon suffered his first electoral defeat, for student body president.
The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits.
Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for Governor of California in the 1962 election.
They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara.
Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913 in Yorba Linda, California, in a house his father built.
They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate.
Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as "Vietnamization".
Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges.
McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights.
He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory.
The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it.
Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China even before he became president, writing in ''Foreign Affairs'' a year before his election: "There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation."
The secrecy allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the contact.
The scandal escalated, costing Nixon much of his political support, and on August 9, 1974, he resigned in the face of almost certain impeachment and removal from office.
Nixon hoped that a successful run would confirm him in his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics.
''The Washington Post'' picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as "Deep Throat"—later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI—to link the men to the Nixon administration.
Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon, whom he considered forthright, unlike the leftists and the Soviets.
The final round of diplomatic notes, reaffirming the 1962 accord, were exchanged in November.
At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7&nbsp;percent—its highest rate since the Korean War.
And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing."
Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred.
Initial talks, however, did not result in an agreement.
After the war, and under Nixon's presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967.
Olson suggests that grants of power to George W. Bush in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks restored the president's power.
In 1964, he supported Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater for the Republican nomination for president; when Goldwater was successful in gaining the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce the candidate to the convention.
George McGovern, Nixon's onetime opponent, commented in 1983, "President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II&nbsp;... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history."
He was 81 years old.
He called the conversation "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House".
The school was new and sought to attract top students by offering scholarships.
Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower–Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in ballistic missiles (the "missile gap").
Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting broke out again, this time without American combat involvement.
In early 1978, Nixon went to the United Kingdom.
Nixon described it in his memoirs as "a case of love at first sight"—for Nixon only, as Pat Ryan turned down the young lawyer several times before agreeing to date him.
thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.
He painted himself as a man of modest means (his wife had no mink coat; instead she wore a "respectable Republican cloth coat") and a patriot.
He defended his record as president, quoting from Theodore Roosevelt's 1910 speech ''Citizenship in a Republic'':
He remained on the team as a substitute, and was noted for his enthusiasm.
The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred Nixon and Kissinger to pursue a vigorous campaign of covert resistance to Allende, first designed to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election and then messages to military officers in support of a coup.
Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did.
More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory.
A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon, and later the White House, was involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats.
He imposed wage and price controls for a period of ninety days, enforced desegregation of Southern schools and established the Environmental Protection Agency.
He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow.
Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California.
And it's not necessary for them to know."
Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, which proved victorious in the November election.
His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy, and the race remained close for the duration.
He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler.
After a nearly decade-long national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11.
The speech was a masterpiece and prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon.
Tom Wicker of ''The New York Times'' noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote,
On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance.
Johnson felt he could not publicly mention Chennault's involvement, which had been obtained by wiretapping, but told Humphrey, who chose not to use the information.
As part of his "New Federalism" views, he proposed grants to the states, but these proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process.
Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace.
As a birthright Quaker, he could have claimed exemption from the draft; he might also have been deferred because he worked in government service.
The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional.
In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the "Smoking Gun Tape" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had a lapse of memory.
The speech would be remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back: "a little cocker spaniel dog … sent all the way from Texas.
Nixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration.
A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chairman Mao invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players.
His slogan of "Nixon's the One" proved to be effective.
Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations.
At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time.
Black opined that "What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue.
Nixon's Southern Strategy is credited by some historians as causing the South to become a Republican stronghold, though others deem economic factors more important to the change.
He did not release specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a "secret plan".
Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles.
Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race.
On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a New York City townhouse at 817 Fifth Avenue after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops.
John F. Stacks of ''Time'' magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death,
Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950.
Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election; the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject.
After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier.
Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of "peaceful coexistence".
I know how it feels to lose a close one."
Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of possible conflict of interest.
What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation."
He was persuaded by Kissinger that the papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication.
Nixon had wanted to return to China, but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975.
There were charges of vote fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy; Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world, and the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests.
