His compositions, particularly those of his later period, are notable for their complex textures, rich harmonies and orchestration, and the elaborate use of leitmotifs—musical phrases associated with individual characters, places, ideas or plot elements.
At the age of nine he was hugely impressed by the Gothic elements of Carl Maria von Weber's opera ''Der Freischütz,'' which he saw Weber conduct.
Unlike most opera composers, Wagner wrote both the libretto and the music for each of his stage works.
Abandoned works include a pastoral opera based on Goethe's ''Die Laune des Verliebten'' (''The Infatuated Lover's Caprice''), written at the age of 17, ''Die Hochzeit'' (''The Wedding''), on which Wagner worked in 1832, and the singspiel ''Männerlist größer als Frauenlist'' (''Men are More Cunning than Women'', 1837–38).
This doctrine contradicted Wagner's view, expressed in "Opera and Drama", that the music in opera had to be subservient to the drama.
Wagner planned for a collected edition of his publications as early as 1865; he believed that such an edition would help the world understand his intellectual development and artistic aims.
The 1876 Festival consisted of three full ''Ring'' cycles (under the baton of Hans Richter).
After completing ''Parsifal'', Wagner expressed his intention to turn to the writing of symphonies, and several sketches dating from the late 1870s and early 1880s have been identified as work towards this end.
Widespread discontent came to a head in 1849, when the unsuccessful May Uprising in Dresden broke out, in which Wagner played a minor supporting role.
Amongst the conducting engagements that Wagner undertook for revenue during this period, he gave several concerts in 1855 with the London Philharmonic Society, including one before Queen Victoria.
They were also influenced by Wagner's concepts of ancient Greek drama, in which tetralogies were a component of Athenian festivals, and which he had amply discussed in his essay "Oper und Drama".
The topic of Wagner and the Jews is further complicated by allegations, which may have been credited by Wagner, that he himself was of Jewish ancestry, via his supposed father Geyer.
Many of Wagner's concepts, including his speculation about dreams, predated their investigation by Sigmund Freud.
Amongst those claiming inspiration from Wagner's music are the German band Rammstein, and the electronic composer Klaus Schulze, whose 1975 album ''Timewind'' consists of two 30-minute tracks, ''Bayreuth Return'' and ''Wahnfried 1883''.
Wagner made a major contribution to the principles and practice of conducting.
The political ban that had been placed on Wagner in Germany after he had fled Dresden was fully lifted in 1862.
Perfectly good ones will be bound to drive people mad."
Apart from his operas, Wagner composed relatively few pieces of music.
He initially wrote the libretto for a single opera, ''Siegfrieds Tod'' (''Siegfried's Death''), in 1848.
Wagner lived in Dresden for the next six years, eventually being appointed the Royal Saxon Court Conductor.
Amongst the disillusioned were Wagner's friend and disciple Friedrich Nietzsche, who, having published his eulogistic essay "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth" before the festival as part of his ''Untimely Meditations'', was bitterly disappointed by what he saw as Wagner's pandering to increasingly exclusivist German nationalism; his breach with Wagner began at this time.
The Wagners moved to the town the following year, and the foundation stone for the Bayreuth Festspielhaus ("Festival Theatre") was laid.
Warrants were issued for the revolutionaries' arrest.
In "Opera and Drama" (1851), Wagner described the aesthetics of drama that he was using to create the ''Ring'' operas.
While planning the opera, Wagner composed the ''Wesendonck Lieder,'' five songs for voice and piano, setting poems by Mathilde.
The characters of Mime in the ''Ring'', Sixtus Beckmesser in ''Die Meistersinger,'' and Klingsor in ''Parsifal'' are sometimes claimed as Jewish representations, though they are not identified as such in the librettos of these operas.
Wagner was also much troubled by problems of financing ''Parsifal'', and by the prospect of the work being performed by other theatres than Bayreuth.
Wagner was active among socialist German nationalists there, regularly receiving such guests as the conductor and radical editor August Röckel and the Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin.
The ''Ring'' and ''Parsifal'' were premiered here and his most important stage works continue to be performed at the annual Bayreuth Festival, run by his descendants.
The indiscreet affair scandalised Munich, and Wagner also fell into disfavour with many leading members of the court, who were suspicious of his influence on the King.
Wagner's followers (known as Wagnerians or Wagnerites) have formed many societies dedicated to Wagner's life and work.
Since 1973, the festival has been overseen by the Richard-Wagner-Stiftung (Richard Wagner Foundation), the members of which include a number of Wagner's descendants.
Wagner's autobiography ''Mein Leben'' was originally published for close friends only in a very small edition (15–18 copies per volume) in four volumes between 1870 and 1880.
Joey DeMaio of the band Manowar has described Wagner as "The father of heavy metal".
These three operas are sometimes referred to as Wagner's "romantic operas".
The differences also result from Wagner's development as a composer during the period in which he wrote ''Tristan'', ''Meistersinger'' and the Paris version of ''Tannhäuser''.
To one side a cushion holding a crown sits on a table.In Biebrich, Wagner at last began work on ''Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg'', his only mature comedy.
With help from her friend Jessie Laussot, this was to have been augmented to an annual sum of 3,000 Thalers per year; but this plan was abandoned when Wagner began an affair with Mme.
In late 1820, Wagner was enrolled at Pastor Wetzel's school at Possendorf, near Dresden, where he received some piano instruction from his Latin teacher.
It remains controversial because of its treatment of Christianity, its eroticism, and its expression, as perceived by some commentators, of German nationalism and antisemitism.
Wagner's operas, writings, politics, beliefs and unorthodox lifestyle made him a controversial figure during his lifetime.
In "The Artwork of the Future" (1849), he described a vision of opera as ''Gesamtkunstwerk'' ("total work of art"), in which the various arts such as music, song, dance, poetry, visual arts and stagecraft were unified.
The "Bridal Chorus" from ''Lohengrin'' is frequently played as the bride's processional wedding march in English-speaking countries.
His thoughts on the relative contributions of music and drama in opera were to change again, and he reintroduced some traditional forms into his last few stage works, including ''Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg'' (''The Mastersingers of Nuremberg'').
Wagner continued his correspondence with Mathilde and his friendship with her husband Otto, who maintained his financial support of the composer.
The Wagners settled in Paris in September 1839 and stayed there until 1842.
'''Wilhelm Richard Wagner''' (; ; 22 May 181313 February 1883) was a German composer, theatre director, polemicist, and conductor who is primarily known for his operas (or, as some of his later works were later known, "music dramas").
He is also discussed in some of the works of James Joyce.
Richard and Cosima's wedding took place on 25 August 1870.
Musically the opera has been held to represent a continuing development of the composer's style, and Barry Millington describes it as "a diaphanous score of unearthly beauty and refinement".
Wagner did not attend the funeral.
Wagner had his own opera house built, the Bayreuth Festspielhaus, which embodied many novel design features.
In November 1859, Wagner once again moved to Paris to oversee production of a new revision of ''Tannhäuser'', staged thanks to the efforts of Princess Pauline von Metternich, whose husband was the Austrian ambassador in Paris.
From 1876 to 1878 Wagner also embarked on the last of his documented emotional liaisons, this time with Judith Gautier, whom he had met at the 1876 Festival.
The composer settled in Biebrich, on the Rhine near Wiesbaden in Hesse.
Completed in 1859, the work was given its first performance in Munich, conducted by Bülow, in June 1865.
and consider that it lays the groundwork for the direction of classical music in the 20th century.
Geyer's love of the theatre came to be shared by his stepson, and Wagner took part in his performances.
He took composition lessons with the Thomaskantor Theodor Weinlig.
Following Minna's death Cosima wrote to Hans von Bülow on a number of occasions asking him to grant her a divorce, but Bülow refused to concede this.
, and required on his part, and the part of his associates, "the rewriting of some recent Wagnerian history", so as to represent, for example, the ''Ring'' as a work reflecting Christian ideals.
He was the ninth child of Carl Friedrich Wagner, who was a clerk in the Leipzig police service, and his wife, Johanna Rosine (née Paetz), the daughter of a baker.
This was staged at Magdeburg in 1836 but closed before the second performance; this, together with the financial collapse of the theatre company employing him, left the composer with serious money problems.
The Slovenian group Laibach created the 2009 suite ''VolksWagner'', using material from Wagner's operas.
His first creative effort, listed in the ''Wagner-Werk-Verzeichnis'' (the standard listing of Wagner's works) as WWV 1, was a tragedy called ''Leubald.''
Initially they took a stormy sea passage to London, from which Wagner drew the inspiration for ''Der fliegende Holländer'' (''The Flying Dutchman''), with a plot based on a sketch by Heinrich Heine.
After the festival, the Wagner family journeyed to Venice for the winter.
In August 1814 Johanna and Geyer probably married—although no documentation of this has been found in the Leipzig church registers.
The Festspielhaus finally opened on 13 August 1876 with ''Das Rheingold'', at last taking its place as the first evening of the complete ''Ring'' cycle; the 1876 Bayreuth Festival therefore saw the premiere of the complete cycle, performed as a sequence as the composer had intended.
Millington notes that Jean-Jacques Nattiez has also applied psychoanalytical techniques in an evaluation of Wagner's life and works.
Even those who, like Debussy, opposed Wagner ("this old poisoner") could not deny his influence.
Georg Groddeck considered the ''Ring'' as the first manual of psychoanalysis.
He only consented after she had two more children with Wagner; another daughter, named Eva, after the heroine of ''Meistersinger'', and a son Siegfried, named for the hero of the ''Ring''.
''Der Ring des Nibelungen'', commonly referred to as the ''Ring'' or "''Ring'' cycle", is a set of four operas based loosely on figures and elements of Germanic mythology—particularly from the later Norse mythology—notably the Old Norse ''Poetic Edda'' and ''Volsunga Saga'', and the Middle High German ''Nibelungenlied''.
By 1839, the couple had amassed such large debts that they fled Riga to avoid their creditors; debt would plague Wagner for most of his life.
Wagner's early piano sonatas and his first attempts at orchestral overtures date from this period.
Following his death, debate about his ideas and their interpretation, particularly in Germany during the 20th century, has continued.
There have been modern complete or partial editions of Wagner's writings, including a centennial edition in German edited by Dieter Borchmeyer (which, however, omitted the essay "Das Judenthum in der Musik" and ''Mein Leben'').
Édouard Dujardin, whose influential novel ''Les Lauriers sont coupés'' is in the form of an interior monologue inspired by Wagnerian music, founded a journal dedicated to Wagner, ''La Revue Wagnérienne'', to which J. K. Huysmans and Téodor de Wyzewa contributed.
Wagner was determined to set it to music, and persuaded his family to allow him music lessons.
Hitler visited Bayreuth frequently from 1923 onwards and attended the productions at the theatre.
During this period, Wagner's growing passion for his patron's wife inspired him to put aside work on the ''Ring'' cycle (which was not resumed for the next twelve years) and begin work on ''Tristan''.
In this polemic Wagner argued, frequently using traditional antisemitic abuse, that Jews had no connection to the German spirit, and were thus capable of producing only shallow and artificial music.
The earliest was a silent film made by Carl Froelich in 1913 and featured in the title role the composer Giuseppe Becce, who also wrote the score for the film (as Wagner's music, still in copyright, was not available).
This Tristan is turning into something ''terrible''.
In 1831, Wagner enrolled at the Leipzig University, where he became a member of the Saxon student fraternity.
More rarely performed are the ''American Centennial March'' (1876), and ''Das Liebesmahl der Apostel'' (''The Love Feast of the Apostles''), a piece for male choruses and orchestra composed in 1843 for the city of Dresden.
Notably from ''Tristan und Isolde'' onwards, he explored the limits of the traditional tonal system, which gave keys and chords their identity, pointing the way to atonality in the 20th century.
He extended the introduction, and wrote a lengthy additional final section.
The full building programme included the family home, "Wahnfried", into which Wagner, with Cosima and the children, moved from their temporary accommodation on 18 April 1874.
''Die Feen'' (''The Fairies'', 1833) was unperformed in the composer's lifetime and ''Das Liebesverbot'' (''The Ban on Love'', 1836) was withdrawn after its first performance.
David Cronenberg) and ''Melancholia'' (dir.
Later in life, Wagner said that he did not consider these works to be part of his ''oeuvre''; none of them has ever been performed at the Bayreuth Festival, and they have been performed only rarely in the last hundred years (although the overture to ''Rienzi'' is an occasional concert piece).
From act 3 of ''Siegfried'' onwards, the ''Ring'' becomes more chromatic melodically, more complex harmonically and more developmental in its treatment of leitmotifs.
Wagner's father Carl died of typhus six months after Richard's birth.
While Bayreuth presented a useful front for Nazi culture, and Wagner's music was used at many Nazi events, the Nazi hierarchy as a whole did not share Hitler's enthusiasm for Wagner's operas and resented attending these lengthy epics at Hitler's insistence.
Wagner's concept of the use of leitmotifs and the integrated musical expression which they can enable has influenced many 20th and 21st century film scores.
Two of these settings are explicitly subtitled by Wagner as "studies for ''Tristan und Isolde''".
The overtures and certain orchestral passages from Wagner's middle and late-stage operas are commonly played as concert pieces.
Wagner's final opera, ''Parsifal'' (1882), which was his only work written especially for his Bayreuth Festspielhaus and which is described in the score as a "''Bühnenweihfestspiel''" ("festival play for the consecration of the stage"), has a storyline suggested by elements of the legend of the Holy Grail.
In January 1828 he first heard Beethoven's 7th Symphony and then, in March, the same composer's 9th Symphony (both at the Gewandhaus).
Despite numerous rehearsals, the opera remained unperformed, and gained a reputation as being "impossible" to sing, which added to Wagner's financial problems.
Wagner fell victim to ill-health, according to Ernest Newman "largely a matter of overwrought nerves", which made it difficult for him to continue writing.
Wagner, settled into his new-found domesticity, turned his energies towards completing the ''Ring'' cycle.
This was in part because the libretti of the four ''Ring'' operas had been written in reverse order, so that the book for ''Götterdämmerung'' was conceived more "traditionally" than that of ''Rheingold''; still, the self-imposed strictures of the ''Gesamtkunstwerk'' had become relaxed.
Before leaving Dresden, Wagner had drafted a scenario that eventually became the four-opera cycle ''Der Ring des Nibelungen''.
Wagner noted that his rescue by Ludwig coincided with news of the death of his earlier mentor (but later supposed enemy) Giacomo Meyerbeer, and regretted that "this operatic master, who had done me so much harm, should not have lived to see this day."
One source of inspiration for ''Tristan und Isolde'' was the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, notably his ''The World as Will and Representation,'' to which Wagner had been introduced in 1854 by his poet friend Georg Herwegh.
This contained his first public announcement of what was to become the ''Ring'' cycle:
Wagner initially announced the first Bayreuth Festival, at which for the first time the ''Ring'' cycle would be presented complete, for 1873, but since Ludwig had declined to finance the project, the start of building was delayed and the proposed date for the festival was deferred.
There continues to be debate about the extent to which Wagner's views might have influenced Nazi thinking.
He was once again assisted by the liberality of King Ludwig, but was still forced by his personal financial situation in 1877 to sell the rights of several of his unpublished works (including the ''Siegfried Idyll'') to the publisher Schott.
A complete edition of Wagner's correspondence, estimated to amount to between 10,000 and 12,000 items, is still under way under the supervision of the Institute for Music Research at the University of Würzburg.
As I have no wish to invent an arbitrary title for my works, I will call them Dramas&nbsp;...
This was partly a consequence of the conservative tastes of the Jockey Club, which organised demonstrations in the theatre to protest at the presentation of the ballet feature in act 1 (instead of its traditional location in the second act); but the opportunity was also exploited by those who wanted to use the occasion as a veiled political protest against the pro-Austrian policies of Napoleon III.
Ludwig settled Wagner's considerable debts, and proposed to stage ''Tristan'', ''Die Meistersinger'', the ''Ring'', and the other operas Wagner planned.
After grave difficulties in rehearsal, ''Tristan und Isolde'' premiered at the National Theatre Munich on 10 June 1865, the first Wagner opera premiere in almost 15 years.
Chamberlain met Hitler on a number of occasions between 1923 and 1927 in Bayreuth, but cannot credibly be regarded as a conduit of Wagner's own views.
In the 20th century, W. H. Auden once called Wagner "perhaps the greatest genius that ever lived", while Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust were heavily influenced by him and discussed Wagner in their novels.
The composition took four years, much of which Wagner spent in Italy for health reasons.
In his autobiography ''Mein Leben'' Wagner recalled once playing the part of an angel.
Ludwig II of Bavaria about the time when he first met Wagner, by Ferdinand von Piloty, 1865|alt=A young man in a dark military jacket, jodhpurs, long boots, and a voluminous ermine robe.
"Judaism in Music" (1850) was the first of Wagner's writings to feature antisemitic views.
He remained an adherent of Schopenhauer for the rest of his life.
In 1829 he saw a performance by dramatic soprano Wilhelmine Schröder-Devrient, and she became his ideal of the fusion of drama and music in opera.
Moreover, the festival finished with a deficit of about 150,000 marks.
Wagner's middle stage output began with ''Der fliegende Holländer'' (''The Flying Dutchman'', 1843), followed by ''Tannhäuser'' (1845) and ''Lohengrin'' (1850).
''Rienzi'' (1842) was Wagner's first opera to be successfully staged.
I shall never write an ''Opera'' more.
Wagner was responsible for several theatrical innovations at Bayreuth; these include darkening the auditorium during performances, and placing the orchestra in a pit out of view of the audience.
Some music historians date the beginning of modern classical music to the first notes of ''Tristan'', which include the so-called Tristan chord.
Wagner's primary published output during his first years in Zürich was a set of essays.
The conductor of this premiere was Hans von Bülow, whose wife, Cosima, had given birth in April that year to a daughter, named Isolde, a child not of Bülow but of Wagner.
According to Robert Gutman, this theme is reflected in the opera ''Parsifal''.
To raise funds for the construction, "Wagner societies" were formed in several cities, and Wagner began touring Germany conducting concerts.
The writer Robert Donington has produced a detailed, if controversial, Jungian interpretation of the ''Ring'' cycle, described as "an approach to Wagner by way of his symbols", which, for example, sees the character of the goddess Fricka as part of her husband Wotan's "inner femininity".
He almost certainly thought that Geyer was his biological father.
She and her family moved to Geyer's residence in Dresden.
In the 20th century Wagner's music was parodied by Paul Hindemith and Hanns Eisler, among others.
''Die Feen'', ''Das Liebesverbot'' and ''Rienzi'' were performed at both Leipzig and Bayreuth in 2013 to mark the composer's bicentenary.
The first two components of the ''Ring'' cycle were ''Das Rheingold'' (''The Rhinegold''), which was completed in 1854, and ''Die Walküre'' (''The Valkyrie''), which was finished in 1856.
He had not abandoned polemics: he republished his 1850 pamphlet "Judaism in Music", originally issued under a pseudonym, under his own name in 1869.
He apparently also toyed with the idea of abdicating to follow his hero into exile, but Wagner quickly dissuaded him.
Wagner had fallen for one of the leading ladies at Magdeburg, the actress Christine Wilhelmine "Minna" Planer.
The first such edition was published between 1871 and 1883, but was doctored to suppress or alter articles that were an embarrassment to him (e.g.
Adolf Hitler was an admirer of Wagner's music and saw in his operas an embodiment of his own vision of the German nation; in a 1922 speech he claimed that Wagner's works glorified "the heroic Teutonic nature&nbsp;... Greatness lies in the heroic."
Liszt initially disapproved of his daughter's involvement with Wagner, though nevertheless the two men were friends.
Charles Baudelaire, Stéphane Mallarmé and Paul Verlaine worshipped Wagner.
Other biographers (such as Lucy Beckett) believe that this is not true, as the original drafts of the story date back to 1857 and Wagner had completed the libretto for ''Parsifal'' by 1877; but he displayed no significant interest in Gobineau until 1880.
The two married in Tragheim Church on 24 November 1836.
Others who proved resistant to Wagner's operas included Gioachino Rossini, who said "Wagner has wonderful moments, and dreadful quarters of an hour."
Afterwards his mother Johanna lived with Carl's friend, the actor and playwright Ludwig Geyer.
At this period Wagner entertained ambitions as a playwright.
These three operas are considered to represent a significant developmental stage in Wagner's musical and operatic maturity as regards thematic handling, portrayal of emotions and orchestration.
In 1850, Julie, the wife of his friend Karl Ritter, began to pay him a small pension which she maintained until 1859.
He was baptized at St. Thomas Church.
Minna had died of a heart attack on 25 January 1866 in Dresden.
Wagner completed ''Parsifal'' in January 1882, and a second Bayreuth Festival was held for the new opera, which premiered on 26 May.
The compositional style of these early works was conventional—the relatively more sophisticated ''Rienzi'' showing the clear influence of Grand Opera ''à la'' Spontini and Meyerbeer—and did not exhibit the innovations that would mark Wagner's place in musical history.
, while Minna returned to Germany.
Hans-Jürgen Syberberg's 1977 film ''Hitler: A Film from Germany'''s visual style and set design are strongly inspired by ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'', musical excerpts from which are frequently used in the film's soundtrack.
Begun when he was in school in 1826, the play was strongly influenced by Shakespeare and Goethe.
Wagner took 26 years from writing the first draft of a libretto in 1848 until he completed ''Götterdämmerung'' in 1874.
Although distancing himself from the style of these operas from 1849 onwards, he nevertheless reworked both ''Der fliegende Holländer'' and ''Tannhäuser'' on several occasions.
These include a symphony in C major (written at the age of 19), the ''Faust Overture'' (the only completed part of an intended symphony on the subject), some overtures, and choral and piano pieces.
Initially establishing his reputation as a composer of works in the romantic vein of Weber and Meyerbeer, Wagner revolutionised opera through his concept of the ''Gesamtkunstwerk'' ("total work of art"), by which he sought to synthesise the poetic, visual, musical and dramatic arts, with music subsidiary to drama.
Guido Fackler has researched evidence that indicates that it is possible that Wagner's music was used at the Dachau concentration camp in 1933–34 to "reeducate" political prisoners by exposure to "national music".
I propose to produce my myth in three complete dramas, preceded by a lengthy Prelude (Vorspiel).&nbsp;...
The first public edition (with many passages suppressed by Cosima) appeared in 1911; the first attempt at a full edition (in German) appeared in 1963.
It also carries elements of Buddhist renunciation suggested by Wagner's readings of Schopenhauer.
During the sixteenth and final performance of ''Parsifal'' on 29 August, he entered the pit unseen during act 3, took the baton from conductor Hermann Levi, and led the performance to its conclusion.
Commenting on the struggle to finish the building, Wagner remarked to Cosima: "Each stone is red with my blood and yours".
those praising Meyerbeer), or by altering dates on some articles to reinforce Wagner's own account of his progress.
By 1827, the family had returned to Leipzig.
Wagner realised these ideas most fully in the first half of the four-opera cycle ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' (''The Ring of the Nibelung'').
The performances of the Paris ''Tannhäuser'' in 1861 were a notable fiasco.
He then began to work on an opera, ''Die Hochzeit'' (''The Wedding''), which he never completed.
Wagnerian themes inhabit T. S. Eliot's ''The Waste Land'', which contains lines from ''Tristan und Isolde'' and ''Götterdämmerung'' and Verlaine's poem on ''Parsifal''.
There have been frequent suggestions that antisemitic stereotypes are represented in Wagner's operas.
The divorce was finally sanctioned, after delays in the legal process, by a Berlin court on 18 July 1870.
They reinforced the reputation, among the public in Germany and beyond, that Wagner had begun to establish with ''Rienzi''.
Wagner described it to Cosima as his "last card".
Meanwhile, Wagner's wife Minna, who had disliked the operas he had written after ''Rienzi'', was falling into a deepening depression.
Wagner wrote a first draft of the libretto in 1845, and he had resolved to develop it during a visit he had made to Venice with the Wesendoncks in 1860, where he was inspired by Titian's painting ''The Assumption of the Virgin''.
All three (including the differing versions of ''Der fliegende Holländer'' and ''Tannhäuser'') continue to be regularly performed throughout the world, and have been frequently recorded.
(The premiere had been scheduled for 15 May, but was delayed by bailiffs acting for Wagner's creditors, and also because the Isolde, Malvina Schnorr von Carolsfeld, was hoarse and needed time to recover.)
His essay "About Conducting" (1869) advanced Hector Berlioz's technique of conducting and claimed that conducting was a means by which a musical work could be re-interpreted, rather than simply a mechanism for achieving orchestral unison.
The Queen enjoyed his ''Tannhäuser'' overture and spoke with Wagner after the concert, writing of him in her diary that he was "short, very quiet, wears spectacles & has a very finely-developed forehead, a hooked nose & projecting chin."
Weinlig was so impressed with Wagner's musical ability that he refused any payment for his lessons.
Many of these later articles, including "What is German?"
Wagner even planned an elopement with her in 1850, which her husband prevented.
(1878, but based on a draft written in the 1860s), repeated Wagner's antisemitic preoccupations.
Wagner had to flee, first visiting Paris and then settling in Zürich where he at first took refuge with a friend, Alexander Müller.
Wagner developed a compositional style in which the importance of the orchestra is equal to that of the singers.
The Nazis used those parts of Wagner's thought that were useful for propaganda and ignored or suppressed the rest.
Until his final years, Wagner's life was characterised by political exile, turbulent love affairs, poverty and repeated flight from his creditors.
In ''Mein Leben'', Wagner wrote "When I look back across my entire life I find no event to place beside this in the impression it produced on me," and claimed that the "profoundly human and ecstatic performance of this incomparable artist" kindled in him an "almost demonic fire."
Like ''Tristan'', it was premiered in Munich under the baton of Bülow, on 21 June 1868, and became an immediate success.
Wagner's attitude to Minna had changed; the editor of his correspondence with her, John Burk, has said that she was to him "an invalid, to be treated with kindness and consideration, but, except at a distance, was a menace to his peace of mind."
The work was withdrawn after the third performance and Wagner left Paris soon after.
