Burton admired and was inspired by the actor and dramatist Emlyn Williams.
A. H. Weiler of ''The New York Times'', however, called Burton's rendering of Alexander "serious and impassioned".
He worked for the local wartime Co-operative committee, handing out supplies in exchange for coupons.
Burton reprised his role in the play's 1972 film adaptation with Taylor.
and that Burton "staggers around looking ghastly and spouting irrelevance".
In 2000, Ellis Amburn's biography of Elizabeth Taylor suggested that Burton had an affair with Laurence Olivier and tried to seduce Eddie Fisher, although this was strongly denied by Burton's younger brother Graham Jenkins.
He was also responsible for nurturing in young Richard a passion for Rugby.
The opening night party was a lavish affair, attended by six hundred celebrities.
Burton remains closely associated in the public consciousness with his second wife, actress Elizabeth Taylor.
In August 1976, a month after his second divorce from Taylor, Burton married model Suzy Miller, the former wife of Formula 1 Champion James Hunt; the marriage ended in divorce in 1982.
During his tenure at Port Talbot Secondary School, Richard also showed immense interest in reading poetry as well as English and Welsh literature.
According to biographer Melvyn Bragg, Richard is quoted saying that Daddy Ni was "twelve-pints-a-day man" who sometimes went off on drinking and gambling sprees for weeks, and that "he looked very much like me".
''Anne of the Thousand Days'' received ten nominations at the 42nd Academy Awards, including one for Burton's performance as Henry VIII of England, which many thought to be largely the result of an expensive advertising campaign by Universal Studios; The same year, ''Staircase'' in which he and his "Cleopatra" co-star Rex Harrison appeared as a bickering homosexual couple, received negative reviews and was unsuccessful.
On rugby, Richard said he "would rather have played for Wales at Cardiff Arms Park than Hamlet at The Old Vic."
Burton was discharged from the RAF on 16 December 1947.
The Benthall-directed production opened in December 1955 to glowing reviews and was a much-needed triumph for Burton.
This was to be the first time in his career he took up the role.
''The Taming of the Shrew'' also became a notable critical and commercial success.
The relationship Burton and Taylor portrayed in the film ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?''
The ghosts of them were looking over my shoulder."
Rossen planned to cast Burton in ''Alexander the Great'' (1956) as the eponymous character.
''Cleopatra'' finally released on 11 June 1963 with a runtime of 243 minutes to polarising reviews.
Many critics dubbed him "the next Laurence Olivier".
The play and Burton's Hamlet were, on the whole, well received, with critics describing his interpretation of the character as "moody, virile and baleful" and that he had "dash, attack and verve".
The other roles he essayed for the season were Sir Toby Belch in ''Twelfth Night'', Caliban in ''The Tempest'' and Philip of Cognac in ''King John''.
He also provided narration for 26 episodes of ''The Valiant Years'', a series by the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) based on Winston Churchill’s memoirs.
Burton requested the film's director, Peter Glenville, not to oust him out of the project like he had previously done so for ''Adventure Story'' before accepting the role of Becket.
Following Edith's death, Richard's elder sister Cecilia, whom he affectionately addressed as "Cis", and her husband Elfed James, also a miner, took him under their care.
Gielgud was initially uncertain about selecting Burton and asked him to come back the following day to repeat his audition.
Burton thought the role was "a nothing part" and that he "hardly spoke at all".
A critic from ''Time'' magazine said that Burton "put his passion into Hamlet's language rather than the character.
The play nevertheless made $22,000 dollars, which Coghill was happy with.
Sensing an opportunity for a career resurgence, Burton readily agreed to do the role of Prince Albert, who falls in love with a milliner named Amanda (Strasberg).
Tynan lauded Burton's role of Captain Montserrat, noting that he played it "with a variousness which is amazing when you consider that it is really little more than a protracted exposition of smouldering dismay."
The play was also the subject of books written by cast members William Redfield and Richard L. Sterne.
All five of Burton's plays were directed by Benthall; three of those plays featured Bloom.
He had been warned that his liver was enlarged as early as March 1970, and had been diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver and kidney disease in April 1981.
Burton's stay at The Old Vic was cut short when he was approached by the Italian neorealist director Roberto Rossellini for Fox's ''Sea Wife'' (1957), a drama set in World War II about a nun and three men marooned on an island after the ship they travel on is torpedoed by a U-boat.
By the age of 41 he had declined so far in health that his arms were by his own admission thin and weak.
Crowther, however, lauded Burton's scenes where he performed Shakespeare plays such as Richard III.
After ''Sea Wife'', Burton next appeared as the British Army Captain Jim Leith in Nicholas Ray's ''Bitter Victory'' (1957).
Both Alpert and historian Alex von Tunzelmann noted Burton gave an effective, restrained performance, contrasting with co-actor and friend Peter O'Toole's manic portrayal of Henry.
It was also in 1943 that Richard qualified for admission into a University after excelling in the School Certificate Examination.
Irving Wardle of ''The Times'' called it "University drama at its worst" while the American newspaper columnist John Crosby, in his review for ''The Observer'', lauded Burton's speech where he asks God to be merciful, stating that "It takes a great actor to deliver that speech without wringing a strangled sob of laughter out of one.
And the voice which would sing like a violin and with a bass that could shake the floor."
He also found success in 1978, when he narrated ''Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of The War of the Worlds''.
Rye recommended Richard to director Peter Glenville for the part of Hephaestion in Rattigan's play about Alexander the Great, ''Adventure Story'', in 1949.
Seeing the talent Richard possessed, both Jones and Philip re-admitted him to school on 5 October 1942.
He shared his anxiety with de Havilland whilst coming to terms with her.
Philip later recalled, "His voice was tough to begin with but with constant practice it became memorably beautiful."
Burton lived in Céligny until his death.
Gielgud took the play to Broadway in the United States, where it opened at the Royale Theatre on 8 November 1950.
Do you want to be a great actor or a household word?".
Biographer Hollis Alpert notes that both Daddy Ni and Ifor considered Richard's education to be "of paramount importance" and planned to send him to the University of Oxford.
Burton died at age 58 from a brain haemorrhage on 5 August 1984 at his home in Céligny, Switzerland, and is buried there.
Marcellus' Greek slave Demetrius (played by Victor Mature) guides him as a spiritual teacher, and his wife Diana (played by Jean Simmons) follows his lead.
In 1969, Burton enjoyed a commercial blockbuster with Clint Eastwood in the World War II action film ''Where Eagles Dare''; he received a $1&nbsp;million fee plus a share of the film's box office gross.
His father, also a heavy drinker, refused to acknowledge his son's talents, achievements and acclaim.
Contrary to Burton's expectations, both the films were critical and commercial failures, and he rued his decision to act in them.
He chose to sing Sir Arthur Sullivan's "Orpheus with his Lute" (1866), which biographer Alpert thought "a difficult composition".
The cause of Edith's death was because "of puerperal fever".
I seem to remember that he never stopped talking, and I had given him the cold fish eye."
After The Old Vic season ended, Burton's contract with Fox required him to do three more films.
Burton called the latter a "piece of shit".
Throughout the late 40s and early 50s, Burton acted in small parts in various British films such as ''Now Barabbas'' (1949) with Richard Greene and Kathleen Harrison, ''The Woman with No Name'' (1950) opposite Phyllis Calvert, ''Waterfront'' (1950) with Kathleen Harrison again; he had a bigger part as Robert Hammond, a spy for a newspaper editor in ''Green Grow the Rushes'' (1951) alongside Honor Blackman.
As a result, Richard became Philip's legal ward and changed his surname to "Richard Burton", after Philip's own surname, by means of deed poll, which Richard's father accepted.
Pleased with the feedback Burton received for his performance in ''The Last Days of Dolwyn'', the film's co-producer Alexander Korda offered him a contract at a stipend of £100 a week, which he signed.
(1968) were critical and commercial failures.
He was also a chain smoker, with an intake of between three and five packs a day for most of his adult life.
The advance sales managed to keep ''Camelot'' running for three months until a twenty-minute extract was broadcast on ''The Ed Sullivan Show''.
The same year he provided narration for the Jack Howells documentary ''Dylan Thomas''.
Health issues continued to plague him until his death of a stroke at the age of 58.
Bacall later said of him: "He was just marvellous ... Bogie loved him.
Tynan made it official by famously saying Burton was now "the next successor to Olivier".
Burton was generous and supportive to everyone throughout the production and coached the understudies himself.
The film earned Burton the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year&nbsp;– Actor and his first Academy Award nomination in the Best Supporting Actor category.
According to Collins, Burton had a "take-the-money-and-run attitude" toward the film.
In her review for ''The New York Daily News'', Kate Cameron thought Taylor "nothing less than brilliant as the shrewish, slovenly.
The film was a success in the UK and Europe but had only limited distribution in the U.S. owing to the collapse of the studio that funded it and the lack of an American star in the movie.
His last film performance, as O'Brien in ''Nineteen Eighty-Four'', was critically acclaimed, though he was not the first choice for the part.
He earned pocket money by running messages, hauling horse manure, and delivering newspapers.
John F. Kennedy, who was then the President of the United States, reportedly enjoyed the play and invited Burton for a visit to the White House.
In the mid-1960s Burton ascended into the ranks of the top box office stars, and by the late 1960s was one of the highest-paid actors in the world, receiving fees of $1 million or more plus a share of the gross receipts.
It was then that film producer and screenwriter Milton Sperling offered Burton to star alongside Helen Hayes and Susan Strasberg in Patricia Moyes' adaptation of Jean Anoulih's play, ''Time Remembered'' (''Léocadia'' in the original French version).
Burton went on to star opposite Claire Bloom and Oskar Werner in ''The Spy Who Came in from the Cold'' (1965), a Cold War espionage about a British Intelligence agent Alec Leamas (Burton), who is sent to East Germany on a mission to find an expose a mole working within his organisation for an East German Intelligence officer, Hans-Dieter Mundt (Peter van Eyck).
Andrew Sarris of ''The Village Voice'' however criticised Taylor, believing her performance "lack genuine warmth" but his review of Burton was more favourable, noting that he gave "a performance of electrifying charm."
Richard Brody of ''The New Yorker'' commented positively on the chemistry between Burton and Taylor, describing it as "entrancing in the movie’s drama as it was in life."
Burton's Hamlet was quite popular with the young audience, who came to watch the play in numbers as they were quite taken with the aggressiveness with which he portrayed the role.
Burton performed the screen test for the role of Gareth, which Williams wrote especially for him, and was subsequently selected when Williams sent him a telegram which quoted a line from ''The Corn Is Green''  "You have won the scholarship".
In January 1956, the free daily newspaper, ''London Evening Standard'' honoured Burton by presenting to him its Theatre Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Henry V. His success in and as Henry V led him to be called the "Welsh Wizard".
After his death, Burton was replaced by Edward Fox, and the character changed to Faulkner's younger brother.
In turn, Burton declined to attend the funeral, when his father died from a cerebral haemorrhage in January 1957 at age 81.
Burton disagreed with others about Taylor's famed beauty, saying that calling her "the most beautiful woman in the world is absolute nonsense.
Martin Ritt, the film's director and producer, wanted Burton's character to exhibit more anonymity, which meant no display of eloquent speeches or intense emotional moments.
Olivier too agreed it was the greatest Coriolanus he had ever seen till then.
Burton was to reprise the role of Colonel Faulkner, while Laurence Olivier was cast as Rudolf Hess.
The magazine ''Variety'' termed the performances of the lead cast "effective" and complemented the fight sequences between Burton and Jeff Morrow.
During filming, Burton met and fell in love with Elizabeth Taylor, who was then married to Eddie Fisher.
Burton himself said of the time leading up to his near loss of life, "I was fairly sloshed for five years.
Burton picked up the hint and infused some of Gielgud's traits to his own in later performances as Hamlet.
The play was directed by Burton's English literature professor, Nevill Coghill, and was performed at the college in the presence of an audience of West End theatre luminaries such as John Gielgud, Terence Rattigan and Binkie Beaumont.
Burton and O'Toole also received nominations for Best Actor&nbsp;– Motion Picture Drama at the 22nd Golden Globe Awards, with O'Toole emerging victorious.
Richard played the role of an escaped convict in Lloyd's play, ''The Bishop's Candlesticks'', an adaptation of a section of Victor Hugo's ''Les Misérables''.
Alpert believed Burton's success was due to how well he varied his acting with the three female characters, each of whom he tries to seduce differently: Ava Gardner (the randy hotel owner), Sue Lyon (the nubile American tourist), and Deborah Kerr (the poor, repressed artist).
From 1949 until their divorce in 1963, he was married to Welsh actress/producer Sybil Williams, with whom he had two daughters, Katherine "Kate" Burton (born 10 September 1957) and Jessica Burton (born 1959).
The play on the whole, however, initially received mixed reviews on its opening at the Majestic Theatre in Broadway and made a slow start in raking the moolah.
He didn't want anyone else to do it as he thought it could be for Elizabeth what ''Hamlet'' was for him.
Bloom played the role of Barsine, the daughter of Artabazos II of Phrygia, and one of Alexander's three wives.
Rye cast Burton in a minor role as a young officer, Mr. Hicks, in ''Castle Anna'' (1948), a drama set in Ireland.
From 1983 until his death in 1984, Burton was married to make-up artist Sally Hay.
Burton played Taylor's tycoon husband Paul Andros in Anthony Asquith's ''The V.I.P.s'' (1963), an ensemble cast film described by Alpert as a "kind of ''Grand Hotel'' story" that was set in the VIP lounge of London Heathrow Airport; it proved to be a box-office hit despite mixed reviews.
Burton remarked on Taylor's performance, "I didn't know she was going to be this good."
The film marked the beginning of a series of collaborations with Taylor, in addition to making Burton one of the Top 10 box office draws until 1967.
Ritt, a non-drinker, was displeased with Burton's drinking habits as he felt it "lacked a certain discipline" and expected the same level of commitment from him as everyone else during filming.
The short won the Best Documentary Short Subject at the 35th Academy Awards ceremony.
He was a recipient of BAFTA, Golden Globe and Tony Awards for Best Actor.
The lead roles were played by Gielgud himself, and Pamela Brown, while Burton played a supporting role as Richard alongside the then-relatively unknown actress Claire Bloom.
and Taylor "does the best work of her career, sustained and urgent."
Both roles didn't go too well with critics, with a reviewer saying "he lacked inches" as Henry V. Olivier defended Burton by retaliating that he too received the same kind of review by the same critic for the same role.
''The Last Days of Dolwyn'' opened to generally positive reviews from critics.
After the first performance in Toronto, Gielgud decreed that the actors must wear capes as he felt it "lacked colour".
Among those who gave negative reviews were Jonathan Rosenbaum of the ''Chicago Reader'' who called ''The Robe'' a "pious claptrap", and Dennis Schwartz of Ozus' World Movie Reviews who wrote, "Burton is served a death sentence to be in such a turgid film, one that ranges from being creaky to silly to just plain vulgar."
Rye came to the rescue again by sending Burton to audition for a role in ''The Lady's Not for Burning'', a play by Christopher Fry and directed by Gielgud.
This incident marked the beginning of his association with Philip.
He requested the help of his schoolmaster, Philip Burton, but his voice cracked during their practice sessions.
which Richard termed "hygiene neglect".
At a party held in Simmons' residence in Bel Air, Los Angeles to celebrate the success of ''The Robe'', Burton met Elizabeth Taylor for the first time in his life.
He suffered from bursitis, possibly aggravated by faulty treatment, arthritis, dermatitis, cirrhosis of the liver, and kidney disease, as well as developing, by his mid-forties, a pronounced limp.
Burton was buried in a red suit, a tribute to his Welsh roots, and with a copy of Dylan Thomas' poems.
Burton's intense preparation and competitive desire to succeed served him well.
Burton admired Ray's ''Rebel Without A Cause'' (1955) and was excited about working with him, but unfortunately, ''Bitter Victory'' tanked as well despite positive feedback.
Shortly after the release of ''Prince of Players'', Burton met director Robert Rossen, who was well-known at the time for his Academy Award winning film, ''All the King's Men'' (1949).
Roddy McDowall played the villainous Mordred.
In 1964, Burton portrayed Thomas Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury who was martyred by Henry II of England, in the film adaptation of Jean Anouilh's historical play ''Becket''.
On Burton's performance, fellow actor and friend, Robert Hardy recalled, "There were moments when he totally commanded the audience by this stillness.
Theatre critic and dramaturge, Kenneth Tynan said of his performance, "His playing of Prince Hal turned interested speculation to awe almost as soon as he started to speak; in the first intermission local critics stood agape in the lobbies."
For his contributions to cinema, Burton has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6336 Hollywood Boulevard.
He was also praised by Humphrey Bogart and his wife Lauren Bacall after both witnessed the play.
The success of ''Camelot'' lead to Burton being coined the term "The King of Broadway", and he went on to receive the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical.
Burton returned to the United States for filming John Frankenheimer's television adaptation of Ernest Hemingway's ''The Fifth Column''.
Burton was loaned by Fox to the film's production company United Artists, which paid Burton a fee of $100,000.
The film's director Philip Dunne observed, "He hadn't mastered yet the tricks of the great movie stars, such as Gary Cooper, who knew them all.
The film received generally good reviews from critics in London, although they complained the British contribution to the campaign had been minimised.
Broadway theatre reviewer Walter Kerr noted Richard's syllables, "sing, the account of his wrestling the stone from the sword becomes a bravura passage of house-hushing brilliance" and complemented his duets with Andrews, finding Burton's rendition to possess "a sly and fretful and mocking accent to take care of the  without destroying the man."
Conversely, a critic from the ''Los Angeles Examiner'' labelled Burton as "terribly, terribly tweedy".
In a February 1975 interview with his friend David Lewin he said he "tried" homosexuality.
Writer and journalist Samantha Ellis of ''The Guardian'', in her overview of the play, thought critics found Burton to be "most authentic" for his role.
While Belch was considered "disappointing" due to Burton not putting on the proper make-up for the part, his reviews for Caliban and Philip of Cognac were positive.
Biographer Bragg observed that ''Look Back in Anger'' "had defined a generation, provided a watershed in Britain's view of itself and brought Osborne into the public prints as a controversial, dangerous figure."
But Burton did it."
Based on Lloyd C. Douglas' 1942 historical novel of the same name, ''The Robe'' was well received at the time of its release, but contemporary reviews have been less favourable.
The film and Burton's performance received mixed reviews upon release.
Burton was paid $250,000 for four months work in the film.
Burton starred as the titular character, Doctor Faustus while Taylor essayed her first stage role as Helen of Troy, a non-speaking part.
Richard Burton was born Richard Walter Jenkins, Jr. on 10 November 1925 in his house at 2 Dan-y-bont in Pontrhydyfen, a small village located in the county borough of Neath Port Talbot, Wales.
He also joined the Taibach Youth Center, a youth drama group founded by Meredith Jones and led by Leo Lloyd, a steel worker and avid amateur thespian, who taught him the fundamentals of acting.
In 1970, on his 45th birthday, Burton was ceremonially honoured with a CBE at Buckingham Palace; Taylor and Cis were present during the ceremony.
''Alexander the Great'' was made mostly in Spain during February 1955 and July 1955 on a budget of $6&nbsp;million.
Burton began 1952 by starring alongside Noel Willman in the title role of Emmanuel Roblès adventure ''Montserrat'', which opened on 8 April at the Lyric Hammersmith.
Later collaborations from the Burtons like ''The Comedians'' (1967), which was based on Graham Greene's 1966 novel of the same name, and the Tennessee Williams adaptation ''Boom!''
After marrying Sybil, Burton moved to his new address in 6 Lyndhurst Road, Hampstead NW3.
Philip too was happy with the progress his ward made and that he felt "proud, humble, and awed by god's mysterious ways".
After drinking himself nearly to death during the shooting of ''The Klansman'' (1974), Burton was dried out at Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, California.
The film received twelve Oscar nominations, including Best Actor for both Burton and O'Toole; they lost to Harrison for ''My Fair Lady'' (1964).
It was on the sets of this film where Burton was introduced by Williams to Sybil Williams, whom he married on 5 February 1949 at a register office in Kensington.
Both Geoff Andrew of ''Time Out'' magazine and Schwartz felt Burton was too old for the part, and the ''Variety'' reviewer thought "the role gives him little opportunity for variety."
The success of ''Becket'' and ''The Night of the Iguana'' led ''Time'' magazine to term him "the new Mr.
From the 1970s, after his completion of ''Anne of the Thousand Days'', Burton began to work in mediocre films, which hurt his career.
According to the film's director, Michael Radford, Paul Scofield was originally contracted to play the part, but had to withdraw due to a broken leg, then Sean Connery, Marlon Brando and Rod Steiger were all approached before Burton was cast.
Unaccustomed to the freedom of wearing their own clothes to perform on stage, the cast members found it hard to select the appropriate clothes and wore different attire day by day.
Walter Kerr felt that though Burton carried "a certain lack of feeling" in his performance, he appreciated Burton's "reverberating" vocal projections.
Burton successfully made the transition to Hollywood when, on the recommendation of film director George Cukor, he was given the lead role in the Gothic romance film, ''My Cousin Rachel'' (1952) opposite Olivia de Havilland.
Fredric March, Danielle Darrieux, Stanley Baker, Michael Hordern and William Squire were respectively cast as Philip II of Macedon, Olympias, Attalus, Demosthenes and Aeschines.
In 1964, the couple adopted a daughter from Germany, Maria Burton (born 1 August 1961).
He was married twice, consecutively, to actress Elizabeth Taylor, from 15 March 1964 to 26 June 1974 and from 10 October 1975 to 29 July 1976.
He lived there from 1949 to 1956.
Gielgud was not too happy with Burton's Hamlet and asked him while both were backstage: "Shall I go ahead and wait until you're better?...
After performing ''Camelot'' for six months, in July 1961, Burton was met by producer Walter Wanger to replace Stephen Boyd as Mark Antony in director Joseph L. Mankiewicz's magnum opus ''Cleopatra''.
Zanuck threatened to force Burton into cutting the deal, but the duo managed to come to a compromise when Burton agreed to a less binding contract, also for seven years and seven films at $1&nbsp;million, that would begin only after he returned from his stint at The Old Vic 1953–54 season.
Burton and Taylor next performed a 1966 Oxford Playhouse adaptation of Christopher Marlowe's ''Doctor Faustus''; the couple did the play to benefit the Oxford University Dramatic Society and as a token of Burton's gratitude to Nevill Coghill.
Howard Taubman of ''The New York Times'' called it "a performance of electrical power and sweeping virility."
So immersed had the Burtons become in the roles of George and Martha over the months of shooting that, after it was wrapped up, he and Taylor found it difficult not to be George and Martha, "I feel rather lost."
Theatre critic Brooks Atkinson appreciated the performances and praised the play's "hard glitter of wit and skepticism", while describing Fry as precocious with "a touch of genius".
Crowther wrote of Burton: "His tirades are eloquent but tiring, his breast beatings are dramatic but dull and his occasional lapses into sadness are pathetic but endurable."
The film flopped at the box office and has since been described as "the first flop in CinemaScope".
Maggie McNamara played Edwin's wife, Mary Devlin Booth.
Burton next featured as Jimmy Porter, "an angry young man" role, in the film version of John Osborne's play ''Look Back in Anger'' (1959), a gritty drama about middle-class life in the British Midlands, directed by Tony Richardson, again with Claire Bloom as co-star.
The film set a trend for Biblical epics such as ''Ben-Hur'' (1959).
The ''Time'' magazine critic found the film, "raddled with flaws, lacking style both in image and in action."
The play debuted at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool on 22 November 1943 and later premiered in St Martin's Theatre, London in January 1944.
According to Lerner, "he kept the boat from rocking, and ''Camelot'' might never have reached New York if it hadn't been for him."
Philip gave him a part in a radio documentary/adaptation of his play for BBC Radio, ''Youth at the Helm'' (1942).
Burton got the part the second time he auditioned for the role.
His acting is a technician's marvel.
Both plays opened in 1951 at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon to mixed reviews, but Burton received acclaim for his role as Prince Hal.
He was paid ten pounds a week for playing the role, which was "three times what the miners got."
He returned to films with ''The Medusa Touch'' (1978), ''Circle of Two'' (1980), and the title role in ''Wagner'' (1983), a role he said he was born to play, after his success in ''Equus''.
Public sentiment towards his perennial frustration at not winning an Oscar made many pundits consider him the favourite to finally win the award, but on Oscar Night he lost to Richard Dreyfuss in ''The Goodbye Girl''.
Crowther believed that Burton was "stalwart, spirited and stern" as Marcellus.
The play was directed by Glenville and starred the then up-and-coming actor Paul Scofield as the titular character.
