He had gotten to know her, and both liked and admired her.
Joan eventually became an astrophysicist specializing in interactions between the Earth and the solar wind.
He never settled into a particular house or apartment, living in guest houses or student residences, or with married friends "until these arrangements became sexually volatile".
He administered the computation group of human computers in the theoretical division.
His work during this period, which used equations of rotation to express various spinning speeds, ultimately proved important to his Nobel Prize–winning work, yet because he felt burned out and had turned his attention to less immediately practical problems, he was surprised by the offers of professorships from other renowned universities, including the Institute for Advanced Study, the University of California, Los Angeles, and the University of California, Berkeley.
The publication of the book brought a new wave of protest about Feynman's attitude toward women.
We have no definite rule against Jews but like to keep their proportion in our department reasonably small".
A school-administered IQ test estimated his IQ at 125—high, but "merely respectable" according to biographer James Gleick.
The video was made for the 50th anniversary of Feynman's 1965 Nobel Prize, in response to CalTech's request for thoughts on Feynman.
It was solved with the BCS theory of superconductivity, proposed by John Bardeen, Leon Neil Cooper, and John Robert Schrieffer.
They were among the first to depart for New Mexico, leaving on a train on March 28, 1943.
Morse conceded that Feynman was indeed Jewish, but reassured Smyth that Feynman's "physiognomy and manner, however, show no trace of this characteristic".
His interviews of NASA's high-ranking managers revealed startling misunderstandings of elementary concepts.
One of these involved analyzing the physics of a twirling, nutating disk as it is moving through the air, inspired by an incident in the cafeteria at Cornell when someone tossed a dinner plate in the air.
This was done in a quite different manner from that used by the calutron that was under development by a team under Wilson's former mentor, Ernest O. Lawrence, at the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California.
A key insight was that positrons behaved like electrons moving backwards in time.
These were clear mathematical flaws in the theory, which Feynman and Wheeler had unsuccessfully attempted to work around.
Many of the mathematics texts covered subjects of use only to pure mathematicians as part of the "New Math".
Feynman's account reveals a disconnect between NASA's engineers and executives that was far more striking than he expected.
He proposed to her by mail from Rio de Janeiro, and they married in Boise, Idaho, on June 28, 1952, shortly after he returned.
They frequently quarrelled and she was frightened by his violent temper.
The letter was sealed and only opened after his death.
and became a best-seller.
He concluded that the space shuttle reliability estimate by NASA management was fantastically unrealistic, and he was particularly angered that NASA used these figures to recruit Christa McAuliffe into the Teacher-in-Space program.
Feynman became one of the first of the Los Alamos Laboratory's group leader to depart, leaving for Ithaca, New York, in October 1945.
When Feynman was 15, he taught himself trigonometry, advanced algebra, infinite series, analytic geometry, and both differential and integral calculus.
Upon starting high school, Feynman was quickly promoted into a higher math class.
For Feynman, it was his "first big conference with big men...
While he was in Brazil, she had taught classes on the history of furniture and interiors at Michigan State University.
He was not fond of Ithaca's cold winter weather, and pined for a warmer climate.
Ultimately, on Lawrence's recommendation, the isotron project was abandoned.
Bacher, who had been instrumental in bringing Feynman to Cornell, had lured him to the California Institute of Technology (Caltech).
It did not help that Jenijoy La Belle, who had been hired as Caltech's first female professor in 1969, was refused tenure in 1974.
Feynman did not return to Cornell.
Feynman spent several weeks in Rio de Janeiro in July 1949, and brought back a woman called Clotilde from Copacabana who lived with him in Ithaca for a time.
Above all, at Cornell he was always in the shadow of Hans Bethe.
Further operations were performed in October 1986 and October 1987.
The railroad supplied Arline with a wheelchair, and Feynman paid extra for a private room for her.
The unfamiliar Feynman diagrams, used for the first time, puzzled the audience.
I had never gone to one like this one in peacetime."
The first public recognition of Feynman's work came in 1954, when Lewis Strauss, the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) notified him that he had won the Albert Einstein Award, which was worth $15,000 and came with a gold medal.
An offer was made to the Princeton team to be redeployed there.
Feynman was a keen popularizer of physics through both books and lectures, including a 1959 talk on top-down nanotechnology called ''There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom'', and the three-volume publication of his undergraduate lectures, ''The Feynman Lectures on Physics''.
"Theoreticians", noted Murray Gell-Mann, "were in disgrace."
It did not go well.
Instead, he attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he joined the Phi Beta Delta fraternity.
The day after he died, a letter arrived for him from the Soviet government, giving him authorization to travel to Tuva.
She filed suit with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which ruled against Caltech in 1977, adding that she had been paid less than male colleagues.
He read the work of Sir William Rowan Hamilton on quaternions, and attempted unsuccessfully to use them to formulate a relativistic theory of electrons.
Feynman had no such inhibitions, vigorously pointing out anything he considered to be flawed in Bohr's thinking.
Julian Schwinger gave a long presentation of his work in quantum electrodynamics, and Feynman then offered his version, titled "Alternative Formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics".
Feynman applied to Columbia University but was not accepted because of their quota for the number of Jews admitted.
Feynman could only kiss Arline on the cheek.
Feynman's salary was $380 a month, about half what he needed to cover his modest living expenses and Arline's medical bills.
He received a PhD from Princeton in 1942; his thesis advisor was John Archibald Wheeler.
In one case he found the combination to a locked filing cabinet by trying the numbers he thought a physicist would use (it proved to be 27–18–28 after the base of natural logarithms, ''e'' = 2.71828...), and found that the three filing cabinets where a colleague kept a set of atomic bomb research notes all had the same combination.
Students learned and used the powerful new tool that Feynman had created.
He and Bethe developed the Bethe–Feynman formula for calculating the yield of a fission bomb, which built upon previous work by Robert Serber.
The computational device that Feynman discovered then for gravity, "ghosts", which are "particles" in the interior of his diagrams that have the "wrong" connection between spin and statistics, have proved invaluable in explaining the quantum particle behavior of the Yang–Mills theories, for example, quantum chromodynamics and the electro-weak theory.
As an undergraduate, he published two papers in the ''Physical Review''.
Physicist David Bohm was arrested on December 4, 1950, and emigrated to Brazil in October 1951.
Howarth pointed out that she already had two boyfriends, but eventually decided to take Feynman up on his offer, and arrived in Altadena, California, in June 1959.
The work has endured and is useful to this day.
Perhaps because of this, Bohr never warmed to Feynman.
That this sort of behavior was illegal was not overlooked; Feynman had a friend, Matthew Sands, act as her sponsor.
Oppenheimer had also hoped to recruit Feynman for his own university, the University of California, but the head of the physics department, Raymond T. Birge was reluctant.
Feynman is commemorated in various ways.
He liked to date undergraduates, hire prostitutes, and sleep with the wives of friends.
In 1974, Feynman delivered the Caltech commencement address on the topic of ''cargo cult science'', which has the semblance of science, but is only pseudoscience due to a lack of "a kind of scientific integrity, a principle of scientific thought that corresponds to a kind of utter honesty" on the part of the scientist.
For example, the data showed that some 45% of the energy momentum was carried by electrically-neutral particles in the nucleon.
*  Includes ''Feynman's Tips on Physics'' (with Michael Gottlieb and Ralph Leighton), which includes four previously unreleased lectures on problem solving, exercises by Robert Leighton and Rochus Vogt, and a historical essay by Matthew Sands.
The relationship between the two models was murky; Gell-Mann referred to Feynman's partons derisively as "put-ons".
Surgeons removed a tumor the size of a football that had crushed his kidney and spleen.
In 2011, Feynman was the subject of a biographical graphic novel entitled simply ''Feynman'', written by Jim Ottaviani and illustrated by Leland Myrick.
On 28 February 1944, this was endorsed by Robert Bacher, also from Cornell, and one of the most senior scientists at Los Alamos.
Actor Alan Alda commissioned playwright Peter Parnell to write a two-character play about a fictional day in the life of Feynman set two years before Feynman's death.
At this juncture, in early 1943, Robert Oppenheimer was establishing the Los Alamos Laboratory, a secret laboratory on a remote mesa in New Mexico where atomic bombs would be designed and built.
In addition to his work in theoretical physics, Feynman has been credited with pioneering the field of quantum computing, and introducing the concept of nanotechnology.
In 2013, the BBC drama ''The Challenger'' depicted Feynman's role on the Rogers Commission in exposing the O-ring flaw in NASA's solid-rocket boosters (SRBs), based in part on Feynman's book ''What Do You Care What Other People Think?''
On October 17, 1946, he wrote a letter to Arline, expressing his deep love and heartbreak, that he kept for the rest of his life.
Feynman thought that he could do this, but when he went back to Bethe with his solution, it did not converge.
Feynman was sought out by physicist Niels Bohr for one-on-one discussions.
Before entering college, he was experimenting with and deriving mathematical topics such as the half-derivative using his own notation.
In the mid-1960s, physicists believed that quarks were just a bookkeeping device for symmetry numbers, not real particles, as the statistics of the Omega-minus particle, if it were interpreted as three identical strange quarks bound together, seemed impossible if quarks were real.
"Like a bunch of professional soldiers," Wilson later recalled, "we signed up, en masse, to go to Los Alamos."
In 1984–86, he developed a variational method for the approximate calculation of path integrals, which has led to a powerful method of converting divergent perturbation expansions into convergent strong-coupling expansions (variational perturbation theory) and, as a consequence, to the most accurate determination of critical exponents measured in satellite experiments.
He also tried marijuana and ketamine experiences at John Lilly's famed sensory deprivation tanks, as a way of studying consciousness.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor brought the United States into the war, he was recruited by Robert R. Wilson, who was working on means to produce enriched uranium for use in an atomic bomb, as part of what would become the Manhattan Project.
One of the conditions of Feynman's scholarship to Princeton was that he could not be married; but he continued to see his high school sweetheart, Arline Greenbaum, and was determined to marry her once he had been awarded his Ph.D.  despite the knowledge that she was seriously ill with tuberculosis.
The main building for the Computing Division at Fermilab is named the "Feynman Computing Center" in his honor.
Three volumes; originally published as separate volumes in 1964 and 1966.
On May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service issued the ''American Scientists'' commemorative set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations.
On June 29, 1942, they took the Staten Island Ferry to Staten Island, where there were married in the city office.
Any virtue that a man has, even if he has many vices, should not be used as a tool against him."
From his diagrams of a small number of particles interacting in spacetime, Feynman could then model all of physics in terms of the spins of those particles and the range of coupling of the fundamental forces.
The divorce became final on May 5, 1958.
This helped with the problem of superconductivity but the solution eluded Feynman.
His sister Joan did better, allowing her to claim that she was smarter.
He wanted a picture of a drumhead sprinkled with powder to show the modes of vibration at the beginning of the book.
Feynman nominally held an appointment at the University of Wisconsin–Madison as an assistant professor of physics, but was on unpaid leave during his involvement in the Manhattan project.
In 1964, he served on the California State Curriculum Commission, which was responsible for approving textbooks to be used by schools in California.
Real Time Opera premiered its opera ''Feynman'' at the Norfolk (CT) Chamber Music Festival in June 2005.
Feynman attended Far Rockaway High School, a school in Far Rockaway, Queens, also attended by fellow Nobel laureates Burton Richter and Baruch Samuel Blumberg.
Feynman tried LSD during his professorship at Caltech.
The government did, however, send Feynman to Geneva for the September 1958 Atoms for Peace Conference.
Feynman's stamp, sepia-toned, features a photograph of a 30-something Feynman and eight small Feynman diagrams.
Feynman was hospitalized at the UCLA Medical Center again on February 3, 1988.
Finally, in papers on the "Mathematical Formulation of the Quantum Theory of Electromagnetic Interaction" in 1950 and "An Operator Calculus Having Applications in Quantum Electrodynamics" in 1951, he developed the mathematical basis of his ideas, derived familiar formulae and advanced new ones.
This was followed by the  AEC's Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award in 1962.
Gell-Mann often expressed frustration at the attention Feynman received; he remarked: "Feynman was a great scientist, but he spent a great deal of his effort generating anecdotes about himself."
Feynman's love life had been turbulent since his divorce; his previous girlfriend had walked off with his Albert Einstein Award medal, and, on the advice of an earlier girlfriend, had feigned pregnancy and blackmailed him into paying for an abortion, then used the money to buy furniture.
In 1939, Feynman received a bachelor's degree, and was named a Putnam Fellow.
The stamps were designed by Victor Stabin under the artistic direction of Carl T. Herrman.
Later in his life, during a visit to the Jewish Theological Seminary, he encountered the Talmud for the first time, and remarked that it contained a medieval kind of reasoning and was a wonderful book.
Years later he declined to join Mensa International, saying that his IQ was too low.
In 1978, Feynman sought medical treatment for abdominal pains, and he was diagnosed with liposarcoma, a rare form of cancer.
He had become smitten by Mary Louise Bell, a platinum blonde from Neodesha, Kansas.
In 1941, with World War II raging in Europe but the United States not yet at war, Feynman spent the summer working on ballistics problems at the Frankford Arsenal in Pennsylvania.
To Schwinger, the Feynman diagram was "pedagogy, not physics".
Unable to focus on research problems, Feynman began tackling physics problems, not for utility, but for self-satisfaction.
When Richard was five years old, his mother gave birth to a younger brother, Henry Philips, but this brother died at four weeks of age on February 25, 1924.
With Murray Gell-Mann, Feynman developed a model of weak decay, which showed that the current coupling in the process is a combination of vector and axial currents (an example of weak decay is the decay of a neutron into an electron, a proton, and an antineutrino).
He also stated "To select, for approbation the peculiar elements that come from some supposedly Jewish heredity is to open the door to all kinds of nonsense on racial theory," and adding "... at thirteen I was not only converted to other religious views, but I also stopped believing that the Jewish people are in any way 'the chosen people'."
Other work at Los Alamos included calculating neutron equations for the Los Alamos "Water Boiler", a small nuclear reactor, to measure how close an assembly of fissile material was to criticality.
Co-authors Robert B. Leighton and Matthew Sands, colleagues of Feynman, edited and illustrated them into book form.
At Los Alamos, Feynman was assigned to Hans Bethe's Theoretical (T) Division, and impressed Bethe enough to be made a group leader.
"Please excuse my not mailing this," the letter concluded, "but I don't know your new address."
He attained a perfect score on the graduate school entrance exams to Princeton University in physics—an unprecedented feat—and an outstanding score in mathematics, but did poorly on the history and English portions.
Richard Phillips Feynman was born on May 11, 1918, in Queens, New York City, the son of Lucille , a homemaker, and Melville Arthur Feynman, a sales manager, originally from Minsk in Belarus, in those days part of the Russian Empire; both were Ashkenazi Jews.
When he was in grade school, he created a home burglar alarm system while his parents were out for the day running errands.
Though separated by nine years, Joan and Richard were close, as they both shared a natural curiosity about the world.
He enjoyed the house's convenience and said that "it's there that I did the fundamental work" for which he won the Nobel Prize.
Since he was no longer working at the Los Alamos Laboratory, Feynman was no longer exempt from the draft, and was called up by the Army in the fall of 1946.
Feynman opposed rote learning or unthinking memorization and other teaching methods that emphasized form over function.
Gell-Mann was upset by Feyman's account in the book of the weak interaction work, and threatened to sue, resulting in a correction being inserted in later editions.
He assisted in the development of the atomic bomb during World War II and became known to a wide public in the 1980s as a member of the Rogers Commission, the panel that investigated the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.
In high school he was developing the mathematical intuition behind his Taylor series of mathematical operators.
In a talk given there several years later, Feynman quipped, "It's great to be back at the only university that ever had the good sense to fire me."
On the beach on Lake Geneva, he met Gweneth Howarth, who was from Ripponden, Yorkshire, and working in Switzerland as an ''au pair''.
Asked who at Los Alamos was most likely to be a spy, Fuchs speculated that Feynman, with his safe cracking and frequent trips to Albuquerque, was the mostly likely candidate.
Elementary students were taught about sets, but:
He instructed the graduating class that "The first principle is that you must not fool yourself—and you are the easiest person to fool.
Feynman was working in the computing room when he was informed that Arline was dying.
In the 1960s, Feynman began thinking of writing an autobiography, and began granting interviews to historians.
The commission ultimately determined that the disaster was caused by the primary O-ring not properly sealing in unusually cold weather at Cape Canaveral.
Fuchs was arrested as a Soviet spy in 1950, and the FBI questioned Bethe about Feynman's loyalty.
The result corresponded to Bethe's version.
By 1949, Feynman was becoming restless at Cornell.
The young Feynman was heavily influenced by his father, who encouraged him to ask questions to challenge orthodox thinking, and who was always ready to teach Feynman something new.
Due to the top secret nature of the work, the Los Alamos Laboratory was isolated.
He was in charge of the group responsible for the theoretical work and calculations on the proposed uranium hydride bomb, which ultimately proved to be infeasible.
With Stanley Frankel and Nicholas Metropolis, he assisted in establishing the system for using IBM punched cards for computation.
It could be perilous even to approach him when unprepared, and he did not forget the fools or pretenders.
He found that people tended to leave their safes unlocked, or leave them on the factory settings, or write the combinations down, or use easily guessable combinations like dates.
Quantum electrodynamics suffered from infinite integrals in perturbation theory.
His habit of direct characterization sometimes rattled more conventional thinkers; for example, one of his questions, when learning feline anatomy, was "Do you have a map of the cat?"
At this time the FBI interviewed a woman close to Feynman, possibly Mary Lou, who sent a written statement to J. Edgar Hoover on August 8, 1958:
Concerned over the connections to drugs and rock and roll that could be made from the image, the publishers changed the cover to plain red, though they included a picture of him playing drums in the foreword.
Feynman devoted the latter half of his book ''What Do You Care What Other People Think?''
The FBI would compile a bulky file on Feynman.
The SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory deep inelastic scattering experiments of the late 1960s showed that nucleons (protons and neutrons) contained point-like particles that scattered electrons.
Bethe took the lead from the work of Hans Kramers, and derived a renormalized non-relativistic quantum equation for the Lamb shift.
Despite their mother's disapproval of Joan's desire to study astronomy, Richard encouraged his sister to explore the universe.
''Clear thinking'' and ''clear presentation'' were fundamental prerequisites for his attention.
She later followed him to Caltech, where he gave a lecture.
He noted that Feynman's eccentricities included a refusal to brush his teeth, which he advised others not to do on national television, despite dentists showing him scientific studies that supported the practice.
The parton model emerged as a complement to the quark model developed by Gell-Mann.
A ruptured duodenal ulcer caused kidney failure, and he declined dialysis that might have prolonged his life for a few months.
''The Feynman Lectures on Physics'' occupied two physicists, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew Sands, as part-time co-authors for several years.
and ''What Do You Care What Other People Think?''
His last words were: "I'd hate to die twice.
In Brazil, Feynman was particularly impressed with the ''Samba'' music, and learned to play a metal percussion instrument, the ''frigideira''.
They separated on May 20, 1956.
Feynman also became known through his semi-autobiographical books ''Surely You're Joking, Mr.
He spent time in Rio with his good friend Bohm, but Bohm could not convince Feynman to take up investigating Bohm's ideas on physics.
They had a son, Carl, in 1962, and adopted a daughter, Michelle, in 1968.
Feynman attempted an explanation of the strong interactions governing nucleons scattering called the parton model.
The rest came from her $3,300 in savings.
When Feynman found that Howarth was being paid only $25 a month, he offered her $20 a week to be his live-in maid.
Like many other young physicists, Feynman soon fell under the spell of the charismatic Oppenheimer, who telephoned Feynman long distance from Chicago to inform him that he had found a sanatorium in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for Arline.
In 1965, he shared the Nobel Prize in Physics with Schwinger and Tomonaga "for their fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics, with deep-ploughing consequences for the physics of elementary particles".
Their mother thought that women did not have the cranial capacity to comprehend such things.
The book was published in 1985 as ''Surely You're Joking, Mr.
He was buried in Mountain View Cemetery and Mausoleum in Altadena.
Feynman played jokes on colleagues.
When Fuchs confessed to being a spy for the Soviet Union in 1950, this would be seen in a different light.
He had a sabbatical coming for 1951–52, and elected to spend it in Brazil, where he gave courses at the Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas.
He warned in his appendix to the commission's report (which was included only after he threatened not to sign the report), "For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature cannot be fooled."
In the wake of the 1957 Sputnik crisis, the U.S. government's interest in science rose for a time.
On paper, the isotron was many times as efficient as the calutron, but Feynman and Paul Olum struggled to determine whether or not it was practical.
The head of the physics department there, Henry D. Smyth, had another concern, writing to Philip M. Morse to ask: "Is Feynman Jewish?
The Soviet Union detonated its first atomic bomb in 1949, generating anti-communist hysteria.
He was not impressed with what he found.
La Belle finally received tenure in 1979.
Feynman presented his work to his peers at the Pocono Conference in 1948.
On witnessing the blast, Feynman ducked towards the floor of his truck because of the immense brightness of the explosion, where he saw a temporary "purple splotch" afterimage of the event.
For instance, NASA managers claimed that there was a 1 in 100,000 chance of a catastrophic failure aboard the shuttle, but Feynman discovered that NASA's own engineers estimated the chance of a catastrophe at closer to 1 in 200.
Later Feynman's daughter Michelle would undertake the journey.
He borrowed Fuchs' car and drove to Albuquerque where he sat with her for hours until she died on June 16, 1945.
While papers by others initially cited Schwinger, papers citing Feynman and employing Feynman diagrams appeared in 1950, and soon became prevalent.
