He is the only child of confectioners Elsie (née Gleave) and Richard Starkey.
While attending an intermediate course at his ashram in Rishikesh, India, they enjoyed one of their most prolific writing periods, composing most of the album's songs there.
A subsequent conversation with the ship's captain regarding the behaviours of the animal served as the inspiration for his ''Abbey Road'' composition, "Octopus's Garden", which Starr wrote on guitar during the trip.
Starr then played drums on McCartney's 1997 album ''Flaming Pie''.
In December 2015, Starr and Bach auctioned some of their personal and professional items to the public via Julien's Auctions in Los Angeles.
During this time, Starr was temporarily replaced for five concert dates by 24-year-old session drummer Jimmie Nicol.
Author Peter Doggett describes ''Ringo'' as a template for Starr's solo career, saying that, as a musician first rather than a songwriter, "he would rely on his friends and his charm, and if both were on tap, then the results were usually appealing."
His recovery spanned twelve months, which he spent away from his family at Liverpool's Myrtle Street children's hospital.
In 1987 he abandoned sessions in Memphis for a planned country album, produced by Chips Moman, after which Moman was blocked by a court injunction from issuing the recordings.
Houses in the area were "poorly ventilated, postage-stamp-sized ... patched together by crumbling plaster walls, with a rear door that opened onto an outhouse."
On 7 July 2010, Starr celebrated his 70th birthday at Radio City Music Hall with another All-Starr Band concert, topped with friends and family joining him on stage including Ono, his son Zak, and McCartney.
He and the other Beatles were cumulatively nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer for their performances in the 1964 film ''A Hard Day's Night''.
It knocked me out to see and hear the kids waving for me.
Starr served as an honorary Santa Tracker and voice-over personality in 2003 and 2004 during the London stop in Father Christmas's annual Christmas Eve journey, as depicted in the annual NORAD tracks Santa program.
In 2011, ''Rolling Stone'' readers named Starr the fifth-greatest drummer of all time.
After his appearance at the Cavern Club the following day, Best fans, upset by his firing, held vigils outside his house and at the club shouting "Pete forever!
The album was a commercial failure, although the record company chose not to issue it in Britain.
Following a business meeting on 20 September, Lennon told the others that he had quit the Beatles.
I can't roll around the drums because of that."
During the 50th Grammy Awards, Starr, George Martin and his son Giles accepted the Best Compilation Soundtrack award for ''Love''.
Starr commented: "I've always believed that the drummer is not there to interpret the song"; comparing his drumming to painting, he stated: "I am the foundation, and then I put a bit of glow here and there ...
Starr subsequently combined his musical activities with developing a career as a film actor.
He stated that Martin had thought that he "was crazy and couldn't play ... because I was trying to play the percussion and the drums at the same time, we were just a four piece band".
Because of his distinctive voice, Starr rarely performed backing vocals during his time with the Beatles, but they can be heard on songs such as "Maxwell's Silver Hammer" and "Carry That Weight".
Richard Starkey was born on 7 July 1940, at 9 Madryn Street, in Dingle, Liverpool.
Starr was twice afflicted by life-threatening illnesses during childhood, and as a result of prolonged hospitalisations fell behind in school.
By December, he had moved into an upscale estate on three acres in Saint George's Hill called Sunny Heights.
Also in 1976, Starr issued ''Ringo's Rotogravure'', the first release under his new contract with Atlantic Records for the North American market and Polydor for all other territories.
Despite leaving after 10 days, Starr completed his first recorded Beatles song, "Don't Pass Me By", while in India.
Its disappointing performance inspired Atlantic to revamp Starr's formula; the result was a curious blend of disco and 1970s pop, titled ''Ringo the 4th'' (1977).
By the early 1960s he had become an ardent fan of Lee Dorsey.
Graves stated that he and "Ritchie" never had an unpleasant exchange between them; Starkey later commented: "He was great ...
Martin later clarified: "I simply didn't know what Ringo was like and I wasn't prepared to take any risks."
Soon afterwards, he became interested in the UK skiffle craze, developing a fervent admiration for the genre.
He was also influenced by country artists, including Hank Williams, Buck Owens and Hank Snow, and jazz drummers such as Chico Hamilton and Yusef Lateef, whose compositional style inspired Starr's fluid and energetic drum fills and grooves.
The album included the song "Yellow Submarine", which was the only British number one single with Starr as the lead singer.
Starr released the album ''Liverpool 8'' in January 2008, coinciding with the start of Liverpool's year as the European Capital of Culture.
Starr sang lead vocals for a song on most of the Beatles' studio albums as part of an attempt to establish a vocal personality for each band member.
However, he retains a property in the London district of Chelsea off King's Road, and he and Bach continue to divide their time between London and Los Angeles.
Starr considered himself fortunate to be on the same "wavelength" as the other Beatles: "I had to be, or I wouldn't have lasted.
In the ''Sunday Times Rich List 2011'', Starr was listed at number 56 in the UK with an estimated personal wealth of £150 million.
The extended non-speaking sequences had to be arranged by director Richard Lester because of Starr's lack of sleep the previous night, Starr commented: "Because I'd been drinking all night I was incapable of saying a line."
He was inducted into the ''Modern Drummer'' Hall of Fame in 1998.
A commercial and critical success, the LP also included "Oh My My", a US number five.
On 15 October 1960, he drummed with John Lennon, Paul McCartney and George Harrison, recording with them for the first time while backing Hurricanes singer Lu Walters on the George Gershwin aria "Summertime".
McCartney commented: "Ringo would do these little malapropisms, he would say things slightly wrong, like people do, but his were always wonderful, very lyrical ... they were sort of magic".
In 1972, he released his most successful UK single, "Back Off Boogaloo", which peaked at number two.
Subsequently, "Big Ritchie", as Starkey's father became known, lost interest in his family, choosing instead to spend long hours drinking and dancing in pubs, sometimes for several consecutive days.
During the recording of the White Album, relations within the band became openly divisive.
He played tambourine on a song she wrote and produced for Vera Lynn, "Don't You Remember When", and he inspired another De Paul song, "If I Don't Get You the Next One Will", which she described as being about revenge after he missed a dinner appointment with her because he was asleep in his office.
Released as a Harrison single in 1981, the track, which included Starr's drum part and overdubbed backing vocals by Paul and Linda McCartney, peaked at number two in the US charts and number 13 in the UK.
It used to be a non-stop party."
Later that month, Ringo and his band announced an upcoming summer tour of the US.
Following a routine appendectomy he contracted peritonitis, causing him to fall into a coma that lasted for days.
Sometimes, he just slapped a biscuit tin with some keys, or banged on the backs of chairs."
Starr played the Pope in Ken Russell's ''Lisztomania'' (1975), and a fictionalised version of himself in McCartney's ''Give My Regards to Broad Street'' in 1984.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'', Starr sang lead vocals on the Lennon–McCartney composition "With a Little Help from My Friends".
Prior to the birth of their son, whom they nicknamed "Ritchie", the couple had spent much of their free time on the local ballroom circuit, but soon after his birth their regular outings ended.
Starr founded the record label Ring O'Records in 1975.
Graves, an impassioned fan of big band music and their vocalists, introduced Starkey to recordings by Dinah Shore, Sarah Vaughan and Billy Daniels.
On material issued after the break-up, Starr received a writing credit for "Taking a Trip to Carolina" and received joint songwriting credits with the other three Beatles for "12-Bar Original", "Los Paranoias", "Christmas Time (Is Here Again)", "Suzy Parker", heard in the ''Let It Be'' film, and "Jessie's Dream" from the ''Magical Mystery Tour'' film.
Shortly before this, he and Starr fell out due to McCartney's refusal to cede the release date of his eponymous solo album to allow for Starr's debut, ''Sentimental Journey'', and the Beatles' ''Let It Be''.
In 2010 Starr self-produced and released his fifteenth studio album, ''Y Not'', which included the track "Walk with You" and featured a vocal contribution from McCartney.
In 1971, Starr purchased Lennon's former home, Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill in Berkshire and moved his family there.
Full production will begin in June in Syracuse.
Starr played tambourine on "Love Me Do" and maracas on "P.S.
In total, Ringo Starr has seven grandchildren – one from Zak, three from Jason and three from Lee.
Elsie enjoyed singing and dancing, a hobby that she shared with her husband, an avid fan of swing.
He later admitted that he feared he would be permanently replaced during his illness.
Storm's Hurricanes were given top-billing over the Beatles, who also received less pay.
In 1973, Starr earned two number one hits in the US: "Photograph", a UK number eight hit that he co-wrote with Harrison, and "You're Sixteen", written by the Sherman Brothers.
In 1992, Starr released his first studio album in nine years, ''Time Takes Time'', which was produced by Phil Ramone, Don Was, Lynne and Peter Asher and featured guest appearances by various stars including Brian Wilson and Harry Nilsson.
I learned gentleness from Harry."
Like his father Starr became well known for his late-night dancing and he received considerable praise for his skills.
Trafford recalled: "I played a guitar, and Ritchie just made a noise on a box ...
After the release of the Beatles' second feature film, ''Help!''
For their second recording session with Starr, which took place on 11 September 1962, Martin replaced him with session drummer Andy White while recording takes for what would be the two sides of the Beatles' first single, "Love Me Do", backed with "P.S.
Lennon had offered a pair of songs for inclusion on the album – "Nobody Told Me" and "Life Begins at 40" – but following his death, Starr did not feel comfortable recording them.
In 1978 Starr released ''Bad Boy'', which reached a disappointing number 129 in the US and again failed to place on the UK albums chart.
The label was not prolific, but their first signing was Liam Lynch, who produced a 2003 LP entitled ''Fake Songs''.
For the Beatles' seminal 1967 album, ''Sgt.
Starr was inducted into the Percussive Arts Society Hall of Fame in 2002, joining an elite group including Buddy Rich, William F. Ludwig, Sr., and William F. Ludwig, Jr. On 29 November 2002 (the first anniversary of Harrison's death), he performed "Photograph" and a cover of Carl Perkins' "Honey Don't" at the ''Concert for George'' held in the Royal Albert Hall, London.
In 1985, he was the first of the Beatles to become a grandfather upon the birth of Zak's daughter, Tatia Jayne Starkey.
Starr and Bach split their time between homes in Cranleigh, Surrey; Los Angeles; and Monte Carlo.
Starr, who was previously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a Beatle in 1988, was inducted for his solo career in 2015, making him one of 21 performers inducted more than once.
He achieved commercial and critical success with his 1973 album ''Ringo'', which was a top ten release in both the UK and the US.
Speaking in 2001, he attributed this downward turn to his "not taking enough interest" in music, saying of himself and friends such as Nilsson and Keith Moon: "We weren't musicians dabbling in drugs and alcohol; now we were junkies dabbling in music."
On 10 April 1970, McCartney publicly announced that he had quit the Beatles.
He has been featured in a number of documentaries and hosted television shows.
In 2015, twenty-three years after he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as one of the Beatles, Starr became the last Beatle to be inducted for their solo career.
Released in December 1995, "Free as a Bird" was the first new Beatles single since 1970.
He returned to the studio two weeks later, to find that Harrison had covered his drum kit in flowers as a welcome-back gesture.
If there's a gap, I want to be good enough to fill it."
In March 1996, they released a second single, "Real Love".
In addition, many famous guests joined on various tracks, including Martin, Petty, McCartney and, in his final appearance on a Starr album, Harrison.
I lived in a blackout."
In January 2015 Starr tweeted the title of his new 11-track studio album, ''Postcards from Paradise''.
Starr is credited as a co-writer of "What Goes On", "Flying" and "Dig It".
According to Lewisohn, there were fewer than a dozen occasions in the Beatles' eight-year recording career where session breakdowns were caused by Starr making a mistake, while the vast majority of takes were stopped owing to mistakes by the other three Beatles.
In a letter published in ''Melody Maker'', a fan asked the Beatles to let Starr sing more; he replied: "I am quite happy with my one little track on each album".
The minor planet 4150 Starr, discovered on 31 August 1984 by Brian A. Skiff at the Anderson Mesa Station of the Lowell Observatory, was named in Starr's honour.
He also narrated the first two series of the children's television programme ''Thomas & Friends'' and portrayed "Mr Conductor" during the first season of the PBS children's television series ''Shining Time Station''.
Joe Walsh and the Roundheads joined Starr for his appearance on ''VH1 Storytellers'', which was released as an album under the same name.
Starr played drums on Lennon's ''John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band'' (1970), Ono's ''Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band'' (1970), and on Harrison's albums ''All Things Must Pass'' (1970), ''Living in the Material World'' (1973) and ''Dark Horse'' (1974).
His inability to compose new material led to his input being minimised during recording sessions; he often found himself relegated to adding minor percussion effects to songs by McCartney, Lennon and Harrison.
Soon after Starr made the comment, a provoked Best filed a libel suit against him that lasted for four years before the court reached an undisclosed settlement in Best's favour.
During this period Starr became romantically involved with Lynsey de Paul.
During 1963, the Beatles enjoyed increasing popularity in Britain.
Since 1989, he has toured with twelve variations of Ringo Starr & His All-Starr Band.
In January 2012, he released the album ''Ringo 2012''.
During his down-time Starr worked on his guitar playing; he commented: "I jump into chords that no one seems to get into.
Later that year, Starr announced that his All-Starr Band would tour the Pacific Rim during 2013 with select dates in New Zealand, Australia and Japan; it was his first performance in Japan since 1996, and his debut in both New Zealand and Australia.
While reflecting on Buddy Rich, Starr commented: "He does things with one hand that I can't do with nine, but that's technique.
During his youth, Starr had been a devoted fan of skiffle and blues music, but by the time he joined the Texans in 1958, he had developed a preference for rock and roll.
Drummer Steve Smith commented on Starr's musical contribution:
Starr has said that his favourite drummer is Jim Keltner, with whom he first played at the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971.
Starr's creative contribution to music has received praise from drummers such as Phil Collins, who described him as "a great musician", and Steve Smith, who commented: "Before Ringo, drum stars were measured by their soloing ability and virtuosity.
He later commented on his longstanding addiction: "Years I've lost, absolute years … I've no idea what happened.
I'd made it as a personality ... Our appeal ... is that we're ordinary lads."
Having become friends with the English singer Marc Bolan, Starr made his directorial debut with the 1972 T. Rex documentary ''Born to Boogie''.
In April 2009, Starr reunited with McCartney at the David Lynch Foundation's "Change Begins Within" benefit concert, held at New York's Radio City Music Hall.
On Christmas Day 1957, Graves gave Starkey a second-hand drum kit consisting of a snare drum, bass drum and a makeshift cymbal fashioned from an old rubbish bin lid.
According to NORAD officials, he was "a Starr in the east" who helped guide North American Aerospace Defense Command's Santa-tracking tradition.
In January, their second single, "Please Please Me", followed "Love Me Do" into the UK charts and a successful television appearance on ''Thank Your Lucky Stars'' earned them favourable reviews, leading to a boost in sales and radio play.
Elsie found it difficult to survive on her ex-husband's support payments of thirty shillings a week, so she took on several menial jobs cleaning houses before securing a position as a local barmaid, an occupation that she held for twelve years.
Starkey commented: "I was in the hospital band ... That's where I really started playing.
In his extensive survey of the Beatles' recording sessions, historian Mark Lewisohn confirmed that Starr was both proficient and remarkably reliable and consistent.
Stricken with a high-grade fever, pharyngitis and tonsillitis, he was admitted to a local hospital where he briefly stayed followed by several days of recuperation at home.
Starr performed with the Beatles during a few stand-in engagements while in Hamburg.
Starr commented: "In the states I know I went over well.
Elsie adopted an overprotective approach to raising her son that bordered on fixation.
In November 1976 Starr appeared as a guest at the Band's farewell concert, featured in the 1978 Martin Scorsese documentary ''The Last Waltz''.
Ringo's popularity brought forth a new paradigm ... we started to see the drummer as an equal participant in the compositional aspect ... His parts are so signature to the songs that you can listen to a Ringo drum part without the rest of the music and still identify the song."
Setting a pattern that would continue over the following decades, the band consisted of Starr and an assortment of musicians who had been successful in their own right with popular songs at different times.
Most of the songs were written by Starr and the band.
Starr appeared as himself and a downtrodden alter-ego Ognir Rrats in ''Ringo'' (1978), an American-made television comedy film based loosely on ''The Prince and the Pauper''.
Starr promoted the release heavily, yet ''Rotogravure'' and its accompanying singles failed to chart in the UK.
In 1994, Starr began a collaboration with the surviving former Beatles for the ''Beatles Anthology'' project.
He sang the Buck Owens hit "Act Naturally", and performed a duet with Cilla Black, "Do You Like Me Just a Little Bit?"
Following Starr's repeated infidelities, the couple divorced in 1975.
In 1998, Starr released two albums on the Mercury label.
He co-starred in ''That'll Be the Day'' (1973) as a Teddy Boy and appeared in ''The Last Waltz'', the Martin Scorsese documentary film about the 1976 farewell concert of the Band.
In an effort to secure himself some warm clothes, he briefly held a railway worker's job, which came with an employer-issued suit.
On 9 November 2008, Starr accepted a Diamond Award on behalf of the Beatles during the 2008 World Music Awards ceremony in Monaco.
Although initially reluctant to accept the residency and end his five-year machinist apprenticeship that he had begun four years earlier, Starr eventually agreed to the arrangement.
As the sessions progressed, their collective group dynamic began to decay; at times only one or two Beatles were involved in the recording for a track.
Starr was nominated for a 1989 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Performer in a Children's Series for his role as Mr.
Starr's first musical hero was Gene Autry, about whom he commented: "I remember getting shivers up my back when he sang, 'South of the Border'".
Featuring musical contributions from Lennon, Elton John and Harry Nilsson, the album included a cover of the Platters' "Only You (And You Alone)", which peaked at number six in the US and number 28 in the UK, and Hoyt Axton's "No No Song", which was a US number three and Starr's seventh consecutive top-ten hit.
Starr and Maureen had three children together: Zak (born 13 September 1965), Jason (born 19 August 1967) and Lee (born 11 November 1970).
Zak has performed with his father during some All-Starr Band tours.
In 1971, Starr participated in the Concert for Bangladesh, organised by Harrison, and with him co-wrote the hit single "It Don't Come Easy", which reached number four in both the US and the UK.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band''.
Early the following year, Starr released the album ''Ringo Rama'', which contained a song he co-wrote as a tribute to Harrison, "Never Without You".
By the mid-1960s, Starr had become a connoisseur of film.
Despite receiving some favourable reviews, the album failed to meet with commercial success.
The album failed to achieve commercial success, although the single "Weight of the World" peaked at number 74 in the UK, marking Starr's first appearance on the singles chart there since "Only You" in 1974.
On 23 July 1989, Ringo Starr & His All-Starr Band gave their first performance to an audience of ten thousand in Dallas, Texas.
Having played his own set beforehand, Starr joined McCartney for the finale and performed "With a Little Help from My Friends", among other songs.
The Butlins gig led to other opportunities for the band, including an unpleasant tour of US Air Force bases in France about which Starr commented: "The French don't like the British; at least I didn't like them."
Four years of Beatlemania were enough for anyone."
After several years of twice-weekly tutoring from his surrogate sister and neighbour, Marie Maguire Crawford, Starkey had nearly caught up to his peers academically, but in 1953, he contracted tuberculosis and was admitted to a sanatorium, where he remained for two years.
Zak Starkey is also a drummer, and during his father's regular absences, he spent time with The Who's Keith Moon.
He was a source of inspiration for several songs written at the time, including Penny Valentine's "I Want to Kiss Ringo Goodbye" and Rolf Harris's "Ringo for President".
In 1980, while on the set of the film ''Caveman'', Starr met actress Barbara Bach; they were married on 27 April 1981.
Because he doesn't turn me on."
Starkey attended St Silas, a Church of England primary school near his house where his classmates nicknamed him "Lazarus", and later Dingle Vale Secondary modern school, where he showed an aptitude for art and drama, as well as practical subjects including mechanics.
He commented on the nature of his lifestyle after having achieved success with the Beatles: "I lived in nightclubs for three years.
Starr and Moon were members of a drinking club, The Hollywood Vampires.
Although he had equipped the house with many luxury items, including numerous televisions, light machines, film projectors and stereo equipment, a billiard table, go-kart track and a bar named the Flying Cow, he did not include a drum kit, he explained: "When we don't record, I don't play".
Starr commented: "We gave up touring at the right time.
In July, Starr became involved in "#peacerocks", an anti-violence campaign started by fashion designer John Varvatos, in conjunction with the David Lynch Foundation.
On 20 August 1969, the Beatles gathered for the final time at Abbey Road Studios for a mixing session for "I Want You".
In many cases, Lennon or McCartney wrote the lyrics and melody especially for him, as they did for "Yellow Submarine" from ''Revolver'' and "With a Little Help from My Friends" on ''Sgt.
At age six Starkey developed appendicitis.
Starr quit Rory Storm and the Hurricanes in January 1962 and briefly joined Sheridan in Hamburg before returning to the Hurricanes for a third season at Butlins.
During the 1965 Birthday Honours for Queen Elizabeth II, Starr and the other Beatles were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE); they received their insignia from the Queen at an investiture at Buckingham Palace on 26 October.
As a result of the prolonged hospitalisations, he fell behind his peers scholastically and was ineligible for the 11-plus qualifying examination required for attendance at a grammar school.
Journalist Robyn Flans, writing for the Percussive Arts Society, stated: "I cannot count the number of drummers who have told me that Ringo inspired their passion for drums".
You could take a great drummer from today and say, 'I want it like that', and they really wouldn't know what to do."
He also wrote the Beatles' songs "Don't Pass Me By" and "Octopus's Garden", and is credited as a co-writer of others, including "What Goes On" and "Flying".
That same year, Liverpool's City Council announced plans to demolish Starr's birthplace, 9Madryn Street, stating that it had "no historical significance".
In September 2014, Starr won at the ''GQ'' Men of the Year Awards for his humanitarian work with the David Lynch Foundation.
Starr influenced Phil Collins, the drummer for Genesis, who said: "I think he's vastly underrated, Ringo.
The track, produced by Lynne, features a supergroup composed of Lynne, Tom Petty, Joe Walsh and Jim Keltner.
'''Richard Starkey''',  (born 7 July 1940), known professionally as '''Ringo Starr''', is an English musician, singer, songwriter and actor who gained worldwide fame as the drummer for the Beatles.
The album was produced by Arif Mardin and featured compositions by Lennon, McCartney and Harrison.
When the Beatles formed in 1960, Starr was a member of another Liverpool group, Rory Storm and the Hurricanes.
By the end of the year, the phenomenon known as Beatlemania had spread throughout the country, and by February 1964 the Beatles had become an international success, performing on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' to a record 73 million viewers.
He was also feeling increasingly isolated from the musical activities of his bandmates, who were moving past the traditional boundaries of rock music into territory that often did not require his accompaniment; during recording sessions he spent countless hours playing cards with their road manager Neil Aspinall and roadie Mal Evans while the other Beatles perfected tracks without him.
(1965), Starr won a ''Melody Maker'' poll against his fellow Beatles for his performance as the central character in the film.
His drum solos were billed as ''Starr Time''.
The album's lead single, the Harrison-composed "Wrack My Brain", reached number 38 in the US charts, but failed to chart in the UK.
The temporary reunion ended when Harrison refused to participate in the completion of a third song.
His lack of education contributed to a feeling of alienation at school, which resulted in him regularly playing truant at Sefton Park.
Baby" (number 74), and achieved moderate sales, reaching a chart position of 28.
During the show, he performed greatest hits and new songs and told anecdotes relating to them.
The boys want you out and Ringo in.'
Starr nevertheless maintained a high public profile through his narration over 1984–86 of the popular children's series ''Thomas & Friends'', a Britt Allcroft production based on the books by the Reverend W. Awdry.
Starkey enjoyed dancing as his parents had years earlier, and he and Trafford briefly took dance lessons at two schools.
