In western Madagascar, sympatric ring-tailed lemurs and red-fronted lemurs (''Eulemur rufifrons'') have been studied together.
At night, troops will split into sleeping parties huddling closely together to keep warm.
It is also female dominant, a trait common among lemurs.
Vibrissae are also found slightly above the wrist on the underside of the forearm.
According to analysis of amino acid sequences, the branching of the family Lemuridae has been dated to 26.1&nbsp;±3.3&nbsp;mya while rRNA sequences of mtDNA place the split at 24.9&nbsp;±3.6&nbsp;mya.
Troops typically range in size from 6 to 25, although troops with over 30&nbsp;individuals have been recorded.
Alloparenting between troop females has been reported.
When available, tamarind makes up as much as 50% of the diet, especially during the dry, winter season.
It is exposed on the nose, palms, soles, eyelids, lips, and genitalia.
* Aye-aye(''Daubentonia madagascariensis'')
Fires from the clearing of grasslands, as well as slash-and-burn agriculture destroy forests.
The maximum lifespan reported in captivity was 27&nbsp;years.
Males may inspect the female's genitals to determine receptiveness.
The urine marking behavior also is most frequent during the mating season, and may play a role in reproductive communication between groups.
The dorsal (back) coat varies from gray to rosy-brown, sometimes with a brown pygal patch around the tail region, where the fur grades to pale gray or grayish brown.
However, differences in the relationship between the orbit (eye socket) and the muzzle suggest that the ring-tailed lemur and the true lemurs evolved their elongated faces independently.
Extraction of hardwoods for fuel and lumber, as well mining and overgrazing, have also taken their toll.
Its distribution throughout the rest of its range is very spotty, with population densities varying widely.
The feet are semi-digitigrade and more specialized than the hands.
Another shared characteristic with the other strepsirrhine primates is the rhinarium, a moist, naked, glandular nose supported by the upper jaw and protruding beyond the chin.
The troop included a special infant named Sapphire, who was nearly albino, with white fur, bright blue eyes, and the characteristic ringed tail.
Ring-tailed lemur infants have a birth weight of  and are carried ventrally (on the chest) for the first 1 to 2&nbsp;weeks, then dorsally (on the back).
* Golden bamboo lemur(''Hapalemur aureus'')
Rising populations have created even greater demand in the southwest portion of the island for fuel wood, charcoal, and lumber.
The ring-tailed lemur also has a rudimentary foveal depression on the retina.
To keep warm and reaffirm social bonds, groups will huddle together.
Additionally, Molecular data suggests a deep genetic divergence and sister group relationship between the true lemurs (''Eulemur'') and the remaining three genera: ''Lemur'', ''Hapalemur'', and ''Prolemur''.
Within a troop, females stagger their receptivity so that each female comes into season on a different day during the breeding season, reducing competition for male attention.
Endemic to southern and southwestern Madagascar, the ring-tailed lemur ranges further into highland areas than other lemurs.
The males perform a unique scent marking behavior called ''spur marking'' and will participate in ''stink fights'' by impregnating their tail with their scent and wafting it at opponents.
Within the protected regions it is known to inhabit, the ring-tailed lemur is sympatric (shares its range) with as many as 24 species of lemur, covering every living genus except ''Allocebus'', ''Indri'', and ''Varecia''.
Depending on location, temperatures within its geographic range can vary from  at Andringitra Massif to  in the spiny forests of Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve.
Troops of the ring-tailed lemur will maintain a territory, but overlap is often high.
The penis is nearly cylindrical in shape and is covered in small spines, as well as having two pairs of larger spines on both sides.
It is also the most common of all captive primates.
Because of the difficulty in discerning the relationships within family Lemuridae, not all authorities agree on the taxonomy, although the majority of the primatological community favors the current classification.
The ring-tailed lemur is polygynandrous, although the dominant male in the troop typically breeds with more females than other males.
Male lemurs use their antebrachial and brachial glands to demarcate territories and maintain intragroup dominance hierarchies.
The fourth digit is the longest, and only slightly longer than the second digit.
Use of scent marking varies by age, sex and social status.
All mammalian fossils from Madagascar come from recent times.
The ring-tailed lemur has both native and introduced predators.
For males, social structure changes can be seasonal.
Three factors threaten ring-tailed lemurs.
Its purring vocalization is similar to that of the domestic cat.
In 1991, Ian Tattersall and Jeffrey H. Schwartz reviewed the evidence and came to a different conclusion, instead favoring to return the members of ''Eulemur'' and ''Varecia'' to the genus ''Lemur''.
** Genus ''Prolemur'': the greater bamboo lemur
The ring-tailed lemur will also sunbathe, sitting upright facing its underside, with its thinner white fur towards the sun.
Historically, the species used to be sympatric with the critically endangered southern black-and-white ruffed lemur (''Varecia variegata editorum''), which was once found at Andringitra National Park; however, no sightings of the ruffed lemur have been reported in recent years.
The ears are relatively large compared to other lemurs and are covered in hair, which has only small tufts if any.
The longest-lived ring-tailed lemur in the wild was a female at the Berenty Reserve who lived for 20&nbsp;years.
* Southern lesser bamboo lemur(''Hapalemur meridionalis'')
This behaviour is usually connected with food association.
Molecular analysis suggests that either the bamboo lemurs diverged from the ring-tailed lemur, making the group monophyletic and supporting the current 3-genera taxonomy, or that the ring-tailed lemur is nested in with the bamboo lemurs.
Another study, performed at the Myakka City Lemur Reserve, suggests that this species along with several other closely related lemur species understand simple arithmetic operations.
Home range size varies between .
Other measurements include a hind foot length of , ear length of , and cranium length of .
This is known as ''spur-marking''.
The palms are long and leathery, and like other primates, they have dermal ridges to improve grip.
While the diets of the two species overlap, they eat in different proportions since the ring-tailed lemur has a more varied diet and spends more time on the ground.
The thorny spur that overlays the antebrachial gland on each wrist is scraped against tree trunks to create grooves anointed with their scent.
However, it sits with its legs extended outward, not cross-legged, and will often support itself on nearby branches.
Following Linnaeus' species description, the common name "ringtailed maucauco" was first penned in 1771 by Welsh naturalist Thomas Pennant, who made note of its characteristic long, striped tail.
After years of observations of wild ring-tailed lemur populations at the Berenty Reserve in Madagascar and as well as baboons in Africa, she more recently concluded that this highly social lemur species does not demonstrate the equivalent social complexity of cercopithecine monkeys, despite general appearances.
Native predators include the fossa (''Cryptoprocta ferox''), the Madagascar harrier-hawk (''Polyboroides radiatus''), the Madagascar buzzard (''Buteo brachypterus'') and the Madagascar ground boa (''Boa madagascariensis'').
The ring-tailed lemur is a relatively large lemur.
Ring-tailed lemurs have also been shown to mark using urine.
* Fat-tailed dwarf lemur(''Cheirogaleus medius'')
Cleese later hosted the 1998 BBC documentary ''In the Wild: Operation Lemur with John Cleese'', which tracked the progress of a reintroduction of black-and-white ruffed lemurs back into the Betampona Reserve in Madagascar.
Females typically mate within their troop, but may seek outside males.
* Common brown lemur(''Eulemur fulvus'')
Although slight pattern variations in the facial region may be seen between individuals, there are no obvious differences between the sexes.
* Greater dwarf lemur(''Cheirogaleus major'')
Historically, the northern limits of its range in the west extended to the Morondava River near Morondava.
Although experimental releases have met success on St. Catherines Island in Georgia, demonstrating that captive lemurs can readily adapt to their environment and exhibit a full range of natural behaviors, captive release is not currently being considered.
Subsequent evolutionary radiation and speciation has created the diversity of Malagasy lemurs seen today.
In 1911, Oldfield Thomas made ''Lemur catta'' the type species for the genus, despite the term initially being used to describe lorises.
The permanent teeth erupt in the following order: m&nbsp;1/1 (first molars), i&nbsp;2/2 (first incisors), i&nbsp;3/3 (second incisors), C1 (upper canines), m&nbsp;2/2 (second molars), c1 (lower canines), m&nbsp;3/3 (third molars), p&nbsp;4/4 (third premolars), p&nbsp;3/3 (second premolars), p&nbsp;2/2 (first premolars).
Although the term "lemur" was first intended for slender lorises, it was soon limited to the endemic Malagasy primates, which have been known as "lemurs" ever since.
The ring-tailed lemur is highly social, living in groups of up to 30 individuals.
In 1991 and 1992, for example, a severe drought caused an abnormally high mortality rate among infants and females at the Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve.
Although the ring-tailed lemur may not use tools in the wild, it can not only be trained to use a tool, but will preferentially select tools based on their functional qualities.
In fact, primatologist Alison Jolly noted early in her academic career that some lemur species, such as the ring-tailed lemur, have evolved a social complexity similar to that of cercopithecine monkeys, but not the corresponding intelligence.
It may also be used for grasping small fruits, removing leaves from the stem when eating, and possibly scraping sap and gum from tree bark.
During the dry season it becomes increasingly opportunistic.
It has also been speculated that Linnaeus may also have known that the some Malagasy people have held legends that lemurs are the souls of their ancestors, but this is unlikely given that the name was selected for slender lorises from India.
In 1996, researchers Steven Goodman and Olivier Langrand suggested that the ring-tailed lemur may demonstrate regional variations, particularly a high mountain population at Andringitra Massif that has a thicker coat, lighter coloration, and variations in its tail rings.
Outside of its diminishing habitat and other threats, the ring-tailed lemur reproduces readily and has fared well in captivity.
* '''Family Lemuridae'''
Dominance is enforced by lunging, chasing, cuffing, grabbing and biting.
* Gray mouse lemur(''Microcebus murinus'')
However, these interventions are not always seen favorably, since natural population fluctuations are not permitted.
As early as the mid-1970s, studies had demonstrated that they could be trained through operant conditioning using standard schedules of reinforcement.
Each troop has one to three central, high-ranking adult males who interact with females more than other group males and lead the troop procession with high-ranking females.
Sunning is often a group activity, particularly during the cold mornings.
A complex call is the sequence of clicks, close-mouth click series (CMCS), open-mouth click series (OMCS) and yaps () used during predator mobbing.
Likewise, the fifth digit is only slightly longer than the second.
It belongs to Lemuridae, one of five lemur families, and is the only member of the '''''Lemur''''' genus.
Both are compressed buccolingually (between the cheek and the tongue).
The project had been partly funded by Cleese's donation of the proceeds from the London premier of ''Fierce Creatures''.
However, another study at the Myakka City Lemur Reserve examined the representation of tool functionality in both the ring-tailed lemur and the common brown lemur and discovered that, like monkeys, they used tools with functional properties (e.g., tool orientation or ease of use) instead of tools with nonfunctional features (e.g., color or texture).
It can also be found in Beza-Mahafaly Special Reserve, Kalambatritra Special Reserve, Pic d'Ivohibe Special Reserve, Amboasary Sud, Berenty Private Reserve, Anja Community Reserve, and marginally at Kirindy Mitea National Park.
* White-footed sportive lemur(''Lepilemur leucopus'')
First, the experimental design of older tests may have favored the natural behavior and ecology of simians over that of strepsirrhines, making the experimental tasks inappropriate for lemurs.
The toilet-claw is a trait shared among nearly all living strepsirrhine primates.
The muzzle is dark grayish and the nose is black, and the eyes are encompassed by black triangular patches.
The dorsal coloration is slightly darker around the neck and crown.
More recently, research at the Duke Lemur Center has shown that the ring-tailed lemur can organize sequences in memory and retrieve ordered sequences without language.
In 1758, his 10th edition of ''Systema Naturae'' listed the genus ''Lemur'' with three included species, only one of which is still considered to be a lemur while another is no longer considered to be a primate.
Facial vibrissae (whiskers) are developed and found above the lips (mystacal), on the cheeks (genal), and on the eyebrow (superciliary).
Males have a relatively small baculum (penis bone) compared to their size.
Known locally in Malagasy as '''' (, spelled '''' in French) or '''', it inhabits gallery forests to spiny scrub in the southern regions of the island.
At the Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve, a holistic approach to in-situ conservation has been taken.
The X chromosome is metacentric and the Y chromosome is acrocentric.
For example, ''Hapalemur'' and ''Prolemur'' have short snouts, while the ring-tailed lemur and the rest of Lemuridae have long snouts.
The toothcomb is kept clean using a sublingual organ—a thin, flat, fibrous plate that covers a large part of the base of the tongue.
* Hubbard's sportive lemur(''Lepilemur hubbardorum'')
Males and females scent mark both vertical and horizontal surfaces at the overlaps in their home ranges using their anogenital scent glands.
But this is not the limit of the ring-tailed lemur's reasoning skills.
Therefore, an experiment requiring a lemur to manipulate an object without prior training would favor simians over strepsirrhines.
Little interaction takes place between the two species.
Its lower incisors (i1 and i2) are long, narrow, and finely spaced while pointing almost straight forward in the mouth (procumbent).
The species name, ''catta'', refers to the ring-tailed lemur's cat-like appearance.
In the wild, one offspring is the norm, although twins may occur.
Like other lemurs, this species relies strongly on its sense of smell and marks its territory with scent glands.
Troops are classified as multi-male groups, with a matriline as the core group.
The experimental design demonstrated that the lemurs were using internal representation of the sequence to guide their responses and not simply following a trained sequence, where one item in the sequence cues the selection of the next.
The thumb is both short and widely separated from the other fingers.
Therefore, the conceptual competence to use a tool may have been present in the common primate ancestor, even though the use of tools may not have appeared until much later.
For example, simians are known for their manipulative play with non-food objects, whereas lemurs are only known to manipulate non-food objects in captivity.
Its deciduous dentition is .
The ring-tailed lemur has a dentition of , meaning that on each side of the jaw it has two incisors, one canine tooth, three premolars, and three molar teeth.
In males, the scrotum lacks fur, is covered in small, horny spines, and the two sacs of the scrotum are divided.
Experiments have shown that the ring-tailed lemur, despite the lack of a large brain (relative to simiiform primates), can organize sequences, understand basic arithmetic operations and preferentially select tools based on functional qualities.
The total number of rings nearly matches the approximate number of caudal vertebrae (~25).
The upper lip is attached to the premaxilla, preventing the lip from protruding and thus requiring the lemur to lap water rather than using suction.
The upper canines exhibit slight sexual dimorphism, with males exhibiting slightly larger canines than females.
The young lemurs begin to eat solid food after two months and are fully weaned after five months.
* Pale fork-marked lemur(''Phaner pallescens'')
* Reddish-gray mouse lemur(''Microcebus griseorufus'')
The thicker coat was considered a local adaptation to extreme low temperatures in the region, and the fading of the fur was attributed to increased exposure to solar radiation.
However, this view was not widely accepted and the genus ''Lemur'' remained monotypic, containing only the ring-tailed lemur.
When encounters occur, they are agonistic, or hostile in nature.
Both sexes have separate dominance hierarchies; females have a distinct hierarchy while male rank is correlated with age.
Another threat to the species is harvesting either for food (bush meat) or pets.
These species include: ''Lemur tardigradus'', ''Lemur catta'' (the ring-tailed lemur), and ''Lemur volans'' (the Philippine colugo, now known as ''Cynocephalus volans'').
Male involvement in infant rearing is limited, although the entire troop, regardless of age or sex, can be seen caring for the young.
In the mornings the ring-tailed lemur sunbathes to warm itself.
Its fingers are slender, padded, mostly lacking webbing, and semi-dexterous with flat, human-like nails.
The species is thought to have evolved its high fecundity due to its harsh environment.
Thus, little is known about the evolution of the ring-tailed lemur, let alone the rest of the lemur clade, which comprises the entire endemic primate population of the island.
However, ruffed lemurs were reassigned to the genus ''Varecia'' in 1962, and due to similarities between the ring-tailed lemur and the bamboo lemurs, particularly in regards to molecular evidence and scent glands similarities, the true lemurs were moved to the genus ''Eulemur'' by Yves Rumpler and Elwyn L. Simons (1988) as well as Colin Groves and Robert H. Eaglen (1988).
The upper canines (C1) are long, have a broad base, and curve down and back (recurved).
Recently transferred males, old males or young adult males that have not yet left their natal group are often lower ranking.
During the six-month period between December and May a few males immigrate between groups.
Ring-tailed lemur populations can also benefit from drought intervention, due to the availability of watering troughs and introduced fruit trees, as seen at the Berenty Private Reserve in southern Madagascar.
Both sexes use them in combat by slashing with them.
Because the differences in molecular data are so minute between the ring-tailed lemur and both genera of bamboo lemurs, it has been suggested that all three genera be merged.
In displays of aggression, males engage in a social display behaviour called ''stink fighting'', which involves impregnating their tails with secretions from the antebrachial and brachial glands and waving the scented tail at male rivals.
The now universal English name "ring-tailed lemur" was first used by George Shaw in  his illustrated scientific publication covering the Leverian collection published between 1792 and 1796.
A troop will usually occupy the same part of its range for three or four days before moving.
It inhabits deciduous forests, dry scrub, montane humid forests, and gallery forests (forests along riverbanks).
The spur develops with age through the accumulation of secretions from an underlying gland that may connect through the skin through as many as a thousand minuscule ducts.
Gestation lasts for about 135&nbsp;days, and parturition occurs in September or occasionally October.
The gland secretes a foul-smelling, brown, sticky substance.
The gland is soft and compressible, bears fine dermal ridges (like fingerprints), and is connected to the palm by a fine, 2&nbsp;mm–high, hairless strip.
The ring-tailed lemur shares many similarities with ruffed lemurs (genus ''Varecia'') and true lemurs (genus ''Eulemur''), and its skeleton is nearly indistinguishable from that of the true lemurs.
The big toe is opposable and is smaller than the big toe of other lemurs, which are more arboreal.
Its head–body length ranges between , its tail length is , and its total length is .
The longest-lived male was reported to be 15&nbsp;years old.
The pelage (fur) is so dense that it can clog electric clippers.
* Wright's sportive lemur(''Lepilemur wrightae'')
The ring-tailed lemur is known locally in Malagasy as '''' (pronounced , and spelled ''maki'' in French) or '''' (pronounced  or colloquially ).
Calls range from simple to complex.
Young females do not always inherit their mother's rank and young males leave the troop between three and five years of age.
The relationship between the ring-tailed lemur and bamboo lemurs (both ''Hapalemur'' and ''Prolemur'') is the least understood.
There is a small diastema between the upper canine and the first premolar (P2), which is smaller and more caniniform than the other premolars.
The brachial gland is barely developed if present at all in females.
Taxonomy of family Lemuridae
Unprotected forests that the species has been reported in include Ankoba, Ankodida, Anjatsikolo, Anbatotsilongolongo, Mahazoarivo, Masiabiby, and Mikea.
* Milne-Edwards' sifaka(''Propithecus edwardsi'')
Historically, the studies of learning and cognition in non-human primates have focused on simians (monkeys and apes), while strepsirrhine primates, such as the ring-tailed lemur and its allies, have been overlooked and popularly dismissed as unintelligent.
Unlike other lemurs, the ring-tailed lemur's heel is not covered by fur.
The ring-tailed lemur will perform a handstand to mark vertical surfaces, grasping the highest point with its feet while it applies its scent.
The ring-tailed lemur has also been shown to learn a variety of complex tasks often equaling, if not exceeding, the performance of simians.
The area around the anus (circumanal area) and the perineum are covered in fur.
* Red-bellied lemur(''Eulemur rubriventer'')
The breeding season runs from mid-April to mid-May.
* Petter's sportive lemur(''Lepilemur petteri'')
There is also a diastema (gap) between the second and third premolars (p2 and p3).
Kidnapping by females and infanticide by males also occur occasionally.
Instead, it is only used for balance, communication, and group cohesion.
Ex situ facilities actively involved in the conservation of the ring-tailed lemur include the Duke Lemur Center in Durham, NC, the Lemur Conservation Foundation in Myakka City, FL and the Madagascar Fauna Group headquartered at the Saint Louis Zoo.
In 2001, primatologist Colin Groves concluded that this does not represent a locally occurring subspecies.
Population density ranges from 100&nbsp;individuals per  in dry forests to 250–600&nbsp;individuals per km2 in gallery and secondary forests.
As with all strepsirrhines, the hand is ectaxonic (the axis passes through the fourth digit) rather than mesaxonic (the axis passing through the third digit) as seen in monkeys and apes.
The anterior pair (closest to the head) are very close to the axillae (armpit).
This has been supported by comparisons in communication, chromosomes, genetics, and several morphological traits, such as scent gland similarities.
Unlike other lemurs, the first two upper molars (M1 and M2) have prominent lingual cingulae, yet do not have a protostyle.
According to Carl Linnaeus' own explanation, the name was selected because of the nocturnal activity and slow movements of the slender loris.
