The song is considered the civic anthem of Rio, and is always the favourite song during Rio's Carnival in February.
Home of one of the largest stages in Latin America and one of Brazil's best known venues for opera, ballet, and classical music.
For many years brings together the second largest industrial hub of Brazil, with oil refineries, shipbuilding industries, steel, metallurgy, petrochemical, gas, chemical, textile, printing, publishing, pharmaceutical, beverages, cement and furniture.
Leaseholders at the Wharf of the Cashew operate terminals for roll-on/roll-off cargoes, containers, and liquid bulk.
Rio Olympics 2016,  Rio Paralympics 2016.
The city hosted the World Youth Day in 2013, the second World Youth Day in South America and first in Brazil.
Rio de Janeiro is a main cultural hub in Brazil.
Expansion of the city to the north and south was facilitated by the consolidation and electrification of Rio's streetcar transit system after 1905.
It is also the location of the University of the Air Force (Universidade da Força Aérea), the Museu Aeroespacial, and where air shows take place.
Rio has roads to all neighbour States.
Formerly called Bartolomeu de Gusmão Airport, it was built by the Luftschiffbau Zeppelin.
The city has  of cycle paths that, wherever they exist, are very much preferable to riding in the city's traffic.
Rio de Janeiro is also paradise for rock climbers, with hundreds of routes all over the city, ranging from easy boulders to highly technical big wall climbs, all inside the city.
Rio saw similarly high winds (about ) in January 2015.
Located in Cinelândia, the National Library was originally created by the King of Portugal, in 1810.
The International Airport of Rio de Janeiro (Galeão&nbsp;– Antônio Carlos Jobim International Airport, named after the famous Brazilian musician Antônio Carlos Jobim), the main campus of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro at the Fundão Island, and the State University of Rio de Janeiro, in Maracanã, are also located in the Northern part of Rio.
Internationally famous, Brazilian-made movies illustrating a darker side of Rio de Janeiro include ''Elite Squad'' and ''City of God''.
Consequently, Villegagnon built Fort Coligny on the island when attempting to establish the France Antarctique colony.
Centro or Downtown is the historic core of the city, as well as its financial centre.
Some of the main neighbourhoods of Rio's North Zone are Alto da Boa Vista which shares the Tijuca Rainforest with the South and Southwest Zones; Tijuca, Vila Isabel, Méier, São Cristovão, Madureira, Penha, Manguinhos, Fundão, Olaria among others.
The Olympics was held from the 5th to the 21st of August 2016.
Plans to divert the Paraíba do Sul to the Sistema Cantareira (Cantareira system) during its water crisis of 2014, in order to help the critically drought-stricken Greater São Paulo area, offered the easiest short-term response to the consequences of climate change and the deforestation of the Amazon rainforest (itself affecting climate change), an issue expected to linger across the entire country in the near future.
However, it is only available during weekdays.
It is one of the most traditional carnavals.
"The results of the tests of genomic ancestry are quite different from the self made estimates of European ancestry", say the researchers.
* ''Cordão do Bola Preta'': Parades in the centre of the city.
It was Brazil's capital until 1960, when Brasília took its place.
The tram cars which are currently in operation are Brazilian-built, are of the cross-bench open sided design, and are fitted with trolley poles.
There are also international schools, such as the American School of Rio de Janeiro, Our Lady of Mercy School, the Corcovado German School, the Lycée Français and the British School of Rio de Janeiro.
The average yearly precipitation is .
There is also a ferry to Cocotá.
Rio de Janeiro subsequently served as the capital of the independent monarchy, the Empire of Brazil, until 1889, and then the capital of a republican Brazil until 1960 when the capital was transferred to Brasília.
* ''Suvaco do Cristo'': Band that parades in the Botanic Garden, directly below the Redeemer statue's arm.
The Portuguese cultural influence is still seen in many parts of the city (and many other parts of the state of Rio de Janeiro), including architecture and language—almost every person native to Brazil with some cultural contact with Rio and its inhabitants knows how to easily differentiate between ''fluminense'' and other Brazilian dialects.
After a derail occurred on 28 August 2011, which left seven dead, tram service was suspended to improve the system, and would be reopened in 2014, just before the 2014 FIFA World Cup but after postponements it was finally reopened in July 2015.
Because of its geographic situation, the city is often reached, especially during autumn and winter, by cold fronts advancing from Antarctica, causing frequent weather changes.
Rio de Janeiro recently hosted the 2016 Olympics and Paralympics.
There are 370 secondary schools with 9,699 teachers and 227,892 students.
* Santos Dumont Airport: used mainly by the services to São Paulo, some short- and medium-haul domestic flights, and general aviation.
European and Amerindian ancestries also have overwhelming and wide majorities respectively in Rio de Janeiro's population despite any classifications in IBGE's standardized racial groups, thus there were a bi-directional impact of miscegenation (in minor degree, it also happened in other multicultural white-majority regions, at least in some regions of the United States—a hypodescent society where there was the phenomena of passing—as well Argentina, and it is common elsewhere in Latin America) in both white and black populations.
There are also two port facilities for cargo and passenger ships (Rio de Janeiro and Sepetiba port).
From São Paulo: take the BR-116 (Presidente Dutra Federal Highway) or the BR-101 (Rio-Santos Federal Highway).
Other institutes of higher learning include the Colégio Regina Coeli in Usina, notable for having its own  narrow gauge funicular railway on its grounds.
The Jacarepaguá circuit in Rio de Janeiro was the site for the Formula One Brazilian Grand Prix from 1978 to 1989.
Integration of bus lines has been recently implemented, allowing users to take two non-air conditioned bus rides in two hours paying just one ticket.
One of the most popular sea sports in the city is yachting.
After a short flight, gliders land on the Praia do Pepino (''Pepino'', or "cucumber", Beach) in São Conrado.
The city is commonly divided into the historic center (Centro); the tourist-friendly wealthier South Zone (Zona Sul); the residential less wealthy North Zone (Zona Norte); peripheries in the West Zone (Zona Oeste), Santa Cruz and Campo Grande and the wealthy newer Barra da Tijuca district.
'''Rio de Janeiro''' (; ; ''River of January''), or simply '''Rio''', is the second-most populous municipality in Brazil and the sixth-most populous in the Americas.
Romantic and realist modes both flourished through the late 19th century and often overlapped within works.
Until the early years of the 20th century, the city was largely limited to the neighbourhood now known as the historic city centre (see below), on the mouth of Guanabara Bay.
Rio de Janeiro has many Carnaval choices, including the famous samba school (''Escolas de Samba'') parades in the sambadrome exhibition center and the popular ''blocos de carnaval'', street revelry, which parade in almost every corner of the city.
The most geographically close sister city to Rio that is on the other side of Guanabara Bay is Niterói.
A newer electronics and computer sector has been added to the older industries of metallurgy, engineering, and printing and publishing.
The mountainous areas register greater rainfall since they constitute a barrier to the humid wind that comes from the Atlantic.
Different ethnic groups contributed to the formation of the population of Rio de Janeiro.
The South Zone (Zona Sul) of the city, reaching the beaches fringing the open sea, is cut off from the Centre and from the North Zone by coastal mountains.
It is the second largest celebration only next to the Carnival.
The Maracanã Stadium held the finals of the 1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cups, the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, and the XV Pan American Games.
Temperature also varies according to elevation, distance from the coast, and type of vegetation or land use.
Rio de Janeiro is also the homeland of the biggest entertainment event in the world, the Rock in Rio Festival, which had editions in 1985, 1991, 2001, 2011 and 2013.
Though the most exclusive and interesting is probably the Rio Yacht club, where high society makes it a point to congregate.
Rio also has the most expensive hotel rates in Brazil, and the daily rate of its five star hotels are the second most expensive in the world after only NYC.
Pardo, for example, in popular usage includes those who are ''caboclos'' (mestizos), ''mulatos'' (mulattoes), ''cafuzos'' (zambos), ''juçaras'' (archaic term for tri-racials) and westernized Amerindians (which are called ''caboclos'' as well), being more of a skin color rather than a racial group in particular.
According to the IBGE, it was approximately US$201&nbsp;billion in 2008, equivalent to 5.1% of the national total.
On 27 January 1763, the colonial administration in Portuguese America was moved from Salvador to Rio de Janeiro.
Rio stayed the capital of the pluricontinental Lusitanian monarchy until 1822, when the War of Brazilian Independence began.
Those games were awarded to Athens and London respectively.
In 2015, in the Rio de Janeiro International Short Film Festival, a short film about Bangu and Thomas Donohoe called “Pass to Mr. Danau” (Bola Para Seu Danau, in Portuguese) won the “Curta Rio Award” together with 9 other Shorts about the city.
Although the city clearly ranks among the world's major metropolises, large swaths of the population live in slums known as favelas.
In early May 2013, winds registering above  caused blackouts in 15 neighborhoods of the city and three surrounding municipalities, and killed one person.
Copacabana is also a great place to do surfing as well as "Arpoador of Ipanema" beach and "Praia dos Bandeirantes".
One of the most famous hills in the city is the  Pedra da Gávea (Crow's nest Rock) bordering the South Zone.
Future plans include building a third subway line to Niterói and São Gonçalo, including an underwater tunnel beneath Guanabara Bay to supplement the ferry service currently there.
It attracts a wide range of revellers, including families and a wide spectrum of the LGBT/Queer population (notably spectacular drag queens).
It is expected that the system is operational by 2016 at the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, and must withdraw at least 60% of buses and 15% of the cars that are currently circulating in the city center.
It was originally organized in Rio de Janeiro, from where the name comes from, has become a world level event and, in 2004, had its first edition abroad in Lisbon, Portugal, before Madrid, Spain and Las Vegas, United States.
Rio de Janeiro is the most awarded destination by World Travel Awards in the South American category of "best destination".
A tunnel called ''Túnel da Grota Funda'', opened in 2012, creating a public transit facility between Barra da Tijuca and Santa Cruz, lessening travel time to the region from other areas of Rio de Janeiro.
The dominant ocean current is the warm Brazil Current (as most of elsewhere in the Santos Bight between Santa Catarina and Cabo Frio; the subsurface part of the cold subantarctic Malvinas Current only slightly resurfaces to affect the latter, giving the characteristic semi-arid climate in parts of Arraial do Cabo, the only occurrence of such in the whole state).
Most paths run alongside beaches and extend intermittently from the Marina da Glória, Centro, through Flamengo, Copacabana and Ipanema, to Barra da Tijuca and Recreio dos Bandeirantes.
The city has six major universities and 47 private schools of higher learning.
Though many thought that it was just campaign rhetoric, Kubitschek managed to have Brasília built, at great cost, by 1960.
"This (the early 2010s serial devastation in Rio de Janeiro's mesoregions of Metropolitana do Rio de Janeiro and Sul Fluminense) was not an isolated event.
African and European
Horse racing events are held Thursday nights and weekend afternoons at the Jockey Club.
Rio de Janeiro is Brazil's primary tourist attraction and resort.
The largest urban forest in the world is the Floresta da Pedra Branca (White Rock Forest), which is also located in the West Zone of Rio de Janeiro.
The lowest temperature ever registered in the 21st century was  in Vila Militar, July 2011.
The census revealed the following numbers: 3,239,888 White people (51.2%), 2,318,675 Pardo (multiracial) people (36.5%), 708,148 Black people (11.5%), 45,913 Asian people (0.7%), 5,981 Amerindian people (0.1%).
Allegedly the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci participated as observer at the invitation of King Manuel I in the same expedition.
The Brazilian drought of 2014–2015, most severe in the Southeast Region and the worst in decades, affected the entire metropolitan region's water supply (a diversion from the Paraíba do Sul River to the Guandu River is a major source for the state's most populous mesoregion).
Rio de Janeiro became an attractive place for companies to locate when it was the capital of Brazil, as important sectors of society and of the government were present in the city.
Self-reported ancestry of people from Rio de Janeiro, by race or skin color (2000 survey)
The city is an important global LGBT destination, 1 million LGBT tourists visit the city of Rio de Janeiro each year.
The city's industries produce processed foods, chemicals, petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, metal products, ships, textiles, clothing, and furniture.
Per capita GDP is US$11,786.
* Jacarepaguá-Roberto Marinho Airport: used by general aviation and home to the Aeroclube do Brasil (Brasil Flying club).
The Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange (BVRJ), which currently trades only government securities, was the first stock exchange founded in Brazil in 1845 and located in the central region.
Rio in recent year has had a scheme where adults aged 18 to 25 where made to have literacy tests and education.
Located on the west coast of the Guanabara Bay, it serves the States of Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Espírito Santo.
* Santa Cruz Air Force Base: A Brazilian Air Force airbase.
The wettest and driest months tend to be December and August respectively.
There are 53 University-preparatory schools with 14,864 teachers and 154,447 students.
The region of Rio was inhabited by the Tupi, Puri, Botocudo and Maxakalí peoples.
In 2012, CNN elected Ipanema the best city beach in the world.
In other words, native born Portuguese and their children accounted for 51.20% of the inhabitants of Rio, or a total of 267,664 people in 1890.
Integration with buses are possible in several forms, an integrated Metro and bus ticket for a single journey is available for some lines paying an additional fee and is known as an Integração Expressa (Express Integration) and Expresso Barra, the other possibility is taking the Metro na Superfície (Surface Metro) with no additional fee.
Portuguese born people accounted for 20.36% of the population of Rio, and those with a Portuguese father or a Portuguese mother accounted for 30.84%.
The neighbourhood of Copacabana beach hosts one of the world's most spectacular New Year's Eve parties ("Reveillon"), as more than two million revelers crowd onto the sands to watch the fireworks display.
From Salvador: BR-101 or BR-324/BR-116/BR-393/BR-040.
Trams leave every half an hour between 6:00&nbsp;am and 11:00&nbsp;pm.
The city reputedly has had rare frosts in the past, but this has never been decisively confirmed.
The city was chosen as headquarters for state-owned companies such as Petrobras, Eletrobras, Caixa Econômica Federal and Vale (which was privatized in the 1990s).
Besides Maracanã, the North Zone of Rio also holds other tourist and historical attractions, such "Nossa Senhora da Penha de França Church", the Christ the Redeemer (statue) with its stairway built into the rock bed, 'Manguinhos', the home of Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, a centenarian biomedical research institution with a main building fashioned like a Moorish palace, and the beautiful Quinta da Boa Vista, the park where the historic Imperial Palace is located.
As part of its preparations to host the 2007 Pan American Games, Rio built a new stadium, Estádio Olímpico João Havelange, to hold 45,000 people.
Today, nearly half of the city's population is perceptibly by phenotype black or part black, and a wide majority has some recent Subsaharan ancestor—white in Brazil has more to do with European-looking phenotypes rather than ancestry, and two full siblings can be of different "racial" categories, or actually in a skin color and phenotype continuum between ''pálido'' (''branco'') or fair-skinned, ''branco moreno'' or swarthy Caucasian, ''mestiço claro'' or lighter skinned multiracial, ''pardo'' (mixed race) or and ''negro'' or black.
Commercial and cultural imports from Europe and North America have often influenced Brazil's own cultural output.
* ''Banda de Ipanema'': The most traditional in Ipanema.
The Bike Rio began operations in October 2011.
The buses also run more frequently during the rush hours in the morning and evening.
A history of the Brazilian Academy of Letters is linked to the Royal Cabinet, since the five solemn.
Rio ranks second nationally in industrial production and second financial and service center, trailing only São Paulo.
Amerindian and European
The port handled 852&nbsp;thousand tons of wheat, more than 1.8&nbsp;million tons of iron and steel, over a million tons of liquid bulk cargo, almost 830&nbsp;thousand tons of dry bulk, over five thousand tons of paper goods, and over 78&nbsp;thousand vehicles.
These phenomena are definitely not rare or limited to a few regions, having already happened in the metropolitan area (including western suburbs of the city itself) several times in the 21st century.
The park has three principal entrances: the main one is in Taquara called Pau da Fome Core, another entrance is the Piraquara Core in Realengo and the last one is the Camorim Core, considered the cultural heritage of the city.
On 17 April 1904 in a house of the old Estevão Street, the Bangu Football Club was formerly created with the presence of Mr. Andrew Procter, Mr. Clarence Hibbs, Mr. Frederich Jacques, Mr. John Starck, Mr. José Soares, Mr. Segundo Maffeu, Mr. Thomas Hellowell, Mr. William French, Mr. William Hellowell and Mr. William Procter.
The passenger terminal is presently undergoing extensive renovation and expansion to offer more convenience and comfort to users of the Rio–São Paulo shuttle service.
The system may be relatively safe by day but less so at night.
Military airports include:
The highest peak of the city of Rio de Janeiro is the Pedra Branca Peak (Pico da Pedra Branca) inside the Pedra Branca State Park.
The official song of Rio is "Cidade Maravilhosa", by composer André Filho.
Arriving in Bangu, the Scot soon settled among the British community in the village.
Rio de Janeiro has inherited a strong cultural role from the past.
Translates as 'Friendliness is almost love'.
They are air conditioned—about —more upscale/comfortable and cost between R$6.00–R$12.00.
In 2008, 500,000 people attended in one day.
"Rock in Rio" is a music festival conceived by entrepreneur Roberto Medina for the first time in 1985, and since its creation, recognized as the largest music festival in the Latin world and the largest in the world, with 1.5 million people attending the first event, 700,000 attending the second and fourth, about 1.2 million attending the third, and about 350,000 people attending each of the 3 Lisbon events.
''Rio de Janeiro'' was the name of Guanabara Bay.
The beaches of Barra da Tijuca are also popular with the city's residents.
High rise flats and sprawling shopping centers give the area a far more Modernism feel than the crowded city centre.
With its genesis in the 1970s as the modern black pop music from the United States, it evolved in the 1990s to describe a variety of electronic music associated with the current US black music scene, including hip hop, modern soul, and house music."
As there was no physical space or urban structure to accommodate hundreds of noblemen who arrived suddenly, many inhabitants were simply evicted from their homes.
At the same time, in 2000, there were several Rio neighborhoods with Human Development Index scores higher than the most developed countries in the world.
Since August 2004, with the transfer of many flights from Santos-Dumont Airport, Rio de Janeiro International Airport has returned to being the main doorway to the city.
The collection contains 48,236 items.
In addition, Rio has an ample offering of private schools that provide education at all levels.
This region is also home to most of the samba schools of Rio de Janeiro such as Mangueira, Salgueiro, Império Serrano, Unidos da Tijuca, among others.
Rio Janeiro 's Theatro Municipal is one of the most resplendent buildings in the downtown area of Rio de Janeiro.
Individual items of special interest include a rare first edition of ''Os Lusíadas'' by Luis de Camões, published in 1584; two copies of the Mogúncia Bible; and a first edition of Handel's Messiah.
In the late 19th century, there were sessions held of the first Brazilian film and since then, several production cycles have spread out, eventually placing Rio at the forefront of experimental and national cinema.
For example, the hip hop that has stemmed from New York is localized into forms of musical production such as Funk Carioca and Brazilian hip hop.
Although cheap and frequent, Rio's transportation policy has been moving towards trains and subway in order to reduce surface congestion and increase carrier capacity.
The Metro runs services from 05:00&nbsp;am to 12:00 midnight, Monday to Saturday, and from 07:00&nbsp;am to 11:00&nbsp;pm Sundays and public holidays.
It is necessary to have a registered electronic card (the "''Bilhete Único Carioca (BUC)''") in order to benefit of this system.
Rio de Janeiro is the capital of the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil's third-most populous state.
Founded in 1565 by the Portuguese, the city was initially the seat of the Captaincy of Rio de Janeiro, a domain of the Portuguese Empire.
The sea at these beaches is rough and dangerous, the best surfers from Brazil and other sites of the world come to these beaches to prove themselves.
The name translates to 'Christ's armpit' in English, and was chosen for that reason.
In 1840, the first Carnaval was celebrated with a masked ball.
The literacy rate for cariocas aged 10 and older is nearly 95 percent, well above the national average.
It is considered good luck to shake the champagne bottle and spray around at midnight.
Its interior includes turn of the century stained glass from France, ceilings of rose-colored marble and a 1,000&nbsp;pound crystal bead chandelier surrounded by a painting of the "Dance of the Hours".
The population of the greater metropolitan area is estimated at 11–13.5&nbsp;million.
There was a large influx of African slaves to Rio de Janeiro: in 1819, there were 145,000 slaves in the captaincy.
The summit can be reached via a two-stage cable car trip from Praia Vermelha, with the intermediate stop on Morro da Urca.
In 2003, over 91&nbsp;thousand passengers moved through the Port of Rio Janeiro on 83 cruise vessels.
Most yacht clubs are open to members only and gate crashing is not easy.
The influence of the African-Brazilian drums and music was more noticeable from the first half of the 20th century.
Other studies showed similar results
They later made bids for the 2004 and 2012 Games, but failed to become a candidate city both times.
From Belo Horizonte: BR-040.
On the top of its summit is a huge rock formation (some, such as Erich von Däniken in his 1973 book, ''In Search of Ancient Gods'', claim it to be a sculpture) resembling a sphinx-like, bearded head that is visible for many kilometres around.
The official song of Rio de Janeiro is "Cidade Maravilhosa", which means "marvelous city".
Despite the transfer of the capital to Brasília, many of these headquarters remained within the Rio metropolitan area, including those of Petrobrás, the state oil company, and the National Economic and Social Development Bank, a federal investment bank.
Nowadays, the palace hosts the National Museum, specialising in Natural History, Archaeology, and Ethnology.
The two lines serve the city seven days a week.
Since 1961, the Tijuca National Park (Parque Nacional da Tijuca), the largest city-surrounded urban forest and the second largest urban forest in the world, has been a National Park.
The project will host the Brazilian Symphony Orchestra becoming a main center for music as will be the largest modern concert hall in South America, with 1,780 seats.
In the late 17th century, still during the Sugar Era, the Bandeirantes found gold and diamonds in the neighbouring captaincy of Minas Gerais, thus Rio de Janeiro became a much more practical port for exporting wealth (gold, precious stones, besides the sugar) than Salvador, Bahia, which is much farther to the northeast.
The port is managed by Companhia Docas de Rio de Janeiro.
Many of Rio de Janeiro's roughly 1000 Slums, or favelas, are located in the North Zone.
The city sports world-class hotels, approximately 80&nbsp;kilometres of beaches and the famous Corcovado and Sugarloaf mountains.
As years passed, adorned floats and costumed revelers became a tradition among the celebrants.
Rio de Janeiro was the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics and the 2016 Summer Paralympics, making the city the first South American and Portuguese-speaking city to host the events, and the third time the Olympics were held in a Southern Hemisphere city.
According to Mercer's city rankings of cost of living for expatriate employees, Rio de Janeiro ranks 12th among the most expensive cities in the world in 2011, up from the 29th position in 2010, just behind São Paulo (ranked 10th), and ahead of London, Paris, Milan, and New York City.
A large terminal for long-distance buses is in the Santo Cristo neighborhood of Rio de Janeiro.
Carnaval is known as a historic root of Brazilian music.
People can buy tickets for the Metro at train stations and can either buy single tickets or rechargeable cards.
Bands from Rio de Janeiro also had influence in the mid-to-late development of the Punk in Brazil, and that of Brazilian thrash metal.
According to the 2010 IBGE Census, there were 5,940,224 people residing in the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Rio continued as the capital of Brazil after 1889, when the monarchy was replaced by a republic.
Founded in 1909, the Teatro Municipal was designed after the famed opera house in Paris with close to 1,700 seats.
Rio is home to many colleges and universities.
The tradition of Carnaval parades was probably influenced by the French or German courts and the custom was brought by the Portuguese or Brazilian Imperial families who had Bourbon and Austrian ancestors.
The ''Rua Farme de Amoedo'' is located in Ipanema, a famous neighborhood in the South Zone of Rio de Janeiro.
In Rio de Janeiro, buses are the main form of public transportation.
In Greater Rio, which has one of the highest per capita incomes in Brazil, retail trade is substantial.
"the weather is getting cold"), usually refers to temperatures going below , which is possible year-round and is commonplace in mid-to-late autumn, winter and early spring nights.
