The City of London long claimed responsibility for the tidal river.
Science-fiction novels make liberal use of a futuristic Thames.
There are pairs of transit markers at various points along the non-tidal river that can be used to check speed – a boat travelling legally taking a minute or more to pass between the two markers.
This created a new river course through Berkshire and on into London, after which the river rejoined its original course in southern Essex, near the present River Blackwater estuary.
The most recent road bridges are the bypasses at Isis Bridge and Marlow By-pass Bridge and the motorway bridges, most notably the two on the M25 route Queen Elizabeth II Bridge and M25 Runnymede Bridge.
It rises at Thames Head in Gloucestershire, and flows into the North Sea via the Thames Estuary.
At Swinford Bridge, a toll bridge, there was first a ford and then a ferry prior to the bridge being built.
The river's defences included the Maunsell forts in the estuary, and the use of barrage balloons to counter German bombers using the reflectivity and shapes of the river to navigate during the Blitz.
Colonies of short-snouted seahorses have also recently been discovered in the river.
The river contains over 80&nbsp;islands.
These included Putney Bridge, Westminster Bridge, Datchet Bridge, Windsor Bridge and Sonning Bridge.
In Tudor and Stuart times, various kings and queens built magnificent riverside palaces at Hampton Court, Kew, Richmond on Thames, Whitehall and Greenwich.
:And all that mighty heart is lying still!
Freshwater fish of the Thames and its tributaries include brown trout, chub, dace, roach, barbel, perch, pike, bleak and flounder.
:Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
Sailing is practised on both the tidal and non-tidal reaches of the river.
In an alternative name, derived from its long tidal reach up to Teddington Lock in south west London, the lower reaches of the river are called the Tideway.
These deposits were brought in by the winds during the periglacial periods, suggesting that wide, flat marshes were then part of the landscape, which the new river Brent proceeded to cut down.
Richard Coates suggests that while the river was as a whole called the Thames, part of it, where it was too wide to ford, was called *''(p)lowonida''.
Since Roman times and perhaps earlier, the isostatic rebound from the weight of previous ice sheets, and its interplay with the eustatic change in sea level, have resulted in the old valley of the River Brent, together with that of the Thames, silting up again.
Previously it was a dock.
In non-administrative use, stemming directly from the river and its name are Thames Valley University, Thames Water, Thames Television productions, Thames & Hudson publishing, Thameslink (north-south railways passing through central London) and South Thames College.
The river claims a number of lives each year.
These animals have been sighted as far upriver as Richmond.
Other water birds to be found on the Thames include the great crested grebe, coot, moorhen, heron and kingfisher.
Crowds gathered along the riverbanks to witness the extraordinary spectacle but there was soon concern, as the animal came within yards of the banks, almost beaching, and crashed into an empty boat causing slight bleeding.
On occasion – for example in rowing – the banks are still referred to by their traditional county names.
The principal tributaries of the River Thames on the Tideway include the rivers Brent, Wandle, Effra, Westbourne, Fleet, Ravensbourne (the final part of which is called Deptford Creek), Lea, Roding, Darent and Ingrebourne.
Many details of Thames activity are recorded in the Domesday Book.
He had many castles built, including those at Wallingford, Rochester, Windsor and most importantly the Tower of London.
The two largest operators are Salters Steamers and French Brothers.
The landscape and features of the Thames as described by Jerome are virtually unchanged, and the book's enduring popularity has meant that it has never been out of print since it was first published.
This part of the Thames links to existing navigations at the River Wey Navigation, the River Kennet and the Oxford Canal.
Sheltered water kayakers and canoeists use the non-tidal section for training, racing and trips.
During the 18th century, many stone and brick road bridges were built from new or to replace existing bridges both in London and along the length of the river.
The building of a new London Bridge in 1825, with fewer piers (pillars) than the old, allowed the river to flow more freely and prevented it from freezing over in cold winters.
The tidal Thames links to the canal network at the River Lea Navigation, the Regent's Canal at Limehouse Basin and the Grand Union Canal at Brentford.
Historically, and especially in Victorian times, gazetteers and cartographers insisted that the entire river was correctly named the Isis from its source down to Dorchester on Thames and that only from this point, where the river meets the Thame and becomes the "Thame-isis" (supposedly subsequently abbreviated to Thames) should it be so called.
:And try not to notice I’ve fallen in love.
Since 1950, almost every year at Easter, long distance canoeists have been competing in what is now known as the Devizes to Westminster International Canoe Race, which follows the course of the Kennet and Avon Canal, joins the River Thames at Reading and runs right up to a grand finish at Westminster Bridge.
* Doggett's Coat and Badge for apprentice watermen of London, one of the oldest sporting events in the world
On 5 August 1993, the largest non-tidal salmon in recorded history was caught close to Boulters Lock in Maidenhead.
Water resources consist of groundwater from aquifers and water taken from the Thames and its tributaries, much of it stored in large bank-side reservoirs.
:I wipe them away with a black woolly glove,
It is closed to tides several times a year to prevent water damage to London's low-lying areas upstream (the 1928 Thames flood demonstrated the severity of this type of event).
He was disturbed while writing it in June 1667 by the sound of gunfire as Dutch warships broke through the Royal Navy on the Thames.
In summer, passenger services operate along the entire non-tidal river from Oxford to Teddington.
Along the course of the river a number of smaller private companies also offer river trips at Oxford, Wallingford, Reading and Hampton Court.
Canvey Island in southern Essex (area ; population 37,479) was once marshy, but is now a fully reclaimed island in the Thames estuary.
The Thames is popular for a wide variety of riverside housing, including high-rise flats in central London and chalets on the banks and islands upstream.
The mute swan is a familiar sight on the river but the escaped black swan is more rare.
The Thames also features prominently in Philip Pullman's ''His Dark Materials'' trilogy, as a communications artery for the waterborne Gyptian people of Oxford and the Fens.
The Dutch Navy even entered the Thames in 1667 in the raid on the Medway.
Molesey faces Hampton, London, and in Greater London the Thames passes Hampton Court Palace, Surbiton, Kingston upon Thames, Teddington, Twickenham, Richmond (with a famous view of the Thames from Richmond Hill), Syon House, Kew, Brentford, Chiswick, Barnes, Hammersmith, Fulham, Putney, Wandsworth, Battersea and Chelsea.
Some of the earliest written references to the Thames () occur in Julius Caesar's account of his second expedition to Britain in 54 BC, when the Thames presented a major obstacle and he encountered the Iron Age Belgic tribes the Catuvellauni and the Atrebates along the river.
* The Henley Boat Races currently for the Women's and Lightweight crews of Oxford and Cambridge universities
The administrative powers of the Thames Conservancy have been taken on with modifications by the Environment Agency and, in respect of the Tideway part of the river, such powers are split between the agency and the Port of London Authority.
The growth of the population of London greatly increased the amount of waste that entered the river, including human excrement, animal waste from slaughter houses, and waste from manufacturing processes.
The Woolwich Ferry carries cars and passengers across the river in the Thames Gateway and links the North Circular and South Circular roads.
Around 60 active terminals cater for shipping of all types including ro-ro ferries, cruise liners and vessels carrying containers, vehicles, timber, grain, paper, crude oil, petroleum products, liquified petroleum gas etc.
The following centuries saw the conflict between king and barons coming to a head in AD 1215 when King John was forced to sign the Magna Carta on an island in the Thames at Runnymede.
Subsequent development led to the continuation of the course that the river follows at the present day.
Many companies also provide boat hire on the river.
In &nbsp;43, under the Emperor&nbsp;Claudius, the Romans occupied England and, recognising the river's strategic and economic importance, built fortifications along the Thames valley including a major camp at Dorchester.
Since June 2012 the Port of London Authority has made and enforces a by-law that bans swimming between Putney Bridge and Crossness, Thamesmead (thus including all of central London) without obtaining prior permission, on the grounds that swimmers in that area of the river endanger not only themselves, due to the strong current of the river, but also other river users.
From Teddington Lock to the head of navigation, the navigation authority is the Environment Agency.
Groundwater is vulnerable to surface pollution, especially in highly urbanised areas.
Four serious cholera outbreaks killed tens of thousands of people between the years of 1832 and 1865.
After temperatures began to rise again, starting in 1814, the river stopped freezing over.
The book was intended initially to be a serious travel guide, with accounts of local history of places along the route, but the humorous elements eventually took over.
Due to stiff penalties applicable on the non-tidal river, which is a drinking water source before treatment, sanitary sewer overflow from the many sewage treatment plants covering the upper Thames basin is rare in the non-tidal Thames, which ensures clearer water compared to the river's tideway.
Boats can be approved by the harbour master to travel at speeds of up to 30 knots from below Tower Bridge to past the Thames Barrier.
Efforts were made to resolve the navigation conflicts upstream by building locks along the Thames.
The Thames River Basin District, including the Medway catchment, covers an area of .
In the late 18th and 19th centuries people known as Mudlarks scavenged in the river mud for a meagre living.
Streams and rivers like the River Lea, Tyburn Brook and Bollo Brook drained into the river, while some islands, e.g.
:Fit to deck maydens bowres
On the northern bank were the ancient counties of Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Middlesex and Essex.
This part of the river is managed by the Port of London Authority.
On the night of 31 January, the North Sea flood of 1953 devastated the island taking the lives of 58 islanders, and led to the temporary evacuation of the 13,000 residents.
The Thames is also host to some invasive crustaceans, including the signal crayfish and the Chinese mitten crab.
Other regattas, head races and university bumping races are held along the Thames which are described under Rowing on the River Thames.
The '''River Thames''' ( ) is a river that flows through southern England.
At this time, the Thames' course did not continue to Doggerland but flowed southwards from the eastern Essex coast where it met the Rhine, the Meuse and the Scheldt flowing from what are now the Netherlands and Belgium.
Running through some of the driest parts of mainland Britain and heavily abstracted for drinking water, the Thames's discharge is low considering its length and breadth: the Severn has a discharge almost twice as large on average despite having a smaller drainage basin.
During the Second World War, the protection of certain Thames-side facilities, particularly docks and water treatment plants, was crucial to the munitions and water supply of the country.
Most towns and districts of any size on the river have at least one club.
In descending order, non-related tributaries of the non-tidal Thames, with river status, are the Churn, Leach, Cole, Ray, Coln, Windrush, Evenlode, Cherwell, Ock, Thame, Pang, Kennet, Loddon, Colne, Wey and Mole.
Tide tables are published by the Port of London Authority and are  available online.
The leisure navigation and sporting activities on the river have given rise to a number of businesses including boatbuilding, marinas, ships chandlers and salvage services.
Between the sea and Teddington Lock, the river forms part of the Port of London and navigation is administered by the Port of London Authority.
Dylan Thomas mentions the Thames in his poem "A Refusal to Mourn the Death, by Fire, of a Child in London".
It begins with a scavenger and his daughter pulling a dead man from the river near London Bridge, to salvage what the body might have in its pockets, and heads to its conclusion with the deaths of the villains drowned in Plashwater Lock upstream.
The River Thames has been a subject for artists, great and minor, over the centuries.
These include Temple Footbridge, Bloomers Hole Footbridge, the Hungerford Footbridges and the Millennium Bridge, all of which have distinctive design characteristics.
The decline of heavy industry and tanneries, reduced use of oil-pollutants and improved sewage treatment have led to much better water quality as compared with the late 19th and early- to mid-20th centuries and aquatic life has returned to its formerly 'dead' stretches.
Oslo-Paris convention).
The Victorian era was one of imaginative engineering.
Others were replaced by a footbridge when the weir was removed as at Hart's Weir Footbridge.
There is no absolute speed limit on most of the Tideway downstream of Wandsworth Bridge, although boats are not allowed to create undue wash. Powered boats are limited to 12 knots between Lambeth Bridge and downstream of Tower Bridge, with some exceptions.
The river's name has always been pronounced with a simple ''t'' /t/; the Middle English spelling was typically ''Temese'' and the Brittonic form ''Tamesis''.
Its tidal section, reaching up to Teddington Lock, includes most of its London stretch and has a rise and fall of .
Mark Wallington describes a journey up the Thames in a camping skiff, in his 1989 book ''Boogie up the River'' (ISBN 978-0-09-965910-5).
This was no longer necessary when barges were powered by steam.
:The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers,
In non-administrative use, stemming directly from the river and its name are Thames Valley University, Thames Water, Thames Television productions, Thames & Hudson publishing, Thameslink (north-south railways passing through central London) and South Thames College.
At Teddington just before the tidal section of the river starts is Royal Canoe Club, said to be the oldest in the world and founded in 1866.
A river crossing was built at the site of London Bridge.
In the late 1980s a large Romano-British settlement was excavated on the edge of the village of Ashton Keynes in Wiltshire.
The river was subject to minor redefining and widening of the main channel around Oxford, Abingdon and Marlow before 1850, since when further cuts to ease navigation have reduced distances further.
The land was drained and became farmland; it was built on after the Industrial Revolution.
:Sweet Thames run softly, till I end my song.
The overspill of this lake caused the formation of the Dover Strait gap between Britain and France.
The whole journey takes 4 days and requires several changes of boat.
Before bridges were built, the main means of crossing the river was by ferry.
The Thames through Oxford is sometimes called the Isis.
On its way, it passes through London, the country's capital, where the river is deep and navigable to ships; the Thames drains the whole of Greater London.
In the 19th century the quality of water in Thames deteriorated further.
All the erosion down from this higher land surface, and the sorting action by these changes of water flow and direction, formed what is known as the Thames River Gravel Terraces.
The Tower Subway was the first railway under the Thames, which was followed by all the deep-level tube lines.
Other shorter cuts already existed above and below this point, however only on the non-tidal Thames, hence the need for the Barrier.
Several central London road bridges were built in the 19th century, most conspicuously Tower Bridge, the only Bascule bridge on the river, designed to allow ocean-going ships to pass beneath it.
The next Roman bridges upstream were at Pontes (Staines) on the Devil's Highway between Londinium and Calleva (Silchester).
As early as the 1300s, the Thames was used to dispose of waste matter produced in the city of London, thus turning the river into an open sewer.
The non-tidal section of the river is owned and managed by the Environment Agency, which is responsible for managing the flow of water to help prevent and mitigate flooding, and providing for navigation: the volume and speed of water downstream is managed by adjusting the sluices at each of the weirs and, at peak high water, levels are generally dissipated over preferred flood plains adjacent to the river.
Literary non-fiction works include Samuel Pepys' diary, in which he recorded many events relating to the Thames including the Fire of London.
The stone from the Cotswolds used to rebuild St Paul's Cathedral after the Great Fire in 1666 was brought all the way down from Radcot.
The river gives its name to three informal areas: the Thames Valley, a region of England around the river between Oxford and West London; the Thames Gateway; and the greatly overlapping Thames Estuary around the tidal Thames to the east of London and including the waterway itself.
Various species of birds feed off the river or nest on it, some being found both at sea and inland.
In the early 1980s a pioneering flood control device, the Thames Barrier, was opened.
Use of the term "East End" in a pejorative sense began in the late 19th century,
Upstream of Wandsworth Bridge a speed limit of  is in force for powered craft to protect the riverbank environment and to provide safe conditions for rowers and other river users.
The Thames is maintained for navigation by powered craft from the estuary as far as Lechlade in Gloucestershire and for very small craft to Cricklade.
The East End of London, also known simply as the '''East End''', was the area of London east of the medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames, although it is not defined by universally accepted formal boundaries; the River Lea can be considered another boundary.
London Bridge is now used as the basis for published tide tables giving the times of high tide.
:Oh born in days when wits were fresh and clear
The sediment records show a clear rise and fall of Hg pollution through history.
The last advance from that Scandinavian ice flow to have reached this far south covered much of north west Middlesex and finally forced the Proto-Thames to take roughly its present course.
The eel is particularly associated with the Thames and there were formerly many eel traps.
coxed eights), Schools' Head, Veterans Head, Scullers Head 2-/2x, 4-/4+/4x Fours Head (HOR4s) (shorter) and Pairs Head (shorter) on the Championship Course
As a result, there are four lifeboat stations on the River Thames at Teddington (Teddington lifeboat station), Chiswick (Chiswick lifeboat station), Victoria Embankment/Waterloo Bridge (Tower Lifeboat Station) and Gravesend (Gravesend lifeboat station).
Kingston's growth is believed to stem from its having the only crossing between London Bridge and Staines until the beginning of the 18th century.
In ''The Deptford Mice'' trilogy by Robin Jarvis, the Thames appears several times.
It starts as a tale of anthropomorphic characters "simply messing about in boats" but develops into a more complex story combining elements of mysticism with adventure and reflection on Edwardian society.
Alongside the entire river runs the Thames Path, a National Route for walkers and cyclists.
The river's position has put it at the centre of many events in British history, leading to it being described by John Burns as "liquid history".
The section of the river running through Oxford is traditionally called the Isis.
The 20th century British artist Stanley Spencer produced many works at Cookham.
The northern tip of the ancient parish of Lambeth, for example, was marshland known as ''Lambeth Marshe'', but it was drained in the 18th century; it is remembered in the street name Lower Marsh.
Three further cross-basin canals are disused but are in various stages of reconstruction: the Thames and Severn Canal (via Stroud), which operated until 1927 (to the west coast of England), the Wey and Arun Canal to Littlehampton, which operated until 1871 (to the south coast), and the Wilts and Berks Canal.
In the past, commercial activities on the Thames included fishing (particularly eel trapping), coppicing willows and osiers which provided wood, and the operation of watermills for flour and paper production and metal beating.
Many types of British birds also live alongside the river, although they are not specific to the river habitat.
Organised swimming events take place at various points generally upstream of Hampton Court, including Windsor, Marlow and Henley.
London, capital of Roman Britain, was established on two hills, now known as Cornhill and Ludgate Hill.
In good conditions, barges travelled daily from Oxford to London carrying timber, wool, foodstuffs and livestock.
:The weather conditions bring tears to my eyes.
A Thames meander is a long-distance journey over all or part of the Thames by running, swimming or using any of the above means.
Many of the present-day road bridges are on the site of earlier fords, ferries and wooden bridges.
This gave the name to a settlement on its banks, which became known as Londinium, from the Indo-European roots *''pleu-'' "flow" and *''-nedi'' "river" meaning something like the flowing river or the wide flowing unfordable river.
Other significant Thames floods since 1947 have occurred in 1968, 1993, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2006 and 2014.
So extensive have the changes to this landscape been that what little evidence there is of man's presence before the ice came has inevitably shown signs of transportation here by water and reveals nothing specifically local.
The most popular sailing craft used on the Thames are lasers, GP14s and Wayfarers.
The University Boat Race is rowed between Oxford and Cambridge in late March or early April, on the Championship Course from Putney to Mortlake in the west of London.
It is often carried out as an athletic challenge in a competition or for a record attempt.
A major maritime route is formed for much of its length for shipping and supplies: through the Port of London for international trade, internally along its length and by its connection to the British canal system.
A number of Bronze Age sites and artefacts have been discovered along the banks of the river including settlements at Lechlade, Cookham and Sunbury-on-Thames.
In 2011 comedian David Walliams swam the  from Lechlade to Westminster Bridge and raised over £1 million for charity.
In poetry, William Wordsworth's sonnet On Westminster Bridge closes with the lines:
Lying below sea level it is prone to flooding at exceptional tides, but has nevertheless been inhabited since Roman times.
The tidal river is navigable to large ocean-going ships as far upstream as the Pool of London and London Bridge.
A rescue attempt lasted several hours, but the whale died on a barge.
"London's Daughter", the subject of the poem, lays "Deep with the first dead...secret by the unmourning water of the riding Thames".
Railway development in the 19th century resulted in a spate of bridge building including Blackfriars Railway Bridge and Charing Cross (Hungerford) Railway Bridge in central London, and the spectacular railway bridges by Isambard Kingdom Brunel at Maidenhead Railway Bridge, Gatehampton Railway Bridge and Moulsford Railway Bridge.
In more recent times Platts Eyot at Hampton was the place where MTBs were built, Tagg's Island near Molesey was associated with the impresario Fred Karno, and Eel Pie Island at Twickenham was the birthplace of the South East's R&B music scene.
The river almost inevitably features in many books set in London.
Boudica's Iceni razed the settlement in &nbsp;60 or 61 but it was soon rebuilt and, following the completion of its bridge, it grew to become the provincial capital of the island.
* The Head of the River Race (8+) (i.e.
The non-tidal River Thames is divided into reaches by the 44 locks.
Historic entities include the Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company.
In these circumstances, tidal effects can be observed upstream to the next lock beside Molesey weir, which is visible from the towpath and bridge beside Hampton Court Palace.
''The figures in this boat were those of a strong man with ragged grizzled hair and a sun-browned face, and a girl of nineteen or twenty.
The City of London exercised jurisdiction over the tidal Thames.
The British Museum has a decorated bowl (3300–2700 BC), found in the river at Hedsor, Buckinghamshire, and a considerable amount of material was discovered during the excavations of Dorney Lake.
These rivers formed a single river—the Channel River (''Fleuve Manche'')—that passed through the Dover Strait and drained into the Atlantic Ocean in the western English Channel.
Major annual events include the Henley Royal Regatta and the Boat Race, while the Thames has been used during two Summer Olympic Games: 1908 (rowing);1948 (rowing and canoeing).
A significant number of ferries were provided specifically for navigation purposes.
After the river took its present-day course, many of the banks of the Thames Estuary and the Thames Valley in London were partly covered in marshland, as was the adjoining Lower Lea Valley.
:On Waterloo Bridge, where we said our goodbyes,
Indirect evidence for the antiquity of the name 'Thames' is provided by a Roman potsherd found at Oxford, bearing the inscription ''Tamesubugus fecit'' (Tamesubugus made this).
The 1928 Thames flood was a disastrous flood of the River Thames that affected much of riverside London on 7 January 1928, as well as places further downriver.
All craft using it must be licensed.
The ''th'' spelling lends an air of Greek to the name and was added during the Renaissance possibly to reflect or support a claim that the name was derived from the Thyamis in the Epirus, from where early Celtic-speaking groups were wrongly thought to have migrated to Britain.
Many foot crossings were established across the weirs that were built on the non-tidal river, and some of these remained when the locks were built – for example at Benson Lock.
Other organic geochemical measurements of carbon flow such as stable carbon isotopes (δ13C) were found to be insensitive to this urban disturbance.
Upriver, Henry James' ''Portrait of a Lady'' uses a large riverside mansion on the Thames as one of its key settings.
The highest club upstream is at Oxford.
Most of the local riverside was also marshland.
Around 2000, several footbridges were added along the Thames, either as part of the Thames Path or in commemoration of the millennium.
Thames Valley Police is a formal body that takes its name from the river, covering three counties.
When English counties were established their boundaries were partly determined by the Thames.
