Livestock was badly affected, 72 sheep drowned in Wilford and ten cows were lost in Bridgford.
The most important in terms of the river are the extensive sandstone and limestone aquifers that underlie many of the tributary catchments.
Another translation is given as "the trespasser", referring to the waters flooding over the land.
In Newark the water was deep enough to allow four grammar school boys to row across the countryside to Kelham.
From the 1960s onwards, there were gradual but steady improvements to the inadequate sewage works and sewers built during the Victorian era in the urban areas, but this was expensive, and took time to complete.
At Shardlow, where the Trent and Mersey Canal begins, the river also meets the Derwent at Derwent Mouth.
As water quality improved from the 1960s onwards, fish numbers recovered, and recreational coarse fishing became more popular.
In the lower tidal reaches the Trent has a high sediment load, this fine silt which is also known as ‘warp', was used to improve the soil by a process known as warping, whereby river water was allowed to flood into adjacent fields through a series of warping drains, enabling the silt to settle out across the land.
Returning adult salmon have been seen leaping over weirs on the river  and in 2011 a large salmon weighing over  was caught at an undisclosed location, and was 'thought to be the biggest caught on the Trent in the last thirty years'.
The Newark Navigation Commissioners financed improvements to Newark Town lock at the same time, and dredging of the channel was largely funded by selling the 400,000 tonnes of gravel removed from the river bed.
The last point of measurement is North Muskham here the average flow is , a relatively small increase due to the input of the Devon, and other smaller Nottinghamshire tributaries.
The variation in these factors is also reflected in the contrasting runoff characteristics and subsequent inflows of the principal tributaries.
The first person to swim the entire swimmable length of the Trent was Tom Milner, who swam  over nine days in July 2015.
Domestic effluent and polluting discharges from the metal working industries in the upper reaches, combined to affect the whole length of the tributary River Tame.
There is one hydroelectric power station on the river, at Beeston Weir.
BackgroundColors = canvas:sfondo
A vestige of the saline marshes created by the brine springs that seep from the groundwater of the Mercia mudstones, the reserve contains salt tolerant species normally found on the coast, such as sea plantain, arrowgrass and milkwort.
Large parts of the city and surrounding areas were flooded with 9,000 properties and nearly a hundred industrial premises affected some to first floor height.
The Aegir occurs when a high spring tide meets the downstream flow of the river.
Evidence of fishing along the Trent can be traced back to the Neolithic period, with the possible remnants of a fish weir discovered in the abandoned river channels at Hemington.
The river continues north-east, passing the village of Walton-on-Trent until it reaches the large town of Burton upon Trent.
He also took out an injunction against the council to prevent the ongoing contamination causing a "most foul and offensive stench", the river not even being suitable to water grazing cattle on the estate.
Not only do these provide baseflows to the major tributaries, the groundwater is an important source for public water supply.
Historically swimming in the river was popular, in 1770 at Nottingham there were two bathing areas on opposite banks at Trent Bridge which were improved in 1857 with changing sheds and an assistant.
Open water swimming still takes place at locations including Colwick Park Lake adjacent to the river, with its own voluntary lifeguards.
A number of the smaller Trent tributaries are still named as warping drains, such as Morton warping drain, near Gainsborough.
An Act of Parliament was obtained in 1794, and the existing proprietors subscribed the whole of the authorised capital of £13,000 (equivalent to £ in ), themselves.
bar:Jul from:0 till: 45
At Newark, the last bridge on the Trent until modern times, the bridge was rebuilt in 1775.
The flood defences in Nottingham that protect 16,000 homes and those in Burton where they prevent 7,000 properties from flooding were reassessed after this flood, and were subsequently improved between 2006 and 2012.
Henry Hotspur's speech complaining about the river has been linked to the meanders near West Burton, however, given the wider context of the scene, in which conspirators propose to divide England into three after a revolt, it is thought that Hotspur’s intentions were of a grander design, diverting the river east towards the Wash such that he would benefit from a much larger share of the divided Kingdom.
ScaleMajor = gridcolor:lightgrey increment:20 start:0
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:lightgrey increment:10 start:0
Unusually for an English river, the channel altered significantly during historic times, and has been described as being similar to the Mississippi in this respect, especially in its middle reaches, where there are a numerous old meanders and cut-off loops.
Analysis of catch returns from 1969 to 1985, showed that the fish caught most often by anglers were barbel, bream, bleak, carp, chub, dace, eel, gudgeon, perch, and roach.
To the north of Farndon, beside the Staythorpe Power Station the river splits, with one arm passing Averham and Kelham, and the other arm, which is navigable, being joined by the Devon before passing through the market town of Newark-on-Trent and beneath the town's castle walls.
Seals have been reported up to near the head of the tidal section at Newark.
In some areas, successive layers of peat were built up above the lacustrine deposits during the Holocene period, which created lowland mires such as the Thorne and Hatfield Moors.
Contained within these terraces is evidence of the mega fauna that once lived along the river, the bones and teeth of animals such as the woolly mammoth, bison and wolves that existed during colder periods have all been identified.
bar:Mar from:0 till: 122
by anglers, who would travel from South Yorkshire and other surrounding areas, to fish the Trent as their local rivers still remained badly polluted and were absent of fish.
A third Act of 1892 reverted the name to the Trent Navigation Company, and this time, some improvements were performed.
During the 1950s, however, the same problem of effluent dilution that occurred in Stoke began to become significant in Birmingham and the Black Country.
A list composed in 1641 for the Trent, contained thirty types of fish and other species including those that migrated from the sea such as shad, smelt, salmon and flounder, and riverine species such as trout, grayling, perch and pike.
The two arms recombine at Crankley Point beyond the town, where the river turns due north to pass North Muskham and Holme to reach Cromwell Weir, below which the Trent becomes tidal.
The primary reason for locating so many generating stations beside the Trent was the availability of sufficient amounts of cooling water from the river.
The flood defences around Nottingham and Burton constructed during the 1950s, following the 1947 event, stopped any major urban flooding, but problems did occur in undefended areas such as Willington and Gunthorpe, and again at Girton where 19 houses were flooded.
Downstream of Dunham the river passes Church Laneham and reaches Torksey, where it meets the Foss Dyke navigation which connects the Trent to Lincoln and the River Witham.
These levels extend across the Trent valley, and include the lower reaches of the Eau, Torne and Idle.
Shortly afterwards, the river becomes the Derbyshire-Leicestershire border, passing the traditional crossing point of King's Mill, Castle Donington, Weston-on-Trent and Aston-on-Trent.
However, a more likely explanation may be that it was considered to be a river that could be crossed principally by means of fords, i.e.
The river channel links the remaining, but fragmented wetland areas and nature reserves, providing a refuge for native and migrant species.
bar:Jun from:0 till: 62
Between Trent Falls and Keadby, coastal vessels that have navigated through the Humber still deliver cargoes to the wharves of Grove Port, Neap House, Keadby, Gunness and Flixborough.
The residents of the town wanted to increase the use of the branch nearest to them, and so an Act of Parliament was obtained in 1772 to authorise the work.
Egginton / Balderton
For example, the administration of Royal Forests was subject to a different Justice in Eyre north and south of the river, and the jurisdiction of the medieval Council of the North started at the Trent.
The work was completed by October 1773, and the separate tolls remained in force until 1783, when they were replaced by a one-shilling (5p) toll whichever channel the boats used.
Etwall / Whisby Farm
At Colwick near Nottingham, the average flow rises to , due to the combined inputs of the other major tributaries namely the Dove, Derwent and Soar.
bar:Avr at: 85 fontsize:S text: 85 shift:(-10,5)
Downstream of Keadby the river progressively widens, passing Amcotts and Flixborough to reach Burton upon Stather and finally Trent Falls.
Some of the earliest floods can be assessed by using Spalford bank as a substitute measure for the size of a particular flood, as it has been estimated that the bank only failed when flows were greater than , the bank was also breached in 1403 and 1795.
Riverside lakes near Shardlow act as a reserve water source for Nottingham and Derby, and water is also abstracted at Torksey and Newton-on-Trent for supplies in Lincolnshire.
id:lightgrey value:gray(0.8)
These villages include West Stockwith and East Stockwith, Owston Ferry and East Ferry, and West Butterwick and East Butterwick.
The responsibility for sewage treatment works still belonged primarily to local authorities, which often meant an uncoordinated approach and a proliferation of small works.
More specifically, the name may be a contraction of two Celtic words, ''tros'' ("over") and ''hynt'' ("way").
(Until the late 18th century, a long period of stagnation for economic and technical reasons limited the number of bridges over the Trent; it has been noted that relatively few bridges were constructed in England on new sites anywhere between around 1250–1300 and 1750.)
One of the most important of these is Attenborough Nature Reserve, a  Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) which is visited by wildfowl such as wigeon, teal and the red-breasted merganser.
Lord Paget leased the navigation and the wharf at Burton to George Hayne, while the wharf and warehouses at Wilden were leased by Leonard Fosbrooke, who held the ferry rights and was a business partner of Hayne.
bar:Déc from:0 till: 134
The Trent Valley Way created in 1998 as a long distance footpath, enables walkers to enjoy the combined attractions of ‘the river’s rich natural heritage and its history as an inland navigation’.
During lower flows the Trent and its tributaries are heavily influenced by effluent returns from sewage works, especially the Tame where summer flows can be made up of 90% effluent.
Rowing clubs have existed at Burton, Newark and Nottingham since the mid-1800s, with various regattas taking place between them, both on the river and on the rowing course at the national watersports centre.
It flows through and drains most of the northern Midlands around and east of Birmingham.
Failure to raise much of the capital resulted in another Act being obtained in 1887, with similar aims and similar results.
These include wildfowl and wading birds that use the Trent Valley as a migration corridor, with the river also being used as a wildlife route by mammals such as otters and non-native American mink.
The Aegir cannot travel much beyond Gainsborough as the shape of the river reduces the Aegir to little more than a ripple, and weirs north of Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire stop its path completely.
With traffic still between 350,000 and 400,000 tonnes per year, Frank Rayner became the engineer in 1896, and the company were persuaded that major work was necessary if the navigation was to survive.
They have also now been sighted at locations such as Wolseley, Willington, and Attenborough.
Many of the connecting waterways were bought by railway companies, and gradually fell into disrepair.
During the early 1930s, the Company considered enlarging the navigation above Nottingham, in conjunction with improvements to the River Soar Navigation, between Trent Lock and Leicester.
In an attempt to improve the situation, the Company toyed with the idea of cable-hauled steam tugs, but instead purchased a conventional steam dredger and some steam tugs.
Sir Ernest Jardine, who as vice-chairman had partly funded the first lock at Cromwell in 1908, died in 1947, and the company ceased to exist in 1948, when the waterways were nationalised.
Tolls were reduced to retain the traffic, wages were increased to retain the workforce, and they sought amalgamation with a railway company.
The Trent and Mersey Canal was authorised by Act of Parliament in 1766, and construction from Shardlow to Preston Brook, where it joined the Bridgewater Canal, was completed by 1777.
Competition from other fisheries such as well stocked ponds and lakes with better amenities and more consistent catches of fish also meant a reduction in the appeal of fishing the Trent.
Historic flood levels have also been recorded at Girton and on the churchyard wall at Collingham.
Other changes, such as the replacement of town gas with natural gas, saw the end of the polluting and toxic coal tar emissions to rivers in 1963.
the river flowed over major road routes.
bar:Aoû text:August
He reported that they could be treacherous to the unwary, since there were few gauges to show if the river had become too deep to cross, and that they were rarely used except by locals who knew them well.
A survey in 2003 showed a doubling in the number of sites where evidence, such as spraints and footprints of these elusive animals were found.
Further downstream at Hemington, archaeologists have found the remains of a medieval bridge across another abandoned channel.
There are many fishing clubs that use the river, with catches including barbel, bream, carp, chub, dace, pike, and roach.
Beneath the alluvium are widespread deposits of sand and gravel, which also occur as gravel terraces considerably above the height of the current river level.
The river frontage in the town is lined with warehouses, that were once used when the town was an inland port, many of which have been renovated for modern use.
Flows measured at Nottingham were exceptionally low by the end of August, and were given a drought return period of greater than one hundred years.
As no archive sources record that the Hemington bridge existed, there may have been other medieval bridge projects now forgotten.
During the end of the last Devensian glacial period the formation of Lake Humber in the lowest reaches of the river, meant that substantial lake bed clays and silts were laid down to create the flat landscape of the Humberhead Levels.
The three largest remaining coal-fired stations at Ratcliffe, Cottam and West Burton still use domestic coal supplies, although this is now being replaced by imported coal brought by ship from abroad.
As they were a source of income, they were recorded in the Domesday Book at a number of locations including Weston on Trent and Fiskerton, both of which were still in operation in the middle of the 20th century.
The Tame pollution also reached the Trent as well, with one of the worse effected reaches being that downstream of the confluence with the Tame through Burton, this being exacerbated by its late introduction of sewage treatment, and the substantial wastewater arising from the breweries in the town.
bar:Déc at: 134 fontsize:S text: 134 shift:(-10,5)
Downstream of the town the villages are often named in pairs, representing the fact that they were once linked by a river ferry between the two settlements.
Flooding on the Trent can also be caused by the effects of storm surges independently of fluvial flows, a series of which occurred during October and November 1954, resulting in the worse tidal flooding experienced along the lower reaches.
King Edward fortified the Nottingham bridge in 920, while a notable battle took place at Burton's bridge in 1322, and another in 1643.
The bridge was probably gone by around 1311 when nearby Wilden ferry, near Shardlow was first recorded, and the site thereafter went without a bridge until Cavendish Bridge opened around 1760.
id:barra value:rgb(0.6,0.8,0.9)
The name "Trent" is from a Celtic word possibly meaning "strongly flooding".
It then reaches the town of Gainsborough with its own Trent Bridge.
The last known catch was in 1902 near Holme, the fish was  and weighed .
The first improvement of the lower river was at Newark, where the channel splits into two.
For the Trent this proportion is lower, but with nearly half of low flows being made up of these effluent inflows, it is still significant.
Later, in 1699, the baron William Paget (Lord Paget), who owned coal mines and land in the area, obtained an Act of Parliament to extend navigation up to Fleetstones Bridge, Burton, despite opposition from the people of Nottingham.
The pollution of the "Trent catchment was probably at its worst in the late 1950s", this being the result of the ongoing industrialisation of the urban areas, combined with the interruption and under investment caused by two world wars, which lead to only piecemeal improvements of the sewerage treatment infrastructure taking place.
The flood bank was subsequently strengthened and repaired, following further floods during 1824 and 1852.
The river remains vulnerable to these pollution events, such as the one that occurred in October 2009 when an accidental release of cyanide from a factory into the sewer system in Stoke-on-Trent, affected the treatment works at Strongford.
The wide estuary is a traditional boundary between northern England and the Midlands.
More definitive finds from the medieval period were also found at this site and  near Colwick.
Downstream of the reservoir it passes through Stoke-on-Trent and merges with the Lyme, Fowlea and other brooks that drain the 'six towns' of the Staffordshire Potteries to become the River Trent.
Another notable find in a related terrace system near Derby from a warmer interglacial period, was the Allenton hippopotamus.
Using invertebrates as an indicator of pollution levels, it was appropriately named the Trent Biotic index.
The improvements in water quality along the Trent were recorded through the chemical monitoring of the river from the 1950s.
Food was scarce, "in one day 10,000 loaves had to be sent into the town and distributed gratuitously to save people from famine".
The Dadfords, who were engineers on the Trent and Mersey Canal, estimated the cost at £20,000, but the proposal was opposed by landowners and merchants on the river, while the ''Navigator'', published in 1788, estimated that around 500 men who were employed to bow-haul boats would have lost their jobs.
The topography, geology and land use of the Trent catchment, all have a direct influence on the hydrology of the river.
The fifth largest flood recorded at Nottingham occurred in November 2000, with widespread flooding of low-lying land along the Trent valley, including many roads and railways.
The engineer for the Manchester Ship Canal, Sir Edward Leader Williams, was commissioned to survey the river, while negotiations with the North Staffordshire Railway, who owned the Trent and Mersey Canal and had maintained its viability, ensured that some of the clauses from previous Acts of Parliament did not prevent progress.
Extended in 2012, the route now runs from Trent Lock in the south through to Alkborough where the river meets the Humber.
The major proposals included a cut and lock at Cranfleet, where the River Soar joins the Trent, a cut, locks and weirs at Beeston, which would connect with the Nottingham Canal at Lenton, and a cut and lock at Holme Pierrepont.
The effluent and industrial pollution of the early 20th century, led to a rapid decline in fish stocks, large stretches of the river became fishless and species such as salmon almost disappeared.
The tipping point being the introduction of piped water and a basic sewer network, which meant that effluent, which was previously stored in cesspits, was carried away through drains into the nearest brook.
bar:Nov at: 98 fontsize:S text: 98 shift:(-10,5)
bar:Sep at: 53 fontsize:S text: 53 shift:(-10,5)
An abandoned channel at Repton is described on an old map as 'Old Trent Water', records show that this was once the main navigable route, with the river having switched to a more northerly course in the 18th century.
The most recent occurrence involved the ''Celtic Endeavour'' being aground near Gunness for ten days, finally being lifted off by a high tide.
Mills were important locations for fish and eel traps, the eels being caught during ‘quill time’ between mid-August and early September.
Gravel Terraces of the River Trent
Sand, gravels and alluvium deposits that overlie the mudstone bedrock occur almost along the entire length of the river, and are an important feature of the middle and lower reaches, with the alluvial river silt producing fertile soils that are used for intensive agriculture in the Trent valley.
Raising finance was difficult, but some was subscribed by the chairman and vice-chairman, and construction of Cromwell Lock began in 1908.
Users of the Trent and Mersey Canal, the Loughborough Canal and the Erewash Canal next demanded major improvements to the river down to Gainsborough, including new cuts, locks, dredging and a towing path suitable for horses.
The mudstones are not exposed by the bed of the river, as there is a layer of gravels and then alluvium above the bedrock.
One of the earliest known fords was the crossing at Littleborough, constructed by the Romans it was paved with flagstones, and supported by substantial timber pilings.
Bridges over the river were created in Saxon times at Nottingham at least (and for a time just north of Newark at Cromwell, although it is not known how long that bridge site lasted), and formed major centres of trade and military importance.
There were also negotiations with the London and North Eastern Railway, who were responsible for the Nottingham Canal between Trent Lock and Lenton.
By early 1796, the Beeston cut was operational, with the Cranfleet cut following in 1797, and the Holme cut in 1800, with the whole works being finished by 1 September 1801.
The Trent valley also links together other SSSI and local nature reserves, which have varying habitats not only for birds, but also mammals, insects and fish, a good example is the tributary River Mease where the entire watercourse has been designated both as a SSSI and a European special area of conservation.
At one time these sites provided a quarter of the electricity needs of the UK, giving rise to the epithet 'Megawatt Valley'.
In places, however the mudstones do form river cliffs, most notably at Gunthorpe and Stoke Lock near Radcliffe on Trent, the village being named after the distinctive red coloured strata.
Due to the size of the flood and the ice entrained in the flow, nearly every bridge along the Trent was badly damaged or washed away.
The largest known flood was the Candlemas flood of February 1795, which followed an eight-week period of harsh winter weather, rivers froze which that meant mills were unable to grind corn, and then followed a rapid thaw.
Early bridges were vulnerable to floods, and in 1309 many bridges were washed away or damaged by severe winter floods, including Hethbeth Bridge.
The use of a maritime pilot on the Trent is not compulsory for commercial craft, but is suggested for those without any experience of the river.
bar:Avr from:0 till: 85
bar:Jun at: 62 fontsize:S text: 62 shift:(-10,5)
John Jennings, the local MP for Burton highlighted these problems in a speech to the House when he stated in 1956, that as in previous years the river had been declared unsafe for swimming on advice from the medical officer, and how its unhealthy condition affected a local rowing club.
This resulted in the release of raw sewage and the chemical into the river, killing thousands of fish, and posing a health risk to river users as far south as Burton.
The economic recession in the 1970s meant that there was a considerable contraction of heavy industrial sectors, reducing pollution loadings from factories and foundries.
The two men refused to allow any cargo to be landed which was not carried in their own boats, and so created a monopoly.
The principal flood of the 19th century and the second largest recorded, was in October 1875.
The aim of the improvements was to increase the minimum depth from  to .
At West Stockwith the Trent is joined by the Chesterfield Canal and the River Idle and soon after enters Lincolnshire fully, passing to the west of Scunthorpe.
Over the study period the returns revealed that there was a variation in the species caught, with a shift from roach and dace based catches, to one of chub and bream, a change that was perceived by anglers to represent a ‘serious detriment’ to the fishery.
In addition to this, the University of Oxford was formerly divided into a northern nation and a southern nation, the former consisting of English people north of the River Trent and the Scots and the latter consisting of English people south of the Trent, the Irish, and the Welsh.
The changes were helped by the introduction of more stringent pollution control legislation, which required industrial waste to be discharged to sewers, and the formation of the Trent River Authority, which had new duties relating to managing water quality issues.
Despite a Chancery injunction against them, the two men continued with their action.
Downstream of Burton upon Trent, the river increasingly trends northwards, cutting off a portion of Nottinghamshire and nearly all of Lincolnshire from his share, north of the Trent.
Though the river is no doubt legally still navigable above Shardlow, it is probable that the agreement marks the end of the use of that stretch of the river as a commercial navigation.
The improvements that have taken place mean that the Trent can be used for public water consumption.
In 1974, these works were transferred to the regional water authorities, with the Severn Trent Water Authority taking over the role for the Trent catchment.
It is not clear when pollution first became an issue for the River Trent, but in the late 1880s, it had a thriving salmon fishery, with the river producing an annual catch of some 3,000 fish, a decade later, this had fallen to 100.
The last bridge over the river is at Keadby where it is joined by both the Stainforth and Keadby Canal and the River Torne.
At least one other medieval attempt was made to bridge the Trent near Wilden at Hemington, but this was gone long before the end of the Middle Ages.
The river then continues south through the market town of Stone, and after passing the village of Salt, it reaches Great Haywood, where it is spanned by the 16th-century Essex Bridge near Shugborough Hall.
The idea for this scene, may have been based on the disagreement regarding a mill weir near Shelford Manor, between local landowners Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, and Sir Thomas Stanhope which culminated with a long diversion channel being dug to bypass the mill.
Period     = from:0 till:200
Barges still transport gravel from pits at Girton and Besthorpe to Goole and Hull.
The Trent rises on the Staffordshire moorlands near the village of Biddulph Moor, from a number of sources including the Trent Head Well.
The last act of the directors was to pay a 7.5 per cent dividend on the shares in 1950.
bar:Oct at: 70 fontsize:S text: 70 shift:(-10,5)
Further north at Littleborough is the site of the Roman town of Segelocum, where a Roman road once crossed the river.
Recreational fishing is still popular, although anglers no longer line the banks as they once did.
Wading birds such as oystercatcher and bittern have also been observed at the reserve; as have kingfishers, reed warblers and water rails.
Increased running costs after the First World War could not be met by increasing the tolls, as the company had no statutory powers to do so, and so suggested that the Ministry of Transport should take over the navigation, which they did from 24 September 1920.
This led to increased investment, the closure of older and smaller works, with sewage treatment being combined at larger modern works such as Strongford and Minworth.
At certain times of the year, the lower tidal reaches of the Trent experience a moderately large tidal bore (up to  high), commonly known as the Trent Aegir (named after the Norse sea god).
The central arches of the medieval Swarkestone bridge were knocked out by the great flood of 1795 and rebuilt, but the bridge’s more rural location allowed large portions of the medieval bridge to survive and remain in use today.
Polluting substances such as ammonia showed a reduction, as did the biochemical oxygen demand, an indicator of the contamination present in the river.
In Nottingham a cart overturned in the floodwaters near the Wilford Road and six people drowned, dwellings nearby were flooded to a depth of .
Warp was also used as a commercial product, after being collected from the river banks at low tide, it was transported along the Chesterfield Canal to Walkeringham where it was dried out and refined to be eventually sold as a silver polish for cutlery manufacturers.
In order to retain control of the whole river, they supported the inclusion of the Beeston Cut in the bill for the Nottingham Canal, which prevented the Erewash Canal company from getting permission to build it, and then had the proposal removed from the Nottingham Canal company's bill in return for their support of the main bill.
The lower sequences of these terraces have been widely quarried for sand and gravel, and the extraction of these minerals continues to be an important industry in the Trent Valley, with some three million tonnes of aggregates being produced each year.
Cavendish Bridge was itself damaged beyond repair by a flood in March 1947, requiring a temporary Bailey bridge to be used until a new concrete span was constructed in 1957.
A loan from Nottingham Corporation and a grant from the Unemployment Grants Committee enabled the Company to rebuild Newark Nether lock, which was opened on 12 April 1926.
bar:Nov from:0 till: 98
Various canoe and kayak clubs paddle on the river including those at Stone, Burton, and Nottingham.
Whilst this is not unique for an English river, it does mean that there is an ongoing legacy of issues relating to urban runoff, pollution incidents, and effluent dilution from sewage treatment, industry and coal mining.
Lord Paget seems to have funded the work privately, building locks at King's Mill and Burton Mills and several cuts and basins.
