;Traffic: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, bicycles, and other conveyances using any road for purposes of travel.
*design/build/operate/maintain
;Farm-to-market road: a state road or county road that connects rural or agricultural areas to market towns.
;State highway: Road numbered by the state, falling below numbered national highways (like U.S.
In the UK the term is road surface and the pavement is a pedestrian walkway alongside the road.
;Median: On dual carriageway roads, including controlled-access highways, divided highways and many limited-access roads, the central reservation (British English), median (North American English), median strip (North American English and Australian English), neutral ground Louisiana English or central nature strip (Australian English): Area that separates opposing lanes of traffic
This includes footpaths, bridleways and cycle tracks, and also road and driveways on private land and many car parks.
For example, resupply aircraft are only flown to Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station October to February, and many residents of coastal Alaska have bulk cargo shipped in only during the warmer months.
Large areas of Alaska, Canada, Greenland, and Siberia are sparsely connected.
There are various materials to choose for this method including hot pour bituminous liquid, silicone and preformed compression seals.
;Private road: Road owned and maintained by a private individual, organization, or company rather than by a government
The voids usually occur near cracks or joints due to surface water infiltration.
The radii and gradient are designed and staked out to best suit the natural ground levels and minimize the amount of cut and fill.
Antarctica has very few roads and no continent-bridging network, though there are a few ice roads between bases, such as the South Pole Traverse.
If a void is present, the epoxy will stick to the core and provide physical evidence.
Noise barriers are used to reduce noise pollution, in particular where roads are located close to built-up areas.
For long-distance trips, passengers usually travel by air and rent a car upon arrival.
Additional intercontinental and transoceanic fixed links have been proposed, including a Bering Strait crossing that would connect Eurasia-Africa and North America, a Malacca Strait Bridge to the largest island of Indonesia from Asia, and a Strait of Gibraltar crossing to connect Europe and Africa directly.
Like all structures, roads deteriorate over time.
The assertion that the first pathways were the trails made by animals has not been universally accepted;  in many cases animals do not follow constant paths.
Also called a guard rail or traffic barrier.
A typical tractor-trailer weighing 80,000 pounds (36.287 t) with 8,000 pounds (3.629 t) on the steer axle and 36,000 pounds (16.329 t) on both of the tandem axle groups is expected to do 7,800 times more damage than a passenger vehicle with 2,000 pounds (0.907 t) on each axle.
;Private highway: Highway owned and operated for profit by private industry
;Green lane: (UK) Unsurfaced road, may be so infrequently used that vegetation colonises freely, hence 'green'.
* In 500 BC, Darius I the Great started an extensive road system for Persia (Iran), including the Royal Road, which was one of the finest highways of its time.
The injection devices must include a grout packer capable of sealing the hole.
When a single carriageway road is converted into dual carriageway by building a second separate carriageway alongside the first, it is usually referred to as ''duplication'', ''twinning'' or ''doubling''.
;Road-traffic safety: Process to reduce the harm (deaths, injuries, and property damage) that result from vehicle crashes on public roads
(page34) Great care is taken to preserve reference Benchmarks  (page59)
;Ranch road: U.S. road that connects rural and agricultural areas to market towns
Light poles are designed to break at the base rather than violently stop a car that hits them.
Storm drainage and environmental considerations are a major concern.
;Guide rail: Prevents vehicles from veering off the road into oncoming traffic, crashing against solid objects or falling from a road.
When cleaning the reservoir, no dust, dirt or traces of old sealant should remain.
The subject of road design is considered part of highway engineering.
Concentrations of air pollutants and adverse respiratory health effects are greater near the road than at some distance away from the road.
About 33% of the world by population drive on the left, and 67% keep right.
It does, however, restore the slab support, therefore, decreasing deflections under the load.
In the United Kingdom there is some ambiguity between the terms highway and road.
Virtually all roads require some form of maintenance before they come to the end of their service life.
(pg15) and may be required to meet standards set by law or official guidelines.
;Layby (Pullout, pull-off): A paved area beside a main road where cars can stop temporarily to let another car pass.
* In the 8th century AD, many roads were built throughout the Arab Empire.
The original carriageway is changed from two-way to become one-way, while the new carriageway is one-way in the opposite direction.
The Shell pavement design method is used in many countries for the design of new asphalt roadsides.
Rainwater and snowmelt running off of roads tends to pick up gasoline, motor oil, heavy metals, trash and other pollutants and result in Water pollution.
Drainage systems must be capable of carrying the ultimate design flow from the upstream catchment with approval for the outfall from the appropriate authority to a watercourse, creek, river or the sea for drainage discharge.
Road runoff is a major source of nickel, copper, zinc, cadmium, lead and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are created as combustion byproducts of gasoline and other fossil fuels.
;Roundabout: a road junction where typically three or more roads are joined by a circular section of road.
Economics and society depend heavily on efficient roads.
In addition, on-road transportation greenhouse gas emissions are the largest single cause of climate change, scientists say.
Pavements are designed for an expected service life or design life.
The North and South American road networks are separated by the Darién Gap, the only interruption in the Pan-American Highway.
Slab stabilization is a non-destructive method of solving this problem and is usually employed with other Concrete Pavement Restoration (CPR)  methods including patching and diamond grinding.
Modern roads are normally smoothed, paved, or otherwise prepared to allow easy travel.
This resulted in a poor and variable state of roads.
Final rehabilitation after road construction is completed will include seeding, planting, watering and other activities to reinstate the area to be consistent with the untouched surrounding areas.
Successful resealing consists of old sealant removal, shaping and cleaning the reservoir, installing the backer rod and installing the sealant.
;Profile: the vertical alignment of a road, expressed as a series of grades, connected by parabolic curves.
Blasting is not frequently used to excavate the road bed as the intact rock structure forms an ideal road base.
*design/build/finance/operate
;Curb (kerb): A raised edge at the side of the roadway.
Unpaved roads or lack of roads are more common in developing countries, and these can become impassible in wet conditions.
Sand applied to icy roads can be ground up by traffic into fine particulates and contribute to air pollution.
The process consists of pumping a cementitous grout or polyurethane mixture through holes drilled through the slab.
A hybrid of road transport and ship transport beginning in about 1740 is the horse-drawn boat in which the horse follows a cleared path along the river bank.
Thin surfacing preserves, protects and improves the functional condition of the road while reducing the need for routing maintenance, leading to extended service life without increasing structural capacity.
Maintenance is considered in the whole life cost of the road with service at 10, 20 and 30 year milestones.
The process is repeated until the desired grade is reached.
* Rankin Inlet, Nunavut, population 2,577 (2011)
Tar was derived from petroleum, accessed from oil fields in the region, through the chemical process of destructive distillation.
Erosion and sediment controls are constructed to prevent detrimental effects.
;Pelican crossing: (officially ''Pelicon crossing'') (UK) a PEdestrian LIght CONtrolled crossing.
The placement of energy attenuation devices (e.g.
By about 10,000 BC, rough roads/pathways were used by human travelers.
* From about 312 BC, the Roman Empire built straight strong stone Roman roads throughout Europe and North Africa, in support of its military campaigns.
The most sophisticated roads were those in Baghdad, which were paved with tar.
Deterioration is primarily due to accumulated damage from vehicles, however environmental effects such as frost heaves, thermal cracking and oxidation often contribute.
* Stone-paved streets are found in the city of Ur in the Middle East dating back to 4000 BC.
To remedy this, the first of the "Turnpike trusts" was established around 1706, to build good roads and collect tolls from passing vehicles.
The fill is made by the "compacted layer method" where a layer of fill is spread then compacted to specifications, under saturated conditions.
;Corniche: Road on the side of a cliff or mountain, with the ground rising on one side and falling away on the other
Roads are under construction to many remote places, such as the villages of the Annapurna Circuit, and a road was completed in 2013 to Mêdog County.
Water management systems can be used to reduce the effect of pollutants from roads.
Technically advanced agencies monitor the road network surface condition with sophisticated equipment such as laser/inertial Profilometers.
The requirements for slab stabilization are strength and the ability to flow into or expand to fill small voids.
The technique restores support to concrete slabs by filing small voids that develop underneath the concrete slab at joints, cracks or the pavement edge.
Common stabilization materials include pozzolan-cement grout and polyurethane.
* Juneau, Alaska, population 32,406 (2014)
;Milestone: One of a series of numbered markers placed along a road, often at regular intervals, showing the distance to destinations.
Transport economics is used to understand both the relationship between the transport system and the wider economy and the complex network effects when there are multiple paths and competing modes for both personal and freight (road/rail/air/ferry) and where Induced demand can result in increased on decreased transport levels when road provision is increased by building new roads or decreased (for example California State Route 480).
Traffic 'on the roundabout' has priority over traffic on approach roads, unless indicated otherwise.
Historically many roads were simply recognizable routes without any formal construction or maintenance.
Slab stabilization does not correct depressions, increase the design structural capacity, stop erosion or eliminate faulting.
When pavement lasts longer than its intended life, it may have been overbuilt, and the original costs may have been too high.
Sand can alter stream bed environments, causing stress for the plants and animals that live there.
The definition of a road depends on the definition of a highway; there is no formal definition for a highway in the relevant Act.
In countries where traffic drives on the left the roundabout is travelled in a clockwise direction.
;Roughness: Deviations from a true planar pavement surface, which affects vehicle suspension deflection, dynamic loading, ride quality, surface drainage and winter operations.
For example, travel from other parts of Asia to South Korea would require passage through the hostile country of North Korea.
A very long example is the  Overseas Highway connecting many of the Florida Keys with the continental United States.
The term was also commonly used to refer to roadsteads, waterways that lent themselves to use by shipping.
Stabilization should only be performed at joints and cracks where loss of support exists.
* Nome, Alaska, population 3,788 (2014)
;Shoulder (also hard shoulder): A clear, level area to the side of the roadway available for stopping if needed.
Drainage lines are laid with sealed joints in the road easement with runoff coefficients and characteristics adequate for the land zoning and storm water system.
;Chipseal: Road surface composed of a thin layer of crushed stone 'chips' and asphalt emulsion.
Many green lanes are ancient routes that have existed for millennia.
Regulations can restrict the use of engine braking.
Also called joint and crack repair, this method’s purpose is to minimize infiltration of surface water and incompressible material into the joint system.
;Gutter: a drainage channel usually at the edge of the road or along a median.
In the United States it is usually only used on low volume rural roads
Some asphalt pavements are designed as ''perpetual pavements'' with an expected structural life in excess of 50 years.
Potholes on roads are caused by rain damage and vehicle braking or related construction works.
As of 2014, only 43% of rural Africans have access to an all-season road.
This method can extend the life of the concrete pavement for another 15 years.
Some places are intentionally car-free, and roads (if present) might be used by bicycles or pedestrians.
Structural road design is the science of designing a road for its environment in order to extend its longevity and reduce maintenance.
The United States has the largest network of roads of any country with  as of 2009.
;Road number: Often assigned to identify a stretch of public roads&mdash; often dependent on the type of road, with numbers differentiating between interstates, motorways, arterial thoroughfares, etc.
Built in winter 3807 BC or spring 3806 BC, tree-ring dating (Dendrochronology) enabled very precise dating.
In the early 1970s it was recognized that design of roads can be conducted to influence and minimize noise generation.
Roads are a chief source of environmental noise generation.
;Pedestrian crossing: Designated point on a road where road marking or other means helps pedestrians cross safely
The island of Great Britain is connected to the European road network by Eurotunnel Shuttle - an example of a car shuttle train which is a service used in other parts of Europe to travel under mountains and over wetlands.
Geosynthetics such as geotextiles, geogrids and geocells are frequently used in the various pavement layers to improve road quality.
The Rebecca Riots in Carmarthenshire and Rhayader from 1839 to 1844 contributed to a Royal Commission that led to the demise of the system in 1844, which coincided with the development of the UK railway system.
Others believe that some roads originated from  following animal trails.
The Icknield Way is given as an example of this type of road origination, where man and animal both selected the same natural line.
;Traffic island: (UK) a small raised area used to help define the traffic flow, which may also act as a refuge for pedestrians crossing the carriageway or a location for signs, barriers or lights&mdash;a synonym for roundabout in some parts of the UK
Distress and serviceability loss on concrete roads can be caused by loss of support due to voids beneath the concrete pavement slabs.
In countries where traffic flows on the left, the reverse is true.
The contractor must place the grout using a positive-displacement injection pump or a non-pulsing progressive cavity pump.
* The Highways Act 1555 in Britain transferred responsibility for maintaining roads from government to local parishes.
The injection device must also have a return hose or a fast-control reverse switch, in case workers detect slab movement on the uplift gauge.
;Pavement: The road regarded as a geoconstruction.
Where demand for travel by road vehicle to a disconnected island or mainland settlement is high, roll-on/roll-off ferries are commonly available if the journey is relatively short.
;Traffic light: Also known as a traffic signal, stop light, stop-and-go lights&mdash;a signaling device at a road intersection, pedestrian crossing, or other location that assigns right of way to different approaches to an intersection
;Traffic calming: Set of strategies used by urban planners and traffic engineers to slow down or reduce motor vehicle traffic, thereby improving safety for pedestrians and bicyclists and improving the environment for residents
The European Peninsula is connected to the Scandinavian Peninsula by the Øresund Bridge, and both have many connections to the mainland of Eurasia, including the bridges over the Bosphorus.
See List of countries by road network size.
Roads are generally built and maintained by the public sector using taxation although implementation may be through private contractors).
Processes during earthwork include excavation, removal of material to spoil, filling, compacting, construction and trimming.
Highway authorities may also remove larger trees from the immediate vicinity of the road.
Geosynthetics perform four main functions in roads: separation, reinforcement, filtration and drainage; which increase the pavement performance, reduce construction costs and decrease maintenance.
The top soil and vegetation is removed from the borrow pit and stockpiled for subsequent rehabilitation of the extraction area.
This involves cutting slots in the pavement at each joint, placing dowel bars in the slots, then filling them with concrete patching material.
At its peak the Roman Empire was connected by 29 major roads moving out from Rome and covering 78,000 kilometers or 52,964 Roman miles of paved roads.
Old road surfaces, fences, and buildings may need to be removed before construction can begin.
This data is fed into a pavement management system, which recommends the best maintenance or construction treatment to correct the damage that has occurred.
* In ancient times, transport by river was far easier and faster than transport by road, especially considering the cost of road construction and the difference in carrying capacity between carts and river barges.
During heavy rains, if the elevation of the road surface isn't higher than the surrounding landscape, it may result in flooding.
After design, approval, planning, legal and environmental considerations have been addressed alignment of the road is set out by a surveyor.
Road transport of people and cargo by may also be obstructed by border controls and travel restrictions.
Due to steepness, mud, snow, or fords, roads can sometimes be passable only to four-wheel drive vehicles, those with snow chains or snow tires, or those capable of deep wading or amphibious operation.
;National Highway: Road built and maintained by a national authority.
or occasionally using road tolls.
;Texture (roads): Deviations from a true planar pavement surface, which affects the interaction between road and tire.
Some road fixtures such as road signs and fire hydrants are designed to collapse on impact.
The report estimates that urban drivers pay an average of $746/year on vehicle repairs while the average US motorist pays about $335/year.
Cities on the mainland of continents which do not have road access include:
When looking only at expressways the National Trunk Highway System (NTHS) in China has a total length of  at the end of 2006, and 60,300&nbsp;km at the end of 2008, second only to the United States with  in 2005.
Another legal view is that while a highway historically included footpaths, bridleways, driftways, etc., it can now be used to mean those ways that allow the movement of motor-vehicles, and the term ''rights of way'' can be used to cover the wider usage.
General fill material should be free of organics, meet minimum California bearing ratio (CBR) results and have a low plasticity index.
The type of road surface is dependent on economic factors and expected usage.
Much of the vegetation may be mulched and put aside for use during reinstatement.
Some roads like Chicago, Illinois's "Wacker Drive", a major two-level viaduct in the downtown area, are being rebuilt with a designed service life of 100 years.
Trees in the road construction area may be marked for retention.
It is recommended to do this testing at night as during cooler temperatures, joints open, aggregate interlock diminishes and load deflections are at their highest.
In countries where traffic flows on the right, traffic signs are mostly on the right side of the road, roundabouts and traffic circles go counter-clockwise/anti-clockwise, and pedestrians crossing a two-way road should watch out for traffic from the left first.
Eurasia and Africa are connected by roads on the Sinai Peninsula.
In some parts of the United Kingdom the standard design life is 40 years for new bitumen and concrete pavement.
A 1984 ruling said "the land over which a public right of way exists is known as a highway; and although most highways have been made up into roads, and most easements of way exist over footpaths, the presence or absence of a made road has nothing to do with the distinction.
In the United States, laws distinguish  between ''public roads'', which are open to public use, and ''private roads'', which are privately controlled.
The topsoil is usually stripped and stockpiled nearby for rehabilitation of newly constructed embankments along the road.
Routes) in the hierarchy ''or'' a road maintained by the state, including nationally-numbered highways
In the same way as converting railway lines from single track to double track, the new carriageway is not always constructed directly alongside the existing carriageway.
Pro-active agencies use pavement management techniques to continually monitor road conditions and schedule preventive maintenance treatments as needed to prolong the lifespan of their roads.
Safety improvements such as traffic signs, crash barriers, raised pavement markers and other forms of road surface marking are installed.
* The Sweet Track, a timber track causeway in England, is one of the oldest engineered roads discovered and the oldest timber trackway discovered in Northern Europe.
'''Road construction''' requires the creation of an engineered continuous right-of-way or '''roadbed''', overcoming geographic obstacles and having grades low enough to permit vehicle or foot travel.
Many concrete pavements built since the 1950s have significantly outlived their intended design lives.
After inserting the backer rod, the sealant is placed into the joint.
The Federative Republic of Brazil has the fourth largest road system in the world with  (2002).
It seals the surface and protects it from weather, but provides no structural strength.
;Loose chippings: the hazard of stone chippings that have come loose
Bahrain is the only island country to be connected to a continental network by road (the King Fahd Causeway to Saudi Arabia).
Even on mainlands, some settlements have no roads connecting with the primary continental network, due to natural obstacles like mountains or wetlands, remoteness, or general expense.
The Republic of India has the second largest road system in the world with 4,689,842 kilometres (2,914,133&nbsp;mi) of road (2013).
Motor vehicle emissions contribute air pollution.
A borrow pit (source for obtaining fill, gravel, and rock) and a water source should be located near or in reasonable distance to the road construction site.
These materials and methods are used in low-traffic private roadways as well as public roads and highways.
Roads that are available for use by the public may be referred to as parkways, avenues, freeways, interstates, highways, or primary, secondary, and tertiary local roads.
Saws are used to shape the reservoir.
* Corduroy roads (log roads) are found dating to 4000 BC in Glastonbury, England.
Many asphalt pavements built over 35 years ago, despite not being specifically designed as a perpetual pavement, have remained in good condition long past their design life.
In the  European Union (EU) 44% of all goods are moved by trucks over roads and 85% of all people are transported by cars, buses or coaches on roads.
The compacted fill also serves as lower-stratum drainage.
Sand clay fill may also be used.
Once the epoxy hardens, technicians drill through the hole.
