''The sand of granite, and beholding far''
::''Under the wide and starry sky,''
The labours of my sires, and fled the sea,
In September 1857, Stevenson went to ''Mr Henderson's School'' in India Street, Edinburgh, but because of poor health stayed only a few weeks and did not return until October 1859.
Stevenson grew depressed and wondered if he had exhausted his creative vein as he had been "overworked bitterly".
In 1890 Stevenson purchased a tract of about 400 acres (1.6&nbsp;km²) in Upolu, an island in Samoa.
A garden was designed by the Bournemouth Corporation in 1957 as a memorial to Stevenson, on the site of his Westbourne house, "Skerryvore", which he occupied from 1885 to 1887.
At least three US elementary schools are named after Stevenson, in the Upper West Side of New York City, in Fridley, Minnesota, and in Burbank, California.
He rebelled against this idea: "I wish to die in my boots; no more Land of Counterpane for me.
He took the native name Tusitala (Samoan for "Teller of Tales", i.e.
Stevenson School in Pebble Beach, California, was established in 1952 and still exists as a college preparatory boarding school.
Robert Louis Stevenson State Park near Calistoga, California, contains the location where he and Fanny spent their honeymoon in 1880.
This was such a stinging protest against existing conditions that it resulted in the recall of two officials, and Stevenson feared for a time it would result in his own deportation.
In addition to building his house and clearing his land and helping the Samoans in many ways, he found time to work at his writing.
Stevenson at first remained in Europe, making the walking trip that would form the basis for ''Travels with a Donkey in the Cévennes'' (1879).
In spite of his ill health, he produced the bulk of his best-known work during these years: ''Treasure Island'', his first widely popular book; ''Kidnapped''; ''Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde'', the story which established his wider reputation; ''The Black Arrow''; and two volumes of verse, ''A Child's Garden of Verses'' and ''Underwoods''.
In October 1861, he went to Edinburgh Academy, an independent school for boys, and stayed there sporadically for about fifteen months.
::''Glad did I live and gladly die,''
But though you will be angry to hear it, I believe, for myself at least, what is is best.
Though the elder Stevenson was naturally disappointed, the surprise cannot have been great, and Stevenson's mother reported that he was "wonderfully resigned" to his son's choice.
Although Stevenson returned to Britain shortly after this first meeting, Fanny apparently remained in his thoughts, and he wrote an essay, "On falling in love", for the ''Cornhill Magazine''.
Indeed, even Thomas's maternal grandfather, Thomas Smith, had been in the same profession.
He paid for the printing of Robert's first publication at sixteen, an account of the Covenanters' rebellion, which was published on its two hundredth anniversary, ''The Pentland Rising: A Page of History, 1666'' (1866).
He befriended the king's niece, Princess Victoria Kaiulani, who also had a link to Scottish heritage.
A plaque above the door of a house in Castleton of Braemar states "Here R.L.
He felt that this was the best work he had done.
In 1994, to mark the 100th anniversary of Stevenson's death, the Royal Bank of Scotland issued a series of commemorative £1 notes which featured a quill pen and Stevenson's signature on the obverse, and Stevenson's face on the reverse side.
Stevenson, Advocate" to the Heriot Row house.
Stevenson had always wanted his 'Requiem' inscribed on his tomb:
He even feared that he might again become a helpless invalid.
Lighthouse design was the family's profession: Thomas's father (Robert's grandfather) was the famous Robert Stevenson, and both of Thomas's brothers (Robert's uncles) Alan and David, were in the same field.
Soon after their first meeting, he had placed Stevenson's first paid contribution, an essay entitled "Roads," in ''The Portfolio''.
In other respects too, Stevenson was moving away from his upbringing.
asking his wife "Does my face look strange?"
One particular open letter from this period stands as testimony to his activism and indignation at the pettiness of the "powers that be", in the person of a Presbyterian minister in Honolulu named Rev.
This led to a strong bond between the Stevenson and Ide families.
A literary celebrity during his lifetime, Stevenson now ranks among the 26 most translated authors in the world.
During his time in the Hawaiian Islands, Stevenson had visited Molokai and the leper colony there, shortly after the demise of Father Damien.
There is an R. L. Stevenson middle school in Honolulu, Hawaii.
Throughout the vicissitudes of his scholarly reception, Stevenson has remained popular worldwide.
Dr. Charles McEwen Hyde.
Half of Stevenson's original manuscripts are lost, including those of ''Treasure Island'', ''The Black Arrow'' and ''The Master of Ballantrae''.
But anger over her husband's infidelities led to a number of separations.
I believed it all through my worst days, and I am not ashamed to profess it now."
He was forty-four years old.
''Around the fire addressed its evening hours.''
::''Dig the grave and let me lie.''
Stevenson's heirs sold Stevenson's papers during World War I; many Stevenson documents were auctioned off in 1918.
By December 1879, Stevenson had recovered his health enough to continue to San Francisco, where for several months he struggled "all alone on forty-five cents a day, and sometimes less, with quantities of hard work and many heavy thoughts," in an effort to support himself through his writing.
Stevenson spent much of the following year with her and her children in France.
He wrote about this experience in ''The Silverado Squatters''.
But by the end of the winter, his health was broken again and he found himself at death's door.
''And tall memorials catch the dying sun,''
He felt that with each fresh attempt, the best he could write was "ditch-water".
In November 1873, after Stevenson's health failed, he was sent to Menton on the French Riviera to recuperate.
I have convinced myself (for the moment) that we had better leave these great changes to what we call great blind forces: their blindness being so much more perspicacious than the little, peering, partial eyesight of men ... Now I know that in thus turning Conservative with years, I am going through the normal cycle of change and travelling in the common orbit of men's opinions.
Stevenson inherited a tendency to coughs and fevers, exacerbated when the family moved to a damp, chilly house at 1&nbsp;Inverleith Terrace in&nbsp;1851.
He took second-class passage on the steamship ''Devonia'', in part to save money but also to learn how others travelled and to increase the adventure of the journey.
When his father died in 1887, Stevenson felt free to follow the advice of his physician to try a complete change of climate, and he started with his mother and family for Colorado.
What a ''damned'' curse I am to my parents!
When his father heard of his condition, he cabled him money to help him through this period.
In 1875 she had taken her children to France, where she and Isobel studied art.
The towers we founded and the lamps we lit,
::''And the hunter home from the hill.''
In 1966, the Canadian actor Lloyd Bochner played Stevenson in the episode "Jolly Roger and Wells Fargo" of the syndicated American television series, ''Death Valley Days'', hosted by Robert Taylor and directed by Denver Pyle.
Each year during vacations, Stevenson travelled to inspect the family's engineering works—to Anstruther and Wick in 1868, with his father on his official tour of Orkney and Shetland islands lighthouses in 1869, and for three weeks to the island of Erraid in 1870.
Stevenson was born at 8&nbsp;Howard Place, Edinburgh, Scotland, on 13 November 1850 to Thomas Stevenson (1818–87), a leading lighthouse engineer, and his wife Margaret Isabella (née Balfour; 1829–97).
All his energies were now spent in travel and writing.
She attracted the devotion of many who met her, including Colvin, who eventually married her in 1901.
In November 1867, Stevenson entered the University of Edinburgh to study engineering.
Stephen in turn would introduce him to a more important friend.
In October 1864, following an improvement to his health, he was sent to Robert Thomson's private school in Frederick Street, Edinburgh, where he remained until he went to university.
In any case, his frequent illnesses often kept him away from his first school, so he was taught for long stretches by private tutors.
Stevenson's parents were both devout and serious Presbyterians, but the household was not strict in its adherence to Calvinist principles.
However, the piece is misquoted in many places, including his tomb:
In 1866, Stevenson voted for Benjamin Disraeli, future Conservative Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, over Thomas Carlyle, for the role of Lord Rectorship of the University of Edinburgh.
Soon afterwards, in April 1890, Stevenson left Sydney on the ''Janet Nicoll'' for his third and final voyage among the South Seas islands.
He compulsively wrote stories throughout his childhood.
An only child, strange-looking and eccentric, Stevenson found it hard to fit in when he was sent to a nearby school at age six, a problem repeated at age eleven when he went on to the Edinburgh Academy; but he mixed well in lively games with his cousins in summer holidays at Colinton.
His cousin and biographer, Sir Graham Balfour, said that "he probably throughout life would, if compelled to vote, have always supported the Conservative candidate."
His influence spread to the Samoans, who consulted him for advice, and he soon became involved in local politics.
Stevenson spent the Summer of 1881 and wrote Treasure Island, his first great work".
In 1968 Robert Hughes arranged a number of Stevenson's works for chamber orchestra, which toured the Pacific Northwest that year.
Born in Indianapolis, she had married at age seventeen and moved to Nevada to rejoin husband Samuel after his participation in the American Civil War.
He wrote ''The Beach of Falesa'', ''Catriona'' (titled ''David Balfour'' in the US), ''The Ebb-Tide'', and the ''Vailima Letters'' during this period.
::''This be the verse you grave for me:''
That marriage produced three children: Isobel (or "Belle"), Lloyd, and Hervey (who died in 1875).
His father was proud of this interest; he had also written stories in his spare time until his own father found them and told him to "give up such nonsense and mind your business."
Colvin became Stevenson's literary adviser and after his death was the first editor of Stevenson's letters.
The canoe voyage with Simpson brought Stevenson to Grez in September 1876, where he first met Fanny Van de Grift Osbourne (1840–1914).
During the intensely cold winter Stevenson wrote some of his best essays, including ''Pulvis et Umbra'', began ''The Master of Ballantrae'', and lightheartedly planned, for the following summer, a cruise to the southern Pacific Ocean.
He preserved the experience of these years in his various letters and in his ''In the South Seas'' (which was published posthumously), an account of the 1888 cruise which Stevenson and Fanny undertook on the ''Casco'' from the Hawaiian Islands to the Marquesas and Tuamotu islands.
The Stevensons were on friendly terms with some of the colonial leaders and their families.
He showed from the start no enthusiasm for his studies and devoted much energy to avoiding lectures.
"After a while," he wrote, "my spirit got up again in a divine frenzy, and has since kicked and spurred my vile body forward with great emphasis and success."
Besides playing the piano and flageolet, Stevenson wrote over 123 original musical compositions or arrangements, including solos, duets, trios and quartets for various combinations of flageolet, flute, clarinet, violin, guitar, mandolin, and piano.
With his new wife and her son, Lloyd, he travelled north of San Francisco to Napa Valley and spent a summer honeymoon at an abandoned mining camp on Mount Saint Helena.
But rather say: ''In the afternoon of time''
At one point he formally donated, by deed of gift, his birthday to the daughter of the American Land Commissioner Henry Clay Ide, since she was born on Christmas Day and had no birthday celebration separate from the family's Christmas celebrations.
::''Home is the sailor, home from sea,''
He then suddenly had a return of his old energy and he began work on ''Weir of Hermiston''.
"The proudest moments of my life," he wrote, "have been passed in the stern-sheets of a boat with that romantic garment over my shoulders."
He made long and frequent trips to the neighbourhood of the Forest of Fontainebleau, staying at Barbizon, Grez-sur-Loing, and Nemours and becoming a member of the artists' colonies there, as well as to Paris to visit galleries and the theatres.
Buckland visited the Stevensons at Vailima in 1894.
To play at home with paper like a child.
Stevenson spent the greater part of his boyhood holidays in his maternal grandfather's house.
A bronze relief memorial to Stevenson, designed by the American sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens in 1904, is mounted in the Moray Aisle of St Giles' Cathedral, Edinburgh.
In the wintertime Stevenson travelled to France and lived at Davos Platz and the Chalet de Solitude at Hyères, where, for a time, he enjoyed almost complete happiness.
Her Calvinism and folk beliefs were an early source of nightmares for the child, and he showed a precocious concern for religion.
He enjoyed the travels more for the material they gave for his writing than for any engineering interest.
The voyage with his father pleased him because a similar journey of Walter Scott with Robert Stevenson had provided the inspiration for Scott's 1822 novel ''The Pirate''.
"I have so many things to make life sweet for me," he wrote, "it seems a pity I cannot have that other one thing—health.
To provide some security, it was agreed that Stevenson should read Law (again at Edinburgh University) and be called to the Scottish bar.
During this period he completed ''The Master of Ballantrae'', composed two ballads based on the legends of the islanders, and wrote ''The Bottle Imp''.
As my mother said "This is the heaviest affliction that has ever befallen me".
The family moved again to the sunnier 17&nbsp;Heriot Row when Stevenson was six years old, but the tendency to extreme sickness in winter remained with him until he was eleven.
The museum collection includes several original items belonging to Stevenson and his family.
The late 20th century saw the start of a re-evaluation of Stevenson as an artist of great range and insight, a literary theorist, an essayist and social critic, a witness to the colonial history of the Pacific Islands, and a humanist.
He was convinced, "sick and well, I have had splendid life of it, grudge nothing, regret very little ... take it all over, damnation and all, would hardly change with any man of my time."
He returned in better health in April 1874 and settled down to his studies, but he returned to France several times after that.
But although his law studies would influence his books, he never practised law.
In August 1880, he sailed with Fanny and Lloyd from New York to Britain and found his parents and his friend Sidney Colvin on the wharf at Liverpool, happy to see him return home.
Perhaps most important at this point in his life was a cousin, Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson (known as "Bob"), a lively and light-hearted young man who, instead of the family profession, had chosen to study art.
From New York City he travelled overland by train to California.
A statue of the Skerryvore lighthouse is present on the site.
During his college years he briefly identified himself as a "red-hot socialist".
His works include ten songs written to his own poetry and with original or arranged melodies.
To be drowned, to be shot, to be thrown from a horse — ay, to be hanged, rather than pass again through that slow dissolution."
Stevenson was loved by the Samoans, and his tombstone epigraph was translated to a Samoan song of grief which is well-known and still sung in Samoa.
Two million notes were issued, each with a serial number beginning "RLS".
Stevenson was also drawn to her, and over several years they kept up a heated correspondence in which Stevenson wavered between the role of a suitor and a son (he came to address her as "Madonna").
More importantly, he had come to reject Christianity and declared himself an atheist.
He met Charles Warren Stoddard, co-editor of the ''Overland Monthly'' and author of ''South Sea Idylls'', who urged Stevenson to travel to the South Pacific, an idea which would return to him many years later.
::''Here he lies where he longed to be;''
He spent his summers at various places in Scotland and England, including Westbourne, Dorset, a residential area in Bournemouth.
But she also cared for him tenderly in illness, reading to him from Bunyan and the Bible as he lay sick in bed and telling tales of the Covenanters.
"It's so good that it frightens me," he is reported to have exclaimed.
Gradually his new wife was able to patch up differences between father and son and make herself a part of the new family through her charm and wit.
Here, after two aborted attempts to visit Scotland, he established himself, after much work, upon his estate in the village of Vailima.
He later wrote about the experience in ''The Amateur Emigrant''.
Condemned by literary figures such as Virginia Woolf (daughter of his early mentor Leslie Stephen) and her husband Leonard, he was gradually excluded from the canon of literature taught in schools.
In late 1873, on a visit to a cousin in England, Stevenson met two people who were to be of great importance to him, Sidney Colvin and Fanny (Frances Jane) Sitwell.
Sitwell was a 34-year-old woman with a son, separated from her husband.
Fanny, now divorced and recovered from her own illness, came to Stevenson's bedside and nursed him to recovery.
He spent time at the Gilbert Islands, Tahiti, New Zealand and the Samoan Islands.
I submit to this, as I would submit to gout or gray hair, as a concomitant of growing age or else of failing animal heat; but I do not acknowledge that it is necessarily a change for the better—I dare say it is deplorably for the worse."
In June 1888 Stevenson chartered the yacht ''Casco'' and set sail with his family from San Francisco.
''A strenuous family dusted from its hands''
He is now being re-evaluated as a peer of authors such as Joseph Conrad (whom Stevenson influenced with his South Seas fiction), and Henry James, with new scholarly studies and organisations devoted to Stevenson.
His exclusion reached a height when in the 1973 2,000-page ''Oxford Anthology of English Literature'' Stevenson was entirely unmentioned; and ''The Norton Anthology of English Literature'' excluded him from 1968 to 2000 (1st–7th editions), including him only in the 8th edition (2006).
Margaret's natal family, the Balfours, were gentry, tracing their lineage back to a certain Alexander Balfour who had held the lands of Inchyra in Fife in the fifteenth century.
I must suppose, indeed, that he was fond of preaching sermons, and so am I, though I never heard it maintained that either of us loved to hear them."
One of his journeys, a canoe voyage in Belgium and France with Sir Walter Simpson, a friend from the Speculative Society and frequent travel companion, was the basis of his first real book, ''An Inland Voyage'' (1878).
According to the Index Translationum, Stevenson is ranked the 26th most translated author in the world, ahead of fellow nineteenth-century writers Oscar Wilde and Edgar Allan Poe.
At about age 18, Stevenson was to change the spelling of "Lewis" to "Louis", and in 1873 he dropped "Balfour."
He was near death when he arrived in Monterey, California, where some local ranchers nursed him back to health.
As my father said "You have rendered my whole life a failure".
In the autumn of 1863, he spent one term at an English boarding school at Spring Grove in Isleworth in Middlesex (now an urban area of West London).
(Fanny misnames the ship as the ''Janet Nicol'' in her account of the 1890 voyage, ''The Cruise of the Janet Nichol''.)
The vessel "plowed her path of snow across the empty deep, far from all track of commerce, far from any hand of help."
In Westbourne he named his house ''Skerryvore'' after the tallest lighthouse in Scotland, which his uncle Alan had built (1838–1844).
By 1877, at only twenty-six years of age and before having written most of his major fictional works, Stevenson reflected: "For my part, I look back to the time when I was a Socialist with something like regret.
Visiting Edinburgh in 1875, he took Stevenson with him to visit a patient at the Edinburgh Infirmary, William Ernest Henley.
He was convinced the European officials appointed to rule the Samoans were incompetent, and after many futile attempts to resolve the matter, he published ''A Footnote to History''.
O Lord, what a pleasant thing it is to have damned the happiness of (probably) the only two people who care a damn about you in the world.
When things had finally blown over he wrote to Colvin, who came from a family of distinguished colonial administrators, "I used to think meanly of the plumber; but how he shines beside the politician!"
He died within a few hours, probably of a cerebral haemorrhage.
Stevenson was soon active in London literary life, becoming acquainted with many of the writers of the time, including Andrew Lang, Edmund Gosse, and Leslie Stephen, the editor of the ''Cornhill Magazine'', who took an interest in Stevenson's work.
Image:Robert louis stevenson.jpg|Portrait by Girolamo Nerli, 1892
Lewis Balfour and his daughter both had weak chests, so they often needed to stay in warmer climates for their health.
For the next seven years, between 1880 and 1887, Stevenson searched in vain for a place of residence suitable to his state of health.
But in August 1879 he set off to join her, against the advice of his friends and without notifying his parents.
When Dr. Hyde wrote a letter to a fellow clergyman speaking ill of Father Damien, Stevenson wrote a scathing open letter of rebuke to Dr. Hyde.
Fanny and Robert were married in May 1880, although, as he said, he was "a mere complication of cough and bones, much fitter for an emblem of mortality than a bridegroom."
The path to Stevenson's grave at the top of Mt Vaea commences from the museum.
Within the limits of a strict allowance, he visited cheap pubs and brothels.
''Along the sounding coast its pyramids''
Another memorial in Edinburgh stands in West Princes Street Gardens below Edinburgh Castle; it is a simple upright stone inscribed with "RLS – A Man of Letters 1850–1894" by sculptor Iain Hamilton Finlay in 1987.
During the 1889 voyage they spent several months on Abemama with the tyrant-chief Tem Binoka, of Abemama, Aranuka and Kuria.
Dr. Charles McEwen Hyde influenced the founding of the Saint Damien Advocates in Hawaii.
In April 1871, Stevenson notified his father of his decision to pursue a life of letters.
Margaret's father, Lewis Balfour (1777–1860), was a minister of the Church of Scotland at nearby Colinton, and her siblings included the physician George William Balfour and the marine engineer James Balfour.
However, Robert's mother's family were not of the same profession.
The first note to be printed was sent to Samoa in time for their centenary celebrations on 3 December 1994.
He did qualify for the Scottish bar in July 1875, and his father added a brass plate with "R.L.
This time was more important for the friendships he made with other students in the Speculative Society (an exclusive debating club), particularly with Charles Baxter, who would become Stevenson's financial agent, and with a professor, Fleeming Jenkin, whose house staged amateur drama in which Stevenson took part, and whose biography he would later write.
::''And the hunter home from the hill.''
His dress became more Bohemian; he already wore his hair long, but he now took to wearing a velveteen jacket and rarely attended parties in conventional evening dress.
Much like his father, Stevenson remained a staunch Tory for most of his life.
While Stevenson intended to write another book of travel writing to follow his earlier book ''In the South Seas'', it was his wife who eventually published her journal of their third voyage.
Stevenson extensively described Binoka in ''In the South Seas''.
Questioning his son about his beliefs, he discovered the truth, leading to a long period of dissension with both parents:
Another small version depicting Stevenson with a cigarette in his hand rather than the pen he holds in the St. Giles memorial is displayed in the Nichols House Museum in Beacon Hill, Boston.
Alongside Stevenson's portrait are scenes from some of his books and his house in Western Samoa.
His nurse, Alison Cunningham (known as Cummy), was more fervently religious.
Although it was good experience for his literature, it broke his health.
The Samoans insisted on surrounding his body with a watch-guard during the night and on bearing their Tusitala upon their shoulders to nearby Mount Vaea, where they buried him on a spot overlooking the sea on land donated by British Acting Vice Consul Thomas Trood.
It was during his time in Bournemouth that he wrote the story ''Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde'', naming one of the characters (Mr Poole) after the town of Poole, which is situated next to Bournemouth.
In August 1878 Fanny returned to San Francisco, California.
In 2013, a statue of Stevenson as a child with his dog was unveiled by the author Ian Rankin outside Colinton Parish Church.
