:"He is but of midling stature, something crooked, pale faced, and his face but little below, but his head is lardge, his eie full and popping, and not quick; a grey eie.
Partington even goes so far as to claim that if "Hooke had continued his experiments on combustion it is probable that he would have discovered oxygen".
Hooke believed that such fossils provided reliable clues to the past history of life on earth, and, despite the objections of contemporary naturalists like John Ray who found the concept of extinction theologically unacceptable, that in some cases they might represent species that had become extinct through some geological disaster.
One of the contrasts between the two men was that Newton was primarily a pioneer in mathematical analysis and its applications as well as optical experimentation, while Hooke was a creative experimenter of such great range, that it is not surprising to find that he left some of his ideas, such as those about gravitation, undeveloped.
Hooke's reputation was revived during the twentieth century through studies of Robert Gunther and Margaret 'Espinasse.
Two contemporary written descriptions of Hooke's appearance have survived.
The Royal Society was founded in 1660, and in April 1661 the society debated a short tract on the rising of water in slender glass pipes, in which Hooke reported that the height water rose was related to the bore of the pipe (due to what is now termed capillary action).
Hooke's ultimate failure to secure sufficiently lucrative terms for the exploitation of this idea resulted in its being shelved, and evidently caused him to become more jealous of his inventions.
This in turn makes it understandable how in 1759, decades after the deaths of both Newton and Hooke, Alexis Clairaut, mathematical astronomer eminent in his own right in the field of gravitational studies, made his assessment after reviewing what Hooke had published on gravitation.
There he met the natural philosopher Robert Boyle, and gained employment as his assistant from about 1655 to 1662, constructing, operating, and demonstrating Boyle's "machina Boyleana" or air pump.
Dugald Stewart, in his ''Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind'', quoted Hooke's own words on his system of the world.
Moreover, Montagu found that two contemporary written descriptions of Hooke's appearance agreed with one another, but that neither matched the ''Time'''s portrait.
He never married, but his diary shows that he was not without affections, and more, for others.
Waller's comments influenced other writers for well over two centuries, so that a picture of Hooke as a disgruntled, selfish, anti-social curmudgeon dominates many older books and articles.
In 1659 Hooke described some elements of a method of heavier-than-air flight to Wilkins, but concluded that human muscles were insufficient to the task.
Hooke recorded that he conceived of a way to determine longitude (then a critical problem for navigation), and with the help of Boyle and others he attempted to patent it.
appeared in 1705, containing 'A Discourse of Earthquakes'... His treatise... is the most philosophical production of that age, in regard to the causes of former changes in the organic and inorganic kingdoms of nature.
Hooke developed an air pump for Boyle's experiments based on the pump of Ralph Greatorex, which was considered, in Hooke's words, "too gross to perform any great matter."
He was at one time simultaneously the curator of experiments of the Royal Society and a member of its council, Gresham Professor of Geometry and a Surveyor to the City of London after the Great Fire of London, in which capacity he appears to have performed more than half of all the surveys after the fire.
He was also an important architect of his time – though few of his buildings now survive and some of those are generally misattributed – and was instrumental in devising a set of planning controls for London whose influence remains today.
Jenkins concluded ''... this story must be omitted from the history of the steam engine, at any rate until documentary evidence is forthcoming.''
The legacy of this can be observed in the construction of the spiral staircase, which has no central column, and in the observation chamber which remains in place below ground level.
In Hooke's time, the Royal Society met at Gresham College, but within a few months of Hooke's death Newton became the Society's president and plans were laid for a new meeting place.
To Busby and his select students the Anglican Church was a framework to support the spirit of inquiry into God's work, those who were able were destined by God to explore and study His creation, and the priesthood functioned as teachers to explain it to those who were less able.
Hooke also did not provide accompanying evidence or mathematical demonstration.
''Time'' magazine published a portrait, supposedly of Hooke, on 3 July 1939.
He was employed as a "chemical assistant" to Dr Thomas Willis, for whom Hooke developed a great admiration.
The Royal Society's Hooke papers (recently discovered after disappearing when Newton took over) will open up a modern reassessment.
Hooke's work on elasticity culminated, for practical purposes, in his development of the balance spring or hairspring, which for the first time enabled a portable timepiece&nbsp;– a watch&nbsp;– to keep time with reasonable accuracy.
His appointment was made on 12 November, with thanks recorded to Dr. Boyle for releasing him to the Society's employment.
He performed experiments to study how such craters might have formed.
Robert Gunther's ''Early Science in Oxford'', a history of science in Oxford during the Protectorate, Restoration and Age of Enlightenment, devotes five of its fourteen volumes to Hooke.
Jenkins points out a number of errors in Robison's article, and questions whether the correspondent might in fact have been Newton, whom Hooke is known to have corresponded with, the name being misread as Newcomen.
His reputation suffered after his death and this is popularly attributed to a dispute with Isaac Newton over credit for his work on gravitation, the planets and to a lesser degree light.
Hooke also was an early observer of the rings of Saturn, and discovered one of the first observed double-star systems, Gamma Arietis, in 1664.
The hand-crafted, leather and gold-tooled microscope he used to make the observations for ''Micrographia'', originally constructed by Christopher White in London, is on display at the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Washington, DC.
Newton's reply offered "a fansy of my own" about a terrestrial experiment (not a proposal about celestial motions) which might detect the Earth's motion, by the use of a body first suspended in air and then dropped to let it fall.
Hooke coined the term ''cell'' for describing biological organisms, the term being suggested by the resemblance of plant cells to cells of a honeycomb.
Jenkins traced the origin of the story to an article "Steam Engines" by Dr. John Robison (1739–1805) in the third edition of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica”, which says ''There are to be found among Hooke's papers, in the possession of the Royal Society, some notes of observations, for the use of Newcomen, his countryman, on Papin's boasted method of transmitting to a great distance the action of an mill by means of pipes'', and that Hooke had dissuaded Newcomen from erecting a machine on this principle.
Hooke was in demand to settle many of these disputes, due to his competence as a surveyor and his tact as an arbitrator.
Newton, faced in May 1686 with Hooke's claim on the inverse square law, denied that Hooke was to be credited as author of the idea, giving reasons including the citation of prior work by others before Hooke.
In 2003, historian Lisa Jardine claimed that a recently discovered portrait was of Hooke, but this claim was disproved by William Jensen of the University of Cincinnati.
''Micrographia'' also contains Hooke's, or perhaps Boyle and Hooke's, ideas on combustion.
That all bodies having a simple motion, will continue to move in a straight line, unless continually deflected from it by some extraneous force, causing them to describe a circle, an ellipse, or some other curve.
Contemporary accounts say he was "not much seen" in the school, and this appears to be true of others in a similar position.
It is founded on the following positions.
A chance surviving copy of Willis' pioneering ''De anima brutorum'', a gift from the author, was chosen by Hooke from Wilkins' library on his death as a memento at John Tillotson's invitation.
This model addressed the components of encoding, memory capacity, repetition, retrieval, and forgetting—some with surprising modern accuracy.
On his father's death in 1648, Robert was left a sum of forty pounds that enabled him to buy an apprenticeship; with his poor health throughout his life but evident mechanical facility his father had it in mind that he might become a watchmaker or limner (a decorator of illuminated manuscripts), though Hooke was also interested in painting.
It did not help that the first life of Wren, ''Parentalis'', was written by Wren's son, and tended to exaggerate Wren's work over all others.
He first described this discovery in the anagram "ceiiinosssttuv", whose solution he published in 1678 as "Ut tensio, sic vis" meaning "As the extension, so the force."
On the other hand, Newton did accept and acknowledge, in all editions of the 'Principia', that Hooke (but not exclusively Hooke) had separately appreciated the inverse square law in the solar system.
Hooke disagreed with Newton's idea of how the body would continue to move.
issue 6, in which he also explored the nature of "the fluidity of gravity".
Hooke's role at the Royal Society was to demonstrate experiments from his own methods or at the suggestion of members.
Here, too, he embarked on his lifelong study of mechanics.
Although he had talked of leaving a generous bequest to the Royal Society which would have given his name to a library, laboratory and lectures, no will was found and the money passed to an illiterate cousin, Elizabeth Stephens.
Newton himself had shown in the 1660s that for planetary motion under a circular assumption, force in the radial direction had an inverse-square relation with distance from the center.
No authenticated portrait of Robert Hooke exists.
The first was recorded by his close friend John Aubrey, who described Hooke in middle age and at the height of his creative powers:
He wore his own Hair of a dark Brown colour, very long and hanging neglected over his Face uncut and lank..."
Busby, an ardent and outspoken Royalist (he had the school observe a fast-day on the anniversary of the King's beheading), was by all accounts trying to preserve the nascent spirit of scientific inquiry that had begun to flourish in Carolean England but which was at odds with the literal Biblical teachings of the Protectorate.
A recent assessment about the early history of the inverse square law is that "by the late 1660s," the assumption of an "inverse proportion between gravity and the square of distance was rather common and had been advanced by a number of different people for different reasons".
The window was destroyed in the 1993 Bishopsgate bombing.
His ideas about gravitation, and his claim of priority for the inverse square law, are outlined below.
In 1660, Hooke discovered the law of elasticity which bears his name and which describes the linear variation of tension with extension in an elastic spring.
His ''Micrographia'' contains illustrations of the Pleiades star cluster as well as of lunar craters.
Hooke studied at Wadham College, Oxford during the Protectorate where he became one of a tightly knit group of ardent Royalists led by John Wilkins.
In 1653, Hooke (who had also undertaken a course of twenty lessons on the organ) secured a chorister's place at Christ Church, Oxford.
Greer's images of Hooke, his life and work have been used for TV programmes in UK and US, in books, magazines and for PR.
On 20 March 1664, Hooke succeeded Arthur Dacres as Gresham Professor of Geometry.
Hooke's statements up to 1674 made no mention, however, that an inverse square law applies or might apply to these attractions.
"prosecuting this Inquiry").
Newton acknowledged Wren, Hooke and Halley in this connection in the Scholium to Proposition 4 in Book 1.
Hooke clearly postulated mutual attractions between the Sun and planets, in a way that increased with nearness to the attracting body.
Hooke therefore wanted to hear from members about their researches, or their views about the researches of others; and as if to whet Newton's interest, he asked what Newton thought about various matters, giving a whole list, mentioning "compounding the celestial motions of the planetts of a direct motion by the tangent and an attractive motion towards the central body", and "my hypothesis of the lawes or causes of springinesse", and then a new hypothesis from Paris about planetary motions (which Hooke described at length), and then efforts to carry out or improve national surveys, the difference of latitude between London and Cambridge, and other items.
In 2003 history painter Rita Greer embarked on a self-funded project to memorialise Hooke.
He built some of the earliest Gregorian telescopes and observed the rotations of Mars and Jupiter.
Hooke was apt to use ciphers and guard his ideas.
There were also experiments on the subject of gravity, the falling of objects, the weighing of bodies and measuring of barometric pressure at different heights, and pendulums up to .
* A seal used by Hooke displays an unusual profile portrait of a man's head, which some have argued portrays Hooke.
It is known that Hooke had a particularly keen eye, and was an adept mathematician, neither of which applied to Boyle.
He also demonstrated that a dog could be kept alive with its thorax opened, provided air was pumped in and out of its lungs, and noting the difference between venous and arterial blood.
The extent to which the drawing is based on an actual work of art is unknown.
Wilkins' "philosophical meetings" in his study were clearly important, though few records survive except for the experiments Boyle conducted in 1658 and published in 1660.
This book is now in the Wellcome Library.
This was a method sometimes used by scientists, such as Hooke, Huygens, Galileo, and others, to establish priority for a discovery without revealing details.
Hooke went on to conclude that respiration also involves a specific component of the air.
The book and its inscription in Hooke's hand are a testament to the lasting influence of Wilkins and his circle on the young Hooke.
In acoustics, in 1681 he showed the Royal Society that musical tones could be generated from spinning brass cogs cut with teeth in particular proportions.
Hooke received the degree of "Doctor of Physic" in December 1691.
The star chosen was Gamma Draconis and the method to be used was parallax determination.
In 1664 Hooke also was appointed Professor of Geometry at Gresham College in London and Cutlerian Lecturer in Mechanics.
* The engraved frontispiece to the 1728 edition of Chambers' ''Cyclopedia'' shows a drawing of a bust of Robert Hooke.
Hooke published his ideas about the "System of the World" again in somewhat developed form in 1674, as an addition to "An Attempt to Prove the Motion of the Earth from Observations".
Robert Hooke was born in 1635 in Freshwater on the Isle of Wight to John Hooke and Cecily Gyles.
He also came near to an experimental proof that gravity follows an inverse square law, and hypothesised that such a relation governs the motions of the planets, an idea which was subsequently developed by Isaac Newton.
Hooke's gravitation was also not yet universal, though it approached universality more closely than previous hypotheses.
Hooke in a 1682 lecture to the Royal Society proposed a mechanistic model of human memory, which would bear little resemblance to the mainly philosophical models before it.
Newton also acknowledged to Halley that his correspondence with Hooke in 1679–80 had reawakened his dormant interest in astronomical matters, but that did not mean, according to Newton, that Hooke had told Newton anything new or original: "yet am I not beholden to him for any light into that business but only for the diversion he gave me from my other studies to think on these things & for his dogmaticalness in writing as if he had found the motion in the Ellipsis, which inclined me to try it."
After a long period of relative obscurity he has now been recognised as one of the most important scientists of his age.
This group went on to form the nucleus of the Royal Society.
A search by Mr. H W Dickinson of Hooke's papers held by the Royal Society, which had been bound together in the middle of the 18th century, i.e.
As to the proportion in which those forces diminish by an increase of distance, I own I have not discovered it...."
Hooke often met Christopher Wren, with whom he shared many interests, and had a lasting friendship with John Aubrey.
Henry Sully, writing in Paris in 1717, described the anchor escapement as ''an admirable invention of which Dr. Hooke, formerly professor of geometry in Gresham College at London, was the inventor.''
'The Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke M.D.,'...
It is now known that Hooke's equipment was far too imprecise to allow the measurement to succeed.
Hooke was an apt student, so although he went to London to take up an apprenticeship, and studied briefly with Samuel Cowper and Peter Lely, he was soon able to enter Westminster School in London, under Dr. Richard Busby.
Hooke and Wren both being keen astronomers, the Monument was designed to serve a scientific function as a telescope for observing transits, though Hooke's characteristically precise measurements after completion showed that the movement of the column in the wind made it unusable for this purpose.
Manuel used the phrase "cantankerous, envious, vengeful" in his description.
'However trivial a thing,' he says, 'a rotten shell may appear to some, yet these monuments of nature are more certain tokens of antiquity than coins or medals, since the best of those may be counterfeited or made by art and design, as may also books, manuscripts, and inscriptions, as all the learned are now sufficiently satisfied has often been actually practised,' &c.; 'and though it must be granted that it is very difficult to read them and to raise a chronology out of them, and to state the intervals of the time wherein such or such catastrophes and mutations have happened, yet it is not impossible.
Hooke became Curator of Experiments in 1662 to the newly founded Royal Society, and took responsibility for experiments performed at its weekly meetings.
While this position kept him in the thick of science in Britain and beyond, it also led to some heated arguments with other scientists, such as Huygens (see above) and particularly with Isaac Newton and the Royal Society's Henry Oldenburg.
This was a position he held for over 40 years.
A bitter dispute between Hooke and Christiaan Huygens on the priority of this invention was to continue for centuries after the death of both; but a note dated 23 June 1670 in the Hooke Folio (see ''External links'' below), describing a demonstration of a balance-controlled watch before the Royal Society, has been held to favour Hooke's claim.
While many of his contemporaries believed in the aether as a medium for transmitting attraction or repulsion between separated celestial bodies, Hooke argued for an attracting principle of gravitation in Micrographia of 1665.
For an extensive study of Hooke's architectural work, see the book by Cooper.
Hooke's diaries also make frequent reference to meetings at coffeehouses and taverns, and to dinners with Robert Boyle.
This story was discussed by Rhys Jenkins, a past President of the Newcomen Society, in 1936.
One of the observations in ''Micrographia'' was of fossil wood, the microscopic structure of which he compared to ordinary wood.
He was a Royalist and almost certainly a member of a group who went to pay their respects to Charles I when he escaped to the Isle of Wight.
This lecture would be published posthumously in 1705 as the memory model was unusually placed in a series of works on the nature of light.
Richard Waller mentions it in his introduction to ''The Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke, M.D.
before Robison's time, and carefully preserved since, revealed no trace of any correspondence between Hooke and Newcomen.
The portrait identified by Jardine depicts the Flemish scholar Jan Baptist van Helmont.
Hooke made tremendously important contributions to the science of timekeeping, being intimately involved in the advances of his time; the introduction of the pendulum as a better regulator for clocks, the balance spring to improve the timekeeping of watches, and the proposal that a precise timekeeper could be used to find the longitude at sea.
That all the heavenly bodies have not only a gravitation of their parts to their own proper centre, but that they also mutually attract each other within their spheres of action.
She writes that "the picture which is usually painted of Hooke as a morose and envious recluse is completely false."
In 1664, Sir John Cutler settled an annual gratuity of fifty pounds on the Society for the founding of a ''Mechanick Lecture'', and the Fellows appointed Hooke to this task.
Hooke was Surveyor to the City of London and chief assistant to Christopher Wren, in which capacity he helped Wren rebuild London after the Great Fire in 1666, and also worked on the design of London's Monument to the fire, the Royal Greenwich Observatory, Montagu House in Bloomsbury, and the infamous Bethlem Royal Hospital (which became known as 'Bedlam').
Based on his microscopic observations of fossils, Hooke was an early proponent of biological evolution.
In 1663 and 1664, Hooke produced his microscopy observations, subsequently collated in ''Micrographia'' in 1665.
Gamma Draconis was the same star James Bradley used in 1725 in discovering the aberration of light.
The Rita Greer Robert Hooke project aimed to produce credible images of him, both painted and drawn, that fitted his contemporary descriptions by John Aubrey and Richard Waller.
"One must not think that this idea ... of Hooke diminishes Newton's glory", Clairaut wrote; "The example of Hooke" serves "to show what a distance there is between a truth that is glimpsed and a truth that is demonstrated".
Regardless, it is clear that Hooke was a valued assistant to Boyle and the two retained a mutual high regard.
He performed pioneering work in the field of surveying and map-making and was involved in the work that led to the first modern plan-form map, though his plan for London on a grid system was rejected in favour of rebuilding along the existing routes.
Wadham was then under the guidance of John Wilkins, who had a profound impact on Hooke and those around him.
More described Hooke having both a "cynical temperament" and a "caustic tongue."
For example, Arthur Berry said that Hooke "claimed credit for most of the scientific discoveries of the time."
In November 1679, Hooke initiated a remarkable exchange of letters with Newton (of which the full text is now published).
Among his earliest demonstrations were discussions of the nature of air, the implosion of glass bubbles which had been sealed with comprehensive hot air, and demonstrating that the ''Pabulum vitae'' and ''flammae'' were one and the same.
There was a sense of urgency in preserving the scientific work which they perceived as being threatened by the Protectorate.
'', printed in 1705.
Hooke's collaboration with Christopher Wren also included St Paul's Cathedral, whose dome uses a method of construction conceived by Hooke.
As a youth, Robert Hooke was fascinated by observation, mechanical works, and drawing, interests that he would pursue in various ways throughout his life.
He did not take his Master of Arts until 1662 or 1663.
It has been speculated that this work saw little review as the printing was done in small batches in a post-Newtonian age of science and was most likely deemed out of date by the time it was published.
When the move to new quarters finally was made a few years later, in 1710, Hooke's Royal Society portrait went missing, and has yet to be found.
Here he was employed as an assistant to Thomas Willis and to Robert Boyle, for whom he built the vacuum pumps used in Boyle's gas law experiments.
It is interesting from a twentieth-century vantage point that Hooke first announced his law of elasticity as an anagram.
This was exemplified in the person of George Hooper, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, whom Busby described as "the best scholar, the finest gentleman and will make the completest bishop that ever was educated at Westminster School".
As curator of Experiments to the Royal Society he was responsible for demonstrating many ideas sent in to the Society, and there is evidence that he would subsequently assume some credit for these ideas.
Hooke also participated in the design of the Pepys Library, which held the manuscripts of Samuel Pepys' diaries, the most frequently cited eyewitness account of the Great Fire of London.
Further interfering with its success was contemporary memory psychologists' rejection of immaterial souls, which Hooke invoked to some degree in regards to the processes of attention, encoding and retrieval.
This work, overlooked for nearly 200 years, shared a variety of similarities with Richard Semon's work of 1919/1923, both assuming memories were physical and located in the brain.
In the process, Hooke demonstrated a pocket-watch of his own devising, fitted with a coil spring attached to the arbour of the balance.
After several months of observing, in 1669, Hooke believed that the desired result had been achieved.
Robert Hooke was expected to succeed in his education and join the Church.
Gunther suggests that Hooke probably made the observations and may well have developed the mathematics of Boyle's law.
John Hooke also was in charge of a local school, and so was able to teach Robert, at least partly at home perhaps due to the boy's frail health.
Their father John was a Church of England priest, the curate of Freshwater's Church of All Saints, and his two brothers (Robert's uncles) were also ministers.
He was always very pale and lean, and laterly nothing but Skin and Bone, with a Meagre Aspect, his Eyes grey and full, with a sharp ingenious Look whilst younger; his nose but thin, of a moderate height and length; his Mouth meanly wide, and upper lip thin; his Chin sharp, and Forehead large; his Head of a middle size.
The model's more interesting points are that it (1) allows for attention and other top-down influences on encoding; (2) it uses resonance to implement parallel, cue-dependent retrieval; (3) it explains memory for recency; (4) it offers a single-system account of repetition and priming, and (5) the power law of forgetting can be derived from the model's assumption in a straightforward way.
Much of Hooke's scientific work was conducted in his capacity as curator of experiments of the Royal Society, a post he held from 1662, or as part of the household of Robert Boyle.
One of the more-challenging problems tackled by Hooke was the measurement of the distance to a star (other than the Sun).
On 3 March 1703, Hooke died in London, and a chest containing £8,000 in money and gold was found in his room at Gresham College.
Robert was the last of four children, two boys and two girls, and there was an age difference of seven years between him and the next youngest.
German antiquarian and scholar Zacharias Conrad von Uffenbach visited the Royal Society in 1710 and his account of his visit specifically mentions him being shown the portraits of 'Boyle and Hoock' (which were said to be good likenesses), but while Boyle's portrait survives, Hooke's has evidently been lost.
He was granted a large number of patents for inventions and refinements in the fields of elasticity, optics, and barometry.
His dispute with Oldenburg about whether Oldenburg had leaked or passed on details of Hooke's watch escapement to others is another well-known example.
Hooke's 1670 Gresham lecture explained that gravitation applied to "all celestial bodies" and added the principles that the gravitating power decreases with distance and that in the absence of any such power bodies move in straight lines.
He investigated the phenomenon of refraction, deducing the wave theory of light, and was the first to suggest that matter expands when heated and that air is made of small particles separated by relatively large distances.
"I will explain," says Hooke, in a communication to the Royal Society in 1666, "a system of the world very different from any yet received.
In the intervening years since 1936 no such evidence has been found, but the story persists.
He dismantled a brass clock and built a wooden replica that, by all accounts, worked "well enough", and he learned to draw, making his own materials from coal, chalk and ruddle (iron ore).
Much of what is known of Hooke's early life comes from an autobiography that he commenced in 1696 but never completed.
Hooke developed the balance spring independently of and at least 5 years before Christiaan Huygens, who published his own work in ''Journal de Scavans'' in February 1675.
However, when the source was traced by Ashley Montagu, it was found to lack a verifiable connection to Hooke.
He is and ever was temperate and modera.te in dyet, etc."
The main point was to indicate how Newton thought the falling body could experimentally reveal the Earth's motion by its direction of deviation from the vertical, but he went on hypothetically to consider how its motion could continue if the solid Earth had not been in the way (on a spiral path to the centre).
Hooke was irascible, at least in later life, proud, and prone to take umbrage with intellectual competitors, though he was by all accounts also a staunch friend and ally and was loyal always to the circle of ardent Royalists with whom he had his early training at Wadham College, particularly Christopher Wren.
He ran a bow along the edge of a glass plate covered with flour, and saw the nodal patterns emerge.
Other possible likenesses of Hooke include the following:
Hooke interacted with noted craftsmen such as Thomas Tompion, the clockmaker, and Christopher Cocks (Cox), an instrument maker.
Allan Chapman has characterised him as "England's Leonardo".
He took tea on many occasions with his lab assistant, Harry Hunt.
Wilkins was also a Royalist, and acutely conscious of the turmoil and uncertainty of the times.
Hooke's 1666 Royal Society lecture "On gravity" added two further principles&nbsp;– that all bodies move in straight lines till deflected by some force and that the attractive force is stronger for closer bodies.
For instance, in a book published in 2011 it is said that ''in a letter dated 1703 Hooke did suggest that Newcomen use condensing steam to drive the piston.''
He haz a delicate head of haire, browne, and of an excellent moist curle.
On 5 November 1661, Sir Robert Moray proposed that a Curator be appointed to furnish the society with Experiments, and this was unanimously passed with Hooke being named.
Hooke himself characterised his Oxford days as the foundation of his lifelong passion for science, and the friends he made there were of paramount importance to him throughout his career, particularly Christopher Wren.
(Hooke's inference about the velocity was actually incorrect)
Hooke's ostensible purpose was to tell Newton that Hooke had been appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence.
Charles Lyell wrote the following in his ''Principles of Geology'' (1832).
The publication of Hooke's diary in 1935 revealed other sides of the man that 'Espinasse, in particular, has detailed carefully.
The second is a rather unflattering description of Hooke as an old man, written by Richard Waller:
It appears that Hooke was one of a group of students whom Busby educated in parallel to the main work of the school.
