''The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress'' tells of a war of independence waged by the Lunar penal colonies, with significant comments from a major character, Professor La Paz, regarding the threat posed by government to individual freedom.
He and Ginny crisscrossed the country helping to reorganize blood donation in the United States in an effort to assist the system which had saved his life, and he was the guest of honor at the Worldcon for the third time at MidAmeriCon in Kansas City, Missouri, in 1976.
Some of these books, such as ''The Number of the Beast'' and ''The Cat Who Walks Through Walls'', start out as tightly constructed adventure stories, but transform into philosophical fantasias at the end.
It is a matter of opinion whether this demonstrates a lack of attention to craftsmanship or a conscious effort to expand the boundaries of science fiction, either into a kind of magical realism, continuing the process of literary exploration that he had begun with ''Stranger in a Strange Land'', or into a kind of literary metaphor of quantum science (''The Number of the Beast'' dealing with the Observer problem, and ''The Cat Who Walks Through Walls'' being a direct reference to the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment).
In addition, the franchise was only awarded ''after'' leaving the assigned service, thus those serving their terms—in the military, or any other service—were excluded from exercising any franchise.
"The "Patrick Henry" ad shocked 'em," he wrote many years later.
Three novels from this period, ''Stranger in a Strange Land'', ''The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress'', and ''Time Enough for Love'', won the Libertarian Futurist Society's Prometheus Hall of Fame Award, designed to honor classic libertarian fiction.
The novels that Heinlein wrote for a young audience are commonly called "the Heinlein juveniles", and they feature a mixture of adolescent and adult themes.
Maureen's son/lover Lazarus Long makes a related remark in ''Time Enough for Love''.
However, the novel prompted a heated debate in the scientific community regarding the plausibility of developing ethnic bioweapons.
He graduated from the U.S.
When Sinclair gained the Democratic nomination for Governor of California in 1934, Heinlein worked actively in the campaign.
Several of Heinlein's works have been adapted for film and television.
The root of many themes found in his later stories can be found in this book.
The Libertarian Futurist Society has honored six of Heinlein's novels with their Hall of Fame award.
Heinlein had used topical materials throughout his juvenile series beginning in 1947, but in 1959, his novel ''Starship Troopers'' was considered by the editors and owners of Scribner's to be too controversial for one of its prestige lines, and it was rejected.
Heinlein ceased considering himself a Democrat in 1954.
He had once told an interviewer that he did not want to do stories that merely added to categories defined by other works.
Similarly, Charles Stross says his Hugo Award-nominated novel ''Saturn's Children'' is "a space opera and late-period Robert A. Heinlein tribute", referring to Heinlein's ''Friday''.
Heinlein suggests in the book that the Bugs are a good example of Communism being something that humans cannot successfully adhere to, since humans are strongly defined individuals, whereas the Bugs, being a collective, can all contribute to the whole without consideration of individual desire.
Heinlein was fascinated by the social credit movement in the 1930s.
Heinlein stated that he was influenced by James Branch Cabell in taking this new literary direction.
Over time, Heinlein wrote many novels and short stories that deviated freely from the Future History on some points, while maintaining consistency in some other areas.
In a 1953 poll of leading science fiction authors, he was cited more frequently as an influence than any other modern writer.
His views on epistemology seem to have flowed from that interest, and his fictional characters continue to express Korzybskian views to the very end of his writing career.
Isaac Asimov said that, from the time of his first story, the science fiction world accepted that Heinlein was the best science fiction writer in existence, adding that he would hold this title through his lifetime.
He remarked to Cronkite during the landing that, "This is the greatest event in human history, up to this time.
In keeping with his belief in individualism, his work for adults—and sometimes even his work for juveniles—often portrays both the oppressors and the oppressed with considerable ambiguity.
He believed that an appropriate level of adult competence was achieved through a wide-ranging education, whether this occurred in a classroom or not.
In 1962, Oberon Zell-Ravenheart (then still using his birth name, Tim Zell) founded the Church of All Worlds, a Neopagan religious organization modeled in many ways after the treatment of religion in the novel ''Stranger in a Strange Land''.
Heinlein did not publish ''Stranger in a Strange Land'' until some time after it was written, and the themes of free love and radical individualism are prominently featured in his long-unpublished first novel, ''For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs''.
Heinlein assisted with Council contribution to the Reagan "Star Wars" speech of Spring 1983.
Three nonfiction books and two poems have been published posthumously.
Though some regard it as a failure as a novel, considering it little more than a disguised lecture on Heinlein's social theories, some readers took a very different view.
"''Starship Troopers'' outraged 'em."
The ability of the individual to create himself is explored in stories such as ''I Will Fear No Evil'', "—All You Zombies—", and "By His Bootstraps".
As soon as he was well enough to write again, he began work on ''Time Enough for Love'' (1973), which introduced many of the themes found in his later fiction.
In his juvenile, ''Star Beast'', the ''de facto'' foreign minister of the Terran government is an undersecretary, a Mr. Kiku, who is from Africa.
However he read only the first two chapters, finding it too boring to continue.
The tendency toward authorial self-reference begun in ''Stranger in a Strange Land'' and ''Time Enough for Love'' becomes even more evident in novels such as ''The Cat Who Walks Through Walls'', whose first-person protagonist is a disabled military veteran who becomes a writer, and finds love with a female character.
Heinlein was a vocal proponent of the notion that juvenile readers were far more sophisticated and able to handle more complex or difficult themes than most people realized.
A chart of the future history was published in the May 1941 issue of ''Astounding''.
Policy recommendations from the Council included ballistic missile defense concepts which were later transformed into what was called the Strategic Defense Initiative by those who favored it, and "Star Wars" as a term of derision coined by Senator Ted Kennedy.
Heinlein repeatedly denounced racism in his non-fiction works, including numerous examples in ''Expanded Universe''.
While vacationing in Tahiti in early 1978, he suffered a transient ischemic attack.
This spiritual path included several ideas from the book, including non-mainstream family structures, social libertarianism, water-sharing rituals, an acceptance of all religious paths by a single tradition, and the use of several terms such as "grok", "Thou art God", and "Never Thirst".
Several of his other works have been published posthumously.
In addition, he wanted to break into better-paying markets.
Many were seen as radical or as ahead of their time in their social criticism.
From about 1961 (''Stranger in a Strange Land'') to 1973 (''Time Enough for Love''), Heinlein explored some of his most important themes, such as individualism, libertarianism, and free expression of physical and emotional love.
Verhoeven commented that he had tried to read the book after he had bought the rights to it, in order to add it to his existing movie.
Asked to appear before a Joint Committee of the U.S. House and Senate that year, he testified on his belief that spin-offs from space technology were benefiting the infirm and the elderly.
Heinlein's letters were often displayed on the walls of the INFO offices, and his active participation in the organization is mentioned in the INFO Journal.
In the first chapter of the novel ''Space Cadet'' he anticipated the cell-phone, 35 years before Motorola invented the technology.
His stories in publications such as ''The Saturday Evening Post'' took a matter-of-fact approach to their outer-space setting, rather than the "gee whiz" tone that had previously been common.
Heinlein was named the first Science Fiction Writers Grand Master in 1974.
Heinlein's fiction of the 1940s and 1950s, however, began to espouse conservative views.
Previously they had also designed and built their Colorado house.
Robert Heinlein was also influenced by the American writer, philosopher and humorist Charles Fort who is credited as a major influence on most of the leading science-fiction writers of the 20th-century.
(and so on), and that you are not allowed to answer the questions.
In his fiction, Heinlein coined terms that have become part of the English language, including "grok", "waldo", and "speculative fiction", as well as popularizing existing terms like "TANSTAAFL", "pay it forward", and "space marine".
A complete collection of Heinlein's published work, conformed and copy-edited by several Heinlein scholars including biographer William H. Patterson has been published by the Heinlein Trust as the "Virginia Edition", after his wife.
Heinlein considered himself a libertarian, but in a letter to Judith Merril in 1967 (never sent) he also described himself as a philosophical anarchist or an "autarchist"
Scores of science fiction writers from the prewar Golden Age through the present day loudly and enthusiastically credit Heinlein for blazing the trails of their own careers, and shaping their styles and stories."
Heinlein has had a nearly ubiquitous influence on other science fiction writers.
Though Heinlein was neither a member nor a promoter of the Church, there was a frequent exchange of correspondence between Zell and Heinlein, and he was a paid subscriber to their magazine, ''Green Egg''.
Heinlein himself ran for the California State Assembly in 1938, but was unsuccessful.
As Heinlein's increasing success as a writer resolved their initial financial woes, they had a house custom built with various innovative features, later described in an article in ''Popular Mechanics''.
Heinlein was quickly acknowledged as a leader of the new movement toward "social" science fiction.
Heinlein grew up in the era of racial segregation in the United States and wrote some of his most influential fiction at the height of the US civil rights movement.
Isaac Asimov believed that Heinlein made a swing to the right politically at the same time he married Ginny.
He wrote a screenplay for one of the films.
Four films, two television series, several episodes of a radio series, and a board game have been derived more or less directly from his work.
After his death, his wife Virginia Heinlein issued a compilation of Heinlein's correspondence and notes into a somewhat autobiographical examination of his career, published in 1989 under the title ''Grumbles from the Grave''.
Heinlein was also a guest commentator for Walter Cronkite during Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin's Apollo 11 moon landing.
''(See section:  Politics of Robert Heinlein.)''
Over the next few months, he became more and more exhausted, and his health again began to decline.
In 1929, Heinlein married Elinor Curry of Kansas City in Los Angeles, and their marriage lasted about a year.
He has also been accused of contradicting himself on various philosophical questions.
His second marriage in 1932 to Leslyn MacDonald (1904–1981) lasted for 15 years.
These discrepancies were explained, after a fashion, in his later World as Myth stories.
He won Hugo Awards for four of his novels; in addition, fifty years after publication, five of his works were awarded "Retro Hugos"—awards given retrospectively for works that were published before the Hugo Awards came into existence.
Heinlein's surgical treatment re-energized him, and he wrote five novels from 1980 until he died in his sleep from emphysema and heart failure on May 8, 1988.
In the mid-1970s, Heinlein wrote two articles for the ''Britannica Compton Yearbook''.
Where are we going after we die?
The book is sprinkled with racist slurs against Asian people, and blacks and Hispanics are not mentioned at all.
In books written as early as 1956, Heinlein dealt with incest and the sexual nature of children.
The idea for the story was pushed on Heinlein by editor John W. Campbell, and Heinlein wrote later that he had "had to re-slant it to remove racist aspects of the original story line" and that he did not "consider it to be an artistic success."
Also, he embarked on a series of juvenile S.F.
This is—today is New Year's Day of the Year One."
Eight of these books were illustrated by Clifford Geary in a distinctive white-on-black scratchboard style.
Many of his stories, such as ''Gulf'', ''If This Goes On—'', and ''Stranger in a Strange Land'', depend strongly on the premise, related to the well-known  Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, that by using a correctly designed language, one can change or improve oneself mentally, or even realize untapped potential (as in the case of Joe Green in ''Gulf'').
The captain of this carrier was Ernest J.
Heinlein was influential in making space exploration seem to the public more like a practical possibility.
Author Spider Robinson made repeated reference to the doctrine, attributing it to his spiritual mentor Heinlein.
For example, his second juvenile, the 1948 ''Space Cadet'', explicitly uses aliens as a metaphor for minorities.
Alexei expresses awe in Heinlein's ability to show readers a world so drastically different from the one we live in now, yet have so many similarities.
Four have been awarded posthumously for ''Red Planet'', ''Methuselah's Children'', ''Time Enough for Love'' and ''Requiem''.
Heinlein was a lifelong member of the International Fortean Organization also known as INFO, the successor to the original Fortean Society.
He thought it was a bad book and asked Ed Neumeier to tell him the story because he couldn't read it.
Heinlein reveals in ''Starship Troopers'' that the novel's protagonist and narrator, Johnny Rico, the formerly disaffected scion of a wealthy family, is Filipino, actually named "Juan Rico" and speaks Tagalog in addition to English.
She was a chemist, rocket test engineer, and held a higher rank in the Navy than Heinlein himself.
Likewise, the powered armor technology that is not only central to the book, but became a standard subgenre of science fiction thereafter, is completely absent in the movie, where the characters use World War II-technology weapons and wear light combat gear little more advanced than that.
Critic James Gifford writes that "Although many other writers have exceeded Heinlein's output, few can claim to match his broad and seminal influence.
Writer David Gerrold, responsible for creating the tribbles in Star Trek, also credited Heinlein as the inspiration for his ''Dingilliad'' series of novels.
His books have inspired considerable debate about the specifics, and the evolution, of Heinlein's own opinions, and have earned him both lavish praise and a degree of criticism.
Many of the astronauts and others working in the U.S. space program grew up on a diet of the Heinlein juveniles, best evidenced by the naming of a crater on Mars after him, and a tribute interspersed by the Apollo 15 astronauts into their radio conversations while on the moon.
Another Future History story, "Misfit", followed in November.
His brother, Lawrence Heinlein, served in the U.S. Army, the U.S. Air Force, and the Missouri National Guard, and he rose to the rank of major general in the National Guard.
(In a private correspondence, he referred to that as his "usual and favorite occupation between books.")
The most prominent and controversial example is ''Farnham's Freehold'', which casts a white family into a future in which white people are the slaves of cannibalistic black rulers.
As his second wife's alcoholism gradually spun out of control, Heinlein moved out and the couple filed for divorce.
They went on to say that "No one ever dominated the science fiction field as Bob did in the first few years of his career."
Heinlein's first novel published as a book, ''Rocket Ship Galileo'', was initially rejected because going to the moon was considered too far-fetched, but he soon found a publisher, Scribner's, that began publishing a Heinlein juvenile once a year for the Christmas season.
During World War II, he did aeronautical engineering for the U.S. Navy, also recruiting Isaac Asimov and L. Sprague de Camp to work at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard in Pennsylvania.
MacDonald was, according to the testimony of Heinlein's Navy buddy, Caleb 'Cab' Lansing, "astonishingly intelligent, widely read, and extremely liberal, though a registered Republican," while Isaac Asimov later recalled that Heinlein was, at the time, "a flaming liberal".
He made an unsuccessful bid for a California State Assembly seat in 1938.
They would remain married until Heinlein's death.
He was at the top of his form during, and himself helped to initiate, the trend toward social science fiction, which went along with a general maturing of the genre away from space opera to a more literary approach touching on such adult issues as politics and human sexuality.
In order for us to answer the "big questions" about the universe, Lazarus states at one point, it would be necessary to stand ''outside'' the universe.
These novels are controversial among his readers and one critic, Dave Langford, has written about them very negatively.
Heinlein's political positions evolved throughout his life.
The collection includes manuscript drafts, correspondence, photographs and artifacts.
It also contained a large amount of material that could be considered background for his other novels.
The penultimate novel of this period, ''I Will Fear No Evil'', is according to critic James Gifford "almost universally regarded as a literary failure" and he attributes its shortcomings to Heinlein's near-death from peritonitis.
He was assigned to the new aircraft carrier  in 1931, where he worked in radio communications, then in its earlier phases, with the carrier's aircraft.
These books have a thread of common characters and time and place.
Heinlein was always aware of the editorial limitations put in place by the editors of his novels and stories, and while he observed those restrictions on the surface, was often successful in introducing ideas not often seen in other authors' juvenile SF.
At the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard he had met and befriended a chemical engineer named Virginia "Ginny" Gerstenfeld.
The Heinlein society also established the Robert A. Heinlein Award in 2003 "for outstanding published works in science fiction and technical writings to inspire the human exploration of space."
Race was a central theme in some of Heinlein's fiction.
However, ''For Us, The Living'' explicitly discusses the political importance Heinlein attached to privacy as a matter of principle thus negating this line of reasoning.
''Asking'' the questions is the point of metaphysics, but ''answering'' them is not, because once you answer this kind of question, you cross the line into religion.
This Church still exists as a 501(C)(3) religious organization incorporated in California, with membership worldwide, and it remains an active part of the neopagan community today.
In ''To Sail Beyond the Sunset'', Heinlein has the main character, Maureen, state that the purpose of metaphysics is to ask questions:  Why are we here?
Most of the novels from this period are recognized by critics as forming an offshoot from the Future History series, and referred to by the term World as Myth.
Heinlein supported himself at several occupations, including real estate sales and silver mining, but for some years found money in short supply.
He was the guest of honor at Denvention, the 1941 Worldcon, held in Denver.
His protagonists are usually very intelligent teenagers who have to make their way in the adult society they see around them.
Peers such as L. Sprague de Camp and Damon Knight have commented critically on Heinlein's portrayal of incest and pedophilia in a lighthearted and even approving manner.
He published four influential short stories for ''The Saturday Evening Post'' magazine, leading off, in February 1947, with "The Green Hills of Earth".
In 1950, the movie ''Destination Moon''—the documentary-like film for which he had written the story and scenario, co-written the script, and invented many of the effects—won an Academy Award for special effects.
Heinlein explicitly states his skin is "ebony black", and that Kiku is in an arranged marriage that is happy.
Members included Buzz Aldrin, General Daniel Graham, rocket engineer Max Hunter, North American VP and Space Shuttle manager George Merrick, and other aerospace industry leaders.
The treatment of these themes include the romantic relationship and eventual marriage, once the girl becomes an adult via time-travel, of a 30-year-old engineer and an 11-year-old girl in ''The Door into Summer'' or the more overt intra-familial incest in ''To Sail Beyond the Sunset'' and ''Farnham's Freehold''.
In 1953–1954, the Heinleins voyaged around the world (mostly via ocean liners and cargo liners, as Ginny detested flying), which Heinlein described in ''Tramp Royale'', and which also provided background material for science fiction novels set aboard spaceships on long voyages, such as ''Podkayne of Mars'' and ''Friday''.
Ginny undoubtedly served as a model for many of his intelligent, fiercely independent female characters.
He would go on to write a series of challenging books that redrew the boundaries of science fiction, including ''Stranger in a Strange Land'' (1961) and ''The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress'' (1966).
Career military were completely disenfranchised until retirement.
She was also an accomplished college athlete, earning four letters.
Heinlein's early political leanings were liberal.
The decade began with a life-threatening attack of peritonitis, recovery from which required more than two years, and treatment of which required multiple transfusions of Heinlein's rare blood type, A2 negative.
Heinlein was frequently interviewed during his later years by military historians who asked him about Captain King and his service as the commander of the U.S. Navy's first modern aircraft carrier.
''Stranger in a Strange Land'' was embraced by the hippie counterculture, and libertarians have found inspiration in ''The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress''.
In 1980 Robert Heinlein was a member of the Citizens Advisory Council on National Space Policy, chaired by Jerry Pournelle, which met at the home of SF writer Larry Niven to write space policy papers for the incoming Reagan Administration.
Both groups found resonance with his themes of personal freedom in both thought and action.
''For Us, the Living'' was intriguing as a window into the development of Heinlein's radical ideas about man as a social animal, including his interest in free love.
Alexei and Cory Panshin noted that Heinlein's impact was immediately felt.
He also anticipated mechanical Computer Aided Design with "Drafting Dan" and described a modern version of a waterbed in his novel ''The Door into Summer'', though he never patented or built one.
Many of the issues that he takes on in these books have to do with the kinds of problems that adolescents experience.
Fans of Heinlein were critical of the movie, which they considered a betrayal of Heinlein's philosophy, presenting the society in which the story takes place as fascist.
Freudianism and psychoanalysis were at the height of their influence during the peak of Heinlein's career, and stories such as ''Time for the Stars''  indulged in psychological theorizing.
Heinlein seems to have known from the beginning, as if instinctively, technical lessons about fiction which other writers must learn the hard way (or often enough, never learn).
Robert and Virginia designed and built their California house themselves, which is in a circular shape.
In reaction to this trend, hard science fiction began to be distinguished as a separate subgenre, but paradoxically Heinlein is also considered a seminal figure in hard science fiction, due to his extensive knowledge of engineering, and the careful scientific research demonstrated in his stories.
As the war wound down in 1945, Heinlein began re-evaluating his career.
The Future History was eventually overtaken by actual events.
Although Heinlein had previously written a few short stories in the fantasy genre, during this period he wrote his first fantasy novel, ''Glory Road'', and in ''Stranger in a Strange Land'' and ''I Will Fear No Evil'', he began to mix hard science with fantasy, mysticism, and satire of organized religion.
In ''Time Enough for Love'', Lazarus Long gives a long list of capabilities that anyone should have, concluding, "Specialization is for insects."
In 1940, the year after selling 'Life-Line' to Campbell, he wrote three short novels, four novelettes, and seven short stories.
Jeff Riggenbach described ''The Moon is a Harsh Mistress'' as "unquestionably one of the three or four most influential libertarian novels of the last century".
Heinlein and Virginia had been smokers, and smoking appears often in his fiction, as do fictitious strikable self-lighting cigarettes.
Heinlein imagined how everything about the human world, from our sexual mores to our religion to our automobiles to our government to our plans for cultural survival, might be flawed, even fatally so."
''For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs'' was published posthumously in 2003; ''Variable Star'', written by Spider Robinson based on an extensive outline by Heinlein, was published in September 2006.
Heinlein was active in Upton Sinclair's socialist End Poverty in California movement in the early 1930s.
He does not always operate the machinery to the best advantage, but he always seems to be aware of it."
Heinlein edited an anthology of other writers' SF short stories.
Heinlein's biographer William Patterson  relates a number of instances in which Heinlein responded to anti-semitic remarks by falsely claiming to be half-Jewish himself and breaking off all further contact with anti-semites.
The documentary-like film ''Destination Moon'' advocated a Space Race with an unspecified foreign power almost a decade before such an idea became commonplace, and was promoted by an unprecedented publicity campaign in print publications.
Businessman and entrepreneur Elon Musk says that Heinlein's books have helped inspire his career.
At the height of the Cold War, he built a bomb shelter under his house, like the one featured in ''Farnham's Freehold.''
Many of these were first published in serial form under other titles, e.g., ''Farmer in the Sky'' was published as ''Satellite Scout'' in the Boy Scout magazine ''Boys' Life''.
He also wrote for ''Boys' Life'' in 1952.
After a seven-year hiatus brought on by poor health, Heinlein produced five new novels in the period from 1980 (''The Number of the Beast'') to 1987 (''To Sail Beyond the Sunset'').
Heinlein believed that individualism was incompatible with ignorance.
Gregory Benford refers to his novel Jupiter Project as a Heinlein tribute.
The name ''Starship Troopers'' was licensed for an unrelated, B movie script called ''Bug Hunt at Outpost Nine'', which was then retitled to benefit from the book's credibility.Verhoeven went returned to genre territory, optioning a script from his ROBOCOP collaborator Ed Neumeier entitled BUG HUNT AT OUTPOST 9 and refashioning it with elements from Robert Heinlein’s STARSHIP TROOPERS.
Many of his books including ''Time for the Stars'', ''Glory Road'', ''Time Enough for Love'', and ''The Number of the Beast'' dealt explicitly or implicitly with incest, sexual feelings and relations between adults and children, or both.
The first novel that Heinlein wrote, ''For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs'' (1939), did not see print during his lifetime, but Robert James tracked down the manuscript and it was published in 2003.
Heinlein's friendship with Virginia turned into a relationship and on October 21, 1948&nbsp;— shortly after the decree nisi came through&nbsp;— they married in the town of Raton, New Mexico shortly after having set up house in Colorado.
Heinlein found another publisher (Putnam), feeling himself released from the constraints of writing novels for children.
After the war, her engagement having fallen through, she moved to UCLA for doctoral studies in chemistry, and made contact again.
After Sinclair lost, Heinlein became an anti-Communist Democratic activist.
After 1945, he came to believe that a strong world government was the only way to avoid mutual nuclear annihilation.
A loose adaptation at best, Verhoeven saw the potential in another science-fiction satire and pursued it head-on The resulting film, entitled ''Starship Troopers'' (1997), which was written by Ed Neumeier and directed by Paul Verhoeven, had little relationship to the book, beyond the inclusion of character names, the depiction of space marines, and the concept of suffrage earned by military service.
Four collections have been published posthumously.
The 1982 novel ''Friday'', a more conventional adventure story (borrowing a character and backstory from the earlier short story ''Gulf'', also containing suggestions of connection to ''The Puppet Masters'') continued a Heinlein theme of expecting what he saw as the continued disintegration of Earth's society, to the point where the title character is strongly encouraged to seek a new life off-planet.
It appears that Heinlein at least attempted to live in a manner consistent with these ideals, even in the 1930s, and had an open relationship in his marriage to his second wife, Leslyn.
During the 1930s and 1940s, Heinlein was deeply interested in Alfred Korzybski's General Semantics and attended a number of seminars on the subject.
His 1949 novel ''Space Cadet'' describes a future scenario where a military-controlled global government enforces world peace.
