Several young politicians including William Pitt the Elder and George Grenville formed a faction known as the "Patriot Boys" and joined the Prince of Wales in opposition.
His colleague retired on 15 May 1730 and this date is sometimes given as the beginning of Walpole's unofficial tenure as Prime Minister.
Under the Treaty of Seville (1729), Great Britain agreed not to trade with the Spanish colonies in North America.
Walpole's first year as Prime Minister was also marked by the discovery of a plot formed by Francis Atterbury, the Bishop of Rochester.
The Stanhope–Sunderland faction, however, had the King's support.
Robert Walpole became a Privy Councillor and rose to the position of Paymaster of the Forces in a Cabinet nominally led by Lord Halifax, but actually dominated by Lord Townshend (Walpole's brother-in-law) and James Stanhope.
Disputes, however, broke out over trade with the West Indies.
For his role in preventing these individuals and others from being punished, Walpole gained the nickname of "The Screen", or "Screenmaster-General".
As part of his resignation the King agreed to elevate him to the House of Lords as the Earl of Orford and this occurred on 6 February 1742.
Despite such opposition, Walpole secured the support of the people and of the House of Commons with a policy of avoiding war which, in turn, allowed him to impose low taxes.
He was impeached by the House of Commons and found guilty by the House of Lords; he was then imprisoned in the Tower of London for six months and expelled from Parliament.
They had one son, George, who died unmarried.
His abilities were recognised by Lord Godolphin (the Lord High Treasurer and leader of the Cabinet) and he was subsequently appointed to the position of Secretary at War in 1708; for a short period of time in 1710 he also simultaneously held the post of Treasurer of the Navy.
His art collection gave him particular pleasure.
After the general elections of 1734, Walpole's supporters still formed a majority in the House of Commons although they were less numerous than before.
In 1736 an increase in the tax on gin inspired riots in London.
In the same year, however, his influence was seriously threatened by a taxation scheme he introduced.
The Tory Party was equally unfortunate even though Lord Bolingbroke, a Tory leader who fled to France to avoid punishment for his Jacobite sympathies, was permitted to return to Britain in 1723.
In 1746, this daughter married Colonel Charles Churchill of Chalfont (1720–1812), illegitimate son of General Charles Churchill and became the housekeeper of Windsor Castle.
Walpole, a polarising figure, had many opponents, the most important of whom were in the Country Party, such as Lord Bolingbroke (who had been his political enemy since the days of Queen Anne) and William Pulteney (a capable Whig statesman who felt snubbed when Walpole failed to include him in the Cabinet).
Walpole had planned to become a clergyman but as he was now the eldest surviving son in the family, he abandoned the idea.
Walpole was not consulted and stated that Townshend was "too precipitate" in his actions.
Walpole's strategy of keeping Great Britain at peace contributed greatly to the country's prosperity.
He was one of the Founder Knights of the Order of the Bath, and was the 545th Knight of the Garter.
He effectively defended Lord Godolphin against Tory attacks in parliamentary debate, as well as in the press.
Normally, Walpole and Lord Townshend were on one side, with Stanhope and Lord Sunderland on the other.
Soon after Walpole returned to the Cabinet, Britain was swept by a wave of over-enthusiastic speculation which led to the South Sea Bubble.
As Walpole was defeated on the vote, he agreed to resign from the Government.
As a child, Walpole attended a private school at Massingham, Norfolk.
During this time, Walpole also made two interventions in the Lords.
While the "country party" attacked Walpole relentlessly, he subsidised writers who spoke up in his behalf.
Later in the century, the Whig MP Edmund Burke "admitted him into the whig pantheon".
Townshend and Walpole were thus restored to power and "annihilated the opposing faction".
This defeat led Lord Stanhope and Lord Sunderland to reconcile with their opponents; Walpole returned as Paymaster of the Forces and Townshend was appointed Lord President of the Council.
In 1716 Townshend had been removed from the important post of Northern Secretary and put in the lesser office of Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
On 25 May 1698 he left Cambridge after the death of his only remaining elder brother, Edward, so that he could help his father administer the family estate to which he had become the heir.
Walpole had married her by March 1738.
Townshend's departure enabled Walpole to conclude the Treaty of Vienna, creating the Anglo-Austrian alliance.
On 30 July 1700, Walpole married Catherine, daughter of John Shorter of Bybrook in Ashford, Kent.
Walpole's new majority was difficult to determine because of the uncertain loyalties of many new members, but contemporaries and historians estimated it as low as fourteen to eighteen.
Together they had two daughters and three sons:
The revenue of the country had been severely diminished by smugglers so Walpole proposed that the tariff on wine and tobacco be replaced by an excise tax.
King George II wept on his resignation and begged to see him frequently.
* Robert who married Margaret Rolle (17 January 1709&nbsp;– 13 January 1781), later the 15th Baroness Clinton, in 1724.
The Tories became a minor, insignificant faction, and the Whigs became a dominant and largely unopposed party.
* Mary, who married George Cholmondeley, 3rd Earl of Cholmondeley, on 14 September 1723.
Queen Anne died in 1714.
In the new Parliament, many Whigs thought the aging Prime Minister incapable of leading the military campaign.
He dominated the Walpole–Townshend Ministry and the Walpole Ministry and holds the record as the longest serving Prime Minister in British history.
Great Britain, free from Jacobite threats, from war, and from financial crises, grew prosperous, and Robert Walpole acquired the favour of George I.
Arnall argued that government must be strong enough to control conflict, and in that regard Walpole was quite successful.
In his second intervention, Walpole, with fear of a Jacobite-inspired invasion in February 1744, made a speech on the situation.
Under the guidance of Walpole, Parliament attempted to deal with the financial crisis brought on by the South Sea Bubble.
They had sons and daughters.
Walpole was also satirised and parodied extensively; he was often compared to the criminal Jonathan Wild as, for example, John Gay did in his farcical ''Beggar's Opera''.
The resignation of Sunderland and the death of Stanhope in 1721 left Walpole as the most important figure in the administration.
However, Walpole had bought at the bottom and sold at the top, adding greatly to his inherited wealth and allowing him to create Houghton Hall as seen today.
In 1720 he improved his position by bringing about a reconciliation between the Prince of Wales and the King.
In Ireland, Lord Carteret used his power to secretly aid in the controversy over Wood's Halfpence and support ''Drapier's Letters'' behind the scenes and cause harm to Walpole's power.
Chesterfield claimed he was "much acquainted with him both in his publick and his private life":
Although no longer First Lord of the Treasury, Walpole remained politically involved.
The two also had to contend with the Secretary of State for the Southern Department, Lord Carteret.
Walpole's other enemies included Jonathan Swift, Alexander Pope, Henry Fielding, and Dr Samuel Johnson.
Walpole has attracted attention from hetrodox economists as a pioneer of protectionist policies, in the form of tariffs and subsidies to woolen manufacturers.
Speck says that Walpole's uninterrupted run of 20 years as Prime Minister "is rightly regarded as one of the major feats of British political history...&nbsp;Explanations are usually offered in terms of his expert handling of the political system after 1720, and his unique blending of the surviving powers of the crown with the increasing influence of the Commons."
The exposure of the scheme crushed the hopes of the Jacobites whose previous attempts at rebellion (most notably the risings of 1715 and 1719) had also failed.
This collection — then regarded as one of the finest in Europe — now lies in the State Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
Walpole also managed to secure the position of the Hanoverian Dynasty, and effectively countervailed Jacobitism.
Even this change did not appease Stanhope and Sunderland who secured the dismissal of Townshend from the Lord-Lieutenancy in April 1717.
Both Craggs the Elder and Craggs the Younger died in disgrace; the remainder were impeached for their corruption.
Gradually Walpole became the clearly dominant partner in government.
His son, Edward, born in 1737, died in 1771 without issue.
A paper in his father's handwriting, dated 9 June 1700, shows the family estate in Norfolk and Suffolk to have been nine manors in Norfolk and one in Suffolk.
This new proposal, however, was extremely unpopular and aroused the opposition of the nation's merchants.
Their daughter Mary became the second wife of Charles Cadogan, 1st Earl Cadogan, and had issue.
Along with his political interests in his last years, Walpole enjoyed the pleasures of the hunt.
The even more serious Porteous Riots broke out in Edinburgh after the King pardoned a captain of the guard (John Porteous) who had commanded his troops to shoot a group of protesters.
It was widely believed that the Company would eventually reap an enormous profit through international trade in cloth, agricultural goods, and slaves.
10 Downing Street represents another part of Walpole's legacy.
His opponents acquired a vocal leader in the Prince of Wales who was estranged from his father, the King.
Despite his personal clout, however, Walpole could not stop Lord Godolphin and the Whigs from pressing for the prosecution of Henry Sacheverell, a minister who preached anti-Whig sermons.
Walpole is immortalised in St Stephen's Hall, where he and other notable Parliamentarians look on at visitors to Parliament.
Prior to the death of his first wife, Walpole took on a mistress, Maria, daughter of Thomas Skerrett (died 1734; an Irish merchant living in Dover Street, London).
Walpole also concerned himself with estate matters.
Never was Man more flattered nor more abused, and his long power, was probably the chief cause of both".
Walpole was re-elected for King's Lynn in 1713.
By accepting the position of Paymaster, however, Walpole lost the favour of the Prince of Wales (the future King George II) who still harboured disdain for his father's Government.
During the remainder of George I's reign, Walpole's ascendancy continued; the political power of the monarch was gradually diminishing and that of his ministers gradually increasing.
Walpole was able to recover from these events by removing the patent.
He advised Pelham to make use of his seat in the Commons to serve as a bridge between the King and Parliament, just as Walpole had done.
Though her death did not end his personal influence with George II, who had grown loyal to the Prime Minister during the preceding years, Walpole's domination of government continued to decline.
Dickinson sums up his historical role:
Critics called his system the "Robinocracy."
* Katherine, who died unmarried and without issue
Five days later he formally relinquished the seals of office.
Parliamentary committees were formed to investigate these charges.
His son, Horace, claimed that his father would "assist the Ministry in the Lords" and remarked that his enemies "cry out that he is still Minister behind the curtain."
William Arnall and others defended Walpole from the charge of evil political corruption by arguing that corruption is the universal human condition.
In 1725 he persuaded the king to revive the Knight of the Bath, and in 1726 a Knight of the Garter, earning him the nickname "Sir Bluestring".
Historian Frank O'Gorman says his leadership in Parliament reflected his "reasonable and persuasive oratory, his ability to move both the emotions as well as the minds of men, and, above all, his extraordinary self-confidence."
Walpole exercised a tremendous influence on the politics of his day.
Thus, Walpole lost a considerable element of his Whig Party to the Opposition.
Walpole considered her "indispensable to his happiness", and her loss plunged him into a "deplorable and comfortless condition", which ended in a severe illness.
However, Irish sentiment was situated against the English control.
His brother-in-law Lord Townshend, served as Secretary of State for the Northern Department and controlled the nation's foreign affairs.
Walpole was alleged to have presided over an immense increase in corruption and to have enriched himself enormously whilst in office.
The year of George's accession, 1714, marked the ascendancy of the Whigs who would remain in power for the next fifty years.
He avoided controversy and high-intensity disputes, as his middle way attracted moderates from both the Whig and Tory camps.
However, despite these great occasions, Walpole's broader popularity had begun to wane.
He was a Whig from the gentry class, who was first elected to Parliament in 1701, and held many senior positions.
Lord Orford was succeeded as Prime Minister by Lord Wilmington in an administration whose true head was Lord Carteret.
In general the government made gains in England and Wales but this was not enough to overturn the reverses of the 1734 election and further losses in Cornwall where many constituencies were obedient to the will of the Prince of Wales (who was also Duke of Cornwall).
The news of the naval disaster against Spain in the Battle of Cartagena de Indias also prompted the end of his political career.
Though no longer a member of the Cabinet, Lord Orford continued to maintain personal influence with George II and was often dubbed the "Minister behind the Curtain" for this advice and influence.
After he was released, Walpole wrote and published anonymous pamphlets attacking the Harley ministry and assisted Sir Richard Steele in crafting political pamphlets.
He had spent much money in the 1720s and 1730s in building up a collection of Old Masters from all over Europe.
In April 1721 he was appointed First Lord of the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Leader of the House of Commons.
Hoppit says Walpole's policies sought moderation: he worked for peace, lower taxes, growing exports, and allowed a little more tolerance for Protestant Dissenters.
After having been singled out in a struggle between the Whigs and the government, Walpole became the intermediary for reconciling the government to the Whig leaders.
In the new Cabinet, Sunderland and Stanhope (who was created an Earl) were the effective heads.
The youngest daughter, Charlotte, was wife of Lionel Tollemache, 4th Earl of Dysart.
On the next day, Walpole resigned from the Cabinet to join the Opposition "because I could not connive at some things that were carrying on", and by joining the opposition he did not intend "to make the king uneasy or to embarrass his affairs."
Philip Meadows, the deputy ranger of the park and son of  Walpole's political ally, Sir Philip Meadows,  lived at Great Lodge after Walpole had vacated it.
Although it was proven that he had retained none of the money, Walpole was pronounced "guilty of a high breach of trust and notorious corruption".
He maintained both his parliamentary supremacy and his popularity in Norfolk, his home county.
Although the King disliked Townshend, he retained him as well.
Maria had borne him a daughter, also called Maria, who was no longer illegitimate after her parents' marriage and, as the daughter of an Earl, became Lady Maria Walpole.
The crisis had significantly damaged the credibility of the King and of the Whig Party, but Walpole defended both with skilful oratory in the House of Commons.
Under the Act of Settlement 1701, which excluded Roman Catholics from the line of succession, Anne was  succeeded by a distant German cousin, George I. George I distrusted the Tories, whom he believed opposed his right to succeed to the Throne.
Lord Oxford was impeached, and Lord Bolingbroke suffered from an act of attainder.
Laura, the eldest, married Bishop Frederick Keppel.
His influence on the development of the uncodified constitution of Great Britain was less momentous even though he is regarded as Great Britain's first Prime Minister.
Back at his recently rebuilt country seat in Houghton, Norfolk, such pastimes were denied him due to "dismal weather."
He relied primarily on the favour of the King rather than on the support of the House of Commons.
Although the exact dates of his dominance are a matter of scholarly debate, 1721–42 are often used.
He was especially active in opposing one of the Government's more significant proposals, the Peerage Bill, which would have limited the power of the monarch to create new peerages.
His immediate successors did not always reside in Number 10 (preferring their larger private residences) but the home has nevertheless become established as the official residence of the Prime Minister (in his or her capacity as First Lord of the Treasury).
In the 1741 general election his supporters secured an increase in votes in constituencies that were decided by mass electorates but failed to win in many pocket boroughs (constituencies subject to the informal but strong influence of patrons).
Walpole Street in Wolverhampton is named after Sir Robert Walpole.
As a result, the industry became Britain's primary export, enabling the country to import the raw materials and food that fueled the industrial revolution.
A keen huntsman, Walpole built for himself Great Lodge (Old Lodge) in Richmond Park.
The Act revealed a disdain for Swift, Pope, Fielding, and other literary figures who had attacked his government in their works.
As a young man, Walpole had bought shares in the South Sea Company, which monopolized trade with Spain, the Caribbean and South America.
By the latter part of 1720, however, the company had begun to collapse as the price of its shares plunged..
Walpole entered Eton College in 1690 where he was considered "an excellent scholar".
In his new political  positions, and encouraged by his advisers, Walpole introduced the sinking fund, a device to reduce the national debt.
It lies at the mouth of the St. Clair River on Lake St. Clair, approximately thirty miles (50&nbsp;km) northeast of Detroit, Michigan, and of Windsor, Ontario.
Most of his immediate successors were, comparatively speaking, extremely weak; it would take several decades more for the premiership to develop into the most powerful and most important office in the country.
Walpole prevented them from losing the troops.
Foreign policy was the primary issue of contention; George I was thought to be conducting foreign affairs with the interests of his German territories, rather than those of Great Britain, at heart.
on the 29th of May".
Walpole also left behind a collection of art which he had assembled during his career.
In 1705, Walpole was appointed by Queen Anne to be a member of the council for her husband, Prince George of Denmark, Lord High Admiral.
Though these events diminished Walpole's popularity, they failed to shake his majority in Parliament.
In 1739 Walpole abandoned all efforts to stop the conflict and commenced the War of Jenkins' Ear (so called because Robert Jenkins, a Welsh mariner, claimed that a Spaniard inspecting his vessel had severed his ear).
Walpole's domination over the House of Commons was highlighted by the ease with which he secured the rejection of Sir John Barnard's plan to reduce the interest on the national debt.
His grandson, the 3rd Earl of Orford, sold many of the works in this collection to the Russian Empress Catherine II in 1779.
He was a  member of the ''Board of General Officers'' established in 1717 to investigate the abuse of pay.
Walpole's failure to maintain a policy of avoiding military conflict eventually led to his fall from power.
The first was in January 1744 in the debate on Hanoverian troops being kept in British pay.
Walpole built as his country seat Houghton Hall in Norfolk.
Walpole agreed to withdraw the bill before Parliament voted on it, but he dismissed the politicians who had dared to oppose it in the first place.
He also enjoyed the beauties of the countryside.
To countervail the threat of smuggling, the tax was to be collected not at ports but at warehouses.
Behind these political enemies were opposition Whigs, Tories and Jacobites.
Soon after Walpole's resignation, a bitter family quarrel between the King and the Prince of Wales split the Royal Family.
Bolingbroke and Pulteney ran a periodical called ''The Craftsman'' in which they incessantly denounced the Prime Minister's policies.
He left Eton on 2 April 1696 and matriculated at King's College, Cambridge on the same day.
Walpole was also able to persuade Parliament to pass the Licensing Act of 1737 under which London theatres were regulated.
(Contemporaries satirised the Walpole regime as the "Robinocracy" or as the "Robinarchy".)
In 1724 the primary political rival of Walpole and Townshend in the Cabinet, Lord Carteret, was dismissed from the post of Southern Secretary and once again appointed to the lesser office of Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
The new ministry, under the leadership of the Tory Robert Harley, removed Walpole from his office of Secretary at War but he remained Treasurer of the Navy until 2 January 1711.
Walpole attempted to prevent war but was opposed by the King, the House of Commons, and by a faction in his own Cabinet.
Lord Chesterfield expressed scepticism as to whether "an impartial Character of Sr Robert Walpole, will or can be transmitted to Posterity, for he governed this Kingdom so long that the various passions of Mankind mingled, and in a manner incorporated themselves, with every thing that was said or writt concerning him.
This style of "court" political rhetoric continued through the 18th century.
In 1742 when the House of Commons was prepared to determine the validity of an allegedly rigged by-election in Chippenham, Walpole and others agreed to treat the issue as a Motion of No Confidence.
In 1744 he managed to secure the dismissal of Carteret and the appointment of Henry Pelham whom he regarded as a political protégé.
Moreover, his eldest son was granted a barony.
Spain claimed the right to board and search British vessels to ensure compliance with this provision.
*Edward who died unmarried but had four illegitimate children with Dorothy Clement, three of whom were daughters.
Over the next years Walpole continued to share power with Townshend but the two clashed over British foreign affairs, especially over policy regarding Austria.
Harley had first attempted to entice him and then threatened him to join the Tories, but Walpole rejected the offers, instead becoming one of the most outspoken members of the Whig Opposition.
Walpole continued to be an influential figure in the House of Commons.
She was a fashionable socialite of wit and beauty, with an independent fortune of £30,000.
Furthermore, they argued, political divisiveness was also universal and inevitable because of selfish passions that were integral to human nature.
Walpole's position was threatened in 1727 when George I died and was succeeded by George II.
The nursery rhyme, "Who Killed Cock Robin?
He used his influence to prevent George II from entering a European conflict in 1733 when the War of the Polish Succession broke out.
Walpole Island, named for Sir Robert Walpole, comprises an island and an Indian reserve in southwestern Ontario, Canada, on the border between Ontario and Michigan.
George II offered this home to Walpole as a personal gift in 1732, but Walpole accepted it only as the official residence of the First Lord of the Treasury, taking up his residence there on 22 September 1735.
In May 1734, he presented a new silver mace "weighing 168 ounces, gilt and finely exchased, to the city of Norwich – on the cup part of it are Sir Robert's arms, and the arms of the city; it was first carried before  Mayor Philip Meadows Esq.
Walpole was born in Houghton, Norfolk, in 1676.
One of 19 children, he was the third son and fifth child of Robert Walpole, a member of the local gentry and a Whig politician who represented the borough of Castle Rising in the House of Commons, and his wife Mary Walpole, the daughter and heiress of Sir Geoffrey Burwell of Rougham, Suffolk.
After his resignation, his main political roles were to support the government by means of advice, to deal with patronage and to speak on the ministry's behalf in the Lords.
The Government had established a plan whereby the South Sea Company would assume the national debt of Great Britain in exchange for lucrative bonds.
Walpole and others who opposed the Government often congregated at Leicester House, the home of the Prince of Wales, to form political plans.
She died at Aix-en-Provence in 1731, and was buried at Malpas, Cheshire.
His power stemmed from his personal influence instead of the influence of his office.
The trial was extremely unpopular with much of the country, causing the Sacheverell riots, and was followed by the downfall of the Duke of Marlborough and the Whig Party in the general election of 1710.
Walpole was also appointed chairman of a secret committee formed to investigate the actions of the previous Tory ministry in 1715.
