The Irish even crowned Edward Bruce as High King of Ireland in 1316.
A number of reconstructions of the face of Robert the Bruce have been produced, including those by Richard Neave from the University of Manchester  and Peter Vanezis from the University of Glasgow.
Looping back via the hinterlands of Inverness and a second failed attempt to take Elgin, Bruce finally achieved his landmark defeat of Comyn at the Battle of Inverurie in May 1308; he then overran Buchan and defeated the English garrison at Aberdeen.
The funeral was a grand affair, with  of wax having been purchased for the making of funerary candles.
A further sign of Edward's distrust occurred on 10 October 1305, when Edward revoked his gift of Sir Gilbert de Umfraville's lands to Bruce that he had made only six months before.
The Earl of Richmond, Edward's nephew, was to head up the subordinate government of Scotland.
Robert the Bruce would most probably have become trilingual at an early age.
According to Barbour, Comyn betrayed his agreement with Bruce to King Edward I, and when Bruce arranged a meeting for 10 February 1306 with Comyn in the Chapel of Greyfriars Monastery in Dumfries and accused him of treachery, they came to blows.
The king's body was embalmed at Cardross, and his sternum was sawn open to allow extraction of the heart, which Sir James Douglas placed in a silver casket to be worn on a chain around his neck.
The ''Lanercost Chronicle'' and ''Scalacronica'' state that the king was said to have contracted and died of leprosy.
Fragments of marble and alabaster had been found in the debris around the site of the vault several years earlier, which were linked to Robert the Bruce's recorded purchase of a marble and alabaster tomb made in Paris.
His ambition was further thwarted by John Comyn, who had been much more resolute in his opposition to the English.
Most of the Comyn castles in Moray, Aberdeen, and Buchan were destroyed and their inhabitants killed.
It was destroyed at the Reformation, but some fragments were discovered in the 19th century (now in the Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh).
The Irish Annals of the period described the defeat of the Bruces by the English as one of the greatest things ever done for the Irish nation due to the fact it brought an end to the famine and pillaging wrought upon the Irish by both the Scots and the English.
The Scotichronicon says that on being told that Comyn had survived the attack and was being treated, two of Bruce's supporters, Roger de Kirkpatrick (uttering the words "I mak siccar" ("I make sure")) and John Lindsay, went back into the church and finished Bruce's work.
Robert was one of the most famous warriors of his generation, and eventually led Scotland during the First War of Scottish Independence against England.
From there he marched through Moray to Badenoch before re-tracing his path back south to Dunfermline.
The battle began on 23 June as the English army attempted to force its way across the high ground of the Bannock Burn, which was surrounded by marshland.
Nonetheless, Bruce was excommunicated for this crime.
After submitting to Edward I in 1302 and returning to "the king's peace", Robert inherited his family's claim to the Scottish throne upon his father's death.
Other versions have Bruce in a small house watching the spider try to make its connection between two roof beams.
Very little is known of his youth.
The campaign had been very successful, but the English triumph would only be temporary.
At the end of March 1329 he was staying at Glenluce Abbey and at Monreith, from where St Ninian's cave was visited.
Although the Bruces were by now back in possession of Annandale and Carrick, in August 1296 Robert Bruce, Lord of Annandale, and his son, Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick and future king, were among the more than 1,500 Scots at Berwick who swore an oath of fealty to King Edward I of England.
The writer of this letter reported that Robert I was so feeble and struck down by illness that he would not live, 'for he can scarcely move anything but his tongue'.
They made their way quickly for Scotland.
When these stones were removed, the vault was found to be seven feet (214&nbsp;cm) in length, 56&nbsp;cm wide and 45&nbsp;cm deep.
Along with suggestions of eczema, tuberculosis, syphilis, motor neurone disease, cancer or stroke, a diet of rich court food has also been suggested as a possible contributory factor in Robert's death.
None of the Scottish accounts of his death hint at leprosy.
The bones were measured and drawn, and the king's skeleton was measured to be .
The pact is often interpreted as a sign of their patriotism despite both having already surrendered to the English.
Afterwards the King merely expressed regret that he had broken the shaft of his favourite axe.
Robert Bruce would have gained first-hand knowledge of the city's defences.
Almost immediately, Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale, resigned his lordship of Annandale and transferred his claim to the Scottish throne to his son, antedating this statement to 7 November.
Urgent letters were sent ordering Bruce to support Edward's commander, John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey (to whom Bruce was related), in the summer of 1297; but instead of complying, Bruce continued to support the revolt against Edward I.
In 1974 the Bruce Memorial Window was installed in the north transept, commemorating the 700th anniversary of the year of his birth.
Robert de Brus, 1st Lord of Annandale, the first of the Bruce, or de Brus, line arrived in Scotland with David I in 1124 and was given the lands of Annandale in Dumfries and Galloway.
The next time Carlisle was besieged, in 1315, Robert the Bruce would be leading the attack.
Robert Bruce as Earl of Carrick, and now 7th Lord of Annandale, held huge estates and property in Scotland and a barony and some minor properties in England, and a strong claim to the Scottish throne.
The Harrying of Buchan in 1308 was ordered by Bruce to make sure all Comyn family support was extinguished.
By 1314, Robert I had recaptured most of the castles in Scotland once held by the English, and was sending raiding parties into northern England as far as Carlisle.
Most likely he spent it in the Hebrides, possibly sheltered by Christina of Garmoran, who was married to Bruce's brother-in-law, Duncan, the brother of Bruce's first wife, Isabella of Mar.
This was unacceptable; the Scots instead formed an alliance with France.
Buchan had a very large population because it was the agricultural capital of northern Scotland, and much of its population was loyal to the Comyn family even after the defeat of the Earl of Buchan.
They were placed in a new lead coffin, into which was poured 1,500&nbsp;lbs of molten pitch to preserve the remains, before the coffin was sealed.
Accordingly, on 5 November 1819, the investigation took place.
A further provocation came in a case brought by Macduff, son of Malcolm, Earl of Fife, in which Edward demanded that John appear in person before the English Parliament to answer the charges.
She claimed the right of her family, the MacDuff Earl of Fife, to crown the Scottish king for her brother, Donnchadh IV, Earl of Fife, who was not yet of age, and in English hands.
They state that the Comyn murder was planned in an attempt to gain the throne of Scotland.
In September 1305, Edward ordered Robert Bruce to put his castle at Kildrummy, "in the keeping of such a man as he himself will be willing to answer for," suggesting that King Edward suspected Robert was not entirely trustworthy and may have been plotting behind his back.
It appears that Robert Bruce had fallen under the influence of his grandfather's friends, Wishart and Stewart, who had inspired him to resistance.
Robert's later performance in war certainly underlines his skills in tactics and single combat.
Robert I died in June 1329.
In 1320, the Scottish nobility submitted the Declaration of Arbroath to Pope John XXII, declaring Robert as their rightful monarch and asserting Scotland's status as an independent kingdom.
There does not seem to be any evidence as to what the king himself or his physicians believed his illness to be.
Buoyed by his military successes, Bruce's forces also invaded Ireland in 1315, purportedly to free the country from English rule (having received a reply to offers of assistance from Donal O'Neil, king of Tyrone), and to open a second front in the continuing wars with England.
By Elizabeth he had four children: David II, John (died in childhood), Matilda (who married Thomas Isaac and died at Aberdeen 20 July 1353), and Margaret (who married William de Moravia, 5th Earl of Sutherland in 1345).
The story serves to illustrate the maxim: "if at first you don't succeed, try try try again."
The eight years of exhausting but deliberate refusal to meet the English on even ground have caused many to consider Bruce as one of the great guerrilla leaders of any age.
Edward I's forces defeated Robert in battle, forcing him to flee into hiding in the Hebrides and Ireland before returning in 1307 to defeat an English army at Loudoun Hill and wage a highly successful guerrilla war against the English.
The family would have moved between the castles of their lordships — Lochmaben Castle, the main castle of the lordship of Annandale, and Turnberry and Loch Doon Castle, the castles of the earldom of Carrick.
William Wallace resigned as Guardian of Scotland after his defeat at the Battle of Falkirk.
In 1325 Robert I exchanged lands at Cardross for those of Old Montrose in Angus with Sir David Graham.
Barbour reported that Robert read aloud to his band of supporters in 1306, reciting from memory tales from a twelfth-century romance of Charlemagne, ''Fierabras'', as well as relating examples from history such as Hannibal's defiance of Rome.
Robert I was originally buried in Dunfermline Abbey, traditional resting-place of Scottish monarchs since the reign of Malcolm III.
Penman states that it is very difficult to accept the notion of Robert as a functioning king serving in war, performing face-to-face acts of lordship, holding parliament and court, travelling widely and fathering several children, all while displaying the infectious symptoms of a leper.
The other, led by his brothers Thomas and Alexander, landed slightly further south in Loch Ryan, but they were soon captured and executed.
The historian Roy Haines describes the defeat as a "calamity of stunning proportions" for the English, whose losses in the battle were huge.
Bruce defeated his other Scots enemies, destroying their strongholds and devastating their lands, and in 1309 held his first parliament.
In October 1328 the Pope finally lifted the interdict from Scotland and the excommunication of Robert I.
Fortunately for Bruce, his friend, and Edward's son-in-law, Ralph de Monthermer learnt of Edward's intention and warned Bruce by sending him twelve pence and a pair of spurs.
In conjunction with the invasion, Bruce popularised an ideological vision of a "Pan-Gaelic Greater Scotia" with his lineage ruling over both Ireland and Scotland.
The body was raised up and placed on a wooden coffin board on the edge of the vault.
While all this took place, William Wallace was finally captured near Glasgow, and he was hanged, drawn, and quartered in London on 23 August 1305.
He would have been schooled to speak, read and possibly write in the Anglo-Norman language of his Scots-Norman peers and his father's family.
In 1920, the heart was discovered by archaeologists and was reburied, but the location was not marked.
Jean Le Bel also stated that in 1327 the king was a victim of 'la grosse maladie', which is usually taken to mean leprosy.
His Milanese physician, Maino De Maineri, did criticise the king's eating of eels as dangerous to his health in advancing years.
In response, Edward II planned a major military campaign with the support of Lancaster and the barons, mustering a large army between 15,000 and 20,000 strong.
Bruce also made raids into northern England and, landing at Ramsey in the Isle of Man, then laid siege to Castle Rushen in Castletown, capturing it on 21 June 1313 and denying the island's strategic importance to the English.
On 7 July, Bruce and his friends made terms with Edward by a treaty called the Capitulation of Irvine.
After his death his heart was to be removed from his body and, accompanied by a company of knights led by Sir James Douglas, taken on pilgrimage to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, before being interred in Melrose Abbey upon its return from the Holy Land:
In the spring of 1314, Edward Bruce laid siege to Stirling Castle, a key fortification in Scotland whose governor, Philip de Mowbray, agreed to capitulate if not relieved before 24 June 1314.
However, the Scots failed to win over the non-Ulster chiefs or to make any other significant gains in the south of the island, where people couldn't see the difference between English and Scottish occupation.
With these acts, Bruce had successfully destroyed the power of the Comyns, which had controlled much of northern and southwestern Scotland for over a hundred and fifty years.
At this height he would have stood almost as tall as Edward I ().
If one should break the secret pact, he would forfeit to the other the sum of ten thousand pounds.
Robert's mother died early in 1292.
A large number of families definitely are descended from him.
His mother was by all accounts a formidable woman who, legend would have it, kept Robert Bruce's father captive until he agreed to marry her.
The cloth of gold shroud and the lead covering were found to be in a rapid state of decay since the vault had first been opened 21 months earlier.
Bruce stabbed Comyn before the high altar.
Soules, who had probably been appointed by John, supported his return, as did most other nobles.
He fought successfully during his reign to regain Scotland's place as an independent country and is today revered in Scotland as a national hero.
Robert's first appearance in history is on a witness list of a charter issued by Alexander Og MacDonald, Lord of Islay.
They would have had masters drawn from their parents' household to school them in the arts of horsemanship, swordsmanship, the joust, hunting and perhaps aspects of courtly behaviour, including dress, protocol, speech, table etiquette, music and dance, some of which may have been learned before the age of ten while serving as pages in their father's or grandfather's household.
However, his actions of supporting alternately the English and Scottish armies had led to a great deal of distrust towards Bruce among the "Community of the Realm of Scotland".
The bishops of Moray and Glasgow were in attendance as well as the earls of Atholl, Menteith, Lennox, and Mar.
While the Bruces' bid for the throne had ended in failure, the Balliols' triumph propelled the eighteen-year-old Robert the Bruce onto the political stage in his own right.
A plinth of black fossiliferous limestone from Frosterley topped this structure, and atop this plinth was a white alabaster effigy of Robert I, painted and gilded.
In accordance with Bruce's written request, the heart was buried at Melrose Abbey in Roxburghshire.
Freed from English threats, Scotland's armies could now invade northern England.
It is also around this time that Robert would have been knighted, and he began to appear on the political stage in the Bruce dynastic interest.
Bruce hurried from Dumfries to Glasgow, where his friend and supporter Bishop Robert Wishart granted him absolution and subsequently adjured the clergy throughout the land to rally to Bruce.
Bruce also married his second wife that year, Elizabeth de Burgh, the daughter of Richard de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster.
Robert, with between 5,500 and 6,500 troops, predominantly spearmen, prepared to prevent Edward's forces from reaching Stirling.
So a second coronation was held and once more the crown was placed on the brow of Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick, Lord of Annandale, King of the Scots.
Edward continued his advance the following day, and encountered the bulk of the Scottish army as they emerged from the woods of New Park.
It is still uncertain where Bruce spent the winter of 1306–07.
Thus, lineally and geopolitically, Bruce attempted to support his anticipated notion of a pan-Gaelic alliance between Scottish-Irish Gaelic populations, under his kingship.
In November of the same year Edward I of England, on behalf of the Guardians of Scotland and following the "Great Cause", awarded the vacant Crown of Scotland to his grandfather's first cousin once removed, John Balliol.
In his last years, Robert would pay for Dominican friars to tutor his son, David, for whom he would also purchase books.
On 17 February 1818, workmen breaking ground on the new parish church to be built on the site of the eastern choir of Dunfermline Abbey uncovered a vault before the site of the former abbey high altar.
The heart, together with Douglas' bones were brought back to Scotland.
He was probably brought up in a mixture of the Anglo-Norman culture of northern England and south-eastern Scotland, and the Gaelic culture of south-west Scotland and most of Scotland north of the River Forth.
Edward I thereupon provided a safe refuge for the Bruces, having appointed the Lord of Annandale to the command of Carlisle Castle in October 1295.
Scientific study by AOC archaeologists in Edinburgh, demonstrated that it did indeed contain human tissue and it was of appropriate age.
The Irish chief, Donal O'Neil, for instance, later justified his support for the Scots to Pope John XXII by saying "the Kings of Lesser Scotia all trace their blood to our ''Greater Scotia'' and retain to some degree our language and customs."
The Bruces and the earls of Angus and March refused, and the Bruce family withdrew temporarily from Scotland, while the Comyns seized their estates in Annandale and Carrick, granting them to John Comyn, Earl of Buchan.
It has been proposed that, alternatively, he may have suffered from eczema, tuberculosis, syphilis, motor neurone disease, cancer or a series of strokes.
Ten alabaster fragments from the tomb are on display in the National Museum of Scotland and traces of gilding still remain on some of them.
The future king was now twenty-two, and in joining the rebels he seems to have been acting independently of his father, who took no part in the rebellion and appears to have abandoned Annandale once more for the safety of Carlisle.
In April, Bruce won a small victory over the English at the Battle of Glen Trool, before defeating Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, at the Battle of Loudoun Hill.
It was at this point in the proceedings that some small relics – teeth and finger bones – were allegedly removed from the skeleton.
There were rumours that John Balliol would return to regain the Scottish throne.
In March, James Douglas captured Roxburgh, and Randolph captured Edinburgh Castle, while in May, Bruce again raided England and subdued the Isle of Man.
Barbour, however, tells no such story.
However, an identical phrase appears in an agreement between Edward and his lieutenant and lifelong friend, Aymer de Valence.
As most of mainland Scotland's major royal castle had remained in their razed state since around 1313-14, Cardross manor was perhaps built as a modest residence sympathetic to Robert's subjects' privations through a long war, repeated famines and livestock pandemics.
Robert Bruce, the king to be, was sixteen years of age when Margaret, Maid of Norway died in 1290.
The surviving members of the company recovered Douglas' body together with the casket containing Bruce's heart.
Robert's final wish reflected conventional piety, and was perhaps intended to perpetuate his memory.
Isabella MacDuff, Countess of Buchan and wife of John Comyn, 3rd Earl of Buchan (a cousin of the murdered John Comyn) arrived the next day, too late for the coronation.
The Declaration of Arbroath of 1320 strengthened his position, particularly ''vis-à-vis'' the Papacy, and Pope John XXII eventually lifted Bruce's excommunication.
The extant chamberlain's accounts for 1328 detail a manor house at Cardross with king's and queen's chambers and glazed windows, a chapel, kitchens, bake- and brew-houses, falcon aviary, medicinal garden, gatehouse, protective moat and a hunting park.
As king, Robert certainly commissioned verse to commemorate Bannockburn and his subjects' military deeds.
At some point in early 1296, Robert married his first wife, Isabella of Mar, the daughter of Domhnall I, Earl of Mar and his wife Helen.
Bruce took the hint, and he and a squire fled the English court during the night.
Ireland is also a serious possibility, and Orkney (under Norwegian rule at the time) or Norway proper (where his sister Isabel Bruce was queen dowager) although unlikely are not impossible.
One, led by Bruce and his brother Edward landed at Turnberry Castle and began a guerrilla war in south-west Scotland.
The English cavalry found it hard to operate in the cramped terrain and were crushed by Robert's spearmen.
The Bruces sided with King Edward against King John and his Comyn allies.
For this reason King Edward of England wrote to the Pope and asked for his excommunication of Robert Bruce.
Bruce fled with a small following of his most faithful men, including Sir James Douglas and Gilbert Hay, Bruce's brothers Thomas, Alexander, and Edward, as well as Sir Neil Campbell and the Earl of Lennox.
The site of the tomb in Dunfermline Abbey was marked by large carved stone letters spelling out "King Robert the Bruce" around the top of the bell tower, when the eastern half of the abbey church was rebuilt in the first half of the 19th century.
It depicts stained glass images of the Bruce flanked by his chief men, Christ, and saints associated with Scotland.
It is said that before the Battle of Bannockburn, Bruce was attacked by the English Knight Sir Henry de Bohun.
The king's body was carried east from Cardross by a carriage decked in black lawn cloth, with stops recorded at Dunipace and Cambuskenneth Abbey.
Early in April he arrived at the shrine of St Ninian at Whithorn.
It tried and failed twice, but began again and succeeded on the third attempt.
He was an active Guardian and made renewed efforts to have King John returned to the Scottish throne.
The following year, Bruce finally resigned as joint Guardian and was replaced by Sir Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus.
That Bruce was in the forefront of fomenting rebellion is shown in a letter written to Edward by Hugh Cressingham on 23 July 1292, which reports the opinion that "if you had the earl of Carrick, the Steward of Scotland and his brother…you would think your business done".
The great banner of the kings of Scotland was planted behind his throne.
On 11 June 1304, Bruce and William Lamberton made a pact that bound them, each to the other, in "friendship and alliance against all men."
Bruce ordered similar harryings in Argyle and Kintyre, in the territories of Clan MacDougall.
Barbour and other sources relate that Robert summoned his prelates and barons to his bedside for a final council at which he made copious gifts to religious houses, dispensed silver to religious foundations of various orders, so that they might pray for his soul, and repented of his failure to fulfil a vow to undertake a crusade to fight the 'Saracens' in the Holy Land.
Six weeks after Comyn was killed in Dumfries, Bruce was crowned King of Scots by Bishop William de Lamberton at Scone, near Perth, on 25 March 1306 with all formality and solemnity.
Within the vault, inside the remnants of a decayed oak coffin, there was a body entirely enclosed in lead, with a decayed shroud of cloth of gold over it.
In March 1309, Bruce held his first Parliament at St. Andrews, and by August he controlled all of Scotland north of the River Tay.
From his mother, he inherited the Earldom of Carrick, and through his father, a royal lineage that would give him a claim to the Scottish throne.
Though he captured the castles of Bothwell and Turnberry, he did little to damage the Scots' fighting ability, and in January 1302 he agreed to a nine-month truce.
Under circumstances which are still disputed, Sir James and most of his companions were killed.
A parliamentary briefing document of c.1364 would also assert that Robert 'used continually to read, or have read in his presence, the histories of ancient kings and princes, and how they conducted themselves in their times, both in wartime and in peacetime; from these he derived information about aspects of his own rule.'
The sternum was found to have been sawn open from top to bottom, permitting removal of the king's heart after death.
Robert I's body in a wooden coffin was then interred within a stone vault beneath the floor, underneath a box tomb of white Italian marble purchased in Paris by Thomas of Chartres after June 1328.
In March 1302 Bruce sent a letter to the monks at Melrose Abbey apologising for having called tenants of the monks to service in his army when there had been no national call-up.
This participation is contested as no Bruce appears on the Falkirk roll of nobles present in the English army, and two 19th Century antiquarians: Alexander Murison and George Chalmers have stated Bruce did not participate and in the following month decided to lay waste Annandale and burn Ayr Castle, to prevent it being garrisoned by the English.
"I will that as soone as I am trespassed out of this worlde that ye take my harte owte of my body, and embawme it, and take of my treasoure as ye shall thynke sufficient for that enterprise, both for your selfe and suche company as ye wyll take with you, and present my hart to the holy Sepulchre where as our Lorde laye, seyng my body can nat come there".
Robert I was one of the ten children, and the eldest son, of Robert de Brus, 6th Lord of Annandale, and Marjorie, Countess of Carrick, and claimed the Scottish throne as a fourth great-grandson of David I.
But it was no more than a rumour and nothing came of it.
The diplomacy worked to a certain extent, at least in Ulster, where the Scots had some support.
Over the next three years, one English-held castle or outpost after another was captured and reduced: Linlithgow in 1310, Dumbarton in 1311, and Perth, by Bruce himself, in January 1312.
With Moray by his side, Robert set off from his manor at Cardross for Tarbert on his 'great ship', thence to the Isle of Arran, where he celebrated Christmas of 1328 at the hall of Glenkill near Lamlash.
The king's last journey appears to have been a pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint Ninian at Whithorn; this was possibly in search of a miraculous cure, or to make his peace with God.
Bruce and his followers returned to the Scottish mainland in February in two groups.
The Barons of Exchequer ordered that the vault was to be secured from all further inspection with new stones and iron bars and guarded by the town constables, and that once the walls of the new church were built up around the site, an investigation of the vault and the remains could take place.
His wife and daughters and other women of the party were sent to Kildrummy in August 1306 under the protection of Bruce's brother Neil Bruce and the Earl of Atholl and most of his remaining men.
This grandfather, known to contemporaries as Robert the Noble, and to history as "Bruce the Competitor", seems to have been an immense influence on the future king.
Robert the Bruce's remains were ceremonially re-interred in the vault in Dunfermline Abbey on 5 November 1819.
Before Cardross became habitable in 1327, Robert I's main residence had been Scone Abbey.
A 1929 statue of Robert the Bruce is set in the wall of Edinburgh Castle at the entrance, along with one of William Wallace.
Robert also arranged for perpetual soul masses to be funded at the chapel of Saint Serf, at Ayr and at the Dominican friary in Berwick, as well as at Dunfermline Abbey.
The Scottish lords were not to serve beyond the sea against their will and were pardoned for their recent violence in return for swearing allegiance to King Edward.
Edward deposed King John, placed him in the Tower of London, and installed Englishmen to govern the country.
In 1996, a casket was unearthed during construction work.
The entire account may in fact be a version of a literary trope used in royal biographical writing.
Skirmishing between the two sides broke out, resulting in the death of Sir Henry de Bohun, whom Robert killed in personal combat.
Sir Thomas Grey asserted in his ''Scalacronica'' that in about 1292, Robert the Bruce, then aged eighteen, was a 'young bachelor of King Edward's Chamber'.
Six days after his death, to complete his triumph still further, papal bulls were issued granting the privilege of unction at the coronation of future Kings of Scots.
They state that King Edward did not hear of the murder of John Comyn until several days after his death.
As the heir to a considerable estate and a pious layman, Robert would also have been given working knowledge of Latin, the language of charter lordship, liturgy and prayer.
The following Latin epitaph was inscribed around the top of the tomb: ''Hic jacet invictus Robertus Rex benedictus qui sua gesta legit repetit quot bella peregit ad libertatem perduxit per probitatem regnum scottorum: nunc vivat in arce polorum'' ("Here lies the invincible blessed King Robert / Whoever reads about his feats will repeat the many battles he fought / By his integrity he guided to liberty the Kingdom of the Scots: May he now live in Heaven").
Thence he sailed to the mainland to visit his son and his bride, both mere children, now installed at Turnberry Castle, the head of the earldom of Carrick and once his own main residence.
Comyn was the most powerful noble in Scotland and was related to many more powerful nobles both within Scotland and England, including relatives that held the earldoms of Buchan, Mar, Ross, Fife, Angus, Dunbar, and Strathearn; the Lordships of Kilbride, Kirkintilloch, Lenzie, Bedrule, and Scraesburgh; and sheriffdoms in Banff, Dingwall, Wigtown, and Aberdeen.
Over the head of the body the lead was formed into the shape of a crown.
Both his father and grandfather were at one time Governors of the Castle, and following the loss of Annandale to Comyn in 1295, it was their principal residence.
Bruce's descendants include all later Scottish monarchs and all British monarchs since the Union of the Crowns in 1603.
