Clive was awarded an Irish peerage in 1762, being created '''Baron Clive''' ''of Plassey, County Clare''; he bought lands in County Limerick and County Clare, Ireland, naming part of his lands near Limerick City, Plassey.
The vote that followed completely exonerated Clive, who was commended for the "great and meritorious service" he rendered to the country.
Whilst it established British military supremacy in Bengal, it did not secure the East India Company's control over Upper India, as is sometimes claimed.
He was soon captured by Mir Jafar's forces, and later executed by the assassin Mohammadi Beg.
Meanwhile, Clive improved the organization and drill of the sepoy army, after a European model, and enlisted into it many Muslims from upper regions of the Mughal Empire.
The struggle lasted about an hour...the garrison lost only five or six men.
The family had a lengthy history of public service: members of the family included an Irish chancellor of the exchequer under Henry VIII, and a member of the Long Parliament.
Clive took £160,000, a vast fortune for the day, while half a million was distributed among the army and navy of the East India Company, and provided gifts of £24,000 to each member of the company's committee, as well as the public compensation stipulated for in the treaty.
For many years he had been working to negotiate the release of Chanda Sahib, a longtime French ally who had at one time occupied the throne of Tanjore, and sought for himself the throne of the Carnatic.
Clive was taken through the treasury, amid a million and a half sterling's worth of rupees, gold and silver plate, jewels and rich goods, and besought to ask what he would.
Gunpowder for the cannons of the Nawab were not well protected from rain.
On 4 September 1746, Madras was attacked by French forces led by La Bourdonnais.
On the left bank of the Bhagirathi, the most westerly of these,  above Chandernagore, stands Murshidabad, the capital of the Mughal viceroys of Bengal.
While loyal to his employers (the British East India Company), actions taken by Robert Clive resulted in the plundering of Indian treasures and famines caused due to policies which were disastrous to local Indian farmers.
The Treaty of Paris (1763) formally confirmed Mohammed Ali Khan Walajah as Nawab of the Carnatic.
The relationship between the Europeans in the region was influenced by a series of wars and treaties in Europe, and by commercial rivalries for trade on the subcontinent.
When he was older he and a gang of teenagers established a protection racket that vandalised the shops of uncooperative merchants in Market Drayton.
When war again broke out in 1756, during Clive's absence in Bengal, the French obtained successes in the northern districts, and it was Mohammed Ali Khan Walajah's efforts which drove them from their settlements.
The overwhelming strength of the joint British and Maratha forces ensured that the battle was won with few losses.
By Christmas 1756, as no response had been received to diplomatic letters to the Nawab, Admiral Charles Watson and Clive were dispatched to attack the Nawab's army and remove him from Calcutta by force.
He was buried in St Margaret's Parish Church at Moreton Say, near his birthplace in Shropshire.
Because of the darkness, the besiegers had no idea how large Clive's force was, and they fled in panic.
The siege finally reached critical when Raza Sahib launched an all-out assault against the fort on 14 November.
That morning the guns arrived, and Chanda Sahib's men again retreated.
The date was 12 August 1765, the place Benares, the throne an English dining-table covered with embroidered cloth and surmounted by a chair in Clive's tent.
Madras was returned to the British as part of the peace agreement in early 1749.
He climbed the tower there and threw slates at passers by.
Another, turned into verse by Sir Alfred Lyall, pictures his resolution as the result of a dream.
In June Clive received news that the new Nawab had attacked the English at Kasimbazar and shortly afterwards on 20 June he had taken the fort at Calcutta.
Robert was their eldest son of thirteen children; he had seven sisters and five brothers, six of whom died in infancy.
Over the forty years since the death of the Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707, the power of the emperor had gradually fallen into the hands of his provincial viceroys or ''Subahdars''.
He sent Major Coote in pursuit of the French almost as far as Benares.
In 1760, after four years of hard labour, his health gave way and he returned to England.
Some miles farther down is the field of Plassey, then an extensive grove of mango trees.
Clive's political opponents turned these hearings into attacks on Clive.
A fleet surgeon, Edward Ives, noted that Clive refused to take any part of the treasure divided among the victorious forces as was custom at the time.
In this extraction of wealth Clive followed a usage fully recognized by the company, although this was the source of future corruption which Clive was later sent to India again to correct.
Raza Sahib arrived at Arcot, and on 23 September occupied the town.
It was originally agreed that the town would be restored to the British after negotiation but this was opposed by Dupleix
It was there that he met and befriended Robert Orme, who became his principal chronicler and biographer.
Mir Jafar was succeeded by his son-in-law Kasim Ali, though not before the government had been further demoralized by taking £100,000 as a gift from the new Nawab; while Kasim Ali had induced not only the viceroy of Awadh, but the emperor of Delhi himself, to invade Bihar.
After running aground on the coast of Brazil, his ship was detained for nine months while repairs were completed.
For once in his career Clive hesitated, and called a council of sixteen officers to decide, as he put it, "whether in our present situation, without assistance, and on our own bottom, it would be prudent to attack the Nawab, or whether we should wait till joined by some country (Indian) power."
* Margaret Clive (bapt 18 September 1763 Condover, Shropshire d. June 1814 married 11 April 1780 Lt-Col Lambert Theodore Walpole (d. in Wexford Rebellion 1798)
In the five years of his conquests and administration in Bengal, the young man had crowded together a succession of exploits which led Lord Macaulay, in what that historian termed his "flashy" essay on the subject, to compare him to Napoleon Bonaparte, declaring that "Clive gave peace, security, prosperity and such liberty as the case allowed of to millions of Indians, who had for centuries been the prey of oppression, while Napoleon's career of conquest was inspired only by personal ambition, and the absolutism he established vanished with his fall."
The dominant rulers on the Coromandel Coast were the Nizam of Hyderabad, Asaf Jah I, and the Nawab of the Carnatic, Anwaruddin Muhammed Khan.
The whole hot season of 1757 was spent in negotiations with the Nawab of Bengal.
The land Clive arrived in was divided into a number of successor states to the Mughal Empire.
In 1720 France effectively nationalized the French East India Company, and began using it to expand its imperial interests.
Approximately a month later, on 3 February 1757, Clive encountered the army of the Nawab itself.
At the fort of Devikottai on the Coleroon River the British force was confronted by the much larger Tanjorean army.
That impaired those cannons.
Clive also briefly sat as Member of Parliament for the Cornwall rotten borough of St Michael's, which then returned two Members, from 1754 to 1755.
In 1744 Clive's father acquired for him a position as a "factor" or company agent in the service of the East India Company, and Clive set sail for Bombay, (present day India.)
Unfortunately this had very little impact in reducing corruption, which remained widespread until the days of Warren Hastings.
Lawrence gave Clive command of 30 British soldiers and 700 sepoys, with orders to lead the assault on the fort.
While the Black Hole became infamous in Britain, it is debatable whether the Nawab was aware of the incident.
On the same date Clive obtained not only an imperial charter for the company's possessions in the Carnatic, completing the work he began at Arcot, but a third firman for the highest of all the lieutenancies of the empire, that of the Deccan itself.
During the rainy season, the Hooghly is fed by the overflow of the Ganges to the north through three streams, which in the hot months are nearly dry.
Jafar Ali Khan, also known as Mir Jafar, the Nawab's commander-in-chief, led the conspirators.
Mir Jafar had finally rebelled over payments to British officials, and Clive's successor had put Kasim Ali Khan, Mir Jafar's son-in-law upon the ''musnud'' (throne).
Dupleix was rewarded for French assistance with titled nobility and rule of the nizam's territories south of the Kistna River.
Some officials of the Nawab's court formed a confederacy to depose him.
Clive deposed later to the House of Commons that, "to the best of his remembrance, he gave the gentleman who carried it leave to sign his name upon it; his lordship never made any secret of it; he thinks it warrantable in such a case, and would do it again a hundred times; he had no interested motive in doing it, and did it with a design of disappointing the expectations of a rapacious man."
For this Clive himself must bear much responsibility, as he had set a very poor example during his tenure as Governor.
The company itself acquired revenue of £100,000 a year, and a contribution towards its losses and military expenditure of a million and a half sterling.
He eventually developed a distinctive writing style, and a speech in the House of Commons was described by William Pitt as the most eloquent he had ever heard.
It appears in the records as "firman from the King Shah Aalum, granting the dewany of Bengal, Behar and Odisha to the Company 1765."
The success prompted the Tanjorean rajah to open peace talks, which resulted in the British being awarded Devikottai and the costs of their expedition, and the British client was awarded a pension in exchange for renouncing his claim.
Mir Jafar was compelled to engage in extortion on a vast scale in order to replenish his treasury, which had been emptied by the company's demand for an indemnity of 2.8 ''crores'' of rupees (£3 million).
Immediately thereafter Parliament began debating the Regulating Act of 1773, which significantly reformed the East India Company's practices.
In this he was aided by the news of reverses in Bengal.
* Charlotte Clive (b.
Military power was rapidly becoming as important as commercial acumen in securing India's valuable trade, and increasingly it was used to appropriate territory and to collect land revenue.
Except the 40 Frenchmen and the guns which they worked, the Indian side could do little to reply to the British cannonade (after a spell of rain) which, with the 39th Regiment, scattered the host, inflicting on it a loss of 500 men.
Hostilities in India began with a British naval attack on a French fleet in 1745, which led the French Governor-General Dupleix to request additional forces.
The ignominious retreat of the British force (which lost its baggage train to the pursuing Tanjorean army while crossing a swollen river) was a blow to the British reputation.
Shortly afterwards, on 2 January 1757, Calcutta itself was taken with similar ease.
The grandson, who was ruler of Bijapur, fled west to join Chanda Sahib, whose army was also reinforced by French troops sent by Dupleix.
With only 70 men in the fort, Clive once again was able to disguise his small numbers, and sowed sufficient confusion against his enemies that multiple assaults against the fort were successfully repulsed.
In 1768, Clive lived for a time in the Chateau de Larzac near Pézenas in the Hérault département of the Languedoc-Roussillon region in southern France.
He rode to Cuddalore, and offered his services to lead an attack on Arcot if he was given a captain's commission, arguing this would force Chanda Sahib to either abandon the siege of Trichinopoly or significantly reduce the force there.
The immediate consequence of Clive's victory at Plassey was an increase in the revenue demand on Bengal by at least 20%, much of which was appropriated by ''Zamindars'' and corrupt Company Officials, which led to considerable hardship for the rural population, particularly during the famine of 1770.
After heavy rain, Clive's 3,200 men and the nine guns crossed the river and took possession of the grove and its tanks of water, while Clive established his headquarters in a hunting lodge.
Clive was nearly cut down and the beachhead almost lost before reinforcements sent by Lawrence arrived to save the day.
Admiral Watson refused to sign it.
Clive set himself to reform the home system of the East India Company, and began a bitter dispute with the chairman of the Court of Directors, Laurence Sulivan, whom in the end, he defeated.
But he believed he had other work in the exploitation of the revenues and resources of rich Bengal itself, making it a base from which British India would afterwards steadily grow.
In July 1755, Clive returned to India to act as deputy governor of Fort St. David at Cuddalore.
After consenting to the siege, the Nawab unsuccessfully sought to assist the French.
Lawrence procured for Clive a position as the commissary at Fort St. George, a potentially lucrative posting (its pay included commissions on all supply contracts).
Dupleix had grasped from the first war that small numbers of disciplined European forces (and well-trained sepoys) could be used to tip balances of power between competing interests, and used this idea to greatly expand French influence in southern India.
Changes caused by Robert Clive to the revenue system and existing agricultural practices to maximize profits for the company led to the Bengal Famine of 1770.
Daniel Bayley, the sister's husband, reported that the boy was "out of measure addicted to fighting".
* Richard Clive (d. young)
On the expedition's return the process of restoring Madras was completed.
Clive also exhibited fearlessness at an early age.
He was awakened by the alarm, and was instantly at his post.... After three desperate onsets, the besiegers retired behind the ditch.
Clive himself headed the nine who voted for delay; Major Eyre Coote led the seven who counselled immediate attack.
The European merchant companies raised bodies of troops to protect their commercial interests and latterly to influence local politics to their advantage.
15 September 1760 bapt 10 October 1760 Moreton Say d. December 1795, married in 1780 to Lt-Gen John Robinson of Denston Hall Suffolk, MP (d.
That would come only seven years later in 1764 at the Battle of Buxar, where Sir Hector Munro defeated the combined forces of the Mughal Emperor and the Nawab of Awadh in a much more closely fought encounter.
Fort St. George and the French trading post at Pondicherry were both located in the nawab's territory.
On 22 November 1774 Clive died, aged forty-nine, at his Berkeley Square home in London.
Clive entered Murshidabad, and established Mir Jafar as Nawab, the price which had been agreed beforehand for his treachery.
The British company's military was also in some disarray, as Stringer Lawrence had returned to England in 1750 over a pay dispute, and much of the company was apathetic about the dangers the expanding French influence and declining British influence posed.
Nearly 250 years later in 1998, illegally salvaged coins from Clive's treasure chest were offered for sale, and in 2002 a portion of the coins were given to the South African government after protracted legal wrangling.
As Britain and France were once more at war, Clive sent the fleet up the river against the French colony of Chandannagar, while he besieged it by land.
On 23 June, the engagement took place and lasted the whole day, during which remarkably little actual fighting took place.
One tradition, followed by Macaulay, represents him as spending an hour in thought under the shade of some trees, while he resolved the issues of what was to prove one of the decisive battles of the world.
He sought to make terms with Clive, and surrendered control of Calcutta on 9 February, promising to compensate the East India Company for damages suffered and to restore its privileges.
Clive was one of the most controversial figures in all British military history.
In 1750 Clive was afflicted with some sort of nervous disorder, and was sent north to Bengal to recuperate.
During these, in 1773, General John Burgoyne, one of Clive's most vocal enemies, pressed the case that some of Clive's gains were made at the expense of the Company and the government.
He and his colleague, John Stephenson were later unseated by petition of their defeated opponents, Richard Hussey and Simon Luttrell.
The weakness of the British military command was exposed when a force was sent from Madras to support Muhammed Ali at Trichinopoly, but its commander, a Swiss mercenary, refused to attack an outpost at Valikondapuram.
This enabled him to learn some Portuguese, a language then in common use in south India because of the Portuguese centre at Goa.
Clive's father was known to have a temper, which the boy apparently inherited.
Together with Warren Hastings he was one of the key early figures in the creation of British India, with all his attention focused on one prize, ''Bengal''.
He is reputed to have climbed the tower of St Mary's Parish Church in Market Drayton and perched on a gargoyle, frightening those down below.
When the former garrison was reinforced by 2,000 men Chanda Sahib sent from Trichinopoly it reoccupied the town on 15 September.
Clive did the best he could to prepare for the onslaught he expected.
The company sought to extract the maximum revenue possible from the peasantry to fund military campaigns, and corruption was widespread amongst its officials.
Anwaruddin's son, Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah, fled to Trichinopoly where he sought the protection and assistance of the British.
The Nawab had drawn up 18,000 horse, 50,000-foot and 53 pieces of heavy ordnance, served by French artillerymen.
He was given access to the governor's library, where he became a prolific reader.
The action was led by Admiral James Watson and the English had several ships available, some Royal troops and some Maratha allies.
The Indian theatre of the conflict is also known as the First Carnatic War.
Monsoons ravaged the land forces, and the local support claimed by their client was not in evidence.
With Admiral Watson, Governor Drake and Mr. Watts, Clive made a gentlemen's agreement in which it was agreed to give the office of viceroy of Bengal, Bihar and Odisha to Mir Jafar, who was to pay a million sterling to the Company for its losses in Calcutta and the cost of its troops, half a million to the British inhabitants of Calcutta, £200,000 to the native inhabitants, and £70,000 to its Armenian merchants.
* Rebecca Clive (b.
Clive had already made a secret agreement with aristocrats in Bengal, including Jagat Seth and Mir Jafar.
The non-graduate Clive received an honorary degree as DCL from Oxford University in 1760, and in 1764 he was named a Knight of the Bath.
The affair was a serious blow: 15 of Clive's men were killed, and another 15 wounded.
His reorganisation of the army, on the lines of that which he had begun after Plassey, neglected during his absence in Great Britain, subsequently attracted the admiration of Indian officers.
(Most of these troops came from Pondicherry, not Trichinopoly, and thus did not have the effect Clive desired of raising that siege.)
The losses to the Company because of the fall of Calcutta were estimated by investors at £2,000,000.
Nasir Jung pursued, and was able to capture Arcot and his nephew, Muzaffar Jung.
* Robert Clive Jnr (b.
In thanks for French assistance, the victors awarded them a number of villages, including territory nominally under British sway near Cuddalore and Madras.
Following Irish independence, these lands became state property.
In the summer of 1751, Chanda Sahib left Arcot to besiege Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah at Trichinopoly.
Clive, who accompanied the force as commissary, was outraged at the decision to abandon the siege.
His territories were "said to yield an annual revenue of over 350,000 rupees".
Robert Clive was born at Styche, the Clive family estate, near Market Drayton in Shropshire, on 29 September 1725 to Richard Clive and Rebecca Gaskell Clive.
Clive also repelled the aggression of the Dutch, and avenged the massacre of Amboyna&nbsp;– the occasion when he wrote his famous letter; "Dear Forde, fight them immediately; I will send you the order of council to-morrow".
Clive employed Umichand, a rich Bengali trader, as an agent between Mir Jafar and the British officials.
Early in 1756, Siraj Ud Daulah had succeeded his grandfather Alivardi Khan as Nawab of Bengal.
He dispatched Colonel Forde to Vizagapatam and the northern districts of Madras, where that officer won the Battle of Condore, pronounced by Broome "one of the most brilliant actions on military record".
Umichand threatened to betray Clive unless he was guaranteed, in the agreement itself, £300,000.
The death of the Asaf Jah I, the Nizam of Hyderabad, in 1748 sparked a struggle to succeed him that is known as the Second Carnatic War, which was also furthered by the expansionist interests of French Governor-General Dupleix.
The Mughals were also joined by Jean Law and 200 Frenchmen and waged a campaign against the British during the Seven Years' War.
Clive lost hardly any European troops; in all 22 sepoys were killed and 50 wounded.
He was heartened to learn that some 6,000 Maratha forces had been convinced to come to his relief, but that they were awaiting payment before proceeding.
Even allowing for overestimation this was considerably more than Clive's force of approximately 540 British infantry, 600 Royal Navy sailors, 800 local sepoys, fourteen field guns and no cavalry.
There was a great famine in Bengal between 1769 and 1773, which reduced the population of Bengal by a third.
One 20th century biographer, John Watney, concluded: "He did not die from a self-inflicted wound...He died of a heart attack brought on by an overdose of drugs".
Clive selected some able subordinates, notably a young Warren Hastings, who, a year after Plassey, was made resident at the Nawab's court.
But he had discerned the importance of the province even during his first visit to its rich delta, mighty rivers and teeming population.
, who sought to annex Madras to French holdings.
He re-fortified Calcutta.
Nevertheless, the Court of Proprietors, forced the Directors to hurry Lord Clive to Bengal with the double powers of Governor and Commander-in-Chief.
Hence he returned to the Awadh viceroy all his territory save the provinces of Allahabad and Kora, which he presented to the weak emperor.
In 1760, the 35-year-old Clive returned to Great Britain with a fortune of at least £300,000 and the quit-rent of £27,000 a year.
He left Madras for home, after ten years' absence, early in 1753, but not before marrying Margaret Maskelyne, the sister of his friend Nevil Maskelyne who was afterwards well known as Astronomer Royal.
He arrived after having lost a considerable fortune en route, as the ''Doddington'', the lead ship of his convoy, was wrecked near Port Elizabeth, losing a chest of gold coins belonging to Clive worth £33,000.
Robert Clive married Margaret Maskelyne (d. 28 December 1817) on 18 February 1753, sister of the Rev.
Modern historians have criticised him for atrocities, for high taxes, and for the forced cultivation of crops which exacerbated famines.
Dr Nevil Maskelyne, fifth Astronomer Royal, in Madras.
Madras and Fort St David could supply him with only 200 Europeans, 300 sepoys, and three small cannons; furthermore, of the eight officers who led them, four were civilians like Clive, and six had never been in action.
This placed the British at Madras in a precarious position, since the latter was the last of their major allies in the area.
Later in 1768, Clive was made a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).
It was a result of this action and the increased British influence that in 1765 a ''firman'' (decree) came from the Emperor of Delhi, recognizing the British possessions in southern India.
The hearings highlighted the need for reform of the Company, and a vote to censure Clive for his actions failed.
The Court of Directors of the East India Company voted him a sword worth £700, which he refused to receive unless Lawrence was similarly honoured.
Their forces were reinforced by the forces of Shuja-ud-Daula and Najib-ud-Daula.
The British began sending additional arms to Muhammed Ali Khan Wallajah and sought to bring Nasir Jung into the fray to oppose Chanda Sahib.
Clive and Major Lawrence were able to bring the campaign to a successful conclusion.
He put down a mutiny of the British officers, who chose to resent the veto against receiving presents and the reduction of ''batta'' (extra pay) at a time when two Maratha armies were marching on Bengal.
The revelations and the debates in the parliament reduced his political fortunes considerably.
...&nbsp;the commander who had to conduct the defence...was a young man of five and twenty, who had been bred as a book-keeper... Clive...had made his arrangements, and, exhausted by fatigue, had thrown himself on his bed.
He was also elected Mayor of Shrewsbury for 1762–63.
The historian Thomas Babington Macaulay wrote a century later of the siege:
In 1754, the first of the provisional Carnatic treaties was signed between Thomas Saunders, the Company president at Madras, and Charles Godeheu, the French commander who displaced Dupleix.
While technically not a victory in military terms, the sudden British assault intimidated the Nawab.
He was said to have been a pupil at Stand Grammar School in Whitefield.
The long-term outcome of Plassey was to place a very heavy revenue burden upon Bengal.
His whole army amounted to 1,100 Europeans and 2,100 sepoy troops, with nine field-pieces.
Clive's men were subjected to frequent sniper attacks and disease, lowering the garrison size to 200.
The next day Clive learned that heavy guns he had requested from Madras were approaching, so he sent most of his garrison out to escort them into the fort.
While busy with the civil administration, Clive continued to follow up his military success.
In this battle, unofficially called the 'Calcutta Gauntlet', Clive marched his small force through the entire Nawab's camp, despite being under heavy fire from all sides.
Their first target was the fortress of Baj-Baj which Clive approached by land while Admiral Watson bombarded it from the sea.
Questioned about some of the large sums of money he had received while in India, Clive pointed out that they were not contrary to accepted company practice, and defended his behaviour by stating "I stand astonished at my own moderation" given opportunities for greater gain.
Lawrence wrote of Clive's action that "he behaved in courage and in judgment much beyond what could be expected from his years."
Clive again made a spirited defence of his actions, and closed his testimony by stating "Take my fortune, but save my honour."
The daring move by Clive had an important consequence: the Tanjoreans abandoned the fort, which the British triumphantly occupied.
During the three years that Clive remained in Great Britain, he sought a political position, chiefly that he might influence the course of events in India, which he had left full of promise.
He made a foray against the fort's former garrison, encamped a few miles away, which had no significant effect.
He is credited with securing a large swath of South Asia (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan) and the wealth that followed, for the British crown.
