Peary and his aide Henson both had relationships with Inuit women outside of marriage and fathered children with them.
After his father Charles Peary died in 1859, Peary's mother took the boy with her and settled in Portland, Maine.
In September 1891, Peary's men took dog sled teams and pushed inland onto the ice sheet, to lay caches of supplies.
Josephine stayed with Peary.
At the time, his proofs were not made available to scrutiny by other professionals, as had been done by the Danish panel.
Many fellow explorers knew the facts about Peary and his Inuit "wife", but had no wish to mention them publicly.
He claimed the next day to have achieved a Farthest North world record at 87°06' and returned to 86°30' without camping, an implied trip of at least  between sleeping, even assuming direct travel with no detours.
Peary's leg mended in February 1892.
British explorer Tom Avery and four companions recreated the outward portion of Peary's journey in 2005, using replica wooden sleds and Canadian Eskimo Dog teams.
The film won a Primetime Emmy and Lindo won a Golden Satellite Award for his performance.
Historian Larry Schweikart examined it, finding that: the writing was consistent throughout (giving no evidence of post-expedition alteration), that there were consistent pemmican and other stains on all pages, and that all evidence was consistent with a conclusion that Peary's observations were made on the spot he claimed.
The two found the  high view from Navy Cliff to be revealing: they saw Independence Fjord and concluded that Greenland was an island.
They did not go farther than  from Red Cliff.
Among those he brought back were Minik and his father, Qisuk.
To specify, Peary claimed to travel (in his official report) a total of 304 nautical miles between April 2, 1909 (when he left Bartlett's last camp) and April 9 (when he returned there), 133 NMs to the pole, 133 NMs back and 38 Nautical miles in the vicinity of the pole.
Postal Service's air mail system.
Based on an evaluation of Peary's records, British polar explorer Wally Herbert concluded in a 1989 book that Peary did not reach the pole, although he may have been as close as .
No major professional geographical society followed suit.
The newlyweds honeymooned in Atlantic City, New Jersey, then moved to Philadelphia because Peary was assigned there.
He joined the United States Navy and on October 26, 1881, was commissioned as a civil engineer, with the relative rank of lieutenant.
Unlike most previous explorers, Peary had studied Inuit survival techniques; he built igloos during the expedition and dressed in practical furs in the native fashion.
On June 6, 1891, the party left Brooklyn, New York, in the seal hunting ship SS ''Kite''.
(His home there has been designated a Maine State Historic Site.)
Schweikart had compared the reports and experiences of Japanese explorer Naomi Uemura, who reached the North Pole alone in 1978, to those of Peary and found they were consistent.
He missed the birth of his son and his early death.
Herbert, who reached the Pole in 1969, is recognized as the first man leading a team to reach the Pole.
Minik was adopted by William Wallace of the museum and reared in the United States.
Later in the same year, he retired to Eagle Island on the coast of Maine, in the town of Harpswell.
The second, more difficult path was to start from Whale Sound at the top of the known portion of Baffin Bay and travel north to determine whether Greenland was an island or if it extended all the way across the Arctic.
For his final assault on the Pole, Peary and 23 men, including Ross Gilmore Marvin, set off from New York City on July 6, 1908 aboard the SS ''Roosevelt'' under the command of Captain Robert Bartlett.
His book, ''The Noose of Laurels'', caused a furor when it was published in 1989.
Peary was said to have sold the meteorites for $50,000.
Josephine told Peary that his mother should return to live in Maine.
The Royal Geographical Society of London gave Peary its gold medal in 1910, despite internal council splits which only became known in the 1970s.
He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon and Phi Beta Kappa fraternities while at college.
They worried about endangering their own financial backing by geographical societies or their Inuit relationships.
Maigaard and Peary set off together and traveled nearly  due east before turning back because they were short on food.
Admiral Peary died in Washington, D.C. on February 20, 1920.
In 1989 the NGS also conducted two-dimensional photogrammetric analysis of the shadows in photographs and a review of ocean depth measures taken by Peary; its staff concluded that he was no more than  away from the pole.
Peary was inadvertently without a companion sufficiently trained in navigation to verify his account from that point northward.
To complete his tropical outfit he needed a sun hat, so he went to a men's clothing store.
Some researchers since the late 20th century believe they have found evidence that supports the Peary claim.
Eventually recognized by Congress to have "attained" the pole, Peary was given the Thanks of Congress by a special act of March 3, 1911.
By April, he made some short trips with Josephine and an Inuit dog sled driver to native villages to purchase supplies.
Reporting on its conclusion that Peary had reached the Pole, Gilbert M. Grosvenor, president of the NGS, said, “I consider this the end of a historic controversy and the confirmation of due justice to a great explorer.” The Navigation Foundation's full report of December 11, 1989 has been published and is  available here.
Bob Bartlett) averaged no better than  march northing.
He sailed on a whaler to Greenland, arriving in Godhavn on June 6, 1886.
The conflicting and unverified claims of Cook and Peary prompted Roald Amundsen to take extensive precautions in navigation during his Antarctic expedition so as to leave no room for doubt concerning his 1911 attainment of the South Pole, which (like Robert Scott's a month later in 1912) was supported by the sextant, theodolite, and compass observations of several other navigators.
'''Robert Edwin Peary, Sr.''' (May 6, 1856 – February 20, 1920) was an American explorer who claimed to have reached the geographic North Pole with his expedition on April 6, 1909.
Robert Edwin Peary was born on May 6, 1856, in Cresson, Pennsylvania, to Charles N. and Mary P. Peary.
On assignment in the jungles of Nicaragua, Peary told Henson of his dream of Arctic exploration.
Peary stated (in 1909 Congressional hearings about the expedition) that he made no longitudinal observations during his trip, only latitude observations., yet he maintained he stayed on the "Columbia meridian" all along, and that his soundings were made on this meridian.
In July, as ''Kite'' was ramming through sheets of surface ice, the ship's iron tiller suddenly spun around and broke Peary's lower leg; both bones snapped between the knee and ankle.
Some polar historians believe that Peary honestly thought he had reached the pole.
Peary was unable to fully enjoy the fruits of his labors.
As reflected in a diary entry he made in 1885, during his time in the Navy, he resolved to be the first man to reach the North Pole.
All but two of them soon died, including Minik's father.
The last support party was turned back from "Bartlett Camp" on April 1, 1909, in latitude no greater than 87°45' north.
"After reaching the Pole, Avery and his team were airlifted off the ice rather than returning by dogsled.
Peary appears to have started his relationship with his Inuit wife Aleqasina (''Alakahsingwah'') when she was about 14 years old.
They ensured their sled weights were the same as Peary's sleds throughout their journey.
Peary also took his wife along as dietitian, though she had no formal training.
In 1914 Donald MacMillan and Fitzhugh Green's expedition found that Crocker Land did not exist.
But Peary had a team consisting of 133 dogs and 25 men, meaning he was able to keep his "polar party" fresh for the sprint to the Pole.
By a special act of Congress on March 30, 1911, Peary was promoted to the rank of Rear Admiral in the Navy Civil Engineer Corps retroactive to April 6, 1909, and retired the same day.
Gibson, Cook, Verhoeff and Astrup hunted game by boat, and became familiar with the area and with the Inuit people.
By his lobbying, Peary headed off a move among some US Congressmen to have his claim to the pole evaluated by other explorers.
Peary's original camera (a 1908 #4 Folding Pocket Kodak) has not survived.
Josephine was intolerant of the Inuit people's smell (they did not bathe), of their flea infestations, and of their food.
The party that accompanied Peary on the final stage of the journey included no one else who was trained in navigation and could independently confirm (or contradict) Peary's own navigational work, a point exacerbated by Peary's omission to produce records of observed data for steering, for the direction ("variation") of the compass, for his longitudinal position at any time, or for zeroing-in on the pole either latitudinally or transversely beyond Bartlett Camp.
Peary's account of a beeline journey to the pole and back — which would have assisted his claim of such speed — is contradicted by companion Henson's account of tortured detours to avoid "pressure ridges" (ice floes' rough edges, often a few meters high) and "leads" (of open water between those floes).
The men trekked back to Red Cliff and got there on August 6, having traveled a total of .
The pack ice was moving all the time, so he had no way of knowing where he was without longitudinal observations.
The explorer Major General Adolphus Greely noted that no Arctic expert questions that Peary courageously risked his life traveling hundreds of miles from land, and that he reached regions adjacent to the pole.
(The figure commonly given, 87°47', is based upon Bartlett's slight miscomputation of the distance of a single Sumner line from the pole.)
His conclusions have been widely accepted but are in turn disputed by other authorities.
A subsequent documentary by the same name was also released.
Peary's claim was certified by the National Geographic Society in 1909 after a cursory examination of Peary's records, as NGS was a major sponsor of his expedition.
Avery never exceeded  in any five-day stretch, and was losing over  a day at this time to the southerly drift of the ice.
On April 6, 1909, he established "Camp Jesup" allegedly within  of the pole.
However, she studied the people and kept a journal of her experiences.
Avery writes on his web site that "The admiration and respect which I hold for Robert Peary, Matthew Henson and the four Inuit men who ventured North in 1909, has grown enormously since we set out from Cape Columbia.
The National Geographic Society limited access to Peary's records.
On the final stage of the journey toward the North Pole, Peary told Bartlett to stay behind.
He also gained national recognition of Henson's role in the expeditions.
The expedition is described from the point of view of one not chosen for the final polar attempt.
Peary's chief financial backer for his expeditions was New York philanthropist Morris Ketchum Jesup, a major force in the founding of Anthony Comstock's New York Society for the Suppression of Vice.
The parties made well under  a day until they became separated by a storm.
Having now seen for myself how he travelled across the pack ice, I am more convinced than ever that Peary did indeed discover the North Pole.
There he met 21-year-old Matthew Henson, a black man working as a sales clerk.
Peary has been criticized for his treatment of the Inuit, especially for bringing back six Inuit from Greenland to the United States in 1897.
Specialists questioned the Society's conclusions.
Peary used his celebrity to promote the use of military and naval aviation, which led directly to the formation of Naval Reserve aerial coastal patrol units during the First World War.
Following his retirement, Peary received many honors from numerous scientific societies of Europe and America for his Arctic explorations and discoveries.
It advocated the use of aircraft in detecting warships and submarines off the U.S. coast.
Peary made his first expedition to the Arctic in 1886, intending to cross Greenland by dog sled, taking the first of his own suggested paths.
Peary's next expedition was supported by a $50,000 gift by George Crocker, who was the youngest son of the banker Charles Crocker.
He arranged to bring the men and their families to the United States to meet their American relatives and see their fathers' gravesites.
He claimed that his sighting of Axel Heiberg land was prior to its discovery by Norwegian explorer Otto Sverdrup's expedition.
On May 3, 1892, Peary finally set out on the intended trek with Henson, Gibson, Cook and Astrup.
Cook and his followers criticized Peary for this behavior during the admiral's lifetime.
After some  court trials, Peary was proved right, and Cook was declared wrong.
Avery matched Peary's overall 37-day total in part because Peary was held up by open water for five days at the Big Lead.
In April 1886 he wrote a paper for the National Academy of Sciences proposing two methods for crossing Greenland's ice cap.
This contention has been universally rejected by exploration societies and historians.
Upon returning to civilization, he learned that Dr. Frederick A. Cook, who had been a surgeon on the 1891–1892 Peary expedition, claimed to have reached the pole in 1908.
On August 11, 1888, Peary married Josephine Diebitsch, a business school valedictorian who thought the modern woman should be more than just a mother.
He was financed by several groups, including the American Geographic Society, the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, and the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences.
As Herbert researched the material, he came to believe that Peary must have falsified his records and concluded that he did not reach the Pole.
The NGS commissioned the  Foundation for the Promotion of the Art of Navigation to resolve the issue.
The last five marches when Peary was accompanied by a navigator (Capt.
Supporters of Peary and Henson assert that the depth soundings they made on the outward journey have been matched by recent surveys, and so their claim of having reached the Pole is confirmed.
Peary also relied on the Inuit as hunters and dog-drivers on his expeditions.
Both claims were widely debated in newspapers until 1913.
Peary's claim was widely credited for most of the 20th century, rather than the competing claim by Frederick Cook, who said he got there a year earlier.
Wally Herbert noted the relationship and children in his book on Peary's 1909 expedition, published in 1989.
Peary wanted to make a solo trek but a young Danish official named Christian Maigaard convinced him he would die if he went out alone.
(After initial acceptance of Peary's claim, he later came to doubt Peary's having reached 90°.)
One was to start from the west coast and trek about  to the east coast.
More than 60 years later, Matthew Henson was honored by being re-interred nearby in Arlington Cemetery on April 6, 1988.
By the 1960s these facts were widely acknowledged.
On December 15, 1906, the National Geographic Society of the United States, which was primarily known for publishing a popular magazine, certified Peary's 1905-6 expedition and "Farthest" with its highest honor, the Hubbard Gold Medal.
He was initially assigned to duty in the tropics.
S. Allen Counter, a Harvard neuroscience professor, had heard rumors of Henson's and Peary's children, and was interested in learning more about Henson's role in the Arctic expeditions.
His associate Matthew Henson was played by Delroy Lindo.
Peary was promoted to the rank of lieutenant commander on January 5, 1901, and to commander on April 6, 1902.
They reached the North Pole in 36 days, 22 hours – nearly five hours faster than Peary.
Neither the American Geographical Society nor any of the geographical societies of semi-Arctic Scandinavia has recognized Peary's North Pole claim.
They had two children together, Marie Ahnighito and Robert Peary, Jr. Due to his life as an explorer, Peary was frequently gone for years at a time.
Pierre Berton Canadian author and historian, wrote extensively about Commodore Perry and his Arctic Expeditions in his book: (1988 Anchor Canada ISBN 0-385-65845-1.
After returning to ''Roosevelt'' in May, Peary in June began weeks of difficult travel by heading west along the shore of Ellesmere.
Analysis of the speeds made by Avery do more to cast doubt on Peary's claim than to confirm it.
Peary's team was more experienced than Avery's at dog sledding.
However, Peary made no entries in the diary on the crucial days 6 and 7 April 1909, and his famous words "The Pole at Last!
In his book ''Ninety Degrees North: The Quest for the North Pole'' (2001), polar historian Fergus Fleming describes Peary as "undoubtedly the most driven, possibly the most successful and probably the most unpleasant man in the annals of polar exploration."
In 1984 the National Geographic Society (a major sponsor of Peary's expeditions) commissioned the Arctic explorer Wally Herbert to write an assessment of Peary’s original 1909 diary and astronomical observations.
Peary was unloaded with the rest of the supplies at a camp they called Red Cliff, and a dwelling was built for his recuperation during the next six months.
Counter wrote about Peary's and Henson's Inuit children, and their meeting with their American half-siblings and other relatives in his book, ''North Pole Legacy: Black, White and Eskimo'' (1991).
Henson accompanied Peary on every one of his subsequent Arctic expeditions, becoming his field assistant and "first man," a critical member of his team.
After growing up in Portland, Peary attended Bowdoin College, some  to the north.
''The Arctic Grail: The Quest for the North West Passage and the North Pole, 1818–1909''.
Peary's exploits and life were portrayed in the 1998 TV movie ''Glory & Honor''.
While in the Arctic years later, Peary had a long-term relationship with an Inuit woman, Aleqasina (who is estimated to have been 14 when they began).
Peary returned home knowing more of what was required for long-distance ice trekking.
A later review of his diary for this time and place found that he wrote, "No land visible."
The RGS based their decision on the belief that the NGS had performed a serious scrutiny of the "proofs", which was not the case.
After college, Peary worked as a draftsman making technical drawings in Washington, DC, at the US Coast and Geodetic Survey office.
He discovered Cape Colgate, from the summit of which he claimed in his 1907 book that he had seen a previously undiscovered far-north "Crocker Land" to the northwest on June 24, 1906.
The SS ''Roosevelt'' battled her way through the ice between Greenland and Ellesmere Island, establishing an American hemisphere "farthest north by ship."
He graduated in 1877 with a civil engineering degree.
In early 1916, Peary became chairman of the National Aerial Coast Patrol Commission, a private organization created by the Aero Club of America.
His conclusion has been widely accepted.
The Inuit were curious about the American party and came to visit Red Cliff.
He later pleaded with Robert Peary to help him return to Greenland, which the explorer did.
Newspaper reports criticized Peary for bringing his wife.
Peary's claim to have reached the North Pole has long been subject to doubt.
Only the first few of the Peary party's soundings, taken nearest the shore, touched bottom; experts have said their usefulness is limited to showing that he was above deep water.
Other critics have alleged that Peary stole several large meteorites from Minik's Inuit band in Greenland.
The diary that Robert E. Peary kept on his 1909 polar expedition was finally made available for research in 1986.
Peary also achieved a "farthest north" for the western hemisphere in 1902 north of Canada's Ellesmere Island.
The museum kept Qisuk's remains and later displayed his skeleton.
Henry Czerny played Robert Peary.
This was a few weeks before Cook's Pole claim was rejected by a Danish panel of explorers and navigational experts.
the distance travelled must have been significantly higher to make good the distance claimed.
These distances are counted without detours due to drift, leads and difficult ice, i.e.
She bore him at least two children, including a son Kali, identified in the late 1980s when he was an octogenarian.
In 1986 he went to Greenland to do research and found Peary's son Kali and Henson's son Anaukaq, then octogenarians, and some of their descendants.
They wintered near Cape Sheridan on Ellesmere Island, and from Ellesmere departed for the pole on February 28 – March 1, 1909.
At the close of the First World War, Peary proposed a system of eight air mail routes, which became the genesis of the U.S.
He was given six months' leave from the Navy, and he received $500 from his mother to book passage north and buy supplies.
On April 20, he was no further north than 86°30' latitude.
He adopted these practices both for heat preservation (furs) and to dispense with the extra weight of tents and sleeping bags when on the march by building igloos instead.
Peary was promoted to the rank of captain in the Navy on October 20, 1910.
He continued with five assistants, none capable of making navigation observations: American Matthew Henson, and Inuit ''Ootah'', ''Egigingwah'', ''Seegloo'' and ''Ooqueah''.
Back in Washington attending with the US Navy, Peary was ordered in November 1887 to survey likely routes for a proposed Nicaragua Canal.
He was buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
The NGS has never released Peary's photos for independent analysis.
Peary's account has been newly criticized by Berton (2001) and Henderson (2005).
These allegedly were valuable as the band's only local source of iron, and they needed the material for harpoon points and other tools.
E.L. Doctorow's novel ''Ragtime'' (1974) has as a major character Father, a member of Peary's 1908 polar expedition.
He pioneered the system (which he called the "Peary system") of using support teams and establishing supply caches for Arctic travel.
Peary used the money for a new ship.
Learning that Henson had six years of seagoing experience as a cabin boy, Peary immediately hired him as a personal valet.
In their first twenty-three years of his marriage, he spent only three with his wife and family.
Gilbert Grosvenor persuaded the National Academy of Sciences not to get involved.
This was the second-farthest penetration of Greenland's ice sheet at that date.
The six Inuit were put into the custody of the American Museum of Natural History in New York, whose staff wanted to study them.
But once the last support party turned back at "Camp Bartlett" from where Bartlett was ordered southward, at least  from the pole, Peary's claimed speeds immediately doubled for the five marches to Camp Jesup, and then quadrupled during the 2½ day return to Camp Bartlett—at which point his speed slowed drastically compared to that pace.
While Peary claimed  made good in his last five marches, horrific ice conditions meant that Avery managed only 71 in his last five marches.
(This was common among European explorers of the Arctic; for example, Robert J. Flaherty fathered a son during the filming of ''Nanook of the North''.)
He served twice as president of The Explorers Club from 1909 to 1911 and 1913 to 1916.
At about the  mark, Peary continued on with Astrup.
As a result of Peary's 1898–1902 expedition, he claimed an 1899 visual discovery of "Jesup Land" west of Ellesmere.
Peary and his party arrived back in Cape Columbia on the morning of April 23, 1909, only about two and a half days after Capt Bartlett, yet Peary claimed he had traveled a minimum of 304 NMs more than Bartlett (to the Pole and vicinity).
Peary did not submit his evidence for review to neutral national or international parties or to other explorers.
Diebitsch had started working at the Smithsonian Institution when she was 19–20 years old, replacing her father after he became ill and filling his position as linguist.
Peary's mother accompanied them on their honeymoon and she moved into their Philadelphia apartment, but not without friction between the two women.
With insufficient food, and with uncertainty about whether he could negotiate the ice between him and land, he made the best possible dash and barely escaped with his life off the melting ice.
", allegedly written in his diary at the pole, were written on loose slips of paper that were inserted into the diary.
Members of this expedition included Peary's aide Henson, Dr. Frederick A. Cook, who served as the group's surgeon; and the expedition's ethnologist, Norwegian skier Eivind Astrup; bird expert and marksman Langdon Gibson, and John M. Verhoeff, who was a weatherman and mineralogist.
