Ballads dating back to the 15th century are the oldest existing form of the Robin Hood legends, although none of them were recorded at the time of the first allusions to him, and many are from much later.
The earliest known legal records mentioning a person called Robin Hood (Robert Hod) are from 1226, found in the York Assizes, when that person's goods, worth 32 shillings and 6 pence, were confiscated and he became an outlaw.
And, while Wentbridge is not directly named in ''A Gest of Robyn Hode'', the poem does appear to make a cryptic reference to the locality by depicting a poor knight explaining to Robin Hood that he 'went at a bridge' where there was wrestling'.
From 1261 onward, the names 'Robinhood', 'Robehod' or 'Robbehod' occur in the rolls of several English Justices as nicknames or descriptions of malefactors.
In fact, the only character who does not get the better of Hood is the luckless Sheriff.
During the medieval age Wentbridge was sometimes locally referred to by the name of Barnsdale because it was the predominant settlement in the forest.
This is the first in popular culture to portray King Richard as less than perfect.
In popular culture, Robin Hood and his band of "merry men" are portrayed as living in Sherwood Forest, in Nottinghamshire.
One final locality in the forest of Barnsdale that is associated with Robin Hood is the village of Campsall.
as Richard the Lionheart calls him – makes his debut.
Hunter developed a fairly detailed theory implying that Robert Hood had been an adherent of the rebel Earl of Lancaster, who was defeated by Edward II at the Battle of Boroughbridge in 1322.
In it, the character Valentine is banished from Milan and driven out through the forest where he is approached by outlaws who, upon meeting him, desire him as their leader.
Ritson's friend Walter Scott used Ritson's anthology collection as a source for his picture of Robin Hood in Ivanhoe, written in 1818, which did much to shape the modern legend.
One such place-name location occurred in a cartulary deed of 1422 from Monkbretton Priory, which makes direct reference to a landmark named Robin Hood's Stone, which resided upon the eastern side of the Great North Road, a mile south of Barnsdale Bar.
:loke ye do no husbonde harme
All Saints' Church had a priory hospital attached to it.
It is from the association with the May Games that Robin's romantic attachment to Maid Marian (or Marion) apparently stems.
And in its final lines the Gest sums up:
Each of these three ballads survived in a single copy, so it is unclear how much of the medieval legend has survived, and what has survived may not be typical of the medieval legend.
Yet even in these ballads Robin is more than a mere simpleton: on the contrary, he often acts with great shrewdness.
Children's Robin Hood novels began to appear.
A Neolithic causewayed enclosure on Salisbury Plain has acquired the name Robin Hood's Ball, although had Robin Hood existed it is doubtful that he would have travelled so far south.
The prose life of Robin Hood in Sloane Manuscript contains the substance of the Alan-a-Dale ballad but tells the story about Will Scarlet.
In 1599, the play ''George a Green, the Pinner of Wakefield'' places Robin Hood in the reign of Edward IV.
She does not appear in extant versions of the ballad.
:No more ye shall no gode yeman
However, she betrayed him, his health worsened, and he eventually died there.
There is a village in West Yorkshire called Robin Hood, on the A61 between Leeds and Wakefield and close to Rothwell and Lofthouse.
Egan  made Robin Hood of noble birth but raised by the forestor Gilbert Hood.
The surname "Hood" (or Hude, Hode, etc.)
Robin Hood has also been claimed for the pagan witch-cult supposed by Margaret Murray to have existed in medieval Europe, and his anti-clericalism and Marianism interpreted in this light.
Bower goes on to tell a story about Robin Hood in which he refuses to flee from his enemies while hearing Mass in the greenwood, and then gains a surprise victory over them, apparently as a reward for his piety.
Notably, the ''Lincoln Cathedral Manuscript'', which is the first officially recorded Robin Hood song (dating from approximately 1420), makes an explicit reference to the outlaw that states that "Robyn hode in scherewode stod."
The broadside ballads were fitted to a small repertoire of pre-existing tunes resulting in an increase of "stock formulaic phrases' making them "repetitive and verbose", they commonly feature Robin Hood's contests with artisans; tinkers tanners and butchers.
In these early accounts, Robin Hood's partisanship of the lower classes, his Marianism and associated special regard for women, his outstanding skill as an archer, his anti-clericalism, and his particular animosity towards the Sheriff of Nottingham are already clear.
The early ballads link Robin Hood to identifiable real places.
From east to west the forest extended about five miles, from Askern on the east to Badsworth in the west.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, the Robin Hood ballads were mostly sold in "Garlands" of 16 to 24 Robin Hood ballads; these were crudely printed chap books aimed at the poor.
This was in fact true of the historical outlaw of Sherwood Forest Roger Godberd, whose points of similarity to the Robin Hood of the ballads have often been noted.
Marian did not immediately gain the unquestioned role; in ''Robin Hood's Birth, Breeding, Valor, and Marriage'', his sweetheart is 'Clorinda the Queen of the Shepherdesses'.
Exactly when they displaced the oral tradition of Robin Hood ballads is unknown but the process seems to have been completed by the end of the 16th century.
This could suggest two main possibilities: either that an early form of the Robin Hood legend was already well established in the mid-13th century; or alternatively that the name "Robin Hood" preceded the outlaw hero that we know; so that the "Robin Hood" of legend was so called because that was seen as an appropriate name for an outlaw.
But before the Law of the Normans was the Law of the Danes, The Danelaw had a similar boundary to that of Mercia but had a population of ''Free Peasantry'' that were known to have resisted the Norman occupation.
A more recent theory proposes  that Robin Hood died at Kirkby, Pontefract.
Maurice Keen  provides a brief summary and useful critique of the evidence for the view Robin Hood had mythological origins.
Some ballads, such as ''Erlinton'', feature Robin Hood in some variants, where the folk hero appears to be added to a ballad pre-existing him and in which he does not fit very well.
In 1598, Anthony Munday wrote a pair of plays on the Robin Hood legend, ''The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington'' (published 1601).
:In Yngil-wode and Barnysdale
Robert Hod of York is the only early Robin Hood known to have been an outlaw.
Acknowledging that Robin Hood operated in the Went Valley, located three miles to the southeast of the town of Pontefract, historians today indicate that the outlaw is buried at nearby Kirkby.
In his preface to the collection Ritson assembled an account of Robin Hood's life from the various sources available to him, and concluded that Robin Hood was born in around 1160, and thus had been active in the reign of Richard I.
Dobson and Taylor write: "More generally the Robin of the broadsides is a much less tragic, less heroic and in the last resort less mature figure than his medieval predecessor"  In most of the broadside ballads Robin Hood remains a plebeian figure, a notable exception being Martin Parker's attempt at an overall life of Robin Hood, A True Tale of Robin Hood, which also emphasises the theme of Robin Hood's generosity to the poor more than the broadsheet ballads do in general.
From this location it was once possible to look out over the Went Valley and observe the traffic that passed along the Great North Road.
L. V. D. Owen in 1936 floated the idea that Robin Hood might be identified with an outlawed Robert Hood, or Hod, or Hobbehod, all apparently the same man, referred to in nine successive Yorkshire Pipe Rolls between 1226 and 1234.
:Ne no knyght ne no squyer
:Wayth-men ware commendyd gude
Even when Robin is defeated, he usually tricks his foe into letting him sound his horn, summoning the Merry Men to his aid.
It has been argued that the fact that the surviving ballads were preserved in written form in itself makes it unlikely they were typical; in particular, stories with an interest for the gentry were by this view more likely to be preserved.
Another very popular version for children was Howard Pyle's ''The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood'', which influenced accounts of Robin Hood through the 20th century.
The garlands added nothing to the substance of the legend but ensured that it continued after the decline of the single broadside ballad.
The fifteenth-century ballads relate that before he died, Robin told Little John where to bury him.
:An pipl kauld im robin heud
In popular culture, Robin Hood is typically seen as a contemporary and supporter of the late-12th-century king Richard the Lionheart, Robin being driven to outlawry during the misrule of Richard's brother John while Richard was away at the Third Crusade.
:Vil england nivr si agen
When asked about the exiled Duke Senior, the character of Charles says that he is "already in the forest of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England".
The character Azeem in the 1991 movie ''Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves'' was originally called Nasir, until a crew member who worked on ''Robin of Sherwood'' pointed out that the Nasir character was not part of the original legend and was created for the show ''Robin of Sherwood''.
Pyle's Robin Hood is a yeoman and not an aristocrat.
Ritson gave the date of Robin Hood's death as 18 November 1247, when he would have been around 87 years old.
The third (the "Curtal Friar") and the fourth (the "Butcher"), also probably have late medieval origins.
Other scholars have by contrast stressed the subversive aspects of the legend, and see in the medieval Robin Hood ballads a plebeian literature hostile to the feudal order.
The story of Robin's aid to the "poor knight" that takes up much of the Gest may be an example.
:he was a good outlawe,
The word translated here as "murderer" is the Latin ''siccarius'' (Eng: "knife-man" or "dagger-man"), from the Latin for "knife".
These plays drew on a variety of sources, including apparently A Gest of Robin Hood, and were influential in fixing the story of Robin Hood to the period of Richard I. Stephen Thomas Knight has suggested that Munday drew heavily on Fulk Fitz Warin a historical 12th century outlawed nobleman and enemy of King John, in creating his Robin Hood.
The location is approximately three miles from the site of Robin's robberies at the now famous Saylis.
These are particularly noteworthy as they show Robin's integration into May Day rituals towards the end of the Middle Ages; ''Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham'', among other points of interest, contains the earliest reference to Friar Tuck.
although Dobson and Taylor regard it as "highly probable" that this French Robin's name and functions travelled to the English May Games where they fused with the Robin Hood legend.
It is this location that provides a vital clue to Robin Hood's Yorkshire heritage.
The church was built in the late eleventh century by Robert de Lacy, the 2nd Baron of Pontefract.
The Robin Hood games are known to have flourished in the later 15th and 16th centuries.
The inscription on the grave reads,
Robin Hood type place-names occurred particularly everywhere except Sherwood.
The date is also incorrectly formatted - using the Roman calendar, "24 kal Decembris" would be the twenty-third day ''before'' the beginning of December, that is, November 8.
A tradition dating back at least to the end of the 16th century gives Robin Hood's birthplace as Loxley, Sheffield, in South Yorkshire.
This successful series, which was also shown in Canada, Poland (''Thierry Śmiałek''), Australia (''The King's Outlaw''), and the Netherlands (''Thierry de Slingeraar''), transposes the English Robin Hood narrative into late medieval France during the Hundred Years' War.
:Around this time ie reign of Edward I, according to popular opinion, a certain outlaw named Robin Hood, with his accomplices, infested Sherwood and other law-abiding areas of England with continuous robberies.
Some problems with this theory are that there is no evidence that Godberd was ever known as Robin Hood and no sign in the early Robin Hood ballads of the specific concerns of de Montfort's revolt.
At Kirklees Priory in Yorkshire stands an alleged grave with a spurious inscription, which relates to Robin Hood.
Leaving aside the reference to the "rhymes" of Robin Hood in Piers Plowman in about 1377, the first mention of a quasi-historical Robin Hood is given in Andrew of Wyntoun's ''Orygynale Chronicle'', written in about 1420.
The essence of it in the present context was "neither a knight nor a peasant or 'husbonde' but something in between".
The early compilation, ''A Gest of Robyn Hode'', names the king as "Edward"; and while it does show Robin Hood accepting the King's pardon, he later repudiates it and returns to the greenwood.
:Hear underneath dis laitl stean
The 17th century introduced the minstrel Alan-a-Dale.
the 1400s), or the first decade of the 16th century (1500s).
It is inserted after Fordun's account of the defeat of Simon de Montfort and the punishment of his adherents.
The plays are complex in plot and form, the story of Robin Hood appearing as a play-within-a-play presented at the court of Henry VIII and written by the  poet, priest and courtier John Skelton.
The earliest preserved script of a Robin Hood play is the fragmentary ''Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham'' This apparently dates to the 1470s and circumstantial evidence suggests it was probably performed at the household of Sir John Paston.
After this comes "Robin Hood and the Potter", contained in a manuscript of c.&nbsp;1503.
Largely a paraphrase of the Gest, it also contains material revealing that the author was familiar with early versions of a number of the Robin Hood broadside ballads.
The Royal Forest included Bakewell, Tideswell, Castleton, Ladybower and the Derwent Valley near Loxley.
The 1938 film, ''The Adventures of Robin Hood'', starring Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, portrayed Robin as a hero on a national scale, leading the oppressed Saxons in revolt against their Norman overlords while Richard the Lionheart fought in the Crusades; this movie established itself so definitively that many studios resorted to movies about his son (invented for that purpose) rather than compete with the image of this one.
This is preserved in Cambridge University manuscript Ff.5.48.
His chronicle entry reads:
Robin Hood became a popular folk figure in the late-medieval period, and continues to be widely represented in literature, films and television.
The grave with the inscription is within sight of the ruins of the Kirklees Priory, behind the Three Nuns pub in Mirfield, West Yorkshire.
Written after 1450, it contains many of the elements still associated with the legend, from the Nottingham setting to the bitter enmity between Robin and the local sheriff.
The first two ballads listed here (the "Death" and "Gisborne"), although preserved in 17th century copies, are generally agreed to preserve the substance of late medieval ballads.
He thought that Robin was of aristocratic extraction,  with at least "some pretension" to the title of Earl of Huntingdon,  that he was born in an unlocated Nottinghamshire village of Locksley and that his original name was Robert Fitzooth.
"The Potter" is markedly different in tone from "The Monk": whereas the earlier tale is "a thriller" the latter is more comic, its plot involving trickery and cunning rather than straightforward force.
The existence of the witch cult as proposed by Murray is now generally discredited.
Later versions of the story have followed suit: the 1991 movie ''Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves'' and 2006 BBC TV series ''Robin Hood'' each contain equivalents of Nasir, in the figures of Azeem and Djaq, respectively.
In the early ballad, Robin's men usually kneel before him in strict obedience: in ''A Gest of Robyn Hode'' the king even observes that "His men are more at his byddynge/Then my men be at myn."
The first explicit statement to the effect that Robin Hood habitually robbed from the rich to give the poor can be found in John Stow's ''Annales of England'' (1592), about a century after the publication of the Gest.
*Robin Hood's Death
As it happens the next traveller is not poor, but it seems in context that Robin Hood is stating a general policy.
At the northern most edge of the forest of Barnsdale, in the heart of the Went Valley, resides the village of Wentbridge.
A difficulty with any such historical research is that "Robert" was a very common given name in medieval England, and "Robin" (or Robyn), was its very common diminutive, especially in the 13th century; it is a French hypocorism, already mentioned in the ''Roman de Renart'' in the 12th century.
Other early texts are dramatic pieces, the earliest being the fragmentary ''Robyn Hod and the Shryff off Notyngham'' (c.&nbsp;1475).
The first clear reference to "rhymes of Robin Hood" is from the c. 1377 poem ''Piers Plowman'', but the earliest surviving copies of the narrative ballads that tell his story date to the second half of 15th century (i.e.
*Robin Hood Rescuing Three Squires
And, the linguist Lister Matheson has observed that the language of the ''Gest of Robyn Hode'' is written in a definite northern dialect, probably that of Yorkshire.
Between 1261 and 1300, there are at least eight references to 'Rabunhod' in various regions across England, from Berkshire in the south to York in the north.
The publisher describes the text as a "playe of Robyn Hood, verye proper to be played in Maye games", but does not seem to be aware that the text actually contains two separate plays  An especial point of interest in the "Friar" play is the appearance of a ribald woman who is unnamed but apparently to be identified with the bawdy Maid Marian of the May Games.
Dendrologists have contradicted this claim by estimating the tree's true age at around eight hundred years; it would have been relatively a sapling in Robin's time, at best.
While the precise meaning of this term changed over time, including free retainers of an aristocrat and small landholders, it always referred to commoners.
The first record of a Robin Hood game was in 1426 in Exeter, but the reference does not indicate how old or widespread this custom was at the time.
William Shakespeare makes reference to Robin Hood in his late-16th-century play ''The Two Gentlemen of Verona''.
Robin was often allocated the role of a May King, presiding over games and processions, but plays were also performed with the characters in the roles, sometimes performed at church ales, a means by which churches raised funds.
These broadside ballads were in some cases newly fabricated but were mostly adaptions of the older verse narratives.
:Of my good he shall haue some,
Unsurprisingly, therefore, medieval records mention a number of people called "Robert Hood" or "Robin Hood", some of whom are known to have fallen foul of the law.
For example, the plot of Robin Hood's Death, found in the Percy Folio, is summarised in the 15th-century A Gest of Robyn Hode, and it also appears in an 18th-century version.
Nevertheless, Dobson and Taylor credit Ritson with having "an incalculable effect in promoting the still continuing quest for the man behind the myth", and note that his work remains an "indispensable handbook to the outlaw legend even now".
Within Robin Hood's band, medieval forms of courtesy rather than modern ideals of equality are generally in evidence.
:Obiit 24 kal: Dekembris, 1247
Within close proximity of Wentbridge reside several notable landmarks relating to Robin Hood.
The Major Oak, which resides in the heart of Sherwood Forest, is popularly believed to have been used by the Merry Men as a hide-out.
The tinker, setting out to capture Robin, only manages to fight with him after he has been cheated out of his money and the arrest warrant he is carrying.
He appears not so much as a revolt against societal standards as an embodiment of them, being generous, pious, and courteous, opposed to stingy, worldly, and churlish foes.
According to this theory, Robert Hood was thereafter pardoned and employed as a bodyguard by King Edward, and in consequence he appears in the 1323 court roll under the name of "Robyn Hode".
Ballads whose first recorded version appears (usually incomplete) in the Percy Folio may appear in later versions and may be much older than the mid-17th century when the Folio was compiled.
Barnsdale was a wooded area covering an expanse of no more than thirty square miles, ranging six miles from north to south, with the River Went at Wentbridge near Pontefract forming its northern boundary and the villages of Skelbrooke and Hampole forming the southernmost region.
In ''Robin Hood's Golden Prize'', Robin disguises himself as a friar and cheats two priests out of their cash.
The name was immediately changed to Azeem to avoid any potential copyright issues.
In the ''Jeu de Robin and Marion'', Robin and his companions have to rescue Marion from the clutches of a "lustful knight".
Pyle's version firmly stamp Robin as a staunch philanthropist, a man who takes from the rich to give to the poor.
:That tilleth with his ploughe.
Little John, Much the Miller's Son and Will Scarlet (as Will "Scarlok" or "Scathelocke") all appear, although not yet Maid Marian or Friar Tuck.
The original Robin Hood ballads, which originate from the fifteenth century, set events in the medieval forest of Barnsdale.
They share many common features, often opening with praise of the greenwood and relying heavily on disguise as a plot device, but include a wide variation in tone and plot.
Robin Hood Hill is near Outwood, West Yorkshire, not far from Lofthouse.
In reaching his conclusion Ritson relied or gave weight to a number of unreliable sources, such as the Robin Hood plays of Anthony Munday, and the Sloane Manuscript.
There are certainly parallels between Godberd's career and that of Robin Hood as he appears in the Gest.
Written around the year 1460 by a monk in Latin, it says:
However the Gest was reprinted from time to time throughout the 16th and 17th centuries.
There is no evidence however that this Robert Hood, although an outlaw, was also a bandit.
These developments are part of the 20th century Robin Hood myth.
Since the 1980s, it has become commonplace to include a Saracen (Muslim) among the Merry Men, a trend that began with the character Nasir in the 1984 ITV ''Robin of Sherwood'' television series.
The play identifies Robin Hood as Robert, Earl of Huntingdon, probably for the first time, and identifies Maid Marian with "one of the semi-mythical Matildas persecuted by King John'.
(Neither of these ballads are known to have existed in print at the time, and there is no earlier record known of the "Curtal Friar" story).
Over the next three centuries, the name popped-up all over the place, such as at Robin Hood's Bay near Whitby Yorkshire, Robin Hood's Butts in Cumbria, and Robin Hood's Walk at Richmond Surrey.
The ''Gest'' states that the Prioress was a relative of Robin's.
From the 16th century on, there were attempts to elevate Robin Hood to the nobility and in two extremely influential plays, Anthony Munday presented him at the very end of the 16th century as the Earl of Huntingdon, as he is still commonly presented in modern times.
*Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne
It lies around  southeast of its nearest township of size, Pontefract, close to the A1 road.
In 1795 Joseph Ritson published an enormously influential edition of the Robin Hood ballads ''Robin Hood: A collection of all the Ancient Poems Songs and Ballads now extant, relative to that celebrated Outlaw''  "By providing English poets and novelists with a convenient source book, Ritson gave them the opportunity to recreate Robin Hood in their own imagination,"  Ritson's collection included the Gest and put the Robin Hood and the Potter ballad in print for the first time.
In consequence, it seems probable that the Robin Hood legend actually originates from the county of Yorkshire.
It is not that children did not read Robin Hood stories before, but this is the first appearance of a Robin Hood literature specifically aimed at them.
The next notice is a statement in the ''Scotichronicon'', composed by John of Fordun between 1377 and 1384, and revised by Walter Bower in about 1440.
The historians Barry Dobson and John Taylor suggested that on the opposite side of the road once stood Robin Hood's Well, which has since been relocated six miles north-west of Doncaster, on the south-bound side of the Great North Road.
All Saints' Church at Kirkby, modern Pontefract, which was located approximately three miles from the site of Robin Hood's robberies at the Saylis, accurately matches  Richard Grafton's  description because a road ran directly from Wentbridge to the hospital at Kirkby.
In copious and informative notes Ritson defends every point of his version of Robin Hood's life.
:Laz robert earl of Huntingtun
Himself a supporter of the principles of the French Revolution and admirer of Thomas Paine Ritson held that Robin Hood was a genuinely historical, and genuinely heroic, character who had stood up against tyranny in the interests of the common people.
Another reference, discovered by Julian Luxford in 2009, appears in the margin of the "Polychronicon" in the Eton College library.
In a petition presented to Parliament in 1439, the name is used to describe an itinerant felon.
:That wol be a gode felawe.
He first appeared in a 17th-century broadside ballad, and unlike many of the characters thus associated, managed to adhere to the legend.
The tomb probably dates from the late eighteenth century.
From this period there are a number of ballads in which Robin is severely "drubbed" by a succession of tradesmen including a tanner, a tinker and a ranger.
Ritson's interpretation of Robin Hood was also influential.
was also fairly common because it referred either to a hooder, who was a maker of hoods, or alternatively to somebody who wore a hood as a head-covering.
Among Bower's many interpolations is a passage that directly refers to Robin.
The setting of the early ballads is usually attributed by scholars to either the 13th century or the 14th, although it is recognised they are not necessarily historically consistent.
John Maddicott has called Godberd "that prototype Robin Hood".
The overall picture from the surviving early ballads and other early references indicate that Robin Hood was based in the Barnsdale area of what is now South Yorkshire, which borders Nottinghamshire.
While the outlaw often shows great skill in archery, swordplay and disguise, his feats are no more exaggerated than those of characters in other ballads, such as ''Kinmont Willie'', which were based on historical events.
Years before ''Robin Hood'' had even entered production, Disney had considered doing a project on Reynard the Fox.
In demonstrating Yorkshire's Robin Hood heritage, the historian J. C. Holt drew attention to the fact that although Sherwood Forest is mentioned in ''Robin Hood and the Monk'', there is little information about the topography of the region, and thus suggested that Robin Hood was drawn to Nottinghamshire through his interactions with the city's sheriff.
The idea of Robin Hood as a high-minded Saxon fighting Norman lords also originates in the 19th century.
Davis indicates that there is only one church dedicated to Mary Magdalene within what one might reasonably consider to have been the medieval forest of Barnsdale, and that is the church at Campsall.
*The Jolly Pinder of Wakefield
Francis James Child indeed retitled Child ballad 102; though it was titled ''The Birth of Robin Hood'', its clear lack of connection with the Robin Hood cycle (and connection with other, unrelated ballads) led him to title it ''Willie and Earl Richard's Daughter'' in his collection.
This fragment appears to tell the story of Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne  There is also an early playtext appended to a 1560 printed edition of the Gest.
Traditionally depicted as being dressed in Lincoln green, he is often portrayed as "robbing from the rich and giving to the poor" alongside his band of Merry Men.
An acre of landholding is listed within a glebe terrier of 1688 relating to Kirk Smeaton, which later came to be called "Sailes Close".
The only character to use a quarterstaff in the early ballads is the potter, and Robin Hood does not take to a staff until the 17th century ''Robin Hood and Little John''.
The majority of these references date from the late 13th century.
It is not certain what should be made of these latter two absences as it is known that Friar Tuck, for one, has been part of the legend since at least the later 15th century where he is mentioned in a Robin Hood play script.
The Tudor historian Richard Grafton stated that the prioress who murdered Robin Hood buried the outlaw beside the road,
