It was followed by versions of "Rock the Joint" in 1952, and original works such as "Real Rock Drive" and "Crazy Man, Crazy", the latter of which reached number 12 on the American Billboard chart in 1953.
Two young men from Texas made their record debuts in April 1956: Buddy Holly on the Decca label, and, as a member of the Teen Kings, Roy Orbison with "Ooby Dooby" on the New Mexico/Texas based Je-wel label.
Then in April 1960, while touring with Gene Vincent in the UK, their taxi crashed into a concrete lamp post, killing Eddie at the young age of 21.
In August Sun released Elvis's versions of "I Forgot to Remember to Forget" and "Mystery Train".
The Maddox Brothers and Rose were at "the leading edge of rockabilly with the slapped bass that Fred Maddox had developed".
There was something going on all the time."
Elvis fit right in.
Lead singer Lux Interior's energetic and unpredictable live shows attracted a fervent cult audience.
Another group in the 1950s that were followers of rockabilly were the Ton-Up boys, who rode British motorcycles and would later be known as  rockers in the early 1960s.
In 1999, McCartney released ''Run Devil Run'', his own record of rockabilly covers.
Some enjoyed major chart success and were important influences on future rock musicians.
In April and May 1956, The Rock and Roll Trio played on Ted Mack's TV talent show in New York City.
Today, bands like Lower The Tone are more aligned to Neo-rockabilly that suits popular music venues instead of the Rockabilly clubs that expect only original Rockabilly.
By end of 1954 Elvis asked D.J.
He also ran a service allowing anyone to come in off the street and for $3.98 (plus tax) record himself on a two-song vanity record.
So we kinda talked it over and figured out a little bit what we were doin'.
Other notable British rockabilly bands of the 1980s included The Jets, Crazy Cavan, Matchbox, and the Rockats.
It wasn't any great thing.
It was here that Carl started composing his first songs with an eye toward the future.
It was a big, barn-like building with great echo.
Maine native, and Connecticut resident Bill Flagg began using the term rockabilly for his combination of rock 'n' roll and hillbilly music as early as 1953 He cut several songs for Tetra Records in 1956 and 1957.
Holly's big hits would not be released until 1957.
It knocked my socks off."
Although Martin performed mostly country songs for the show, she also did songs by Rhythm and blues singers Ruth Brown and LaVern Baker, as well as a few Dinah Washington songs.
They didn't care what instruments you had, as long as people could dance."
For several years, Phillips had been recording and releasing performances by blues and country musicians in the area.
Others believe that they were not only at the leading edge, but were one of the first Rockabilly groups, if not the first.
"Queen of Rockabilly" Wanda Jackson's first record came out in July, "I Gotta Know" on the Capitol label; followed by "Hot Dog That Made Him Mad" in November.
In 1980, Queen scored a number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 with the rockabilly-inspired single "Crazy Little Thing Called Love".
Or, you can have a separate machine and do that.
But you can take that and loop it to where it plays a split second after it was recorded and it flips right back into the record head.
Twenty more sides were issued by various labels including 4 Star, Blue Hen, Dot, Cold Bond, Mercury, Reject, Republic, Rodeo, and Starday.
In the summer of 1958 Eddie Cochran had a chart-topping hit with "Summertime Blues".
The legend of how the sound came about says that guitarist Willy Kizart's amplifier was damaged on Highway 61 when the band was driving from Mississippi to Memphis, Tennessee.
There was a close relationship between blues and country music from the very earliest country recordings in the 1920s.
The Sun label correctly lists "Gunter" (Arthur) as the songwriter, a song which he recorded in 1954.
Over the next year, Elvis would record four more singles for Sun.
In 1951 a western swing bandleader named Bill Haley recorded a version of "Rocket 88" with his group, the Saddlemen.
Curtis Gordon's 1953 "Rompin' and Stompin'", an uptempo hillbilly-boogie included the lyrics, "Way down south where I was born / They rocked all night 'til early morn' / They start rockin' / They start rockin' an rollin'."
In 1975, Lennon recorded an album called ''Rock 'n' Roll'', featuring versions of rockabilly hits and a cover photo showing him in full Gene Vincent leather.
An attempt was made to hold the cone in place by stuffing the amplifier with wadded newspapers, which unintentionally created a distorted sound; Phillips liked the sound and used it.
Put it in my data bank.
On April 12, 1954, Haley with his band (now known as Bill Haley and His Comets) recorded "Rock Around the Clock" for Decca Records of New York City.
Presley's second and third records were not as successful as the first.
In addition to the fusion of distinct genres, Presley's recordings contain some traditional as well as new traits: "nervously up tempo" (as Peter Guralnick describes it), with slap bass, fancy guitar picking, lots of echo, shouts of encouragement, and vocals full of histrionics such as hiccups, stutters, and swoops from falsetto to bass and back again.
The trio released "Train Kept A-Rollin'" in 1956, listed by ''Rolling Stone'' magazine as one of the top 500 rock songs of all time, having been covered by the Yardbirds, Aerosmith, and many others.
Scotty and Bill began playing along.
These bands, like the Blasters, were inspired by a full range of historic American styles: blues, country, rockabilly, R&B, and New Orleans jazz.
Some have claimed that the sound of "That's Alright" was not entirely new, "It wasn't that they said 'I never heard anything like it before.'
Two or three takes later, Phillips had a satisfactory recording, and released "That's All Right", on July 19, 1954, along with an "Elvis Presley Scotty and Bill" version of Bill Monroe's waltz, Blue Moon of Kentucky, a country standard.
But it's just basic rhythm and has gone by a lot of different names in my time.
The band formed on Long Island in 1979 when Brian Setzer teamed up with two school chums calling themselves Lee Rocker and Slim Jim Phantom.
He recorded first with 1950s guitar legend Link Wray, and later with U.K. studio guitar veteran Chris Spedding, and found borderline mainstream success.
Bluegrass was a staple of country music in the early 1950s, and is often mentioned as an influence in the development of rockabilly.
In 1953 at the age of 13 Janis Martin was developing her own proto-rockabilly style on WRVA's Old Dominion Barn Dance, which broadcast out of Richmond, VA.
The most notable of these bands was The Beatles.
The rhythm's what's important."
Robert Palmer has written that the amplifier "had fallen from the top of the car", and attributes this information to Sam Phillips.
According to Burlison, "... when we started playing in 1951, we played an uptempo-style country beat with gospel, blues, and a little swing mixed in."
Commenting on his own guitar playing, Scotty Moore said, "All I can tell you is I just stole from every guitar player I heard over the years.
Early shows were attended by the Rolling Stones and Dave Edmunds, who quickly ushered the boys into a recording studio.
It's the same, whether you just follow a drum beat like in Africa or surround it with a lot of instruments.
When the song was finally played by one rogue deejay, Dewey Phillips, Presley's recording created so much excitement it was described as having waged war on segregated radio stations.
Perkins first performed "Blue Suede Shoes" on television March 17 on ''Ozark Jubilee'', a weekly ABC-TV program.
The shape of the ceiling, corrugated tiles, and the setup of the studio were augmented by "slap-back" tape echo which involved feeding the original signal from one tape machine through a second machine.
Shakin' Stevens was a Welsh singer who gained fame in the UK portraying Elvis in a stage play.
They held a strong appeal for listeners who were tired of the commercially oriented MTV-style synthpop and glam metal bands that dominated radio play during this time period, but none of these musicians became major stars.
1955 was also the year in which Chuck Berry's hillbilly-influenced ''Maybellene'' reached high in the charts as a crossover hit, and Bill Haley and His Comets' ''Rock Around the Clock'' was not only number one for eight weeks, but was the number two record for the year.
Perkins's "Blue Suede Shoes" sold 20,000 records a day at one point, and it was the first million-selling country song to cross over to both rhythm and blues and pop charts.
All of Presley's early records combined a blues song on one side and a country song on the other, but both sung in the same vein.
In 2000, an International Rock-A-Billy Hall of Fame Museum was established in Jackson, Tennessee.
An' when I played that's just what come out."
Later made more famous by Elvis Presley, Perkins' original version was an early rock 'n' roll standard.
The first wave of rockabilly fans in the United Kingdom were called Teddy Boys because they wore long, Edwardian-style frock coats, along with tight black drainpipe trousers and brothel creeper shoes.
Many rockabilly guitarists and historians now accept that on many of the classic recordings Johnny Burnette did in Nashville for Decca it was the legendary "A Team" of Grady Martin on guitar, Bob Moore on bass and Buddy Harmann on drums  backing Johnny and Dorsey on vocals (the author of this comment has had discussions with Bob Moore where he confirms this).
But of more historical significance were the then-unknown artists who came to perform at the Jamboree.
managed to crack Billboard's Top 20, peaking at No.
Then Bill Black picked up his bass and began acting the fool too, and I started playing with them.
It is considered one of the earliest recognized rockabilly recordings.
The group has reconvened several times to make new records or tours and continue to attract large audiences live, although record sales have never again approached their early Eighties success.
… on 'That's All Right (Mama)' and 'Blue Moon of Kentucky.'
Bob Wills and his Texas Playboys were the leading proponents of Western Swing, which combined country singing and steel guitar with big band jazz influences and horn sections; Wills's music found massive popularity.
The first record to contain the word "rockabilly" in a song title was issued in November 1956 "Rock a Billy Gal", although Johnny and Dorsey Burnette recorded "Rock Billy Boogie" for the Coral label on July 4, 1956.
''Rock 'n' roll'', an expansive term coined a couple years earlier by DJ Alan Freed, had now been to the pop mountaintop, a position it would never quite relinquish.
Fontana, who was the underutilized drummer for the Louisiana Hayride, "Would you go with us if we got any more dates?"
The first record by Jerry Lee Lewis came out on December 22, 1956 and featured the song "Crazy Arms" (which had been a #1 hit for Ray Price some twenty weeks earlier in the year) along with "End of the Road".
The Stray Cats had three UK Top Ten singles to their credit and two bestselling albums.
Despite his popularity in Europe, he never became popular in the US.
According to Cowboy Jack Clement, who took over production duties from Sam Phillips, "There's two heads; one records, and one plays back.
When Elvis Presley left Phillips' Sun Records and recorded "Heartbreak Hotel" for RCA, the RCA producers placed microphones at the end of a hallway to achieve a similar effect.
Drake Bell, a pop rock singer-songwriter and actor, revived rockabilly with his 2014 album, Ready Steady Go!, which was produced by Brian Setzer, frontman of the rockabilly revival band, The Stray Cats.
In all likelihood both Paul Burlison and Grady Martin played on some of the Nashville recordings, with who played what lost in the mists of time.
Why, man, that's the same kind of music we've been playin' since 1928!...
On February 11, Presley appeared on the Dorsey Brothers' ''Stage Show'' for the third time, singing "Blue Suede Shoes" and "Heartbreak Hotel."
It was basically a rhythm record.
In 1951 and 1952 the Burnettes (Johnny and Dorsey) and Burlison played around Memphis and established a reputation for wild music.
"Go Cat Go" went into the National Billboard charts in 1956, and his "Guitar Rock" is cited as classic rockabilly.
During the 1980s, a number of country music stars scored hits recording in a rockabilly style.
Similarly, R&B deejays categorized it as a (white) country song.
The Who, despite being mod favourites, covered Eddie Cochran's "Summertime Blues" and Johnny Kidd and The Pirates' Shakin' All Over on their ''Live at Leeds'' album.
According to Phillips, "Ninety-five percent of the people I had been working with were black, most of them of course no name people.
A comparison of rockabilly versions of country songs shows that while form, lyrics, chord progressions and arrangements are simplified and with sparser instrumentation, a fuller sound was achieved by more percussive playing—i.e., subdivisions of the beat receive more emphasis.
Jason & the Scorchers combined heavy metal, Chuck Berry, and Hank Williams to create a punk-influenced style of rockabilly, often labelled as alt-country or cowpunk.
In 1956 Elvis acquired vocal backup via the Jordanaires.
Some of the better known musicians who recorded and performed these songs are: the Delmore Brothers, the Maddox Brothers and Rose, Merle Travis, Hank Williams, Hank Snow, and Tennessee Ernie Ford.
The use of distortion on a rock'n'roll record was more accurately "Rocket 88" by Jackie Brenston and the Delta Cats.
Cash returned to Sun in 1955 with his song ''Hey, Porter'', and his group the Tennessee Three, who became the Tennessee Two before the session was over.
Guys were bringing in new "licks" that they had developed and were teaching them to other musicians and were learning new "licks" from yet other musicians backstage.
were released in July.
Through most of 1955, Cash, Perkins, Presley, and other Louisiana Hayride performers toured through Texas, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Louisiana and Mississippi.
Elvis was more like an Adonis.
In the 1980s, McCartney recorded a duet with Carl Perkins, and George Harrison collaborated with Roy Orbison in the Traveling Wilburys.
Marty Stuart's "Hillbilly Rock" and Hank Williams, Jr.'s "All My Rowdy Friends Are Coming Over Tonight" were the most noteworthy examples of this trend, but they and other artists like Steve Earle and the Kentucky Headhunters charted many records with this approach.
Also festering at CBGB's punk environs were The Cramps, who combined primitive and wild rockabilly sounds with lyrics inspired by old drive-in horror movies in songs like "Human Fly" and "I Was a Teenage Werewolf".
It wasn't Sam tellin' him what to do.
Presley made enough of an impression that Phillips deputized guitarist Scotty Moore, who then enlisted bassist Bill Black, both from the Starlight Wranglers, a local western swing band, to work with the green young Elvis.
The revival was related to the "roots rock" movement, which continued through the 1980s, led by artists like James Intveld, who later toured as lead guitar for The Blasters, High Noon, the Beat Farmers, The Paladins, Forbidden Pigs, Del-Lords, Long Ryders, The Last Wild Sons, The Fabulous Thunderbirds, Los Lobos, The Fleshtones, Del Fuegos, and Barrence Whitfield and the Savages.
They didn't hardly allow electric instruments, and I was doing some songs by black artists—stuff like Ruth Brown's "(Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean."
"The Sun recordings were the first salvos in an undeclared war on segregated radio stations nationwide."
Unfortunately for the Burnettes and Burlison, they did not record the song until 1957.
In this recording Presley married "black" and "white" genres to an extent that it was denied airplay on (white) country radio stations and (black) R&B stations, dismissed for being defined as both "black" and "white" music.
And many echo the sentiment that it was a sound like no other they had heard: "When I first heard Elvis singing 'That's Alright Mama'.
Sun also hosted performers, such as Billy Lee Riley, Sonny Burgess, Charlie Feathers, and Warren Smith.
There were also several female performers like Wanda Jackson who recorded rockabilly music long after the other ladies, Janis Martin, the female Elvis Jo Ann Campbell, and Alis Lesley, who also sang in the rockabilly style.
The album peaked at #182 on the Billboard 200 and sold over 2,000 copies in its first week of release.
The Polecats played rockabilly with a punk sense of anarchy and helped revive the genre for a new generation in the early 1980s.
In 2005, Summers's most popular recording, ''School of Rock 'n Roll'', was selected by Bob Solly and Record Collector Magazine as one of the "100 Greatest Rock 'n' Roll Records".
Carl Perkins, meanwhile, was involved in a major automobile accident on his way to appear on national television.
Soon they broke away and began playing their energetic brand of rockabilly to small, but appreciative, local audiences.
Lewis would have big hits in 1957 with his version of Whole Lot Of Shakin' Going On, issued in May, and "Great Balls Of Fire" on Sun.
About the same time, Ringo Starr had a hit with a version of Johnny Burnette's "You're Sixteen".
Nobody was sure what to call Presley's music, so Elvis was described as "The Hillbilly Cat" and "King of Western Bop."
In October 1954 Carl Perkins and "The Perkins Brothers Band" showed up at the Sun Studios.
'Bout the third or fourth time through, we just cut it.
Three weeks earlier, "rockabilly" was used in a press release describing Gene Vincent's "Be-Bop-A-Lula".
This was a combination of rebellion, sexuality, and freedom—a sneering expression of disdain for the workaday world of parents and authority figures.
During the 1930s and 1940s, two new sounds emerged.
An online database lists 262 musicians with names beginning with "A".
Some have also described it as a blend of bluegrass with rock and roll.
The Beatles were not the only British Invasion artists influenced by rockabilly.
Soon these new sounds began to make their way out onto the stage of the Jamboree where they found a very receptive audience.
The most successful early product of the scene was Dave Edmunds, who joined up with songwriter Nick Lowe to form a band called Rockpile in 1975.
The song had been written and performed much earlier, and refer to the birth of Johnny's son Rocky and Dorsey's son Billy, who were born around the same time in 1953, and were firstborns for each of the brothers.
The Saturday Night Jamboree was a local stage show held every Saturday night at the Goodwyn Institute Auditorium in downtown Memphis, Tennessee in 1953–54.
Every Saturday night in 1953, the dressing rooms backstage were a gathering place where musicians would come together and experiment with new sounds—mixing fast country, gospel, blues and boogie woogie.
As the band became more professional and began playing in Hamburg, they took on the "Beatle" name (inspired by Buddy Holly's Crickets ) and they adopted the black leather look of Gene Vincent.
Beck recorded his own tribute album to Gene Vincent's guitarist Cliff Gallup—''Crazy Legs''—and Page's band, Led Zeppelin, offered to work as Elvis Presley's backing band in the 1970s.
I mean it just wasn't us up there pickin' and singing.
He was born and raised in poverty.
Within twenty-one days it sold over two hundred thousand records, stayed at the top of national pop and country charts for twenty weeks, and sold more than a million copies.
Most greasers used to listen to rockabilly, especially Elvis Presley.
The first nationwide country hit was "Wreck of the Old 97", backed with "Lonesome Road Blues", which also became quite popular.
Shakin' Stevens was the biggest selling singles artist of the 1980s in the UK and number two across Europe, outstripping Michael Jackson, Prince, and Bruce Springsteen.
In 1980, he took a cover of The Blasters' "Marie Marie" into the UK Top 20.
When The Beatles became worldwide stars, they released versions of three different Carl Perkins songs, more than any other songwriter outside the band, except Larry Williams, who also added three songs to their discography.
In the early 1950s there was heavy competition among Memphis area bands playing an audience-savvy mix of covers, original songs, and hillbilly flavored blues.
Sun and RCA weren't the only record companies releasing rockabilly music.
Tillman Franks has been quoted as saying, "I want you to give Bill Black the credit.
This was followed by many other artists at the time in London including, Deltas, Long tall texans, Guana batz etc...
Presley's Sun recordings feature his vocals and rhythm guitar, Bill Black's percussive slapped bass, and Scotty Moore on an amplified guitar.
"The audience didn't know what to make of it.
They returned to the USA, performing on the TV show "Fridays" with a message flashing across the screen that they had no record deal in the States.
The recordings done in the Pythian Temple in New York are undoubtedly all the work of Paul Burlison.
Wills is quoted as saying "Rock and Roll?
Elvis sang the way Bill Black played bass."
The sound comes along and it's recorded on this head, and a split second later, it goes to the playback head.
The Rolling Stones recorded Buddy Holly's "Not Fade Away" on an early single and later a rockabilly-style song, "Rip This Joint", on ''Exile on Main St.''.
Whether you like it or not, there will always be an Elvis Presley."
Zeb Turner's February 1953 recording of "Jersey Rock" with its mix of musical styles, lyrics about music and dancing, and guitar solo, is another example of the mixing of musical genres in the first half of the 1950s.
Try to find a place to start, and do it again'.
The song was part of their repertoire in 1956 when they were living in New York City and performing with Gene Vincent.
They won all three times and guaranteed them a finalist position in the September supershow.
From 1955 to 1960, the live national radio and TV show from Springfield, Missouri featured Brenda Lee and Wanda Jackson and guests included Gene Vincent and other rockabilly artists.
The time slot was adjacent to Howlin' Wolf's and the music quickly became a curious blend of blues, country and what would become known as rockabilly music.
When John Lennon first met Paul McCartney, he was impressed that McCartney knew all the chords and the words to Eddie Cochran's "Twenty Flight Rock".
The shows were sometimes broadcast on KWEM Radio Station in West Memphis, Arkansas by Joe Manuel, who fronted the Jamboree and was a KWEM personality.
The style was to mix any popular music to a Rockabilly set up, Drums, Slap bass and guitar.
Paul Burlison, for one, was playing in nondescript hillbilly bands in the very early 1950s.
The rockers loved 1950s rock and roll artists such as Gene Vincent, and some British rockabilly fans formed bands and played their own version of the music.
Over the years it has picked up a little dignity.
However, Presley never took them up on that offer.
Excited, Phillips told them to "back up and start from the beginning."
He was around people that had very little in the way of worldly goods."
Maddox said, "You've got to have somethin' they can tap their foot, or dance to, or to make 'em ''feel'' it."
It wasn't as if this started a revolution, it galvanized a revolution.
if you do it on one machine, you have to echo everything."
Elvis was joking around, just doing what come naturally, what he felt.
Even heavy guitar heroes such as Jeff Beck and Jimmy Page were influenced by rockabilly musicians.
This same facility would also be used to record other rockabilly musicians such as Buddy Holly and The Rock and Roll Trio.
Rockabilly pioneers the Maddox Brothers and Rose, both as a group, and with Rose as a solo act, added onto their two decades of performing by making records that were even more rocking.
Tim Polecat and Boz Boorer started playing together in 1976, they hooked up with Phil Bloomberg and Chris Hawkes at the end of 1977.
In the early 80s the Latin genre was born in Colombia by Marco T Marco Tulio Sanchez, with "The Gatos Montañeros.
Younger musicians around Memphis were beginning to play a mix of musical styles.
Rockabilly music cultivated an attitude that assured its enduring appeal to teenagers.
"... the demonstrative Maddoxes, helped release white bodies from traditional motions of decorum... more and more younger white artists began to behave on stage like the lively Maddoxes."
Rockabilly recorded by artists prior to Presley can be described as being in the long-standing country style of Rockabilly.
Sharecroppers' sons Carl Perkins and his brothers Jay Perkins and Clayton Perkins, along with drummer W. S. Holland, had been playing their music roughly ninety miles from Memphis.
Their third LP, ''Rant 'N' Rave with the Stray Cats'', topped charts across the USA and Europe as they sold out shows everywhere during 1983.
The recordings were thus an idealized representation of the customary live sound.
Slap bass had been a staple of both Western Swing and Hillbilly Boogie since the 1940s.
