The earliest fossil rodents in Australia have a maximum age of 4.5 million years, and molecular data is consistent with the colonization of New Guinea from the west during the late Miocene or early Pliocene followed by rapid diversification.
This is known to occur in black-tailed prairie dogs and Belding's ground squirrels, where mothers have communal nests and nurse unrelated young along with their own.
This allows rodents to suck in their cheeks or lips to shield their mouth and throat from wood shavings and other inedible material, discarding this waste from the sides of its mouth.
In some rodents, males are larger than females, while in others the reverse is true.
They are the most diversified mammalian order and live in a variety of terrestrial habitats, including human-made environments.
The burrows do not interconnect, but are excavated and occupied by territorial family groups known as coteries.
Rats also need plenty of space and can become very tame, can learn tricks and seem to enjoy human companionship.
Some individuals are of intermediate size.
Several reasons have been proposed for this behavior, including nutritional stress, resource competition, avoiding misdirecting parental care and, in the case of males, attempting to make the mother sexually receptive.
In 2007, they constituted about 2% of all laboratory animals.
Albino mutant rats were first used for research in 1828 and later became the first animal domesticated for purely scientific purposes.
Some species have vestigial tails or no tails at all.
****Family Ctenomyidae: tuco-tucos
If handled from a young age, they are usually docile and do not bite.
Although marsupials are the most prominent mammals in Australia, many rodents, all belonging to the subfamily Murinae, are among the continent's mammal species.
For example, when the black rat reached Lord Howe Island in 1918, over 40 percent of the terrestrial bird species of the island, including the Lord Howe fantail, became extinct within ten years.
Rodents, like all placental mammals except primates, have just two types of light receptive cones in their retina, a short wavelength "blue-UV" type and a middle wavelength "green" type.
In Colombia, the brown hairy dwarf porcupine was recorded from only two mountain localities in the 1920s, while the red crested soft-furred spiny rat is known only from its type locality on the Caribbean coast, so these species are considered vulnerable.
Examination of the stomach contents of the North American white-footed mouse, normally considered to be herbivorous, showed 34% animal matter.
Late in the Eocene, hystricognaths invaded Africa, most probably having originated in Asia at least 39.5 million years ago.
Humanity has long used animal skins for clothing, as the leather is durable and the fur provides extra insulation.
The living rodent families based on the study done by Fabre et al.
*::*Family Gliridae (also Myoxidae, Muscardinidae): dormice
There are both direct and indirect benefits of doing this.
****Family Cuniculidae: pacas
At least 89 species of rodent, mostly Hystricomorpha such as guinea pigs, agoutis and capybaras, are eaten by humans; in 1985, there were at least 42 different societies in which people eat rats.
In Europe, the soft underfur known as "beaver wool" was found to be ideal for felting and was made into beaver hats and trimming for clothing.
Some are omnivorous and a few are predators.
The rodent then practices coprophagy, eating its own fecal pellets, so the nutrients can be absorbed by the gut.
Hamsters are solitary but tend to be nocturnal.
*The Vandenbergh effect: Pheromones from mature male house mice cause an early induction of the first estrous cycle in prepubertal female mice
****Family Erethizontidae: New World porcupines
Females with altricial young typically build elaborate nests before they give birth and maintain them until their offspring are weaned.
*:*Superfamily Castoroidea
It occasionally eats invertebrates such as insect larvae.
Compounds derived from the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are bound to several urinary proteins.
In the Great Plains of North America, the burrowing activities of prairie dogs play important roles in soil aeration and nutrient redistribution, raising the organic content of the soil and increasing the absorption of water.
*:** Family Castoridae: beavers
While the largest species, the capybara, can weigh as much as , most rodents weigh less than .
Some tails are prehensile, as in the Eurasian harvest mouse, and the fur on the tails can vary from bushy to completely bald.
Rodents have adapted to almost every terrestrial habitat, from cold tundra (where they can live under snow) to hot deserts.
Here, they can access their food supply underwater even when their pond is frozen over.
**:*Family Thryonomyidae: cane rats
Feticide can also occur among rodents; in Alpine marmots, dominant females tend to suppress the reproduction of subordinates by being antagonistic towards them while they are pregnant.
The first rodents arrived in Australia via Indonesia around 5 million years ago.
*During nursing: Nursing rats receive information about their mother's diet through her milk.
*::*Family Anomaluridae: scaly-tailed squirrels
The diversity of characteristics of rodents is great, sometimes even in closely related species.
To protect against infanticide from other adults, female rodents may employ avoidance or direct aggression against potential perpetrators, multiple mating, territoriality or early termination of pregnancy.
Rodents generally have well-developed senses of smell, hearing, and vision.
The history of the colonization of the world's continents by rodents is complex.
****Family Chinchillidae: chinchillas, viscachas
Brown rat (''Rattus norvegicus'')
There is some question as to whether these mothers can distinguish which young are theirs.
Mice are short-lived but take up very little space.
The traditional Andean stove, known as a ''qoncha'' or a ''fogón'', is made from mud and clay reinforced with straw and hair from animals such as guinea pigs.
Guinea pig (''Cavia porcellus'')
Some species of rodent are monogamous, with an adult male and female forming a lasting pair bond.
*:*Superfamily Dipodoidea
In the eusocial naked mole rats, a single female monopolizes mating from at least three males.
These are too numerous to be eaten in one meal and squirrels gather and store the surplus in crevices and hollow trees.
The use of pathogens such as ''Salmonella'' has the drawback that they can infect man and domestic animals, and rodents often become resistant.
Though relatively independent and weaned within days, precocial young may continue to nurse and be groomed by their mothers.
MUPs may also signal individual identity, with each male house mouse (''Mus musculus'') excreting urine containing about a dozen genetically encoded MUPs.
Too many seeds are inside to be consumed in one meal, so the agouti carries some off and caches them.
*Weaning: When young rats are weaning and eating solid foods for the first time, they use adult rats as guides.
Although rodents have been regarded traditionally as herbivores, a number of species opportunistically include insects, fish, or meat in their diets and more specialized forms rely on such foods.
Brown rats exhibit cognitive bias, where information processing is biased by whether they are in a positive or negative affective state.
These males establish dominance hierarchies, with the high-ranking males having access to the most females.
Rodent groups differ in the arrangement of the jaw muscles and associated skull structures, both from other mammals and amongst themselves.
Species can be arboreal, fossorial (burrowing), or semiaquatic.
The elbow gives the fore arms great flexibility.
They are therefore classified as dichromats; however, they are visually sensitive into the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum and therefore can see light that humans can not.
Males with territories are known as "resident" males and the females that live within the territories are known as "resident" females.
The nails of burrowing species tend to be long and strong, while arboreal rodents have shorter, sharper nails.
This kin recognition is by olfactory cues from urine, feces and glandular secretions.
Territorial beavers and red squirrels investigate and become familiar with the scents of their neighbors and respond less aggressively to intrusions by them than to those made by non-territorial "floaters" or strangers.
It is not understood why this pattern occurs, but in the case of yellow-pine chipmunks, males may have selected larger females due to their greater reproductive success.
The Navajo people ate prairie dog baked in mud, while the Paiute ate gophers, squirrels, and rats.
This occurs in ground squirrels like yellow-bellied marmots, California ground squirrels, Columbian ground squirrels and Richardson's ground squirrels.
The Sciuromorpha, such as the eastern grey squirrel, have a large deep masseter, making them efficient at biting with the incisors.
Rodents participated in the Great American Interchange that resulted from the joining of the Americas by formation of the Isthmus of Panama, around 3 million years ago in the Piacenzian age.
*Suborder Hystricomorpha
Perhaps the most extreme examples of colonial behavior in rodents are the eusocial naked mole rat and Damaraland mole rat.
This behavior was initially interpreted as part of their tunnel building behavior, but it was eventually realized that they generate temporally patterned vibrational signals for long-distance communication with neighboring mole rats.
The Damaraland mole rat is characterized by having a single reproductively active male and female in a colony where the remaining animals are not truly sterile, but only become fertile if they establish a colony of their own.
They greatly diversified in the Eocene, as they spread across continents, sometimes even finding means to cross oceans.
**:*Family Ctenodactylidae: gundis
*::*Family Sciuridae: squirrels, including chipmunks, prairie dogs, marmots
The use of predators including ferrets, mongooses and monitor lizards has been found unsatisfactory.
These species may have different calls for different predators (e.g.
*::*Family ''incertae sedis'' Diatomyidae: Laotian rock rat
Some rodents are considered keystone species and ecosystem engineers in their respective habitats.
This occurs in species like Belding's ground squirrels and some tree squirrel species.
The prairie vole is monogamous and forms a lifelong pair bond.
Rodents reached both South America and Madagascar from Africa, and were the only terrestrial placental mammals to reach and colonize Australia.
During the Eocene, rodents began to diversify.
Footdrumming has been reported to be involved in male-male competition; the dominant male indicates its resource holding potential by drumming, thus minimizing physical contact with potential rivals.
It is used primarily by fossorial or semi-fossorial rodents.
The table below shows the hearing ranges of several species.
Female offspring remain in the colony while male young disperse.
In many species, the molars are relatively large, intricately structured, and highly cusped or ridged, though some, such as ''Pseudohydromys'', have smaller and simpler ones.
Scaly-tailed squirrels and flying squirrels, although not closely related, can both glide from tree to tree using parachute-like membranes that stretch from the fore to the hind limbs.
Guinea pigs played a major role in the establishment of germ theory in the late 19th century, through the experiments of Louis Pasteur, Émile Roux, and Robert Koch.
Brandt (1855) was the first to propose dividing Rodentia into three suborders, Sciuromorpha, Hystricomorpha and Myomorpha, based on the development of certain muscles in the jaw and this system was widely accepted.
Sexual dimorphism occurs in many rodent species.
****Family Octodontidae: octodonts
In Peru, there are at any time 20 million domestic guinea pigs, which annually produce 64 million edible carcasses.
Audible vocalizations can often be heard during agonistic or aggressive encounters, whereas ultrasound is used in sexual communication and also by pups when they have fallen out of the nest.
Fifteen different call-types have been recognized in adult Kataba mole rats and four in juveniles.
Nowadays, the house mouse is the most commonly used laboratory rodent, and in 1979 it was estimated that fifty million were used annually worldwide.
Conservation projects can with careful planning completely eradicate these pest rodents from islands using an anticoagulant rodenticide such as brodifacoum.
As the incisors grind against each other, the softer dentine on the rear of the teeth wears away, leaving the sharp enamel edge shaped like the blade of a chisel.
Guinea pigs have a long lifespan and need a large cage.
*:**Family Muridae: true mice and rats, gerbils, spiny mice, crested rat
The plains pocket gopher eats plant material found underground during tunneling, and also collects grasses, roots, and tubers in its cheek pouches and caches them in underground larder chambers.
When it stands on all fours, its low UV-reflectance back could help make the degu less visible to predators.
Some species are also known to directly defend their resident females and the ensuing fights can lead to severe wounding.
However, the main southward invasion of sigmodontines preceded formation of the land bridge by at least several million years, probably occurring via rafting.
The altricial state is typical for squirrels and mice, while the precocial state usually occurs in species like guinea pigs and porcupines.
The Texas pocket gopher avoids emerging onto the surface to feed by seizing the roots of plants with its jaws and pulling them downwards into its burrow.
The footdrumming may alert nearby offspring but most likely conveys that the rat is too alert for a successful attack, thus preventing the snake's predatory pursuit.
It also practices coprophagy.
While rodents are not the most seriously threatened order of mammals, there are 168 species in 126 genera that are said to warrant conservation attention in the face of limited appreciation by the public.
Though some species are common pests for humans, rodents also play important ecological roles.
****Family Capromyidae: hutias
From Africa, fossil evidence shows that some hystricognaths (caviomorphs) colonized South America, which was an isolated continent at the time, evidently making use of ocean currents to cross the Atlantic on floating debris.
The Modern Latin word "Rodentia" is derived from "rodens", present participle of "rodere" – "to gnaw", "eat away".
'''Order Rodentia''' (from Latin, ''rodere'', to gnaw)
The female gives birth sitting or lying down and the young emerge in the direction she is facing.
*::*Family Pedetidae: springhares
Learning about suitable foods can be divided into four life stages.
Rodent molars are well equipped to grind food into small particles.
**Infraorder Ctenodactylomorphi
Guinea pigs were popular laboratory animals until the late 20th century; about 2.5 million guinea pigs were used annually in the United States for research in the 1960s, but that total decreased to about 375,000 by the mid-1990s.
Other animals such as rabbits, hares, and pikas were once included with them, but are now considered to be in a separate order, the Lagomorpha.
Rodents have efficient digestive systems, absorbing nearly 80% of ingested energy.
*:**Family Spalacidae: mole rats, bamboo rats, zokors
Guinea pigs were first raised for food around 2500 B.C.
Brown rats use social learning in a wide range of situations, but perhaps especially so in acquiring food preferences.
This animal is an excellent food source since the flesh is 19% protein.
Because they do not stop growing, the animal must continue to wear them down so that they do not reach and pierce the skull.
*Pheromones from males or from pregnant or lactating females can speed up or retard sexual maturation in juvenile females
The smallest rodent is the Baluchistan pygmy jerboa, which averages only  in head and body length, with adult females weighing only .
In addition to increased care for young, obligate monogamy can also be beneficial to the adult male as it decreases the chances of never finding a mate or mating with an infertile female.
****Family †Heptaxodontidae: giant hutias
Females can remove the plug and may do so either immediately or after several hours.
Schlosser (1884) performed a comprehensive review of rodent fossils, mainly using the cheek teeth, and found that they fitted into the classical system, but Tullborg (1899) proposed just two sub-orders, Sciurognathi and Hystricognathi.
In many species, the penis contains a bone, the baculum; the testes can be located either abdominally or at the groin.
Interventions may include education, making and applying laws and regulations, modifying the habitat, changing farming practices, and biological control using pathogens or predators, as well as poisoning and trapping.
The resulting stress causes the fetuses to abort.
The agouti is one of the few animals that can break open the large capsules of the Brazil nut fruit.
These can be turned inside out for cleaning.
A coterie often consists of an adult male, three or four adult females, several nonbreeding yearlings, and the current year's offspring.
When eating cellulose, the food is softened in the stomach and passed to the cecum, where bacteria reduce it to its carbohydrate elements.
The vocalization, described as a distinct "chirping", has been likened to laughter, and is interpreted as an expectation of something rewarding.
Rodents have been used as food, for clothing, as pets, and as laboratory animals in research.
They rely on their fat reserves during their long winter hibernation.
Capybara (''Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris'')
The agouti is fleet-footed and antelope-like, being digitigrade and having hoof-like nails.
During copulation, males of some rodent species deposit a mating plug in the female's genital opening, both to prevent sperm leakage and to protect against other males inseminating the female.
****Family Caviidae: cavies, including Guinea pigs and the capybara
In the absence of more detailed knowledge of species at risk and accurate taxonomy, conservation must be based mainly on higher taxa (such as families rather than species) and geographical hot spots.
There is a great deal of parallelism and convergence among rodents caused by the fact that they have tended to evolve to fill largely similar niches.
The Middle East blind mole rat was the first mammal for which vibrational communication was documented.
A male is not aggressive towards other males until he has mated, after which time he defends a territory, a female, and a nest against other males.
This parallel evolution includes not only the structure of the teeth, but also the infraorbital region of the skull (below the eye socket) and makes classification difficult as similar traits may not be due to common ancestry.
Cooperation in ground squirrels varies between species and typically includes making alarm calls, defending territories, sharing food, protecting nesting areas, and preventing infanticide.
Infanticide appears to be widespread in black-tailed prairie dogs, including infanticide from invading males and immigrant females, as well as occasional cannibalism of an individual's own offspring.
In facultative monogamy, the males do not provide direct parental care and stay with one female because they cannot access others due to being spatially dispersed.
This is known as the "dear enemy effect".
The lower jaw is thrust forward while gnawing and is pulled backwards during chewing.
House mouse (''Mus musculus'')
Humans have also allowed the animals to spread to many remote oceanic islands (e.g., the Polynesian rat).
Promiscuity leads to increased sperm competition and males tend to have larger testicles.
Burrowing rodents may eat the fruiting bodies of fungi and spread spores through their feces, thereby allowing the fungi to disperse and form symbiotic relationships with the roots of plants (which usually cannot thrive without them).
The black-tailed prairie dog forms large towns that may cover many hectares.
Vibrations can provide cues to conspecifics about specific behaviors being performed, predator warning and avoidance, herd or group maintenance, and courtship.
The banner-tailed kangaroo rat produces several complex footdrumming patterns in a number of different contexts, one of which is when it encounters a snake.
Characteristics of several rodents are given in the table below.
****Family Myocastoridae: nutria, coypu
Across Africa, rodents including ''Mastomys'' and ''Arvicanthis'' damage cereals, groundnuts, vegetables and cacao.
It has a chunky body with short legs and tail, but is agile and can easily overpower prey as large as itself.
*Suborder Anomaluromorpha
They help with the rearing of the young and can take the place of a reproductive if one dies.
Male-bias sexual dimorphism is typical for ground squirrels, kangaroo rats, solitary mole rats, and pocket gophers; it likely developed due to sexual selection and greater male-male combat.
Ultrasonic calls play a part in social communication between dormice and are used when the individuals are out of sight of each other.
At high population densities, this system breaks down and males show a hierarchical system of dominance with overlapping ranges.
Most are normally kept in cages of suitable sizes and have varied requirements for space and social interaction.
Later, the coypu took over as a cheaper source of fur for felting and was farmed extensively in America and Europe; however, fashions changed, new materials became available and this area of the animal fur industry declined.
However, as the rats age, the tendency to chirp declines.
A potential predator may stop when it knows it has been detected, or an alarm call can allow conspecifics or related individuals to take evasive action.
The distinguishing feature of the rodents is their pairs of continuously growing, razor-sharp incisors.
They can quickly learn to avoid poisoned baits, which makes them difficult pests to deal with.
Coypu (''Myocastor coypus'')
These were based on the degree of inflection of the lower jaw and were to be further subdivided into Sciuromorpha, Myomorpha, Hystricomorpha and Bathyergomorpha.
Distress call of young emitted at 40&nbsp;kHz
The quills and guardhairs of porcupines are used for traditional decorative clothing.
The Myomorpha, such as the brown rat, have enlarged temporalis muscles, making them able to chew powerfully with their molars.
Their urine provides genetic information about individuals including the species, the sex and individual identity, and metabolic information on dominance, reproductive status and health.
