Steers and roping calves will not break from the chute fast enough for ropers to achieve a fast time if they are lame or weak, and they are not generally used for more than a single season.
Several regional gay rodeo organizations were formed in the following years, and, in 1985, the existing organizations formed the International Gay Rodeo Association as a national sanctioning body.
The first rodeo in Canada was held in 1902 in Raymond, Alberta when Raymond Knight funded and promoted a rodeo contest for bronc riders and steer ropers called the Raymond Stampede.
There was no standardization of events for a rodeo competition until 1929, when associations began forming.
The National Agricultural Society of Victoria ran one of the earliest recorded events in 1888, when a roughriding competition was held at their annual show.
During the "Chicano Movement" of the 1970s, Mexican Americans revitalized their heritage by establishing the event in the United States.
By 2003, it was estimated that 65 professional rodeos involving 700 members of the Canadian Professional Rodeo Association (CPRA) took place in Western Canada, along with professionals from the United States.
'''Rodeo''' ( or ) is a competitive sport that arose out of the working practices of cattle herding in Spain, Mexico, and later Central America, the United States, Canada, South America, Australia and New Zealand.
Many rodeo events were based on the tasks required by cattle ranching.
Today it is a sporting event that involves horses and other livestock, designed to test the skill and speed of the cowboys and cowgirls.
Women's barrel racing, sanctioned by the WRPA, has taken place at most of these rodeos.
Until recently, the most important was PRCA, which crowns the World Champions at the National Finals Rodeo (NFR), held since 1985 at Las Vegas, Nevada, featuring the top fifteen money-winners in seven events.
Canadian Humane Societies are careful in criticizing Canadian rodeo as the event has become so indigenous to Western Canada that criticism may jeopardize support for the organization's other humane goals.
Outside of the rodeo world itself, there is disagreement about exactly what rodeo "is."
Rodeo is a popular topic in country-western music, such as the 1991 Garth Brooks hit single "Rodeo", and has also been featured in numerous movies, television programs and in literature.
Bill Pickett and bronc rider Bill Stahl were both elected to the Cowboy Hall of Fame.
It was this latter usage which was adopted into the cowboy tradition of the United States and Canada.
Fans view rodeo as a spectator sport with animals, having aspects of pageantry and theater unlike other professional sport.
The trap door leads to a narrow earthen pathway about 100 metres long with high guard rails, open at the other end.
Chilean Horses are employed to the exclusion of others and riders wear traditional ''huaso'' garb as a requirement.
It remains popular in Mexico and Hispanic communities of the U.S. today.
St. Petersburg, Florida is the only locality in the United States with a complete ban on rodeo.
In the 1960s, bull rider Myrtis Dightman vied for national honors and qualified for the National Finals Rodeo.
In the 1970s, rodeo saw unprecedented growth.
Athletes participate in rodeos sanctioned by their own governing body or one that has a mutual agreement with theirs and their points count for qualification to their Association Finals.
Until the mid-1930s, every rodeo was independent and selected its own events from among nearly one hundred different contests.
Most are allowed to grow up in a natural, semi-wild condition on the open range, but also have to be trained in order to be managed from the ground, safely loaded into trailers, vaccinated and wormed, and be loaded in and out of bucking chutes.
The athletes who have won the most money, including NFR earnings, in each event are the World's Champions.
Many are retired to pasture at the end of their careers.
Finally, some groups consider some or all rodeo events themselves to be cruel.
Some also claim that regulations vary from vague to ineffective and are frequently violated.
Over the years, conditions for animals in rodeo and many other sporting events improved.
In the United States, professional rodeos are governed and sanctioned by the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association (PRCA) and Women's Professional Rodeo Association (WPRA), while other associations govern children's, high school, collegiate, and senior rodeos.
It was based on the skills required of the working vaqueros and later, cowboys, in what today is the western United States, western Canada, and northern Mexico.
Barretos is the most famous rodeo in Brazil.
The Chilean Rodeo Federation has criticized the lack of governmental funding and has pointed out that rodeo reaches a part of the population that does not have access to other Chilean sports.
Each organization has its own regulations and its own method of determining champions.
However, since 1992, Professional Bull Riders, Inc. (PBR) has drawn many top bull riders, and holds its own multimillion-dollar finals in Las Vegas prior to the NFR.
The sport has become so popular that in 2004, more spectators attended rodeo events than professional football matches.
Groups such as PETA, SHARK, and the Humane Society of the United States generally take a position of opposition to all rodeos and rodeo events.
It is capped by the presentation of the American flag, usually with a rendition of "The Star-Spangled Banner," and, depending on region, other ceremonies.
For example, these rules require, among other things, provisions for injured animals, a veterinarian's presence at all rodeos (a similar requirement exists for other equine events), padded flank straps, horn protection for steers, and spurs with dulled, free-spinning rowels.
Native American and Hispanic cowboys compete in modern rodeos in small numbers.
Following the Mexican Revolution of 1910, many rural Mexicans were displaced and took up residence in cities, where urban-based charros and others formed associations to establish and refine the charreada.
The National Intercollegiate Rodeo Association (NIRA) is responsible for the College National Finals Rodeo (CNFR) held each June in Casper, WY.
A later PRCA survey of 60,971 animal performances at 198 rodeo performances and 73 sections of "slack" indicated 27 animals were injured, again approximately five-hundredths of 1
Bushmen's Carnival Association was founded at Maitland, New South Wales.
"Prairie Rose" Henderson debuted at the Cheyenne rodeo in 1901, and, by 1920, women were competing in rough stock events, relay races and trick riding.
The PRCA realized that public education regarding rodeo and the welfare of animals was needed to keep the sport alive.
On 28 March 1946 the Northern (N.S.W.)
There are thousands of rodeos held worldwide each year.
African Americans constitute a smaller minority of rodeo contestants, though many early rodeo champions, such as Nat Love, were African American.
Athletes from the US, Mexico and Canada competed freely in all three countries.
Protests were first raised regarding rodeo animal cruelty in the 1870s, and, beginning in the 1930s, some states enacted laws curtailing rodeo activities and other events involving animals.
Reviewing 33,991 animal runs, the injury rate was documented at 16 animals or 0.047 percent, less than five-hundredths of one percent or one in 2000 animals.
Contestants referred to as "the new breed" brought rodeo increasing media attention.
The PRCA crowns the World Champions at the National Finals Rodeo (NFR), in Las Vegas on the UNLV campus, featuring the top fifteen money-winners in seven events.
Many other professional rodeos are held outside, under the same conditions of heat, cold, dust or mud as were the original events.
Rodeo committees must pay sanctioning fees to the appropriate governing bodies, and employ the needed stock contractors, judges, announcers, bull fighters, and barrel men from their approved lists.
Today, some professional rodeos are staged in large, air-conditioned arenas; offer large purses, and are often telecast.
The term ''rodeo'' was first used in English in approximately 1834 to refer to a cattle round-up.
The second set of concerns surround non-traditional rodeo events that operate outside the rules of sanctioning organizations.
Other nations have similar sanctioning organizations.
A study of rodeo animals in Australia found a similar injury rate.
There are three basic areas of concern to various groups.
When a judge gives a signal, the calf is set loose and starts running.
Historically, women have long participated in rodeo.
Buenos Aires, Rosario, and other major cities hosted rodeos.
It was originally named the Cowboys Turtle Association, later became the Rodeo Cowboys Association, and finally the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association in 1975.
Outside of competitive events, other activities are often associated with rodeos, particularly at local levels.
These contestants were young, often from an urban background, and chose rodeo for its athletic rewards.
Openly gay competitors stage their own rodeos because they are not welcomed in the straight circuit.
Modern rodeos in the United States are closely regulated and have responded to accusations of animal cruelty by instituting a number of rules to guide how rodeo animals are to be managed.
Professional competitors, for example, view rodeo as a sport and call themselves professional athletes while also using the title of cowboy.
The PRCA takes the position that the organization does this and even goes beyond expectation.
An injured animal will not buck well and hence a cowboy cannot obtain a high score for his ride, so sick or injured animals are not run through the chutes, but instead are given appropriate veterinary care so they can be returned to their usual level of strength and power.
If a rodeo queen is crowned, the contestants or winner and runners-up may also be presented.
The Stampede also incorporated mythical and historical elements, including Native Indians in full regalia, chuckwagon races, the Mounted Police, and marching bands.
These two associations are now the Australian Bushmen's Campdraft & Rodeo Association (ABCRA).
The state of Rhode Island has banned tie-down roping and certain other practices.Other locales have similar ordinances and laws.
There are also high-school rodeos, sponsored by the National High School Rodeo Association (NHSRA).
Some local and state governments in North America have banned or restricted rodeos, certain rodeo events, or types of equipment.
The purpose of this formation was to standardize regulations and rules, but insufficient support was given and the association was terminated in 1947.
The events are divided into two basic categories: the rough stock events and the timed events.
In Spanish America, the ''rodeo'' was the process that was used by vaqueros to gather cattle for various purposes, such as moving them to new pastures, separating the cattle owned by different ranchers, or gathering in preparation for slaughter (''matanza'').
The rider who accomplishes this first will increase speed, dragging the calf until it finally stumbles.
The bucking strap has to be an incentive to an animal that already wants to buck off a rider, not a prod, or the animal will either flee the pain, not buck, quickly sour and refuse to work, regardless of any pain that might be inflicted.
In 1956 the first ever Festa do Peão de Boiadeiro was created and as the years went by this rodeo became the biggest in Brazil and in Latin America.
Rough stock must be healthy and well fed to give the cowboy a powerful and challenging ride sufficient to obtain a high score.
In the 1990s, the Black World Championship Rodeo was held in New York City and other locations across the United States.
Laws governing rodeo vary widely.
Subsequently, ''charreada'' was formalized as an amateur team sport and the international competitions ceased.
Later the term "rodeo" became more commonly used, with American saddles used and the events took on American naming patterns.
Chilean rodeo has experienced financial woes, lack of political support and poor promotion.
Non-westerners view the spectacle as a quaint but exciting remnant of the Wild West while animal activists view rodeo as a cruel Roman circus spectacle, or an Americanized bullfight.
Unique among animal protection groups, the ASPCA specifically notes that practice sessions are often the location of more severe abuses than competitions.
Many colleges, particularly land grant colleges in the west, have rodeo teams.
Brazilian "rodeios" can be traced to the town of Barretos where the primary economic activities involved livestock and the transporting the livestock to other locations, where one of the ways the cowboys found to get some entertainment was riding the animals.
Until World War I, there was little difference between rodeo and ''charreada''.
Pittsburgh, for example, specifically prohibits electric prods or shocking devices, flank or bucking straps, wire tie-downs, and sharpened or fixed spurs or rowels.
Pittsburgh also requires humane officers be provided access to any and all areas where animals may go—specifically pens, chutes, and injury pens.
These are usually amateur events such as mutton busting, calf dressing, wild cow milking, calf riding, chuck wagon races, and other events designed primarily for publicity, half-time entertainment or crowd participation.
There also is a National Finals Rodeo.
A couple of seconds later, the riders are released and they race to grab the calf by its tail.
Although the PRCA never formally excluded people of color, pre-1960s racism effectively kept many minority participants, particularly African Americans, out of white competitions.
Others are already well-trained on the ground.
Other common sporting events such as flag and bending races (similar to pole bending) were held for the competitors' horses.
The American rodeo industry has made progress in improving the welfare of rodeo animals, with specific requirements for veterinary care and other regulations that protect rodeo animals.
Bushmen's Carnivals, the Australian equivalent of American rodeos, originated in Northern New South Wales in the 1920s and were well established by the 1930s.
''Rodeo'' is a ballet score written by Aaron Copland in 1942, and choreographer Agnes de Mille's ballet, ''Rodeo'' was commissioned by the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo in 1942 with the Copeland score.
American style professional rodeos generally comprise the following events: tie-down roping, team roping, steer wrestling, saddle bronc riding, bareback bronc riding, bull riding and barrel racing.
Rodeo women organized into various associations and staged their own rodeos.
Knight also coined the rodeo term "stampede" and built rodeo's first known shotgun style bucking chute.
The ABCRA is the largest rodeo and campdraft organization in Australia.
In May 1992 the National Rodeo Council of Australia (NRCA) was formed to further the sport of rodeo and has represented ABCRA and several other associations.
The ABCRA now affiliates the sports of campdrafting, roughriding (saddle bronc and bareback riding, steer and bull riding) and timed rodeo events: barrel races (ladies and junior), rope and tie, steer undecorating (ladies), steer wrestling, junior calf riding, team roping and breakaway roping (ladies).
On the other hand, there are occasions of rule violations and animal mistreatment at sanctioned rodeos.
A coleo starts with the participants and a calf or bull (this depends on the age and stature of the competitors) locked behind a trap door.
Internationally, rodeo is banned in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, with other European nations placing restrictions on certain practices.
In 1976, the first gay rodeo was held in Reno, Nevada as a charity fundraiser.
Such contests often are unregulated, with a higher risk of injury to human participants and poor treatment of animals than in traditionally-sanctioned events, particularly if consumption of alcoholic beverages by participants is permitted.
Many Canadian contestants were part-timers who did not earn a significant living from rodeo.
For example, it is a myth that a bucking horse is a wild, terrified animal.
There are strict standards for the selection, care and treatment of rodeo livestock, arenas, plus equipment requirements and specifications.
The total purse at the PWRA National Finals is $50,000.
The biggest rodeos are in Queensland.
A typical rodeo begins with a "Grand Entry", in which mounted riders, many carrying flags, including the American flag, state flags, banners representing sponsors, and others enter the arena at a gallop, circle once, come to the center of the arena and stop while the remaining participants enter.
A significant number of bucking horses are riding horses that learned to buck off their riders.
From its beginning, the event has been held the second week in July, and since 1938, attendees were urged to dress for the occasion in western hats to add to the event's flavour.
The group singles out children's rodeo events such as goat tying, calf riding and sheep riding (“mutton busting”), "which do not promote humane care and respect for animals."
The PRCA acknowledges that they only sanction about 30 percent of all rodeos, while another 50 percent are sanctioned by other organizations and 20 percent are completely unsanctioned.
PRCA regulations require veterinarians to be available at all rodeos to treat both bucking stock and other animals as needed.
They compete equally with men in team roping, sometimes in mixed-sex teams.
The prize money is obtained from donations and entry fees, with the main prize money being for the open campdraft event.
Associations also exist for Native Americans and other minority groups.
This evolved from these yearly gatherings where festivities were held and horsemen could demonstrate their equestrian skills.
Rodeos not subject to the rules of the PRCA or other organizations, and rodeos outside of the United States and Canada, where animal cruelty laws are weaker, are more likely to be the sites of abusive practices.
However, a number of humane and animal rights organizations have policy statements that oppose many rodeo practices and often the events themselves.
In some places, various types of novelty races or events such as wild cow milking are offered for adults.
Nonetheless, certain amateur and "backyard" rodeos are unregulated, and do not follow PRCA rules.
The Professional Bull Riders (PBR) is a more recent organization dedicated solely to bull riding.
Australian rodeo continued to grow following WWII, and by September 1978 riders from the USA, Canada, New Zealand and Australia competed in the World Rodeo Titles there for prize money totaling $60,000.
The late country singer Chris Ledoux competed in bareback riding and wrote many of his songs based on his experiences.
However, accusations of cruelty in the USA persist.
Professional rodeos in the United States and Canada usually incorporate both timed events and "rough stock" events, most commonly calf roping, team roping, steer wrestling, saddle bronc and bareback bronc riding, bull riding, and barrel racing.
Unlike American rodeo, events are not timed, but judged and scored based on finesse and grace.
However, rodeos are very common in inner state towns in Brazil, especially in Rio Grande do Sul, Mato Grosso do Sul and São Paulo state.
The object is to accomplish this in the shortest time.
Health regulations mandate vaccinations and blood testing of animals crossing state lines, so rodeo stock receives routine care.
In 1982, an Australian Bushmen's Carnival Association team competed in the North American Rodeo Commission's championships in Denver, Colorado, finishing sixth overall.
This Bascom-style bucking chute is now rodeo's standard design.
The yearly rodeos for separating the cattle were overseen by the "Juez del Campo," who decided all questions of ownership.
Many bucking horses understand their job well and reduce or stop their bucking, even while still wearing a flank strap, as soon as they either unseat the rider or hear the buzzer.
A more general position is taken by the ASPCA, only opposing rodeo events that "involve cruel, painful, stressful and potentially harmful treatment of livestock, not only in performance but also in handling, transport and prodding to perform."
Many bucking horses today are specifically bred for use in rodeos.
Over time, it became an event that included games, parades, foods, and contests involving humans, cattle, and horses.
Between 1890 and 1910, rodeos became public entertainment, sometimes combined Wild West shows featuring individuals such as Buffalo Bill Cody, Annie Oakley, and other charismatic stars.
Travelling tent rodeo shows increased the popularity of roughriding throughout much of Australia.
However, animal rights groups are less likely to target these cases.
Women also compete in traditional roping and rough stock events at women-only rodeos.
But after Bonnie McCarrol died in the Pendleton Round-Up in 1929 and Marie Gibson died in a horse wreck in 1933, women's competitive participation was curbed.
By 1910, several major rodeos were established in western North America, including the Calgary Stampede, the Pendleton Round-Up, and the Cheyenne Frontier Days.
Over 2,000 barrel racers compete for nearly four million dollars annually.
Today, the PRCA and other rodeo sanctioning organizations have stringent regulations to ensure rodeo animals' welfare.
"On its deepest level, rodeo is essentially a ritual addressing itself to the dilemma of man's place in nature."
Bull riding has become a significant niche sport in the country in recent years; PBR now runs a national circuit in Brazil, and Brazilian riders are a major presence on the main PBR circuit in the United States.
Women's barrel racing is governed by the WPRA, which holds finals for barrel racing along with the PRCA with the cowboys at the NFR.
In 1909, the Sociedad Sportiva Argentina (Argentina Sports Society) announced a rodeo competition in which the winners would eventually compete in the United States against rodeo performers from other countries.
Rodeo gender bias was a problem for cowgirls, and in response women formed the Girls Rodeo Association in 1948 (now the Women's Professional Rodeo Association (WPRA)) and held their own rodeos.
Rodeo has provoked opposition from animal rights and animal welfare advocates, who argue that various competitions constitute animal cruelty.
Rodeo-type events also became popular for a time in the big cities of the Eastern United States, with large venues such as Madison Square Garden playing a part in popularizing them for new crowds.
Some large events are also held in New South Wales, where Sydney has the rodeo during the Royal Agricultural Society show and Walcha holds a four-day campdrafting and rodeo competition annually.
In 1903, Knight built Canada's first rodeo arena and grandstand and became the first rodeo producer and rodeo stock contractor.
In 1919, Earl and John made rodeo's first reverse-opening side-delivery bucking chute at the Bascom Ranch in Lethbridge, Alberta.
However, enabling legislation has yet to be passed.
Not all rodeos are governed by the PRCA however, though organizations governing collegiate and high school rodeos base their rules on those of the PRCA.
Unlike other Chilean sports, rodeo does not receive any of the revenue from ''Chiledeportes'' because only sports that represent Chile overseas receive funds.
Rodeos have long been a popular competitor and spectator sport in Australia, but were not run on an organized basis until the 1880s.
In the twentieth century, rodeo's popularity increased in Argentina.
The traditional season for competitive rodeo runs from spring through fall, while the modern professional rodeo circuit runs longer, and concludes with the PRCA National Finals Rodeo (NFR) in Las Vegas, Nevada, now held in December.
Animals must also be protected with fleece-lined flank straps for bucking stock and horn wraps for roping steers.
Prescott, Arizona claimed the distinction of holding the first professional rodeo, as it charged admission and awarded trophies in 1888.
Points are earned for proper technique.
Early rodeo-like affairs of the 1820s and 1830s were informal events in the western United States and northern Mexico with cowboys and ''vaqueros'' testing their work skills against one another.
The American Humane Association is the only organization addressing the legislative issue, advocating the strengthening of animal cruelty laws in general, with no exceptions for "training practices."
In response to these concerns, a number of cities and states, mostly in the eastern half of the United States, have passed ordinances and laws governing rodeo.
Numerous organizations govern rodeo in the United States, each with slightly different rules and different events.
Young bucking horses are initially introduced to work with cloth dummies attached to the saddle.
Depending on sanctioning organization and region, other events such as breakaway roping, goat tying, or pole bending may also be a part of some rodeos.
Rodeos may also offer western-themed entertainment at intermission, including music and novelty acts, such as trick riding.
Some champion bucking horses got their start as spoiled riding horses that learned to quickly and effectively unseat riders.
Following the American Civil War, rodeo competitions emerged, with the first held in Cheyenne, Wyoming in 1872.
During the 1940s and 1950s, African Americans created the Southwestern Colored Cowboys Association.
The modern bronc is not a truly feral horse.
Basic injuries occurred at a rate of 0.072 percent, or one in 1405, with injuries requiring veterinary attention at 0.036 percent, or one injury in every 2810 times the animal was used, and transport, yarding and competition were all included in the study.
The Women's Professional Rodeo Association (WPRA) is open exclusively to women.
There are associations governing children's, teen, and college level rodeos as well as associations governing rodeo for gays, seniors, Native Americans and others.
In the American west, some states incorporate the regulations of the PRCA into their statutes as a standard by which to evaluate if animal cruelty has occurred.
Professional cowgirls also compete in bronc and bull riding, team roping and calf roping under the auspices of the PWRA, a WPRA subsidiary.
"We can ride with the best of them," one person stated, "But they don't want us around."
