A carved tympanum generally constitutes the major sculptural work of a Romanesque church.
The term "Pre-romanesque" is sometimes applied to architecture in Germany of the Carolingian and Ottonian periods and Visigothic, Mozarab and Asturian constructions between the 8th and the 10th centuries in the Iberian Peninsula while "First Romanesque" is applied to buildings in north of Italy and Spain and parts of France that have Romanesque features but pre-date the influence of the Abbey of Cluny.
Stained glass came into increasing use from the 11th century.
File:PeterElevDetailDehio.jpg|Exterior elevation, Peterborough Cathedral
Because Romanesque arches are nearly always semi-circular, the structural and design problem inherent in the ribbed vault is that the diagonal span is larger and therefore higher than the transverse span.
File:Monasterio de la Oliva - Sala Capitular 01.jpg|The chapter house of Santa María de la Oliva, Carcastillo, Spain
File:Smithsonian Building NR.jpg|The Smithsonian Institution Building, also known as "The Castle".
At Jumièges there are tall drum columns between piers each of which has a half-column supporting the arch.
Other notable Romanesque baptisteries are that at Parma Cathedral remarkable for its galleried exterior, and the polychrome Baptistery of San Giovanni of Florence Cathedral, with vault mosaics of the 13th century including Christ in Majesty, possibly the work of the almost legendary Coppo di Marcovaldo.
The wider central section has two tiers of three identical windows, while in the outer sections there are two tiers of single windows, giving emphasis to the mass of the towers.
The nave and aisles are separated by an arcade carried on piers or on columns.
Examples of Romanesque architecture can be found across the continent, making it the first pan-European architectural style since Imperial Roman Architecture.
The scheme extends to other parts of the church, with the martyrdom of the local saints shown in the crypt, and Apocalypse in the narthex and Christ in Majesty.
File:Sunlit tower, Tewkesbury Abbey - geograph.org.uk - 1037432.jpg|The most massive Romanesque crossing tower is that at Tewkesbury Abbey, in England, where large crossing towers are characteristic.
The tower to the left fell.
File:Se de Lisboa Frente adj sky.JPG|Lisbon Cathedral, Portugal, 1147, has a similar form to the Old Cathedral of Coimbra above with the addition of two sturdy bell towers in the Norman manner and a wheel window.
The style, sometimes called First Romanesque or Lombard Romanesque, is characterised by thick walls, lack of sculpture and the presence of rhythmic ornamental arches known as a Lombard band.
File:Hildesheim St Michael alternation of arcade.jpg|St Michael's, Hildesheim, shows two columns set between the piers.
In Germany, the Holy Roman Emperors built a number of residences, fortified, but essentially palaces rather than castles, at strategic points and on trade routes.
It has an apsidal west end, which was to become a feature of Churches of Germany, such as Worms Cathedral.
Arcades can occur in storeys or stages.
Each transept projects to the width of two nave bays.
File:San Gimignano.JPG|alt=View of a small town on a hilltop surrounded by trees and vineyards.
By the early 12th century composite piers had evolved, in which the attached shafts swept upward to a ribbed vault or were continued into the mouldings of the arcade, as at Vézelay Abbey, Saint-Étienne, Caen, and Peterborough Cathedral.
In the case of aisled churches, barrel vaults, or half-barrel vaults over the aisles helped to buttress the nave, if it was vaulted.
There are few windows and entrance is on an upper floor, is reached by a modern staircase.
File:Abaziasanvittorefrasassi.jpg|alt=A small church sits on a steep rise, surrounded by craggy mountains.
The term is now used for the more restricted period from the late 10th to 12th centuries.
Some buildings, like Santa Maria in Cosmedin (illustrated above) and the atrium at San Clemente in Rome, may have an odd assortment of columns in which large capitals are placed on short columns and small capitals are placed on taller columns to even the height.
St Alban's Cathedral, above)
Wide doorways are usually surmounted by a semi-circular arch, except where a door with a lintel is set into a large arched recess and surmounted by a semi-circular "lunette" with decorative carving.
All over Europe, dwellers of the town and country built houses to live in, some of which, sturdily constructed in stone, have remained to this day with sufficient of their form and details intact to give a picture of the style of domestic architecture that was in fashion at the time.
Each vault compartment covers two narrow bays of the nave
After churches and the monastic buildings with which they are often associated, castles are the most numerous type of building of the period.
File:Krak des chevaliers15(js).jpg|alt= An enormous castle with encircling walls, on a rise in barren country with distant mountains.|Crusader castle, Krak des Chevaliers, Syria, was mainly constructed in this period, with the outer walls being later.
File: Abbaye de la Sauve Majeure - Interlaced Asps.JPG|Capital retaining Corinthian form decorated with intertwined beasts derived from Irish manuscripts.
This facade can be seen as the foundation for many other buildings, including both French and English Gothic churches.
The sculptured frieze  above is protected by an eave on corbels.
Pointed ribs made their first appearance in the transverse ribs of the vaults at Durham Cathedral in northern England, dating from 1128.
The style can be identified right across Europe, despite regional characteristics and different materials.
File:Great Hall, Oakham Castle - geograph.org.uk - 92787.jpg|alt=A tidy building like a large barn, of red brick with long sloping roofs, dormer windows and a low arched doorway.|The Great Hall of Oakham Castle, England, once part of the fortified manor of a Norman baron.
This is particularly the case on large masonry columns, or on large columns that alternate with piers as at Durham.
Monolithic columns cut from a single piece of stone were frequently used in Italy, as they had been in Roman and Early Christian architecture.
The Nobility of Europe, upon safe return, thanked God by the building of a new church or the enhancement of an old one.
It is basically square with three bulging projections and a castle-like tower.|The monastery of San Vittore alle Chiuse, Genga, Italy, of undressed stone, has a typically fortress-like appearance with small windows of early Romanesque.
File: London Tower (1).JPG|alt= A huge square tower of grey stone is seen beyond fortifications on the edge of a river.|The Tower of London (1078).
The precise form differs from region to region.
Benedict had ordered that all the arts were to be taught and practiced in the monasteries.
It has a typical elevation of nave and aisles with wooden panelled ceilings and an apsidal east end.
File:St John the Baptist, Clayton, Sussex - Wall painting - geograph.org.uk - 1506249.jpg|In England the major pictorial theme occurs above the chancel arch in parish churches.
There is no consensus for the beginning date of the Romanesque style, with proposals ranging from the 6th to the late 10th century, this later date being the most commonly held.
One of the most intact schemes to exist is that at Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe in France.
'''Romanesque architecture''' is an architectural style of medieval Europe characterized by semi-circular arches.
The window is described by George Seddon as being of "unforgettable beauty".
An early ribbed vault in the Romanesque architecture of Sicily is that of the chancel at the Cathedral of Cefalù.
and decorative bands of floral and interlacing.
By far the greatest number of surviving Romanesque buildings are churches.
''Christ in Majesty'' was a common theme for the apse.
Other cathedrals have sections of their building which are clearly an intermediate stage between Norman and Gothic, such as the western towers of Ely Cathedral and part of the nave at Worcester Cathedral.
The tympanum is typically decorated with the imagery of Christ in Majesty with the symbols of the Four Evangelists, drawn directly from the gilt covers of medieval Gospel Books.
File:Erice castle.jpg|alt=A castle with a tall narrow tower and walls topped by battlements stretches along the edge of a cliff covered in trees and palm trees.|, Erice (12th-13th century), is one of many built by the Normans in Sicily, Italy.
Durham is a cathedral of massive Romanesque proportions and appearance, yet its builders introduced several structural features that were new to architectural design and were later to be hallmark features of the Gothic.
Wooden ceilings and timber beams were decorated.
File:Castle-rising-castle.JPG|alt=A large square castle keep of pinkish-grey stone, with a projecting entrance tower, has architectural details to its windows, mouldings and stonework.|Castle Rising, England, shows flat buttresses and reinforcing at the corners of the building typical in both castles and churches.
Each building has clearly defined forms, frequently of very regular, symmetrical plan; the overall appearance is one of simplicity when compared with the Gothic buildings that were to follow.
File:Voûte_en_berceau_Conques.JPG|The vault at the Abbey Church of Saint Foy, Conques, France
File:Le Puy en Velay 03.jpg|alt=A highly ornamental church facade built in alternating courses of red and white stone.|The facade of Notre Dame du Puy, le Puy en Velay, France, has a more complex arrangement of diversified arches: Doors of varying widths, blind arcading, windows and open arcades.
In Italy where open wooden roofs are common, and tie beams frequently occur in conjunction with vaults, the timbers have often been decorated as at San Miniato al Monte, Florence.
They may be vaulted or have timber roofs.
They were subsequently employed with the development of the Gothic style at the east end of the Basilica of St Denis in Paris in 1140.
Because of the massive nature of Romanesque walls, buttresses are not a highly significant feature, as they are in Gothic architecture.
Arcading on a large scale generally fulfils a structural purpose, but it is also used, generally on a smaller scale, as a decorative feature, both internally and externally where it is frequently "blind arcading" with only a wall or a narrow passage behind it.
Although much sculptural ornament was sometimes applied to the interiors of churches, the focus of such decoration was generally the west front, and in particular, the portals.
It is probable that this form came about to accommodate a baptistery at the west end.
As the towers rise, the number and size of openings increases as can be seen on the right tower of the transept of Tournai Cathedral where two narrow slits in the fourth level from the top becomes a single window, then two windows, then three windows at the uppermost level.
Upper windows are similarly separated into two openings by colonettes.
This structure has necessitated the use of very thick walls, and massive piers from which the domes spring.
Abbey and cathedral churches generally follow the Latin Cross plan.
The enclosure of towns brought about a lack of living space within the walls, and resulted in a style of town house that was tall and narrow, often surrounding communal courtyards, as at San Gimignano in Tuscany.
These include the Abbaye-Saint-Denis, Speyer Cathedral and Westminster Abbey (where little of the Norman church now remains).
Local lords built great halls in the countryside, while rich merchants built grand town houses.
Ely Cathedral was never vaulted and retains a wooden ceiling over the nave.
The first truly Gothic building in England is the long eastern end of Canterbury Cathedral commenced in 1175.
In England, the extension eastward may be long, while in Italy it is often short or non-existent, the church being of T plan, sometimes with apses on the transept ends as well as to the east.
The "Gallery of Kings" above the portal is Gothic
In England stout columns of large diameter supported decorated arches, gallery and clerestory, as at the nave of Malmesbury Abbey (see "Piers and columns", above).
File:Abbaye de Lavaudieu - Cloître - JPG1.jpg|The cloister of Lavaudieu Abbey
The dressed polychrome stonework has exquisitely detailed mouldings.
Romanesque churches generally have a single portal centrally placed on the west front, the focus of decoration for the facade of the building.
In the cases where half-barrel vaults were used, they effectively became like flying buttresses.
Adam represents a highly naturalistic and lively portrayal, while in the figure of Seth, the robes have been used to great decorative effect, similar to the best stone carving of the period.
Maria Laach Abbey, above)
Later Romanesque chapter houses sometimes had an apsidal eastern end.
Many of the magnificent stained glass windows of France, including the famous windows of Chartres, date from the 13th century.
At San Zeno, the components of nave and aisles are made clear by the vertical shafts that rise to the level of the central gable and by the varying roof levels.
File:Mainzer Dom Wandaufriss.jpg|Mainz Cathedral, Germany, has rectangular piers and possibly the earliest example of an internal elevation of 3 stages.
In England, of the cathedrals of ancient foundation, all were begun in this period with the exception of Salisbury, where the monks relocated from the Norman church at Old Sarum, and several, such as Canterbury, which were rebuilt on the site of Saxon churches.
Columns are an important structural feature of Romanesque architecture.
East end is Gothic.
Often aisles extended through two storeys, rather than the one usual in Gothic architecture, so as to better support the weight of a vaulted nave.
File:Portal_moissac.jpg|The portal of Saint-Pierre, Moissac, has unusual features including the frieze of roundels on the lintel, the scalloped jambs and figures of prophets on the central jamb
It is also common to see bell or onion-shaped spires of the Baroque period surmounting Romanesque towers in central and Eastern Europe.
This varies from a simple blind arcade decorating the walls, to a narrow arcaded passage, to a fully developed second story with a row of windows lighting the gallery.
The figures, though stiff and formalised, demonstrate considerable proficiency in design, both pictorially and in the functional use of the glass, indicating that their maker was well accustomed to the medium.
The cathedral of Santiago de Compostela shares many features with Ely, but is typically Spanish in its expansive appearance.
The entrance has a narthex which screens the main portal.
Towers were an important feature of Romanesque churches and a great number of them are still standing.
There is marked emphasis on the western entrance, called ''Westwerk'', which is seen in several other churches.
Abbey of St Pere of Burgal, Catalonia, Spain
Colonnettes and attached shafts are also used structurally and for decoration.
The oldest-known fragments of medieval pictorial stained glass appear to date from the 10th century.
William the Conqueror built the central White Tower as his stronghold and residence.
The interior would have been plastered and painted.
File:Verona Zeno-cropped.JPG|Church of San Zeno, Verona, Italy, The facade is neatly divided vertically and horizontally.
San Estebán, Segovia, below)
Charlemagne was crowned by the Pope in Old St. Peter's Basilica on Christmas Day in the year 800, with an aim to re-establishing the old Roman Empire.
In Germany, Limburg Cathedral has a rich variety of openings and arcades in horizontal storeys of varying heights.
While the form is typical of northern France, its various components were common to many Romanesque churches of the period across Europe.
Bishops and the abbots of important monasteries lived and functioned like princes.
File:Abbatiale de Conques.jpg|The Abbey of Saint Foy, Conques, France, was one of many such abbeys to be built along the pilgrimage Way of St James that led to Santiago de Compostela.
File:Coimbra Old Cathedral - Sé Velha de Coimbra crop.JPG|The Old Cathedral of Coimbra, Portugal, is fortress-like and battlemented.
One of the most notable surviving fortifications is that of the city of Carcassonne.
These westwerks take a great variety of forms as may be seen at Maria Laach Abbey, St Gertrude, Nivelles, and St Serviatius, Maastricht.
File:Santa Maria del Naranco 2 crop.JPG |Santa Maria del Naranco, Oviedo, Spain.
While some are dependent on manuscripts illustrations of Biblical scenes and depictions of beasts and monsters, others are lively scenes of the legends of local saints.
The most simple form that this takes is to have a column between each adjoining pier.
Vaults of stone or brick took on several different forms and showed marked development during the period, evolving into the pointed ribbed arch characteristic of Gothic architecture.
A large candelabra hangs above the central altar.
Other variations that appear to hover between Romanesque and Gothic occur, such as the facade designed by Abbot Suger at the Abbey of Saint-Denis, which retains much that is Romanesque in its appearance, and the Facade of Laon Cathedral, which, despite its Gothic form, has round arches.
The invasion of England by William, Duke of Normandy, in 1066, saw the building of both castles and churches that reinforced the Norman presence.
File:Conisbrough Castle keep - geograph.org.uk - 922015 crop.JPG|The keep of Conisbrough Castle, England.|alt=A circular castle tower with enormous jutting buttresses.
Towers and apse of the western end are often incorporated into a multi-storey structure that bears little structural or visual relationship to the building behind it.
File:Nivelles JPG00 (13).jpg|St Gertrude, Nivelles, Belgium, (consecrated 1046) has a nave and aisles divided by piers supporting a clerestorey.
Examples of all these types of buildings can be found scattered across Europe, sometimes as isolated survivals like the two merchants' houses on opposite sides of Steep Hill in Lincoln, England, and sometimes giving form to a whole medieval city like San Gimignano in Tuscany, Italy.
Most of the pilgrims travelled the Way of St. James on foot, many of them barefooted as a sign of penance.
File:Plan.cathedrale.Angouleme.png|France, Angoulême Cathedral
File:Saint-Savin nef.jpg|alt=A tall narrow church interior with rounds columns in delicate pastel colours that rise without interruption from floor to vault.|The painted barrel vault at the Abbey Church of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe is supported on tall marbled columns.
During the 11th and 12th centuries, figurative sculpture flourished in a distinctly Romanesque style that can be recognised across Europe, although the most spectacular sculptural projects are concentrated in South-Western France, Northern Spain and Italy.
These features combine to create one of the richest and most dynamic interiors of the Romanesque period.
At Sainte Marie Madeleine, Vézelay, the ribs are square in section, strongly projecting and polychrome.
The opening of the portal may be arched, or may be set with a lintel supporting a tympanum, generally carved, but in Italy sometimes decorated with mosaic or fresco.
In churches, typically the aisles are vaulted, but the nave is roofed with timber, as is the case at both Peterborough and Ely.
The facades of Gothic churches in Italy are not always easily distinguishable from the Romanesque.
File:F08.Mozac.0191.JPG|alt=A narrow space with grey columns with ornate capitals supporting a plastered cross vault without ribs.|The aisle of the Abbey Church at Mozac has a groin vault supported on transverse arches.
An important example, which retains Medieval paintings, is the vault of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe, France, of the early 12th century.
File:Peterborough interior 01 adjusted.jpg|The nave of Peterborough Cathedral (1118–93) in three stages of arcade, gallery & clerestory, typical of Norman abbey churches.
Church of Santa Maria, San Martín de Castañeda, Spain
Many churches, both large and small, had lateral entrances that were commonly used by worshippers.
File:San Isidoro Plan Vertical.JPG|Spain, San Isidoro de León
One was to have the centre point where the diagonal ribs met as the highest point, with the infill of all the surfaces sloping upwards towards it, in a domical manner.
On the rear west wall would be a Doom painting or Last Judgement, with an enthroned and judging Christ at the top.
The simplest type of vaulted roof is the barrel vault in which a single arched surface extends from wall to wall, the length of the space to be vaulted, for example, the nave of a church.
The apsidal east end was often a focus of decoration, with both architectonic forms such as arcading and pictorial features such as carved figures, murals and occasionally mosaics.
In the case of Winchester Cathedral, the Gothic arches were literally carved out of the existent Norman piers.
A characteristic feature of Romanesque architecture, both ecclesiastic and domestic, is the pairing of two arched windows or arcade openings, separated by a pillar or colonette and often set within a larger arch.
Many cathedrals owe their foundation to this date, with others beginning as abbey churches, and later becoming cathedrals.
File:Parma Dom Fassade4 adjusted.JPG|Parma Cathedral, Italy, 1178, has a screen facade ornamented with galleries.
The First Romanesque employed rubble walls, smaller windows and unvaulted roofs.
The enormous and powerful monastery at Cluny was to have lasting effect on the layout of other monasteries and the design of their churches.
They were essential to the communal way of life, a place for both working during daylight hours and relaxing during inclement weather.
Ocular windows are common in Italy, particularly in the facade gable and are also seen in Germany.
File:TournusTonnengewölbe.jpg|alt= A church interior of yellow stone with arches of alternating red and cream crossing the nave to support an unusual vaulting system.|The Church of St Philibert, Tournus, has a series of transverse barrel vaults supported on arches.
The movement of people and armies also brought about the building of bridges, some of which have survived, including the 12th-century bridge at Besalú, Catalonia, the 11th-century Puente de la Reina, Navarre and the Pont-Saint-Bénézet, Avignon.
The earliest pointed vault in France is that of the narthex of La Madeleine, Vézelay, dating from 1130.
Chevrons and other geometric ornaments, referred to by 19th-century writers as "barbaric ornament", are most frequently found on the mouldings of the central door.
File: Dehio I 56 Konstanz Section.jpg|This drawing is a reconstruction by Dehio of the appearance of the Romanesque Konstanz Cathedral before its alterations in the Gothic style.
Many Nativity scenes occur, the theme of the Three Kings being particularly popular.
The style also lent itself to the building of cloth mills, steelworks and powerstations.
The Romanesque period produced a profusion of sculptural ornamentation.
Architectural compromises of this type are seen where materials have been salvaged from a number of buildings.
In France, Burgundy was the centre of monasticism.
The tower, (Gothic 1284) is a separate structure as usual in Italy.
The lowest stage is marked by large doors, each set within an arch in each of the three vertical sections.
Many castles exist, the foundations of which date from the Romanesque period.
In other countries they have suffered from war, neglect and changing fashion.
Political struggles also resulted in the fortification of many towns, or the rebuilding and strengthening of walls that remained from the Roman period.
The most significant are the great abbey churches, many of which are still standing, more or less complete and frequently in use.
The Perpendicular window and battlement are late Gothic.
Where really massive columns were called for, such as those at Durham Cathedral, they were constructed of ashlar masonry and the hollow core was filled with rubble.
At San Miniato al Monte the definition of the architectural parts is made even clearer by the polychrome marble, a feature of many Italian Medieval facades, particularly in Tuscany.
These range from tiny chapels to large cathedrals, and although many have been extended and altered in different styles, a large number remain either substantially intact or sympathetically restored, demonstrating the form, character and decoration of Romanesque church architecture.
The Romanesque appearance has been achieved while freely adapting an overall style to suit the function of the building.
Large churches of Spain and Portugal usually have two towers.
File:Celles JPG00.jpg|alt=The houses of a small town, surrounded by green hillsides, are dominated by a huge church with a large square tower and a spire like a witch's hat.|Collegiate churches such as that of Saint Hadelin, Celles, Belgium, were administered by lay canons.
In Northern Europe the foliate capitals generally bear far more resemblance to the intricacies of manuscript illumination than to Classical sources.
'''Baptisteries''' often occur in Italy as a free standing structure, associated with a cathedral.
The arcades are often richly decorated and are home to some of the most fanciful carved capitals of the Romanesque period with those of Santo Domingo de Silos in Spain and the Abbey of St Pierre Moissac, being examples.
In Germany, the Rhine and its tributaries were the location of many Romanesque abbeys, notably Mainz, Worms, Speyer and Bamberg.
File:Abadia de Saint-Pierre de Moissac - Portalada sud.JPG|alt=A very large porch of yellowish stone, with a single enormous, slightly pointed archway, juts from the side of a building.|The south portal of the Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac, France, has a square door divided by an ornate doorpost, surmounted by a carved tympanum and set within a vast arched porch.
File: Worcester cathedral 031 crop.JPG|The groin-vaulted crypt of Worcester Cathedral
Unfortunately, very little of the abbey church at Cluny remains; the "Cluny II" rebuilding of 963 onwards has completely vanished, but we have a good idea of the design of "Cluny III" from 1088 to 1130, which until the Renaissance remained the largest building in Europe.
The Crusades, 1095–1270, brought about a very large movement of people and, with them, ideas and trade skills, particularly those involved in the building of fortifications and the metal working needed for the provision of arms, which was also applied to the fitting and decoration of buildings.
Combining features of ancient Roman and Byzantine buildings and other local traditions, Romanesque architecture is known by its massive quality, thick walls, round arches, sturdy pillars, groin vaults, large towers and decorative arcading.
At a time when the remaining architectural structures of the Roman Empire were falling into decay and much of its learning and technology lost, the building of masonry domes and the carving of decorative architectural details continued unabated, though greatly evolved in style since the fall of Rome, in the enduring Byzantine Empire.
The arch leading into the chancel at the far end has alternating red and white stones.
File: King David in Augsburg Cathedral light.JPG|King David from Augsburg Cathedral, late 11th century.
Stylized foliage often appears, sometimes deeply carved and curling outward after the manner of the acanthus leaves on Corinthian capitals, but also carved in shallow relief and spiral patterns, imitating the intricacies of manuscript illuminations.
File:San Martín de Castañeda capital1116.JPG|Capital of simplified concave Corinthian form with billeted abacus, simple dosseret and pronounced annulet.
Architecture of a Romanesque style also developed simultaneously in the north of Italy, parts of France and in the Iberian Peninsula in the 10th century and prior to the later influence of the Abbey of Cluny.
File:SantiagoCompostela-PortaPlaterias-bis.jpg|The Porta Platerias, Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, by Master Esteban, has two wide openings with tympanums supported on brackets.
