No emperor could hope to survive, much less to reign, without the allegiance and loyalty of the Praetorian Guard and of the legions.
The Imperial bureaucracy was so dependent on writing that the Babylonian Talmud declared "if all seas were ink, all reeds were pen, all skies parchment, and all men scribes, they would be unable to set down the full scope of the Roman government's concerns."
Boys and girls received primary education generally from ages 7 to 12, but classes were not segregated by grade or age.
Romans in the 1st and 2nd centuries counted coins, rather than weighing them—an indication that the coin was valued on its face, not for its metal content.
The ''domus'' was a privately owned single-family house, and might be furnished with a private bath ''(balneum)'', but it was not a place to retreat from public life.
This claim of universal dominion was renewed and perpetuated when the Empire came under Christian rule in the 4th century.
Some of the earliest styles of gladiator fighting had ethnic designations such as "Thracian" or "Gallic".
In the wake of the Republic's collapse, state religion had adapted to support the new regime of the emperors.
On the Hellenistic model, Vespasian endowed chairs of grammar, Latin and Greek rhetoric, and philosophy at Rome, and gave teachers special exemptions from taxes and legal penalties, though primary schoolmasters did not receive these benefits.
The terms of this account varied depending on the degree of trust and co-operation between owner and slave: a slave with an aptitude for business could be given considerable leeway to generate profit, and might be allowed to bequeath the ''peculium'' he managed to other slaves of his household.
Under Nero, disillusioned writers reacted to Augustanism.
Although Greek continued as the language of the Byzantine Empire, linguistic distribution in the East was more complex.
File:Roman diatretglas.jpg|Glass cage cup from the Rhineland, latter 4th century
The poetry of Juvenal offers a lively curmudgeon's perspective on urban society.
The Western Roman Empire began to disintegrate in the early 5th century as Germanic migrations and invasions overwhelmed the capacity of the Empire to assimilate the migrants and fight off the invaders.
In the areas of the western Empire inhabited by Celtic-speaking peoples, Rome encouraged the development of urban centres with stone temples, forums, monumental fountains, and amphitheatres, often on or near the sites of the preexisting walled settlements known as ''oppida''.
Although the institution of slavery has often been regarded as waning in the 3rd and 4th centuries, it remained an integral part of Roman society until the 5th century.
During the years of his rule, a new constitutional order emerged (in part organically and in part by design), so that, upon his death, this new constitutional order operated as before when Tiberius was accepted as the new emperor.
Cultural precedent in the Eastern provinces facilitated a rapid dissemination of Imperial cult, extending as far as the Augustan military settlement at Najran, in present-day Saudi Arabia.
The Romans thought gladiator contests had originated with funeral games and sacrifices in which select captive warriors were forced to fight to expiate the deaths of noble Romans.
Stories about great men and women, or cautionary tales about individual failures, were meant to instil Roman values ''(mores maiorum)''.
Rhetoric was not so much a body of knowledge (though it required a command of references to the literary canon) as it was a mode of expression and decorum that distinguished those who held social power.
The mysteries, however, involved exclusive oaths and secrecy, conditions that conservative Romans viewed with suspicion as characteristic of "magic", conspiracy (''coniuratio''), and subversive activity.
This marked the end of the Principate, and the beginning of the Dominate.
During the decades of the Constantinian and Valentinian dynasties, the empire was divided along an east–west axis, with dual power centres in Constantinople and Rome.
The manufacture of pottery in a wide range of quality was important to trade and employment, as were the glass and metalworking industries.
Roman "foodies" indulged in wild game, fowl such as peacock and flamingo, large fish (mullet was especially prized), and shellfish.
"Senator" was not itself an elected office in ancient Rome; an individual gained admission to the Senate after he had been elected to and served at least one term as an executive magistrate.
Greek-style athletics included footraces, boxing, wrestling, and the pancratium.
The legal status of free persons might be further defined by their citizenship.
In addition, numeracy was necessary for any form of commerce.
Higher education promoted career advancement, particularly for an equestrian in Imperial service: "eloquence and learning were considered marks of a well-bred man and worthy of reward".
Intensive large-scale mining—of alluvial deposits, and by means of open-cast mining and underground mining—took place from the reign of Augustus up to the early 3rd century AD, when the instability of the Empire disrupted production.
The military produced a vast amount of written reports and service records, and literacy in the army was "strikingly high".
A period of increasing trouble and decline began with the reign of Commodus.
In the Imperial era, as many as 135 days of the year were devoted to religious festivals and games (''ludi)''.
In art, the toga is shown with the long end dipping between the feet, a deep curved fold in front, and a bulbous flap at the midsection.
The consuls' military power rested in the Roman legal concept of ''imperium'', which literally means "command" (though typically in a military sense).
Among these officials were the "Roman governors", as they are called in English: either magistrates elected at Rome who in the name of the Roman people governed senatorial provinces; or governors, usually of equestrian rank, who held their ''imperium'' on behalf of the emperor in provinces excluded from senatorial control, most notably Roman Egypt.
The ''Natural History'' of the elder Pliny, who died during disaster relief efforts in the wake of the eruption of Vesuvius, is a vast collection on flora and fauna, gems and minerals, climate, medicine, freaks of nature, works of art, and antiquarian lore.
The appellation ''clarissimus'' (Greek ''lamprotatos'') was used to designate the ''dignitas'' of certain senators and their immediate family, including women.
In general, ''honestiores'' were the members of the three higher "orders," along with certain military officers.
File:Boucles d'oreilles 3ème siècle Musée de Laon 030208.jpg|Gold earrings with gemstones, 3rd century
The typical tax rate paid by individuals ranged from 2 to 5%.
The title ''eminentissimus'', "most eminent" (Greek ''exochôtatos'') was reserved for equestrians who had been Praetorian prefects.
The Roman navy (Latin: ''classis,'' "fleet") not only aided in the supply and transport of the legions, but also helped in the protection of the frontiers along the rivers Rhine and Danube.
Tacitus's reputation as a literary artist matches or exceeds his value as a historian; his stylistic experimentation produced "one of the most powerful of Latin prose styles."
The hydraulic pipe organ ''(hydraulis)'' was "one of the most significant technical and musical achievements of antiquity", and accompanied gladiator games and events in the amphitheatre, as well as stage performances.
The Babatha Archive is a suggestive example of multilingualism in the Empire.
From the perspective of the lower classes, a peak was merely added to the social pyramid.
But despite this gesture of universality, the Severan dynasty was tumultuous — an emperor's reign was ended routinely by his murder or execution — and, following its collapse, the Roman Empire was engulfed by the Crisis of the Third Century, a period of invasions, civil strife, economic disorder, and plague.
The in-kind taxes paid by communities included the provision of personnel, animals, or vehicles for the ''cursus publicus'', the state mail and transport service established by Augustus.
In the view of the Greek historian Dio Cassius, a contemporary observer, the accession of the emperor Commodus in 180 AD marked the descent "from a kingdom of gold to one of rust and iron"—a famous comment which has led some historians, notably Edward Gibbon, to take Commodus' reign as the beginning of the decline of the Roman Empire.
In contrast to the unity of Classical Latin, the literary aesthetic of late antiquity has a tessellated quality that has been compared to the mosaics characteristic of the period.
After adolescence, most physical training for males was of a military nature.
A bill of sale might contain a clause stipulating that the slave could not be employed for prostitution, as prostitutes in ancient Rome were often slaves.
At Imperial public baths, a person of humble means could view wall paintings, mosaics, statues, and interior decoration often of high quality.
From the 2nd to the 4th centuries, the Christian authors who would become the Latin Church Fathers were in active dialogue with the Classical tradition, within which they had been educated.
For various reasons, the 1st century BC was a time of political and military upheaval, which ultimately led to rule by emperors.
Women are also portrayed in the pallium.
In Egypt, textile producers could run prosperous small businesses employing apprentices, free workers earning wages, and slaves.
The GDP per capita of Italy is estimated as 40 to 66% higher than in the rest of the Empire, due to tax transfers from the provinces and the concentration of elite income in the heartland.
It was also a centre of family religious rites, containing a shrine and the images of family ancestors.
Illustrated books, including erotica, were popular, but are poorly represented by extant fragments.
Pleas for religious tolerance from traditionalists such as the senator Symmachus (d. 402) were rejected, and Christian monotheism became a feature of Imperial domination.
By means of European colonialism following the Renaissance, and their descendant states, Greco-Roman culture was exported on a worldwide scale, playing a crucial role in the development of the modern world.
In the traditional literary canon, literature under Augustus, along with that of the late Republic, has been viewed as the "Golden Age" of Latin literature, embodying the classical ideals of "unity of the whole, the proportion of the parts, and the careful articulation of an apparently seamless composition."
Slavic populations were also able to penetrate deep into the Balkans.
The Romans often exploited internal political divisions by supporting one faction over another: in the view of Plutarch, "it was discord between factions within cities that led to the loss of self-governance".
He also recognized the importance of play in child development, and disapproved of corporal punishment because it discouraged love of learning—in contrast to the practice in most Roman primary schools of routinely striking children with a cane ''(ferula)'' or birch rod for being slow or disruptive.
Several earthen dams are known from Roman Britain, including a well-preserved example from Longovicium (Lanchester).
The Roman calendar was structured around religious observances.
The most famous description of a Roman meal is probably Trimalchio's dinner party in the ''Satyricon'', a fictional extravaganza that bears little resemblance to reality even among the most wealthy.
Although it has sometimes been thought that ancient Rome lacked "paper" or documentary transactions, the system of banks throughout the Empire also permitted the exchange of very large sums without the physical transfer of coins, in part because of the risks of moving large amounts of cash, particularly by sea.
The army had about 300,000 soldiers in the 1st century, and under 400,000 in the 2nd, "significantly smaller" than the collective armed forces of the territories it conquered.
Formal education was available only to children from families who could pay for it, and the lack of state intervention in access to education contributed to the low rate of literacy.
Plotina exercised influence on both her husband Trajan and his successor Hadrian.
Theodosius I, the last emperor to rule over both East and West, died in 395 AD after making Christianity the official religion of the empire.
Tacitus reports that after the Great Fire of Rome in AD&nbsp;64, some among the population held Nero responsible and that the emperor attempted to deflect blame onto the Christians.
The Roman Republic was not a nation-state in the modern sense, but a network of towns left to rule themselves (though with varying degrees of independence from the Roman Senate) and provinces administered by military commanders.
Diocletian completed the work of fully restoring the empire, but declined the role of ''princeps'' and became the first emperor to be addressed regularly as ''domine'', "master" or "lord".
Roman literary theatre tradition is particularly well represented in Latin literature by the tragedies of Seneca.
A continuing interest in the religious traditions of Rome prior to Christian dominion is found into the 5th century, with the ''Saturnalia'' of Macrobius and ''The Marriage of Philology and Mercury'' of Martianus Capella.
Agriculture and industry, such as milling and mining, relied on the exploitation of slaves.
The early Empire was monetized to a near-universal extent, in the sense of using money as a way to express prices and debts.
Most utilized concrete as well.
The period from the mid-1st century through the mid-2nd century has conventionally been called the "Silver Age" of Latin literature.
Hellenistic cities sponsored schools of higher learning as an expression of cultural achievement.
Mills and commercial ovens were usually combined in a bakery complex.
Personal relationships—patronage, friendship ''(amicitia)'', family, marriage—continued to influence the workings of politics and government, as they had in the Republic.
The first senator from the most eastern province, Cappadocia, was admitted under Marcus Aurelius.
The chief Roman contributions to architecture were the arch, vault and the dome.
Ovid's versions of Greek myths became one of the primary sources of later classical mythology, and his work was so influential in the Middle Ages that the 12th and 13th centuries have been called the "Age of Ovid."
In the Dominate, clothing worn by both soldiers and government bureaucrats became highly decorated, with woven or embroidered stripes ''(clavi)'' and circular roundels ''(orbiculi)'' applied to tunics and cloaks.
Because Roman government officials were few in number, a provincial who needed help with a legal dispute or criminal case might seek out any Roman perceived to have some official capacity, such as a procurator or a military officer, including centurions down to the lowly ''stationarii'' or military police.
To secure their loyalty, several emperors paid the ''donativum'', a monetary reward.
There was no principle analogous to "separation of church and state".
Southern Gaul became a leading producer of the finer red-gloss pottery ''(terra sigillata)'' that was a major item of trade in 1st-century Europe.
Order was eventually restored by Constantine the Great, who became the first emperor to convert to Christianity, and who established Constantinople as the new capital of the eastern empire.
The Circus Maximus could seat around 150,000 spectators, and the Colosseum about 50,000 with standing room for about 10,000 more.
The ''cornu'', a long tubular metal wind instrument that curved around the musician's body, was used for military signals and on parade.
per month, for a per annum total of about 100,000 tons of wheat primarily from Sicily, north Africa, and Egypt.
The Altar of Augustan Peace ''(Ara Pacis Augustae)'' was located there, as was an obelisk imported from Egypt that formed the pointer ''(gnomon)'' of a horologium.
Public baths were a part of urban culture throughout the provinces, but in the late 4th century, individual tubs began to replace communal bathing.
The Sack of Rome in 410 by the Visigoths and again in 455 by the Vandals accelerated the Western Empire's decay, while the deposition of the emperor, Romulus Augustulus, in 476 by Odoacer, is generally accepted to mark the end of the empire in the west.
Tertullian says that otherwise Christians not only availed themselves of the baths, but participated fully in commerce and society.
In the early 4th century, Constantine I became the first emperor to convert to Christianity.
The excesses of ''nouveau riche'' freedmen were satirized in the character of Trimalchio in the ''Satyricon'' by Petronius, who wrote in the time of Nero.
In the medieval West, "Roman" came to mean the church and the Pope of Rome.
Similar facilities were constructed in cities throughout the Empire, and some of the best-preserved Roman structures are in Spain, southern France, and northern Africa.
Transport by water was preferred where possible, and moving commodities by land was more difficult.
Although certain forms of dance were disapproved of at times as non-Roman or unmanly, dancing was embedded in religious rituals of archaic Rome, such as those of the dancing armed Salian priests and of the Arval Brothers, priesthoods which underwent a revival during the Principate.
The dominance of Latin among the literate elite may obscure the continuity of spoken languages, since all cultures within the Roman Empire were predominantly oral.
Octavian's power was then unassailable and in 27 BC the Roman Senate formally granted him overarching power and the new title ''Augustus'', effectively marking the end of the Roman Republic.
Women, freedmen, and slaves had opportunities to profit and exercise influence in ways previously less available to them.
Freeborn Roman women were considered citizens throughout the Republic and Empire, but did not vote, hold political office, or serve in the military.
Throughout the European medieval period, attempts were even made to establish successors to the Roman Empire, including the Empire of Romania, a Crusader state, and the Holy Roman Empire.
The priesthoods of the state religion were filled from the same social pool of men who held public office, and in the Imperial era, the Pontifex Maximus was the emperor.
With its public gardens, the Campus became one of the most attractive places in the city to visit.
The Flavian Amphitheatre, better known as the Colosseum, became the regular arena for blood sports in Rome after it opened in 80 AD.
An individual benefactor might endow a community with a library: Pliny the Younger gave the city of Comum a library valued at 1 million sesterces, along with another 100,000 to maintain it.
As the historian Christopher Kelly has described it:
Borders ''(fines)'' were marked, and the frontiers ''(limites)'' patrolled.
The average recorded age at death for the slaves of the city of Rome was extraordinarily low: seventeen and a half years (17.2 for males; 17.9 for females).
As the republican principle of citizens' equality under the law faded, the symbolic and social privileges of the upper classes led to an informal division of Roman society into those who had acquired greater honours ''(honestiores)'' and those who were humbler folk ''(humiliores)''.
Since his rule ended a century of civil wars, and began an unprecedented period of peace and prosperity, he was so loved that he came to hold the power of a monarch ''de facto'' if not ''de jure''.
In addition to the ''mansiones'', some taverns offered accommodations as well as food and drink; one recorded tab for a stay showed charges for wine, bread, mule feed, and the services of a prostitute.
In antiquity, a city depended on its leading citizens to fund public works, events, and services ''(munera)'', rather than on tax revenues, which primarily supported the military.
Taxation under the Empire amounted to about 5% of the Empire's gross product.
In the secular realm, dancing girls from Syria and Cadiz were extremely popular.
Augustus also created the Praetorian Guard: nine cohorts, ostensibly to maintain the public peace, which were garrisoned in Italy.
One purpose of the Roman census was to determine the ''ordo'' to which an individual belonged.
Another of its duties was the protection of the crucial maritime trade routes against the threat of pirates.
However, Augustulus was never recognized by his Eastern colleague, and separate rule in the Western part of the empire only ceased to exist upon the death of Julius Nepos, in 480.
Through his military reforms, which included consolidating or disbanding units of questionable loyalty, Augustus changed and regularized the legion, down to the hobnail pattern on the soles of army boots.
The Romans, however, managed to stop further Islamic expansion into their lands during the 8th century and, beginning in the 9th century, reclaimed parts of the conquered lands.
Martial and the epic poet Statius, whose poetry collection ''Silvae'' had a far-reaching influence on Renaissance literature, wrote during the reign of Domitian.
Public facilities—such as baths ''(thermae)'', toilets that were flushed with running water ''(latrinae)'', conveniently located basins or elaborate fountains ''(nymphea)'' delivering fresh water, and large-scale entertainments such as chariot races and gladiator combat—were aimed primarily at the common people who lived in the ''insulae''.
If the particulars of provincial law conflicted with Roman law or custom, Roman courts heard appeals, and the emperor held final authority to render a decision.
The renovations of the National Mall at the beginning of the 20th century have been viewed as expressing a more overt imperialist kinship with Rome.
It remained the capital of the east until its demise.
In 212, during the reign of Caracalla, Roman citizenship was granted to all freeborn inhabitants of the empire.
The Romans constructed numerous aqueducts.
The length differed by wearer: a man's reached mid-calf, but a soldier's was somewhat shorter; a woman's fell to her feet, and a child's to its knees.
Much of what is known of Roman painting is based on the interior decoration of private homes, particularly as preserved at Pompeii and Herculaneum by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD.
From earliest times, several religious festivals had featured games ''(ludi)'', primarily horse and chariot races ''(ludi circenses)''.
Those in Imperial service were ranked by pay grade (''sexagenarius'', 60,000 sesterces per annum; ''centenarius,'' 100,000; ''ducenarius'', 200,000).
Even after the collapse of the central government, some roads remained usable for more than a thousand years.
In theory, the Senate was entitled to choose the new emperor, but did so mindful of acclamation by the army or Praetorians.
On a more practical level, the central government took an active interest in supporting agriculture.
Better paid than the legionaries, the Praetorians served only sixteen years.
The network of cities throughout the Empire (''coloniae'', ''municipia'', ''civitates'' or in Greek terms ''poleis'') was a primary cohesive force during the Pax Romana.
A surviving treatise by Frontinus, who served as ''curator aquarum'' (water commissioner) under Nerva, reflects the administrative importance placed on ensuring the water supply.
Then, it was an "empire" long before it had an emperor.
The holder of a debt could use it as a means of payment by transferring it to another party, without cash changing hands.
Although the republic stood in name, contemporaries of Augustus knew it was just a veil and that Augustus had all meaningful authority in Rome.
As an indication of the scale of Roman metal production, lead pollution in the Greenland ice sheet quadrupled over its prehistoric levels during the Imperial era, and dropped again thereafter.
By the late Republic, if not earlier, women dined, reclined, and drank wine along with men.
Religion in the Roman Empire encompassed the practices and beliefs the Romans regarded as their own, as well as the many cults imported to Rome or practised by peoples throughout the provinces.
Republican portraits had been characterized by a "warts and all" verism, but as early as the 2nd century BC, the Greek convention of heroic nudity was adopted sometimes for portraying conquering generals.
The programme of urban renewal under Augustus, and the growth of Rome's population to as many as 1 million people, was accompanied by a nostalgia for rural life expressed in the arts.
In ''The City of God against the Pagans,'' Augustine builds a vision of an eternal, spiritual Rome, a new ''imperium sine fine'' that will outlast the collapsing Empire.
Modern scholars have found the pleasure Romans took in the "theatre of life and death" to be one of the more difficult aspects of their civilization to understand and explain.
Quintilian provides the most extensive theory of primary education in Latin literature.
The military established control of a territory through war, but after a city or people was brought under treaty, the military mission turned to policing: protecting Roman citizens (after 212 AD, all freeborn inhabitants of the Empire), the agricultural fields that fed them, and religious sites.
Professional associations or trade guilds ''(collegia)'' are attested for a wide range of occupations, including fishermen ''(piscatores)'', salt merchants ''(salinatores)'', olive oil dealers ''(olivarii)'', entertainers ''(scaenici)'', cattle dealers ''(pecuarii)'', goldsmiths ''(aurifices)'', teamsters ''(asinarii'' or ''muliones)'', and stonecutters ''(lapidarii)''.
The public baths served hygienic, social and cultural functions.
Better ready-to-wear was exported by businessmen (''negotiatores'' or ''mercatores'') who were often well-to-do residents of the production centres.
The two highest ''ordines'' in Rome were the senatorial and equestrian.
''Pantomimus'' combined expressive dancing, instrumental music and a sung libretto, often mythological, that could be either tragic or comic.
Other officials were appointed as supervisors of government finances.
The three major elements of the Imperial Roman state were the central government, the military, and provincial government.
The ''annona'', public facilities, and spectacular entertainments mitigated the otherwise dreary living conditions of lower-class Romans, and kept social unrest in check.
Significant collections might attract "in-house" scholars; Lucian mocked mercenary Greek intellectuals who attached themselves to philistine Roman patrons.
Ecstatic dancing was a feature of the international mystery religions, particularly the cult of Cybele as practised by her eunuch priests the Galli and of Isis.
The high amount of metal coinage in circulation increased the money supply for trading or saving.
The women of the emperor's family often intervened directly in his decisions.
Books were expensive, since each copy had to be written out individually on a roll of papyrus ''(volumen)'' by scribes who had apprenticed to the trade.
In the Scheidel–Friesen economic model, the total annual income generated by the Empire is placed at nearly 20 billion ''HS'', with about 5% extracted by central and local government.
Another 20% went to about 10% of the population who can be characterized as a non-elite middle.
The Latin word ''ordo'' (plural ''ordines'') refers to a social distinction that is translated variously into English as "class, order, rank," none of which is exact.
Ideally a villa commanded a view or vista, carefully framed by the architectural design.
The sixty years of Jewish–Roman wars in the second half of the 1st century and the first half of the 2nd century were exceptional in their duration and violence.
The conquest of Constantinople in 1204 fragmented what remained of the Empire into successor states, the ultimate victor being that of Nicaea.
Sudden inflation during the reign of Commodus damaged the credit market.
Decorative arts for luxury consumers included fine pottery, silver and bronze vessels and implements, and glassware.
The transition to a professional military had begun during the late Republic, and was one of the many profound shifts away from republicanism, under which an army of conscripts had exercised their responsibilities as citizens in defending the homeland in a campaign against a specific threat.
Death was not a necessary or even desirable outcome in matches between these highly skilled fighters, whose training represented a costly and time-consuming investment.
In 212 AD, by means of the edict known as the ''Constitutio Antoniniana'', the emperor Caracalla extended citizenship to all freeborn inhabitants of the empire.
The satirist Juvenal, however, saw "bread and circuses" ''(panem et circenses)'' as emblematic of the loss of republican political liberty:
During the rest of the fourth century Christianity became the dominant religion of the Empire.
The grain dole also had symbolic value: it affirmed both the emperor's position as universal benefactor, and the right of all citizens to share in "the fruits of conquest".
The ''sestertius'' (plural ''sestertii,'' English "sesterces", symbolized as ''HS'') was the basic unit of reckoning value into the 4th century, though the silver ''denarius'', worth four sesterces, was used also for accounting beginning in the Severan dynasty.
Aurelian (reigned 270–275) brought the empire back from the brink and stabilized it.
Bullion and ingots seem not to have counted as ''pecunia'', "money," and were used only on the frontiers for transacting business or buying property.
(Illyrian, Dacian, and Thracian, however, may have formed a subgroup or a Sprachbund; see Thraco-Illyrian.)
Women of the emperor's family were often depicted dressed as goddesses or divine personifications such as Pax ("Peace").
The curriculum in the East was more likely to include music and physical training along with literacy and numeracy.
Roman roads are considered the most advanced roads built until the early 19th century.
Imperially authorized persecutions were limited and sporadic, with martyrdoms occurring most often under the authority of local officials.
