Both reflected current events, and increasingly "history painting", literally "story painting", a phrase dating back to the Italian Renaissance meaning the painting of subjects with groups of figures, long considered the highest and most difficult form of art, did indeed become the painting of historical scenes, rather than those from religion or mythology.
The third cycle is marked by social poetry, especially the abolitionist movement; the greatest writer of this period is Castro Alves.
The end of the Romantic era is marked in some areas by a new style of Realism, which affected literature, especially the novel and drama, painting, and even music, through Verismo opera.
At that time Germany was a multitude of small separate states, and Goethe's works would have a seminal influence in developing a unifying sense of nationalism.
This is reflected in some notable recent reference works such as the ''New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians'' and the new edition of ''Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart''.
Romanticism in Italian literature was a minor movement, yet still important; it began officially in 1816 when Mme de Staël wrote an article in the journal ''Biblioteca italiana'' called "Sulla maniera e l'utilità delle traduzioni", inviting Italian people to reject Neoclassicism and to study new authors from other countries.
It has continued to be referred to as such in some of the standard music references such as ''The Oxford Companion to Music'' and Grout's ''History of Western Music'' but was not unchallenged.
Préault's plaster relief entitled ''Slaughter'', which represented the horrors of wars with exacerbated passion, caused so much scandal at the 1834 Salon that Préault was banned from this official annual exhibition for nearly twenty years.
These wars, along with the political and social turmoil that went along with them, served as the background for Romanticism.
It had a significant and complex effect on politics, and while for much of the Romantic period it was associated with liberalism and radicalism, its long-term effect on the growth of nationalism was perhaps more significant.
Modern Portuguese poetry develops its character from the work of its Romantic epitome, Almeida Garrett, a very prolific writer who helped shape the genre with the masterpiece ''Folhas Caídas'' (1853).
Dziady is known for various interpretation.
Revival and reinterpretation of ancient myths, customs and traditions by Romantic poets and painters helped to distinguish their indigenous cultures from those of the dominant nations and crystallise the mythography of Romantic nationalism.
In contrast to Germany, Romanticism in English literature had little connection with nationalism, and the Romantics were often regarded with suspicion for the sympathy many felt for the ideals of the French Revolution, whose collapse and replacement with the dictatorship of Napoleon was, as elsewhere in Europe, a shock to the movement.
Important writers were Ludwig Tieck, Novalis (''Heinrich von Ofterdingen'', 1799), Heinrich von Kleist and Friedrich Hölderlin.
The first one is basically focused on the creation of a sense of national identity, using the ideal of the heroic Indian.
Romanticism was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism as well as glorification of all the past and nature, preferring the medieval rather than the classical.
Some examples include José de Alencar, who wrote "Iracema" and "O Guarani", and Gonçalves Dias, renowned by the poem "Canção do Exílio" (Song of the Exile).
The second period, sometimes called Ultra-Romanticism, is marked by a profound influence of European themes and traditions, involving the melancholy, sadness and despair related to unobtainable love.
The Romantic movement gave rise to New England Transcendentalism, which portrayed a less restrictive relationship between God and Universe.
The most notable poet so recognized was Adam Mickiewicz.
Stendhal is today probably the most highly regarded French novelist of the period, but he stands in a complex relation with Romanticism, and is notable for his penetrating psychological insight into his characters and his realism, qualities rarely prominent in Romantic fiction.
The importance the Romantics placed on emotion is summed up in the remark of the German painter Caspar David Friedrich that "the artist's feeling is his law".
In the contemporary music culture, the romantic musician followed a public career depending on sensitive middle-class audiences rather than on a courtly patron, as had been the case with earlier musicians and composers.
There developed the idea of the ''poeta wieszcz'' (the prophet).
In the discussion of English literature, the Romantic period is often regarded as finishing around the 1820s, or sometimes even earlier, although many authors of the succeeding decades were no less committed to Romantic values.
Self-understanding was an important aspect of Romanticism.
These included William Blake and Samuel Palmer and the other members of the Ancients in England, and in Germany Philipp Otto Runge.
The lives of great artists such as Raphael were commemorated on equal terms with those of rulers, and fictional characters were also depicted.
Novels, short stories, and poems replaced the sermons and manifestos of yore.
Fleury-Richard's ''Valentine of Milan weeping for the death of her husband'', shown in the Paris Salon of 1802, marked the arrival of the style, which lasted until the mid-century, before being subsumed into the increasingly academic history painting of artists like Paul Delaroche.
The demonic and anti-rational monsters thrown up by his imagination are only superficially similar to those of the Gothic fantasies of northern Europe, and in many ways he remained wedded to the classicism and realism of his training, as well as looking forward to the Realism of the later 19th century.
Scottish "national drama" emerged in the early 1800s, as plays with specifically Scottish themes began to dominate the Scottish stage.
File:The Fighting Temeraire, JMW Turner, National Gallery.jpg|J.M.W.
Brazilian Romanticism is characterized and divided in three different periods.
This idea is often called "romantic originality."
They took the Romantic approach of rooting religion in the inner world of the human spirit, so that it is a person's feeling or sensibility about spiritual matters that comprises religion.
James Macpherson (1736–96) was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation.
In Haydn's music, according to Hoffmann, "a child-like, serene disposition prevails", while Mozart (in the late E-flat major Symphony, for example) "leads us into the depths of the spiritual world," with elements of fear, love, and sorrow, "a presentiment of the infinite ... in the eternal dance of the spheres".
Elsewhere in Europe, leading artists adopted Romantic styles: in Russia there were the portraitists Orest Kiprensky and Vasily Tropinin, with Ivan Aivazovsky specializing in marine painting, and in Norway Hans Gude painted secenes of fjords.
That it was part of the Counter-Enlightenment, a reaction against the Age of Enlightenment, is generally accepted in current scholarship.
Important motifs in German Romanticism are travelling, nature, for example the German Forest, and Germanic myths.
This is visible in Germany and Ireland, where underlying Germanic or Celtic linguistic substrates dating from before the Romanization-Latinization were sought out.
John Constable, born in 1776, stayed closer to the English landscape tradition, but in his largest "six-footers" insisted on the heroic status of a patch of the working countryside where he had grown up—challenging the traditional hierarchy of genres, which relegated landscape painting to a low status.
In northern Europe, the Early Romantic visionary optimism and belief that the world was in the process of great change and improvement had largely vanished, and some art became more conventionally political and polemical as its creators engaged polemically with the world as it was.
File:Mendelssohn Bartholdy.jpg|Felix Mendelssohn, 1839
Robert Burns (1759–96) and Walter Scott (1771–1832) were highly influenced by the Ossian cycle.
Influenced heavily by Lord Byron, Lermontov sought to explore the Romantic emphasis on metaphysical discontent with society and self, while Tyutchev's poems often described scenes of nature or passions of love.
Also such novelists as Walter Scott from Scotland and Mary Shelley, and the essayists William Hazlitt and Charles Lamb.
This late arrival of a truly personal Romantic style would linger on to the beginning of the 20th century, notably through the works of poets such as Alexandre Herculano, Cesário Verde and António Nobre.
Beethoven's music, on the other hand, conveys a sense of "the monstrous and immeasurable," with the pain of an endless longing that "will burst our breasts in a fully coherent concord of all the passions."
''Fingal'', written in 1762, was speedily translated into many European languages, and its appreciation of natural beauty and treatment of the ancient legend has been credited more than any single work with bringing about the Romantic movement in European, and especially in German literature, through its influence on Johann Gottfried von Herder and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
However, an early Portuguese expression of Romanticism is found already in Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage, especially in his sonnets dated at the end of the 18th century.
To William Wordsworth, poetry should begin as "the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings," which the poet then "recollects in tranquility," evoking a new but corresponding emotion the poet can then mould into art.
Byron, Keats and Shelley all wrote for the stage, but with little success in England, with Shelley's ''The Cenci'' perhaps the best work produced, though that was not played in a public theatre in England until a century after his death.
Some of these large paintings had contemporary settings and staffage, but others had small figures that turned the work into history painting in the manner of Claude Lorrain, like Salvator Rosa a late Baroque artist whose landscapes had elements that Romantic painters repeatedly turned to.
Much historical effort in the 20th century was devoted to combating the romantic historical myths created in the 19th century.
The 18th-century precursor to Romanticism, the cult of sensibility, had become associated with the Ancien regime, and the French Revolution had been more of an inspiration to foreign writers than those experiencing it at first hand.
French Romantic poets of the 1830s to 1850s include Alfred de Musset, Gérard de Nerval, Alphonse de Lamartine and the flamboyant Théophile Gautier, whose prolific output in various forms continued until his death in 1872.
Francisco Goya was called "the last great painter in whose art thought and observation were balanced and combined to form a faultless unity".
This idea of an American identity in the art world is reflected in W. C. Bryant’s poem, ''To Cole, the Painter, Departing for Europe'', where Bryant encourages Cole to remember the powerful scenes that can only be found in America.
The career of Prosper Mérimée followed a similar pattern; he is now best known as the originator of the story of ''Carmen'', with his novella of 1845.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge and others believed there were natural laws that the imagination—at least of a good creative artist—would unconsciously follow through artistic inspiration if left alone.
But around the mid-century the undoubtedly Romantic novels of the Yorkshire-based Brontë family appeared, in particular Charlotte's ''Jane Eyre'' and Emily's ''Wuthering Heights'', which were both published in 1847.
It launched a highly successful career, with other historical novels such as ''Rob Roy'' (1817), ''The Heart of Midlothian'' (1818) and ''Ivanhoe'' (1820).
The most important Romantic writers were Ludovico di Breme, Pietro Borsieri and Giovanni Berchet.
Arguably, the most distinguished Romantic poet of this part of Europe was Adam Mickiewicz, who developed an idea that Poland was the Messiah of Nations, predestined to suffer just as Jesus had suffered to save all the people.
Other Russian poets include Mikhail Lermontov (''A Hero of Our Time'', 1839), Fyodor Tyutchev (''Silentium!
This movement was led by France, with Balzac and Flaubert in literature and Courbet in painting; Stendhal and Goya were important precursors of Realism in their respective media.
Romanticism played an essential role in the national awakening of many Central European peoples lacking their own national states, not least in Poland, which had recently lost its independence when Russia's army crushed the Polish Uprising under Nicholas I.
This in turn led historians such as Alfred Einstein to extend the musical "Romantic Era" throughout the 19th century and into the first decade of the 20th.
The Scottish poet James Macpherson influenced the early development of Romanticism with the international success of his Ossian cycle of poems published in 1762, inspiring both Goethe and the young Walter Scott.
File:JEAN LOUIS THÉODORE GÉRICAULT - La Balsa de la Medusa (Museo del Louvre, 1818-19).jpg|Théodore Géricault, ''The Raft of the Medusa'', 1819
In the United States, at least by 1818 with William Cullen Bryant's "To a Waterfowl", Romantic poetry was being published.
Burns, an Ayrshire poet and lyricist, is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major influence on the Romantic movement.
Image:Giacomo Meyerbeer nuorempana.jpg|Giacomo Meyerbeer, 1847
Old traditions and customs were revived and portrayed in a positive light in the Polish messianic movement and in works of great Polish poets such as Adam Mickiewicz (Pan Tadeusz), Juliusz Słowacki and Zygmunt Krasiński, as well as prose writers such as Henryk Sienkiewicz.
The publication in 1798 of ''Lyrical Ballads'', with many of the finest poems by Wordsworth and Coleridge, is often held to mark the start of the movement.
Before them may be mentioned the pre-romantics José Cadalso and Manuel José Quintana.
In literature, Romanticism found recurrent themes in the evocation or criticism of the past, the cult of "sensibility" with its emphasis on women and children, the isolation of the artist or narrator, and respect for nature.
This elevation in the valuation of pure emotion resulted in the promotion of music from the subordinate position it had held in relation to the verbal and plastic arts during the Enlightenment.
If contemporary poets had little success on the stage, the period was a legendary one for performances of Shakespeare, and went some way to restoring his original texts and removing the Augustan "improvements" to them.
They also put more effort into the psychological development of their characters, and the main characters typically displayed extremes of sensitivity and excitement.
Romanticism in Spanish literature developed a well-known literature with a huge variety of poets and playwrights.
Heidelberg later became a center of German Romanticism, where writers and poets such as Clemens Brentano, Achim von Arnim, and Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff met regularly in literary circles.
However the principal exponent of Romanticism in Russia is Alexander Pushkin (''The Prisoner of the Caucasus'', 1820–1821; ''The Robber Brothers'', 1822; ''Ruslan and Ludmila'', 1820; ''Eugene Onegin'', 1825–1832).
His works best exemplify the Messianic movement in Poland: in two early dramas, ''Nie-boska komedyia'' (1835; ''The Undivine Comedy)'' and ''Irydion'' (1836; ''Iridion),'' as well as in the later ''Psalmy przyszłości'' (1845), he asserted that Poland was the Christ of Europe: specifically chosen by God to carry the world's burdens, to suffer, and eventually be resurrected.
In Prussia, the development of spiritual renewal as a means to engage in the struggle against Napoleon was argued by, among others, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, a disciple of Kant.
Those who speak the same language are joined to each other by a multitude of invisible bonds by nature herself, long before any human art begins; they understand each other and have the power of continuing to make themselves understood more and more clearly; they belong together and are by nature one and an inseparable whole.
The more precise characterization and specific definition of Romanticism has been the subject of debate in the fields of intellectual history and literary history throughout the 20th century, without any great measure of consensus emerging.
File:Hector Berlioz.jpg|Hector Berlioz, 1850
...Only when each people, left to itself, develops and forms itself in accordance with its own peculiar quality, and only when in every people each individual develops himself in accordance with that common quality, as well as in accordance with his own peculiar quality—then, and then only, does the manifestation of divinity appear in its true mirror as it ought to be.
File:Thomas Cole - The Voyage of Life Old Age, 1842 (National Gallery of Art).jpg|Thomas Cole, 1842, ''The Voyage of LifeOld Age''
Ian Duncan and Alex Benchimol suggest that publications like the novels of Scott and these magazines were part of a highly dynamic Scottish Romanticism that by the early nineteenth century, caused Edinburgh to emerge as the cultural capital of Britain and become central to a wider formation of a "British Isles nationalism."
File:Barabas-liszt.jpg|Franz Liszt, 1847
Many Romantic ideas about the nature and purpose of art, above all the pre-eminent importance of originality, remained important for later generations, and often underlie modern views, despite opposition from theorists.
Unlike the much later work of Hans Christian Andersen, who was publishing his invented tales in Danish from 1835, these German works were at least mainly based on collected folk tales, and the Grimms remained true to the style of the telling in their early editions, though later rewriting some parts.
In England Thomas Carlyle was a highly influential essayist who turned historian; he both invented and exemplified the phrase "hero-worship", lavishing largely uncritical praise on strong leaders such as Oliver Cromwell, Frederick the Great and Napoleon.
File:El Tres de Mayo, by Francisco de Goya, from Prado thin black margin.jpg|Francisco Goya, ''The Third of May 1808, 1814
In contrast to the usually very social art of the Enlightenment, Romantics were distrustful of the human world, and tended to believe that a close connection with nature was mentally and morally healthy.
Margaret Drabble described it in literature as taking place "roughly between 1770 and 1848", and few dates much earlier than 1770 will be found.
File:William Blake - Albion Rose - from A Large Book of Designs 1793-6.jpg|William Blake, ''Albion Rose'', 1794-5
Indeed, one of the earliest sustained applications of the term to music occurs in 1789, in the ''Mémoires'' of André Grétry.
Public persona characterized a new generation of virtuosi who made their way as soloists, epitomized in the concert tours of Paganini and Liszt, and the conductor began to emerge as an important figure, on whose skill the interpretation of the increasingly complex music depended.
The arrival of Romanticism in French art was delayed by the strong hold of Neoclassicism on the academies, but from the Napoleonic period it became increasingly popular, initially in the form of history paintings propagandising for the new regime, of which Girodet's ''Ossian receiving the Ghosts of the French Heroes'', for Napoleon's Château de Malmaison, was one of the earliest.
The view that fairy tales, unless contaminated from outside literary sources, were preserved in the same form over thousands of years, was not exclusive to Romantic Nationalists, but fit in well with their views that such tales expressed the primordial nature of a people.
To insulate theology from reductionism in science, 19th-century post-Enlightenment German theologians moved in a new direction, led by Friedrich Schleiermacher and Albrecht Ritschl.
His ''Liberty Leading the People'' (1830) remains, with the ''Medusa'', one of the best-known works of French Romantic painting.
In English literature, the key figures of the Romantic movement are considered to be the group of poets including William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, John Keats, Lord Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and the much older William Blake, followed later by the isolated figure of John Clare.
The period typically called Romantic varies greatly between different countries and different artistic media or areas of thought.
Elements of mysticism became more prominent.
Romanticism tended to regard satire as something unworthy of serious attention, a prejudice still influential today.
And, in Catalonia, nationalists reclaimed Catalanism from before the Hispanicization of the Catholic Monarchs in the 15th century, when the Crown of Aragon was unified with the Castilian nobility.
Although after union with England in 1707 Scotland increasingly adopted English language and wider cultural norms, its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation.
Turner also painted very large landscapes, and above all, seascapes.
File:Postcard-1910 Daniel Fransois Auber.jpg|Daniel Auber, c.1868
America's preoccupation with freedom became a great source of motivation for Romantic writers as many were delighted in free expression and emotion without so much fear of ridicule and controversy.
In contrast to the rational and Classicist ideal models, Romanticism revived medievalism and elements of art and narrative perceived as authentically medieval in an attempt to escape population growth, early urban sprawl, and industrialism.
By the second quarter of the 20th century, an awareness that radical changes in musical syntax had occurred during the early 1900s caused another shift in historical viewpoint, and the change of century came to be seen as marking a decisive break with the musical past.
Like Friedrich, none of these artists had significant influence after their deaths for the rest of the 19th century, and were 20th century rediscoveries from obscurity, though Blake was always known as a poet, and Norway's leading painter Johan Christian Dahl was heavily influenced by Friedrich.
Literary Romanticism had its counterpart in the American visual arts, most especially in the exaltation of an untamed American landscape found in the paintings of the Hudson River School.
A new generation of the French school, developed personal Romantic styles, though still concentrating on history painting with a political message.
However, this is particularly in the effect of nature upon the artist when he is surrounded by it, preferably alone.
The precursors of Romanticism in English poetry go back to the middle of the 18th century, including figures such as Joseph Warton (headmaster at Winchester College) and his brother Thomas Warton, Professor of Poetry at Oxford University.
Cliques of pro- and anti-Romantics developed, and productions were often accompanied by raucous vocalizing by the two sides, including the shouted assertion by one theatregoer in 1822 that "Shakespeare, c'est l'aide-de-camp de Wellington" ("Shakespeare is Wellington's aide-de-camp").
Its relationship to the French Revolution, which began in 1789 in the very early stages of the period, is clearly important, but highly variable depending on geography and individual reactions.
It appealed to those in opposition of Calvinism, which includes the belief that the destiny of each individual is preordained.
The application of the term to literature first became common in Germany, where the circle around the Schlegel brothers, critics August and Friedrich, began to speak of ''romantische Poesie'' ("romantic poetry") in the 1790s, contrasting it with "classic" but in terms of spirit rather than merely dating.
Not essential to Romanticism, but so widespread as to be normative, was a strong belief and interest in the importance of nature.
More often, they worked to distinguish themselves from their European counterparts by depicting uniquely American scenes and landscapes.
Their art featured emotionalism and irrationality, fantasy and imagination, personality cults, folklore and country life, and the propagation of ideals of freedom.
Defining the nature of Romanticism may be approached from the starting point of the primary importance of the free expression of the feelings of the artist.
His writings, all in prose, included some fiction, such as his influential novella of exile ''René'' (1802), which anticipated Byron in its alienated hero, but mostly contemporary history and politics, his travels, a defence of religion and the medieval spirit (''Génie du christianisme'' 1802), and finally in the 1830s and 1840s his enormous autobiography ''Mémoires d'Outre-Tombe'' ("Memoirs from beyond the grave").
They had not suffered the loss of national statehood as was the case with Poland.
The ''wieszcz'' (bard) functioned as spiritual leader to the nation fighting for its independence.
The most important Spanish poet during this movement was José de Espronceda.
Some American paintings (such as Albert Bierstadt’s ''The Rocky Mountains, Lander's Peak'') promote the literary idea of the “noble savage” by portraying idealized Native Americans living in harmony with the natural world.
File:Le poeme de lAme-14-Louis Janmot-MBA Lyon-IMG 0497.jpg|Louis Janmot, from his series "The Poem of the Soul", before 1854
The first emerged in the 1790s and 1800s, the second in the 1820s, and the third later in the century.
Several spent much time abroad, and a famous stay on Lake Geneva with Byron and Shelley in 1816 produced the hugely influential novel ''Frankenstein'' by Shelley's wife-to-be Mary Shelley and the novella ''The Vampyre'' by Byron's doctor John William Polidori.
Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from the Gaelic, but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience.
It often involved a rapturous response to nature.
Turner, ''The Fighting Téméraire tugged to her last Berth to be broken up'', 1839
'', 1830), Yevgeny Baratynsky (''Eda'', 1826), Anton Delvig, and Wilhelm Küchelbecker.
In the second period, many of the Polish Romantics worked abroad, often banished from Poland by the occupying powers due to their politically subversive ideas.
The use of the word did not become general very quickly, and was probably spread more widely in France by its persistent use by Madame de Staël in her ''De l'Allemagne'' (1813), recounting her travels in Germany.
After the Bourbon Restoration, French Romanticism developed in the lively world of Parisian theatre, with productions of Shakespeare, Schiller (in France a key Romantic author), and adaptations of Scott and Byron alongside French authors, several of whom began to write in the late 1820s.
Hoffmann named Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven as "the three masters of instrumental compositions" who "breathe one and the same romantic spirit".
Keats in 1821 and Shelley in 1822 both died in Italy, Blake (at almost 70) in 1827, and Coleridge largely ceased to write in the 1820s.
Though his novels celebrated Scottish identity and history, Scott was politically a firm Unionist.
Zygmunt Krasinski also wrote to inspire political and religious hope in his countrymen.
Similar projects were undertaken by the Russian Alexander Afanasyev, the Norwegians Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, and the Englishman Joseph Jacobs.
Scott probably did more than any other figure to define and popularise Scottish cultural identity in the nineteenth century.
The concept of the genius, or artist who was able to produce his own original work through this process of ''creation from nothingness'', is key to Romanticism, and to be derivative was the worst sin.
Scott meanwhile was effectively inventing the historical novel, beginning in 1814 with ''Waverley'', set in the 1745 Jacobite Rising, which was an enormous and highly profitable success, followed by over 20 further Waverley Novels over the next 17 years, with settings going back to the Crusades that he had researched to a degree that was new in literature.
Thomas Cole's paintings tend towards allegory, explicit in ''The Voyage of Life'' series painted in the early 1840s, showing the stages of life set amidst an awesome and immense nature.
But as the French Republic became Napoleon's Empire, Napoleon became not the inspiration for nationalism, but the object of its struggle.
He also shared with many of the Romantic painters a more free handling of paint, emphasized in the new prominence of the brushstroke and impasto, which tended to be repressed in neoclassicism under a self-effacing finish.
Popular and epic poetry were its workhorses.
American Romanticism was just as multifaceted and individualistic as it was in Europe.
In music such works from after about 1850 are referred to by some writers as "Late Romantic"  and by others as "Neoromantic" or "Postromantic", but other fields do not usually use these terms; in English literature and painting the convenient term "Victorian" avoids having to characterise the period further.
In the visual arts, Romanticism first showed itself in landscape painting, where from as early as the 1760s British artists began to turn to wilder landscapes and storms, and Gothic architecture, even if they had to make do with Wales as a setting.
In both French and German the closeness of the adjective to ''roman'', meaning the fairly new literary form of the novel, had some effect on the sense of the word in those languages.
Scott began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads.
According to Isaiah Berlin, Romanticism embodied "a new and restless spirit, seeking violently to burst through old and cramping forms, a nervous preoccupation with perpetually changing inner states of consciousness, a longing for the unbounded and the indefinable, for perpetual movement and change, an effort to return to the forgotten sources of life, a passionate effort at self-assertion both individual and collective, a search after means of expressing an unappeasable yearning for unattainable goals."
The most significant novelist in English during the peak Romantic period, other than Walter Scott, was Jane Austen, whose essentially conservative world-view had little in common with her Romantic contemporaries, retaining a strong belief in decorum and social rules, though critics  have detected tremors under the surface of some works, especially ''Mansfield Park'' (1814) and ''Persuasion'' (1817).
An early German influence came from Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, whose 1774 novel ''The Sorrows of Young Werther'' had young men throughout Europe emulating its protagonist, a young artist with a very sensitive and passionate temperament.
They sometimes depicted ancient ruins of the old world, such as in Fredric Edwin Church’s piece ''Sunrise in Syria''.
The first major figure was François-René de Chateaubriand, a minor aristocrat who had remained a royalist throughout the Revolution, and returned to France from exile in England and America under Napoleon, with whose regime he had an uneasy relationship.
So, in literature, "much of romantic poetry invited the reader to identify the protagonists with the poets themselves".
In Italy Francesco Hayez (1791–1882) was the leading artist of Romanticism in mid-19th-century Milan.
The decline of Romanticism during this time was associated with multiple processes, including social and political changes and the spread of nationalism.
Elsewhere, including in very different ways the United States and Russia, feelings that great change was underway or just about to come were still possible.
It was also popularised in France by figures that included Napoleon.
Though they have modern critical champions such as György Lukács, Scott's novels are today more likely to be experienced in the form of the many operas that composers continued to base on them over the following decades, such as Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' and Vincenzo Bellini's ''I puritani'' (both 1835).
Girodet's old teacher David was puzzled and disappointed by his pupil's direction, saying: "Either Girodet is mad or I no longer know anything of the art of painting".
The Rome-based Nazarene movement of German artists, active from 1810, took a very different path, concentrating on medievalizing history paintings with religious and nationalist themes.
The longest poem in the volume was Coleridge's ''The Rime of the Ancient Mariner'', which showed the Gothic side of English Romanticism, and the exotic settings that many works featured.
Most Romantics can be said to be broadly progressive in their views, but a considerable number always had, or developed, a wide range of conservative views, and nationalism was in many countries strongly associated with Romanticism, as discussed in detail below.
Arthur Lovejoy attempted to demonstrate the difficulty of defining Romanticism in his seminal article "On The Discrimination of Romanticisms" in his ''Essays in the History of Ideas'' (1948); some scholars see Romanticism as essentially continuous with the present, some like Robert Hughes see in it the inaugural moment of modernity, and some like Chateaubriand, Novalis and Samuel Taylor Coleridge see it as the beginning of a tradition of resistance to Enlightenment rationalism—a "Counter-Enlightenment"—  to be associated most closely with German Romanticism.
It was partly a reaction to the Industrial Revolution, the aristocratic social and political norms of the Age of Enlightenment, and the scientific rationalization of nature.
In English literature, M. H. Abrams placed it between 1789, or 1798, this latter a very typical view, and about 1830, perhaps a little later than some other critics.
There was a strong recourse to historical and natural inevitability, a ''Zeitgeist'', in the representation of its ideas.
These featured different variations of the "Byronic hero", and his own life contributed a further version.
Another strain is exemplified by Schiller's highly emotional language and the depiction of physical violence in his play ''The Robbers'' of 1781.
It also promoted the individual imagination as a critical authority allowed of freedom from classical notions of form in art.
In Italy, the most important Romantic sculptor was Lorenzo Bartolini.
His Romantic period included many historical pieces of "Troubadour" tendencies, but on a very large scale, that are heavily influenced by Gian Battista Tiepolo and other late Baroque Italian masters.
Nevertheless, the huge popularity of German Romantic music led, "whether by imitation or by reaction", to an often nationalistically inspired vogue amongst Polish, Hungarian, Russian, Czech, and Scandinavian musicians, successful "perhaps more because of its extra-musical traits than for the actual value of musical works by its masters".
The movement emphasized intense emotion as an authentic source of aesthetic experience, placing new emphasis on such emotions as apprehension, horror and terror, and awe—especially that experienced in confronting the new aesthetic categories of the sublimity and beauty of nature.
By the 1880s, however, psychological and social realism were competing with Romanticism in the novel.
Théodore Géricault (1791–1824) had his first success with ''The Charging Chasseur'', a heroic military figure derived from Rubens, at the Paris Salon of 1812 in the years of the Empire, but his next major completed work, ''The Raft of the Medusa'' of 1821, remains the greatest achievement of the Romantic history painting, which in its day had a powerful anti-government message.
Nationalist ideology of the period placed great emphasis on racial coherence, and the antiquity of peoples, and tended to vastly over-emphasize the continuity between past periods and the present, leading to national mysticism.
Other major literary figures connected with Romanticism include the poets and novelists James Hogg (1770–1835), Allan Cunningham (1784–1842) and John Galt (1779–1839).
File:Robert Schumann 1839.jpg|Robert Schumann, 1839
Polish Romanticism revived the old "Sarmatism" traditions of the ''szlachta'' or Polish nobility.
Allan Ramsay (1686–1758) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature, as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry, helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form.
During the periods of foreign occupation, the Catholic Church served as bastion of Poland's national identity and language, and the major promoter of Polish culture.
Victor Hugo published as a poet in the 1820s before achieving success on the stage with ''Hernani''—a historical drama in a quasi-Shakespearian style that had famously riotous performances, themselves as much a spectacle as the play, on its first run in 1830.
Better known authors such as Alessandro Manzoni and Giacomo Leopardi were influenced by Enlightenment as well as by Romanticism and Classicism.
