Because it has a large Hungarian minority, Romania has also developed strong relations with Hungary.
This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state.
In the other parts, many small local states with varying degrees of independence developed, but only under Basarab I and Bogdan I the larger principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia would emerge in the 14th century to fight the threat of the Ottoman Empire.
The Carpathian Mountains, with their tallest peak Moldoveanu at , cross Romania from the north to the southwest.
Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid București, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, CFR Cluj and Petrolul Ploiești.
Pentru aceia cu mare muncă scoasem de limba jidovească si grecească si srâbească pre limba românească 5 cărți ale lui Moisi prorocul si patru cărți și le dăruim voo frați rumâni și le-au scris în cheltuială multă... și le-au dăruit voo fraților români,... și le-au scris voo fraților români"'' Palia de la Orăștie (1581–1582), București, 1968.
Subsequently, the youth began to be called Euro-orphans.
The results of the PISA assessment study in schools for the year 2012 placed Romania on the 45th rank out of 65 participant countries, though Romania often wins medals in the mathematical olympiads and not only.
In November 2014, Sibiu mayor Klaus Iohannis was elected president, unexpectedly defeating Prime Minister Victor Ponta, who had been in the lead in the opinion polls.
''În Țara Ardealului nu lăcuiesc numai unguri, ce și sași peste seamă de mulți și români peste tot locul...'', Grigore Ureche, Letopisețul Țării Moldovei, p. 133–134.
According to the 2011 census, Romania's population is 20,121,641.
After joining the EU in 2007, Romania is expected to adopt the euro sometime around 2020.
After being slashed by 50% in 2009 because of the global recession, R&D spending was increased by 44% in 2010 and now stands at $0.5 billion (1.5 billion lei).
Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti and especially George Enescu.
English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools.
Thereafter, southern Dobruja was ceded to Bulgaria, while Hungary received Northern Transylvania as result of an Axis powers' arbitration.
With oil production of 7.2 million tons in 1937, Romania ranked second in Europe and seventh in the world.
Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities.
The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture.
Other denominations include Protestantism (6.2%), Roman Catholicism (4.3%), and Greek Catholicism (0.8%).
According to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities, with localities with ethnic minorities of over 20%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education.
There are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1 December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania.
Romania's economic growth estimate is 3.5 percent for the current year, according to the European Commission's (EC) November 5, 2015 forecast.
Historically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields.
Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs.
Romania was prompted to join the Axis military campaign.
Tourism in Romania attracted €400&nbsp;million in investments in 2005.
In 2010, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie identifies  French speakers in the country.
Romanian competitors have won gold medals in other Olympic sports: rowing, athletics, canoeing, wrestling, shooting, fencing, swimming, weightlifting, boxing, and judo.
During this period, Romania's vast natural resources were continuously drained by mixed Soviet-Romanian companies (SovRoms) set up for unilateral exploitative purposes.
However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late-2000s recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009.
There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts.
The Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of the earliest European civilization, known as the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture.
Tourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5% of GDP.
After the 2009 protests in Moldova and subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably.
A strong majority of the population identify themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language.
After 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform.
Basketball is widely enjoyed, especially by the youth.
Romania still has one of the lowest net average monthly wage in the EU of €540 in 2012, and an inflation of 3.7% in 2013.
The largest local companies include car maker Automobile Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Ford Romania, Electrica, Romgaz, RCS & RDS and Banca Transilvania.
Romania remains interested in Moldovan affairs and has officially rejected the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
There were almost 18,3 million connections to the Internet in June 2014.
Foreign citizens and stateless persons that live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language.
Nevertheless, anti-Communist resistance was one of the most long-lasting in the Eastern Bloc.
According to followers of the continuity theory, the intense Romanization gave birth to the Proto-Romanian language.
The River Danube, Europe's second longest river, rises in Germany and flows southeastwards for a distance of 2,857&nbsp;km, coursing through ten countries before emptying in Romania's Danube Delta.
Overall, the situation has been characterized as "rapidly improving", albeit from a low base.
''Romania'' became the predominant spelling around 1975.
Dinamo București reached the European Champions' Cup semifinal in 1984 and the Cup Winners' Cup semifinal in 1990.
At the same time, Ceaușescu greatly extended the authority of the Securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality, which led to a dramatic decrease in the dictator's popularity and culminated in his overthrow and eventual execution, together with his wife, in the violent Romanian Revolution of December 1989.
The same flag, with the tricolour being mounted vertically, would later be officially adopted as the national flag of Romania.
The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877.
The Constitution of Romania is based on the Constitution of France's Fifth Republic and was approved in a national referendum on 8 December 1991, and amended in October 2003 to bring it into conformity with the EU legislation.
However, a recession following the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF €20bn bailout program.
During this period the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous "enemies of the state" and "parasite elements" were targeted for different forms of punishment, such as deportation, internal exile and internment in forced labour camps and prisons, sometimes for life, as well as extrajudicial killing.
While it has a limited popularity nowadays, oină is a traditional Romanian sporting game similar to baseball that has been continuously practiced since at least the 14th century.
In the history of flight, Traian Vuia made the first airplane to take off on its own power and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coandă discovered the Coandă effect of fluidics.
The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party.
In 1948, the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture.
The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister, who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers.
Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom.
The former governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Ion Iliescu as head of state.
Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24 July 2009, among the last countries to do so.
The current government has stated its goal of strengthening ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia) with the process of integration with the rest of the West.
It has been a member of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007.
In 2015, Romania had a GDP (PPP) of around $414&nbsp;billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $20,787.
During the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including corruption, low funding and a considerable brain drain.
Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century, including George Coșbuc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kogălniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae Bălcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creangă, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem ''Luceafărul''.
During the period of the Austro-Hungarian rule in Transylvania and of Ottoman suzerainty over Wallachia and Moldavia, most Romanians were given few rights in a territory where they formed the majority of the population.
Exports have increased substantially in the past few years, with a 13% annual rise in exports in 2010.
and was Europe's second-largest food producer.
There are 25,000 native German speakers, and 32,000 Turkish speakers in Romania, as well as almost 50,000 speakers of Ukrainian, concentrated in some compact regions, near the border, where they form a majority.
Evidence from this and other sites indicates that the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture extracted salt from salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage.
The Armed Forces consist of approximately 15,000 civilians and 75,000 are military personnel—45,800 for land, 13,250 for air, 6,800 for naval forces, and 8,800 in other fields.
Following the war, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact.
It is a semi-presidential republic where executive functions are held by both government and the president.
Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Iași, Babeș-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, University of Bucharest, and West University of Timișoara have been included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800.
Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna.
Romania lost several territories, of which Northern Transylvania was regained after the war.
Winter holidays include the Christmas festivities and the New Year during which, various unique folklore dances and games are common: ''plugușorul'', ''sorcova'',  ''ursul'', and ''capra''.
Tudor Vladimirescu, a revolutionary leader of the early 19th century, used the term ''Rumânia'' to refer exclusively to the principality of Wallachia."
The rugby national team has competed in every Rugby World Cup.
It has been one of the more successful countries at the Summer Olympic Games, with a total of 301 medals won throughout the years, of which 88 gold ones, ranking 15th overall, and second (behind neighbour Hungary) of the nations that have never hosted the game.
The worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012.
On 13 January 2010, Cristina Neagu became the first Romanian in handball to win the IHF World Player of the Year award.
With a rich cultural history, Romania has been the home of influential artists, musicians, inventors and sportspeople, and features a variety of tourist attractions.
In the Middle Ages, Romanians lived in three Romanian principalities: Wallachia ( – "The Romanian Land"), Moldavia () and in Transylvania.
Its capital and largest city, Bucharest, is the sixth largest city in the EU.
In English, the name of the country was formerly spelt ''Rumania'' or ''Roumania'', corresponding to the now obsolete Romanian spelling ''Rumânia''.
Kindergarten is optional between 3 and 6 years.
'''Romania''' ( ;  ) is a republic in Southeast Europe which borders the Black Sea, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, and Moldova.
The governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA.
According to the ''CIA Factbook'', Romania's total road network was estimated in 2009 at  (excluding urban areas), out of which  was paved roads.
In the 20th century, Romanian artists reached international acclaim, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco, Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu, Eugène Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Brâncuși.
Romanian contribution to Operation Barbarossa was enormous, with the Romanian Army of over 1.2 million men in the summer of 1944, fighting in numbers second only to Nazi Germany.
Association football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Romania with over 234,000 registered players .
Rural tourism, focusing on folklore and traditions, has become an important alternative, and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the Painted churches of Northern Moldavia, and the Wooden churches of Maramureș.
Herodotus, in his work "''Histories''", notes the religious difference between the Getae and other Thracians, however, according to Strabo, the Dacians and the Getae spoke the same language.
The Antonescu fascist regime played a major role in The Holocaust in Romania, and copied the Nazi policies of oppression and genocide of Jews and Roma, mainly in the Eastern territories reoccupied by the Romanians from the Soviet Union.
Romania also declared its public support for Turkey, and Croatia joining the European Union.
Other languages, however, continue to prefer forms with ''u'', e.g.
At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers have achieved third place in 2005 and 2010.
Starting December 2014, Romania is a co-owner of the International Space Station.
According to a 2011 World Bank report, Romania currently ranks 72nd out of 175 economies in the ease of doing business, scoring lower than other countries in the region such as the Czech Republic.
Concerns about stability were raised after the resignation of the Victor Ponta government on November 4, 2015.
Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level.
The fauna consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate, with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians, including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears  and 20% of its wolves.
French ''Roumanie'', German ''Rumänien'', Polish ''Rumunia'', and Russian Румыния (''Rumyniya'').
The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence, prompting the intervention of coal miners summoned by Iliescu.
Popular individual sports include athletics, chess, judo, dancesport, table tennis and combat sports (Lucian Bute, Leonard Dorin Doroftei, Mihai Leu aka Michael Loewe, Daniel Ghiță, Benjamin Adegbuyi, Andrei Stoica, etc.).
In 2016, Romania was chosen as a host for the 2017 EuroBasket.
Multiple castles exist in Romania, including popular tourist attractions of Peleș Castle, Corvin Castle, and "Dracula's Castle".
GDP has been growing by over 2% each year since.
Following a ''coup d'état'' in 1866, Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Carol I of Romania of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen.
The process succeeded in repaying all foreign government debt of Romania in 1989.
The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2 (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity, and are instead used for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes.
This surprise victory is attributed by many to the Romanian diaspora, of which almost 50 percent voted for Iohannis.
Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate.
Romania is divided into 41 counties (județe, pronounced judets) and the municipality of Bucharest.
In October 2011, Romanians made up 88.9% of the population.
In total between 280,000 and 380,000 Jews in Romania (including Bessarabia, Bukovina and the Transnistria Governorate) were murdered during the war
The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009.
In 1600, all three principalities were ruled simultaneously by the Wallachian prince Michael the Brave (''Mihai Viteazul''), who was considered, later on, the precursor of modern Romania and became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for achieving a single Romanian state.
In January 2011, the Parliament also passed a law that enforces "strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review".
Dio Cassius draws attention to the cultural similarities between the two people.
After the war, the transfer of Bukovina from Austria was acknowledged by the 1919 Treaty of Saint Germain, of Banat and Transylvania from Hungary by the 1920 Treaty of Trianon, and of Bessarabia from Russian rule by the 1920 Treaty of Paris.
The 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption.
At the Berlin International Film Festival, ''Child's Pose'' by Călin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013.
More than 60% of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries.
Additionally, 30% of the Romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production, one of the highest rates in Europe.
Since then, there have been several other democratic changes of government: in 1996 Emil Constantinescu was elected president, in 2000 Iliescu returned to power, while Traian Băsescu was elected in 2004 and was narrowly re-elected in 2009.
The municipality of Bucharest is a special case as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county.
Almost a quarter of all the medals and 25 of the gold ones were won in gymnastics, with Nadia Comăneci becoming the first gymnast ever to score a perfect ten in an Olympic event at the 1976 Summer Olympics.
The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality.
He was convicted of war crimes and executed on 1 June 1946.
Romanian cuisine shares some similarities with other Balkan cuisines such as Greek, Bulgarian and Turkish cuisine.
The most famous successful club is Steaua București and was the first Eastern European team to win the European Champions Cup in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989.
There also exists a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which has prospered during the Communist regime.
In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans in Romania, but only about 36,000 remain today.
According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31% of Romanians, French is spoken by 17%, and Italian by 7%.
Also the earliest known salt works in the world is at Poiana Slatinei, near the village of Lunca in Romania; it was first used in the early Neolithic, around 6050 BC, by the Starčevo culture, and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture in the Pre-Cucuteni period.
Roman troops pulled out of Dacia around 271 AD.
In August 1944, a coup d'état led by King Michael toppled Ion Antonescu and his regime.
Romania's main exports are cars, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers).
In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guyana.
For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad.
The World Bank estimates the railway network at  of track, the fourth-largest railroad network in Europe.
Rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989, and was estimated at 99&nbsp;million passenger journeys in 2004; but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatization of lines, accounting for 45% of all passenger and freight movements in the country.
In the same year, the adult literacy rate was 97.3% (45th worldwide), while the combined gross enrollment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools was 75% (52nd worldwide).
It is estimated that the coup shortened the war by as much as six months.
In May 2009, Hillary Clinton, US Secretary of State, declared that "Romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the USA."
, the emigration rate of doctors was 9%, higher than the European average of 2.5%.
The country has joined or is about to join several major international organizations such as CERN and the European Space Agency.
In December 2005, President Traian Băsescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country.
Gheorghe Mureșan was one of the two tallest players to ever play in the NBA.
Other successful players include Nicolae Dobrin, Dudu Georgescu, Florea Dumitrache, Liță Dumitru, Ilie Balaci, Loți Bölöni, Costică Ștefănescu, Cornel Dinu or Gheorghe Popescu, and most recently Adrian Mutu, Cristian Chivu, Dan Petrescu or Cosmin Contra.
According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77% came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy and France), 12% from Asia, and less than 7% from North America.
The Romanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air, and Naval Forces, and are led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defense, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime.
A total of 103 of the larger cities have municipality statuses, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs.
An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians.
In 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16% for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the European Union.
Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times (1969, 1971, 1972).
The number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at around 12&nbsp;million.
As a result of it the Romanian government and the army were forced to retreat from Bessarabia as well as from northern Bukovina in order to avoid war with the Soviet Union.
In December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield.
But in the aftermath of the Crimean War, the electors in both Moldavia and Wallachia voted in 1859 for the same leader, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, as ''Domnitor'' ("ruling prince" in Romanian), and the two principalities became a personal union formally under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire.
Cluj-Napoca (411,379)
''Țuică'' is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70% alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75% of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world).
After the failed 1848 revolutions not all the Great Powers supported the Romanians' expressed desire to officially unite in a single state.
Trade is mostly centered on the member states of the European Union, with Germany and Italy being the country's single largest trading partners.
Industrial output growth reached 6.5% year-on-year in February 2013, the highest in the EU-27.
The flag adopted for Wallachia by the revolutionaries was a blue-yellow-red horizontal tricolour (with blue above, in line with the meaning "Liberty, Justice, Fraternity"), while Romanian students in Paris hailed the new government with the same flag "as a symbol of union between Moldavians and Wallachians".
The number of tourists has been steadily rising, reaching 3.5&nbsp;million in the first half of 2014.
A movement for unification of Romania and Moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule, but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania.
However, the early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes, as there were over 25 separate governments throughout the decade.
Thus they rapidly established themselves as the dominant political force.
The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honor of the 20th century emponymous composer.
It has an area of  and a temperate-continental climate.
This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.
After the 1989 revolution, the National Salvation Front (NSF), led by Ion Iliescu, took partial multi-party democratic and free market measures.
During the Soviet occupation of Romania, the Communist-dominated government called for new elections in 1946, which were fraudulently won, with a fabricated 70% majority of the vote.
There is a scholarly dispute whether the Dacians and the Getae were the same people.
Romania was occupied and a harsh peace treaty was signed in May 1918.
Romania was the main source of oil for the Third Reich, and thus became the target of intense bombing by the Allies.
The largest ethnic minorities are the Hungarians, 6.5% of the population, and the Roma, 3.3% of the population.
The nuclear physics facility of the European Union's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania.
In 2010, Romania had 428 state and 25 private hospitals, with 6.2 hospital beds per 1,000 people, and over 200,000 medical staff, including over 52,000 doctors.
The king was compelled to abdicate and appointed general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime-Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.
The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions.
Bran Castle, near Brașov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often advertised as being Dracula's Castle.
However, since the country's accession to the European Union, this has begun to change.
The core player of this "Golden Generation" was Gheorghe Hagi, who was nicknamed "the Maradona of the Carpathians."
The birth rate (9.49‰, 2012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84‰, 2012), resulting in a shrinking (−0.26% per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 39.1, 2012), with approximately 14.9% of total population aged 65 years and over.
It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade.
With 19.94 million inhabitants, the country is the seventh most populous member state of the European Union.
Moreover, 39,660 people have no religion or are atheist, whilst the religion of the rest is unknown.
From 2000 onward, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterized by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation.
According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked 5th in the world and 2nd in Europe in terms of internet connection speed, with Timișoara ranked among the highest in the world.
During the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War Romania fought on the Russian side, and in the aftermath, it was recognized as an independent state both by the Ottoman Empire and the Great Powers by the Treaty of San Stefano and the Treaty of Berlin.
It participated at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles in defiance of a Warsaw Pact boycott and finished second in gold medals (20) and third in total medal count (53).
