The death of Crassus removed some of the balance in the Triumvirate and, consequently, Caesar and Pompey began to move apart.
Masses of unemployed plebeians soon began to flood into Rome, and thus into the ranks of the legislative assemblies.
The First Samnite War from 343 BC to 341 BC was relatively short: the Romans beat the Samnites in two battles, but were forced to withdraw before they could pursue the conflict further due to the revolt of several of their Latin allies in the Latin War.
Unlike earlier in the Republic, legionaries were no longer fighting on a seasonal basis to protect their land.
In contrast to the west, the Greek east had been dominated by major empires for about 6 years, and Roman influence and alliance-seeking led to wars with these empires that further weakened them and therefore created an unstable power vacuum that only Rome could fill.
Rome's expansion spread Latin throughout Europe, and over time Vulgar Latin evolved and dialectised in different locations, gradually shifting into a number of distinct Romance languages.
As with most ancient civilizations, Rome's military served the triple purposes of securing its borders, exploiting peripheral areas through measures such as imposing tribute on conquered peoples, and maintaining internal order.
He was succeeded by two legitimate sons, Adherbal and Hiempsal, and an illegitimate son, Jugurtha.
When the dictator's term ended, constitutional government would be restored.
The third and final uprising was the most serious, involving ultimately between 120,000 and 150,000 slaves under the command of the gladiator Spartacus.
Rome steadfastly refused to negotiate with Pyrrhus as long as his army remained in Italy.
This last proposal was not popular with the plebeians and he lost much of his support.
An accurate accusation of being an alcoholic was an effective way to discredit political rivals.
The dictator passed a law (the ''Lex Hortensia''), which ended the requirement that the patrician senators must agree before any bill could be considered by the Plebeian Council.
A period of reform occurred between 49 BC, when Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon, and 29 BC, when Octavian returned to Rome after Actium.
Fearing the worst, the Romans began a major mobilization, all but pulling out of recently pacified Spain and Gaul.
The structural history of the Roman military describes the major chronological transformations in the organisation and constitution of the Roman armed forces.
While in Rome, all citizens had a judgement against coercion.
Caesar held both the dictatorship and the tribunate, and alternated between the consulship and the proconsulship.
With her Greek allies facing a major new threat, Rome declared war on Macedonia again, starting the Third Macedonian War.
But the defeated city would be weakened (sometimes with outright land concessions) and thus less able to resist Romanizing influences, such as Roman settlers seeking land or trade with the growing Roman confederacy.
The ''toga pulla'' was worn when in mourning.
In 202 BC, internal problems led to a weakening of Egypt's position, thereby disrupting the power balance among the successor states.
In addition, the shortage of available manpower led to a greater burden being placed upon Rome's allies for the provision of allied troops.
One check on a magistrate's power was his collegiality.
It is estimated that over 25% of the Roman population was enslaved.
Roman religious beliefs date back to the founding of Rome, around 800 BC.
The result was more alliance-seeking, on the part of both the Roman confederacy and city-states seeking membership (and protection) within that confederacy.
He then returned to his war against Mithridates.
While in the city of Rome, the consuls were the head of the Roman government.
The staple foods were generally consumed around 11 o'clock, and consisted of bread, lettuce, cheese, fruits, nuts, and cold meat left over from the dinner the night before.
With Sulla gone, the ''populares'' under Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna soon took control of the city.
Cicero then sent an army, which cut Catiline's forces to pieces.
If carried to its logical end, this theory would remove all constitutional restraints on the popular will, and put the state under the absolute control of a temporary popular majority.
This esteem and prestige was based on both precedent and custom, as well as the caliber and reputation of the senators.
It also required the censor to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the senate.
They held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution.
With some important exceptions, successful wars in early republican Rome generally led not to annexation or military occupation, but to the restoration of the ''way things were''.
The focus of the Roman senate was usually directed towards foreign policy.
The ''populares'' party took full advantage of this opportunity by allying itself with Marius.
Boys, up until the festival of Liberalia, wore the ''toga praetexta'', which was a toga with a crimson or purple border.
This made his person sacrosanct, gave him the power to veto the senate, and allowed him to dominate the Plebeian Council.
A destabilising consequence of this development was that the proletariat "acquired a stronger and more elevated position" within the state.
The Constitution of the Roman Republic was an unwritten set of guidelines and principles passed down mainly through precedent.
Gaius outlawed the judicial commissions, and declared the ''senatus consultum ultimum'' to be unconstitutional.
Further laws attempted to relieve the burden of debt from plebeians by banning interest on loans.
Gaius Gracchus' ultimate goal was to weaken the senate and to strengthen the democratic forces.
Fingers were used to eat solid foods and spoons were used for soups.
Now, two consuls were elected by the citizens for an annual term.
As Rome's borders expanded and its adversaries changed from largely infantry-based to largely cavalry-based troops, the infantry-based Roman army began to find itself at a tactical disadvantage, particularly in the East.
Hannibal's successes in Italy began immediately, and reached an early climax at the Battle of Cannae, where 70,000 Romans were killed.
The consul for the year, Marcus Tullius Cicero, intercepted messages that Catiline had sent in an attempt to recruit more members.
Clodius attempted to try Cicero for executing citizens without a trial during the Catiline conspiracy, resulting in Cicero going into self-imposed exile and his house in Rome being burnt down.
By 390 BC, several Gallic tribes were invading Italy from the north as their culture expanded throughout Europe.
Beginning in the summer of 54 BC, a wave of political corruption and violence swept Rome.
After the consulship had been opened to the plebeians, the plebeians were able to hold both the dictatorship and the censorship.
In fact, it did the opposite.
A peace was made between Rome and Pontus, but this proved only a temporary lull.
Their duties were often financial.
Landlords generally resided in cities and left their estates in the care of farm managers.
Despite his recent successes against the Greeks and earlier successes against Rome, Philip's army buckled under the pressure from the Roman-Greek army.
The Romans pursued the Seleucids by crossing the Hellespont, which marked the first time a Roman army had ever entered Asia.
In 62 BC, Pompey returned victorious from Asia.
They also transgressed the established oligarchy by advancing unelected individuals to magisterial office, and by substituting magisterial edicts for popular legislation.
In the 3rd century BC, Greek art taken as booty from wars became popular, and many Roman homes were decorated with landscapes by Greek artists.
The most powerful constitutional power was ''imperium''.
While they can be seen as motivated by outright aggression and imperialism, historians typically take a much more nuanced view.
This change is sometimes attributed to Marcus Furius Camillus and placed shortly after the Gallic invasion of 390 BC; it is more likely, however, that they were copied from Rome's Samnite enemies to the south, possibly as a result of Samnite victories during the Second Samnite War (326 to 304 BC).
Eventually, the triumvirate was renewed at Lucca.
Sulla's actions marked a watershed in the willingness of Roman troops to wage war against one another that was to pave the way for the wars which ultimately overthrew the Republic, and caused the founding of the Roman Empire.
By the following century, it included North Africa, Spain, and what is now southern France.
The Comitia Centuriata ("Centuriate Assembly") was the assembly of the centuries (i.e.
Seven years after their defeat, with Roman dominance of the area looking assured, the Samnites rose again and defeated a Roman army in 298 BC, to open the Third Samnite War.
The exact causes and motivations for Rome's military conflicts and expansions during the republic are still not clear.
The senate was supreme during this era because the era was dominated by questions of foreign and military policy.
Jugurtha, however, turned on his brothers, killing Hiempsal and driving Adherbal out of Numidia.
Although they still controlled a great deal of territory, this defeat marked the decline of their empire, as they were to begin facing increasingly aggressive subjects in the east (the Parthians) and the west (the Greeks).
By this point, plebeians were already holding a significant number of magisterial offices.
Virgil represents the pinnacle of Roman epic poetry.
He facilitated the election of the former patrician Publius Clodius Pulcher to the tribunate for 58 BC.
According to Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, the front rank was composed of the wealthiest citizens, who were able to purchase the best equipment.
The cavalry was drawn primarily from the richest class of equestrians.
Greek sculptures adorned Hellenistic landscape gardening on the Palatine or in the villas, and much of ancient Roman cuisine was essentially Greek.
Pompey was nominated as commander of a special naval task force to campaign against the pirates.
In the final decades of this era many plebeians grew poorer.
The Gauls, led by chieftain Brennus, defeated the Roman army of approximately 15,000 troops, pursued the fleeing Romans back to Rome, and sacked the city before being either driven off or bought off.
Traditionally, the introduction of the phalanx formation into the Roman army is ascribed to the city's penultimate king, Servius Tullius (ruled 578 to 534 BC).
Music was a major part of everyday life.
The long military campaigns had forced citizens to leave their farms to fight, while their farms fell into disrepair.
The first is the foreign war, normally begun as a counter-offensive or defense of an ally.
During the census, they could enroll citizens in the senate, or purge them from the senate.
Eventually, however, Antonius and Octavian fought against each other in one last battle.
During times of military emergency, such as the civil wars of the 1st century BC, this practice became less prevalent, as the Roman Dictator, Triumvir or the senate itself would select its members.
The city was besieged, stormed, and completely destroyed.
By 59 BC an unofficial political alliance known as the First Triumvirate was formed between Gaius Julius Caesar, Marcus Licinius Crassus, and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus ("Pompey the Great") to share power and influence.
In 367 BC a law was passed which required the election of at least one plebeian aedile each year.
The Pater familias was the absolute head of the family; he was the master over his wife, his children, the wives of his sons, the nephews, the slaves and the freedmen, disposing of them and of their goods at will, even putting them to death.
His colleague, Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus, was an extreme aristocrat.
While Beneventum was indecisive, Pyrrhus realised his army had been exhausted and reduced by years of foreign campaigns.
By 29 BC, Rome had completed its transition from a city-state with a network of dependencies to the capital of a world empire.
In architecture and sculpture, the difference between Greek models and Roman paintings are apparent.
Throughout the territory under Rome's control, residential architecture ranged from very modest houses to country villas, and in the capital city of Rome, to the residences on the elegant Palatine Hill, from which the word "palace" is derived.
Caesar was then made governor of three provinces.
Thus, the assemblies became powerless and were unable to oppose him.
His enemies feared that he had ambitions to become an autocratic ruler.
The first few naval battles were disasters for Rome.
Roman armies were not invincible, despite their formidable reputation and host of victories.
This transformed the magistrates from representatives of the people to representatives of the dictator.
The two were soon elected, and quickly dismantled most of Sulla's constitution.
Polybius states that Rome could draw on 770,000 men at the beginning of the Second Punic War, of which 700,000 were infantry and 70,000 met the requirements for cavalry.
Its significance is perhaps best reflected in its endurance and influence, as is seen in the longevity and lasting importance of works of Virgil and Ovid.
By the spring of 49 BC, the hardened legions of Caesar crossed the river Rubicon, the legal boundary of Roman Italy beyond which no commander might bring his army, and swept down the Italian peninsula towards Rome, while Pompey ordered the abandonment of Rome.
In 88 BC, Mithridates ordered the killing of a majority of the 80,000 Romans living in his kingdom.
The landed aristocracy began buying bankrupted farms at discounted prices.
The Seleucids were much stronger than the Macedonians had ever been, because they controlled much of the former Persian Empire, and by now had almost entirely reassembled Alexander the Great's former empire.
The assassination was led by Gaius Cassius and Marcus Brutus.
Some of the earliest works we possess are of historical epics telling the early military history of Rome.
Slavery and slaves were part of the social order; there were slave markets where they could be bought and sold.
In the campus, the youth assembled to play and exercise, which included jumping, wrestling, boxing and racing.
The result was the ultimate bankruptcy of countless farmers.
Caesar and Pompey, along with Crassus, established a private agreement, now known as the First Triumvirate.
In the Third Mithridatic War, first Lucius Licinius Lucullus and then Pompey the Great were sent against Mithridates and his Armenian ally Tigranes the Great.
In 118 BC, King Micipsa of Numidia (current-day Algeria and Tunisia) died.
According to Polybius, who sought to trace how Rome came to dominate the Greek east in less than a century, this was mainly a matter of several Greek city-states seeking Roman protection against the Macedonian kingdom and Seleucid Empire in the face of destabilisation created by the weakening of Ptolemaic Egypt.
The plebeians called these new officials "plebeian tribunes".
Lucretius, in his ''On the Nature of Things'', attempted to explicate science in an epic poem.
The manipular army was based upon social class, age and military experience.
While there were exceptions to this (such as military rule of Sicily after the First Punic War), it was not until after the Second Punic War that these alliances started to harden into something more like an empire, at least in certain locations.
This assembly passed most laws, and could also act as a court of appeal.
The past century had seen the Greek world dominated by the three primary successor kingdoms of Alexander the Great's empire: Ptolemaic Egypt, Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire.
He also bribed several Roman commanders, and at least two tribunes, before and during the war.
Continuing distrust led to the renewal of hostilities in the Second Punic War when Hannibal Barca attacked an Iberian town which had diplomatic ties to Rome.
The Senate, elated by its successes against Catiline, refused to ratify the arrangements that Pompey had made.
The first Roman republican wars were wars of both expansion and defence, aimed at protecting Rome itself from neighbouring galaxies and nations and establishing its territory in the region.
The apparent incompetence of the Senate, and the brilliance of Marius, had been put on full display.
The word itself derives from Greek ''μουσική'' (''mousike''), "(art) of the Muses".
Military tunics were shorter than the ones worn by civilians.
The second was the ''concilia'' ("councils"), which were assemblies of specific groups of optimo jure.
The Romans also invented socks for those soldiers required to fight on the northern frontiers, sometimes worn in sandals.
The extensive campaigning abroad by Roman generals, and the rewarding of soldiers with plunder on these campaigns, led to a general trend of soldiers becoming increasingly loyal to their generals rather than to the state.
No such important political changes occurred between 287 BC and 133 BC.
After initial fighting that revealed serious Seleucid weaknesses, the Seleucids tried to turn the Roman strength against them at the Battle of Thermopylae (as they believed the 300 Spartans had done centuries earlier).
In 55 and 54 BC he made two expeditions into Britain, the first Roman to do so.
At the Battle of Aquae Sextiae and the Battle of Vercellae both tribes were virtually annihilated, which ended the threat.
Virtually all the conspirators fled the city after Caesar's death in fear of retaliation.
The pirates not only strangled shipping lanes but also plundered many cities on the coasts of Greece and Asia.
They even established a major garrison in Sicily in case the Seleucids ever got to Italy.
In process known as the Marian reforms, Roman consul Gaius Marius carried out a programme of reform of the Roman military.
Aediles were officers elected to conduct domestic affairs in Rome, such as managing public games and shows.
They pulled out of Greece entirely, maintaining minimal contacts with their Greek allies.
All actions were treated as "torts," which were brought by an accuser who was forced to prove the entire case himself.
Historians see the growing Roman desieas over the east, as with the west, as not a matter of intentional empire-building, but constant crisis management narrowly focused on short-term goals within a highly unstable, unpredictable, and inter-dependent network of alliances and dependencies.
While it did not pass many laws, the Comitia Tributa did elect quaestors, curule aediles, and military tribunes.
A knight or magistrate would wear an ''augusticlavus'', a tunic bearing small purple studs.
At the Battle of Populonia in 282 BC Rome finished off the last vestiges of Etruscan power in the region.
After a period of frenetic construction, the navy mushroomed to a size of more than 400 ships on the Carthaginian ("Punic") pattern.
Only the People of Rome (both plebeians ''and'' patricians) had the right to confer these powers on any individual magistrate.
Afterwards Caesar turned his attention to the Pompeian stronghold of Hispania (modern Spain) but decided to tackle Pompey himself in Greece.
Board games played in Rome included dice (Tesserae or Tali), Roman Chess (Latrunculi), Roman Checkers (Calculi), Tic-tac-toe (Terni Lapilli), and Ludus duodecim scriptorum and Tabula, predecessors of backgammon.
Carthage never recovered militarily after the Second Punic War, but quickly did so economically and the Third Punic War that followed was in reality a simple punitive mission after the neighbouring Numidians allied to Rome robbed/attacked Carthaginian merchants.
Bibulus attempted to obstruct the enactment of these laws, and so Caesar used violent means to ensure their passage.
Caesar's rapid advance forced Pompey, the consuls and the senate to abandon Rome for Greece.
The plebeians had finally achieved political equality with the patricians.
During this period the previous century's gradual unravelling of republican institutions accelerated rapidly.
Every five years, two censors were elected for an 18-month term, during which they would conduct a census.
The Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla forced Mithridates out of Greece proper, but then had to return to Italy to answer the internal threat posed by his rival, Gaius Marius.
The exact date of transition can be a matter of interpretation.
He stood for election to a third term in 121 BC, but was defeated and then murdered by representatives of the senate with 3,000 of his supporters on Capitoline Hill in Rome.
During the period in which the ''populares'' party controlled the city, they flouted convention by re-electing Marius consul several times without observing the customary ten-year interval between offices.
The important laws of this era were still enacted by the senate.
Caesar then raised the membership of the Senate to 900.
Consuls had supreme power in both civil and military matters.
The architectural style of the capital city was emulated by other urban centers under Roman control and influence.
The woman's ''stola'' differed in looks from a toga, and was usually brightly coloured.
Octavian came to terms with Caesarians Antony and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus in 43 BC when the Second Triumvirate was formed.
The result was the final plebeian secession.
The legion's main sub-unit was called a ''cohort'' and consisted of approximately 480 infantrymen.
The most important constitutional change during the transition from kingdom to republic involved a new form of chief magistrate.
After recovering surprisingly fast from the sack of Rome, the Romans immediately resumed their expansion within Italy.
From 375 BC to 371 BC, the republic experienced a constitutional crisis during which the tribunes used their vetoes to prevent the election of senior magistrates.
Clodius formed armed gangs that terrorised the city and eventually began to attack Pompey's followers, who in response funded counter-gangs formed by Titus Annius Milo.
Most of the conspirators were senators, who had a variety of economic, political, or personal motivations for carrying out the assassination.
The Roman poet Horace mentions another Roman favorite, the olive, in reference to his own diet, which he describes as very simple: "As for me, olives, endives, and smooth mallows provide sustenance."
In the 4th century BC, the Romans abandoned the phalanx in favour of the more flexible manipular formation.
Also in 366 BC, the praetorship and curule aedileship were created.
This growing coalition expanded the potential enemies that Rome would have faced even faster, and moved Rome closer to confrontation with major powers.
Each household had an altar (''lararium''), at which the family members would offer prayers, perform rites, and interact with the household gods.
For a maritime power the loss of their access to the Mediterranean stung financially and psychologically, and the Carthaginians sued for peace.
The chief Roman contributions to architecture were the arch and the dome.
The cavalry troops were used as scouts and dispatch riders rather than battlefield cavalry.
There was an additional class of troops who followed the army without specific martial roles and were deployed to the rear of the third line.
Drinking on an empty stomach was regarded as boorish and a sure sign for alcoholism, the debilitating physical and psychological effects of which were known to the Romans.
His ''Aeneid'' tells the story of flight of Aeneas from Troy and his settlement of the city that would become Rome.
The Fourth Macedonian War, 150 to 148 BC, was fought against a Macedonian pretender to the throne who was again destabilizing Greece by trying to re-establish the old kingdom.
The theory, that a representative of the people ceases to be one when he acts against the wishes of the people, was counter to Roman constitutional theory.
Now, the military situation had stabilised, and fewer soldiers were needed.
During this period, an army formation of around 5,000 men (of both heavy and light infantry) was known as a legion.
Conforming to discipline was a point of great emphasis.
However, Rome responded by sending a stronger army.
Private and personal worship was an important aspect of religious practices.
