''note''  (notes) vs. ''notte''  (night), ''cade''  (s/he, it falls) vs. ''cadde''  (s/he, it fell).
Occitan, Romanian, southern Italian languages, and many other minority Romance languages still have /au/.
), this fricative later developed into a ; but in others (Spanish, Galician, some Catalan and Occitan dialects, etc.)
There is evidence that in the imperial period all the short vowels except ''a'' differed by quality as well as by length from their long counterparts.
* The plain sibilant ''-s-''  was also voiced to  between vowels, although in many languages its spelling has not changed.
In many languages affected by metaphony, a distinction exists between final /u/ (from most cases of Latin ''-um'') and final /o/ (from Latin ''-ō'', ''-ud'' and some cases of ''-um'', esp.
Italian does not use this letter in native words.
Most Romance languages have the following sets of pronouns and determiners:
Generally this led to a situation where both  and  occur allophonically, with the high-mid vowels in open syllables and the low-mid vowels in closed syllables.
National governments have historically viewed linguistic diversity as an economic, administrative or military liability, as well as a potential source of separatist movements; therefore, they have generally fought to eliminate it, by extensively promoting the use of the official language, restricting the use of the "other" languages in the media, characterizing them as mere "dialects", or even persecuting them.
(A few isolated nouns in Latin had different genders in the singular and plural, but this was an unrelated phenomenon; this is similarly the case with a few French nouns, such as ''amour'', ''délice'', ''orgue''.)
''(Lé) la sèra sèmper sö la finèstra prima de senà.''
* The Lombard language in north-central Italy and the Rhaeto-Romance languages have the "southeast" characteristic of  instead of  for palatalized /k/.
''Li touzur pou ferm lafnet avan (li) manze.''
This usage occurs in Spanish, French, Catalan and Occitan, and occurred before the 2009 spelling reform in Brazilian Portuguese.
The Proto-Romance loss of phonemic length originally produced a system with nine different quality distinctions in monophthongs, where only original  had merged.
Catalan has some pairs where both words are stressed, and one is distinguished by a vowel-quality diacritic, e.g.
* Papiamento (Dutch Antilles official language)
:'''J''': Represents a fricative in most languages, or the palatal approximant  in Romansh and in several of the languages of Italy.
In Spanish and several other world languages influenced by it, the grapheme ''ñ'' represents a palatal nasal consonant.
Spanish ''algún'' "some", ''alguien'' "someone", ''algo'' "something"; ''ningún'' "no", ''nadie'' "no one"; ''todo'' "every"; ''cada'' "each"; ''mucho'' "much/many/a lot", ''poco'' "few/little"; ''otro'' "other/another"; etc.
''Li toujou fèmen fennèt la avan li soupe.''
:'''SCI''': used in Italian and Romance languages in Italy to represent  before ''A'', ''O'', or ''U''.
Adjectives and pronouns must agree in all features with the noun they are bound to.
The original outcomes of palatalization must have continued to be phonetically palatalized even after they had developed into //etc.
Originally, all vowels in both languages were nasalized before any nasal consonants, and nasal consonants not immediately followed by a vowel were eventually dropped.
:'''TX''': used at the beginning or at the end of word or between vowels in Catalan for , as in ''txec'', ''esquitx'' or ''atxa''.
:'''TG''': used in Romansh for  or .
Spanish ''yegua'', Portuguese ''égua'', Sardinian ''ebba''); ''domus'' "house" > ''casa'' (orig.
Borrowing from Classical Latin has produced a large number of suffix doublets.
Concomitant with the loss of cases, freedom of word order was greatly reduced.
Some words derived from phrases, e.g.
Most words with antepenultimate stress are learned borrowings from Latin, e.g.
In some former Italian colonies in Africa—namely Libya, Eritrea and Somalia—it is spoken by a few educated people in commerce and government.
:'''IX''': used between vowels or at the end of word in Catalan for , as in ''caixa'' or ''calaix''.
The Romance languages do not follow the German practice of capitalizing all nouns including common ones.
Sardinian does not fit into this picture at all.
The gender of animate nouns is generally natural (i.e.
Catalan eschews importation of "foreign" letters more than most languages.
For example, ''amās'' "you love" > ''ame'' > ''ami''; ''amant'' "they love" > *''aman'' > ''amano''.
Vowels came to be automatically pronounced long in stressed, open syllables (i.e.
In French, however, both  and  were partly rephonemicized: Both  and  occur in open syllables as a result of , and both  and  occur in closed syllables as a result of .
This has allowed them to resist the historic persecutions and high immigration rates as well as the assimilationist urges that threaten most other minority languages, even those that have strong government support (e.g.
An early process that operated in all Romance languages to varying degrees was metaphony (vowel mutation), conceptually similar to the umlaut process so characteristic of the Germanic languages.
Epenthetic /e/ in Western Romance languages was also probably influenced by Continental Celtic languages.
''(Ela) fecha sempre a janela antes de jantar.''
Most languages added auxiliary marks (diacritics) to some letters, for these and other purposes.
''amor'' – ''amōrem'' "love") have not survived.
''Essa nzerra sempe 'a fenesta primma 'e magnà.''
* Upper Guinea (Guinea-Bissau's national language)
Furthermore, in Spanish, Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese, the use of  to signal the hard pronunciation before  means that a different spelling is also needed to signal the sounds  before these letters (Spanish , Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese ).
The following historical stages occurred:
Latin ''trēdecim'' "thirteen" > Spanish ''trece'', Portuguese ''treze''; Latin ''amāre'' "to love" > Spanish/Portuguese ''amar''.
But many languages ultimately dropped almost all intertonic vowels.
:'''DD''': used in Sicilian and Sardinian to represent the voiced retroflex plosive .
* Haitian Creole (one of Haiti's two official languages)
These include Brithenig (which mirrors Welsh), Breathanach (mirrors Irish), Wenedyk (mirrors Polish), Þrjótrunn (mirrors Icelandic), and Helvetian (mirrors German).
In Catalan, the gemination of the ''l'' is marked by a ''punt volat'' = ''flying point'' – ''l·l''.
:'''SH''': used in Aranese Occitan for .
Subsequently, in some languages they were further weakened, either becoming fricatives or approximants,  (as in Spanish) or disappearing entirely (as  and , but not , in French).
Generally, those languages south and east of the La Spezia–Rimini Line (Romanian and Central-Southern Italian) maintained intertonic vowels, while those to the north and west (Western Romance) dropped all except /a/.
In France, for instance, the dialect spoken in the region of Paris gradually spread to the entire country, and the Occitan of the south lost ground.
One exception was Romanian before the nineteenth century, where, after the Roman retreat, literacy was reintroduced through the Romanian Cyrillic alphabet, a Slavic influence.
''mas'' "but", ''se'' "if/oneself", ''de'' "of", ''nos'' "us").
A few languages have regained secondary geminate consonants.
* French also diphthongized  before palatalized consonants, especially /j/.
However, some, such as Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian, and French, have borrowed heavily from other language groups.
+ Romanian noun inflections
This has the effect of keeping the modern spelling similar to the original Latin spelling, but complicates the relationship between sound and letter.
''un deget'' "one finger" vs. ''două degete'' "two fingers", cf.
Other vowels remained diphthongized, and were dramatically lowered: ''fīnem'' "end" > ''fin''  (often pronounced ); ''linguam'' "tongue" > ''langue'' ; ''ūnum'' "one" > ''un'' .
In Romansch, the soft ''g'' is a voiced palatal plosive  or a voiced alveolo-palatal affricate .
* Original /j/ has the same outcome as palatalized /g/ everywhere.
:'''SC''': used before ''E'' or ''I'' in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, and European Portuguese for , and in French, Brazilian Portuguese, Catalan and Latin American Spanish as  in words of certain etymology (notice this would be  in standard peninsular Spanish)
:'''GU''': used before ''E'' or ''I'' to represent  or  in all Romance languages except Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Romansh, and Romanian (which use '''GH''' instead).
:'''LH''': used in Portuguese and Occitan .
The La Spezia–Rimini Line represents the farthest point to the southeast that these innovations reached, corresponding to the northern chain of the Apennine Mountains, which cuts straight across northern Italy and forms a major geographic barrier to further language spread.
In modern Romanian, this system has been significantly transformed, with  and with new vowels  evolving, leading to a balanced seven-vowel system with central as well as front and back vowels: .
The classification of the Romance languages is inherently difficult, because most of the linguistic area is a dialect continuum, and in some cases political biases can come into play.
This has led some researchers to postulate a basic two-way East-West division, with the "Eastern" languages including Romanian and central and southern Italian.
''lūnam'' > French ''lune'' , Occitan .
Some speakers still use the prosthetic , and it is fossilized in a few set phrases as ''per iscritto'' 'in writing' (although in this case it has probably survived due to the influence of the separate word ''iscritto'' Romance
:'''LL''': used in Spanish, Catalan, Galician, Astur-leonese, Norman and Dgèrnésiais, originally for  which has merged in some cases with .
'''Creoles of French:'''
(See History of French – The Franks.)
'''Romance-based creoles and pidgins'''
Old French also had numerous falling diphthongs resulting from diphthongization before palatal consonants or from a fronted /j/ originally following palatal consonants in Proto-Romance or later: e.g.
:'''X''': Its pronunciation is rather variable, both between and within languages.
At the end of syllables, it may represent special allophonic pronunciations.
Notable examples are *''blancus'' "white", replacing native ''albus'' (but Romansh ''alv'', Dalmatian ''jualb'', Romanian ''alb''); *''guerra'' "war", replacing native ''bellum''; and the words for the cardinal directions, where cognates of English "north", "south", "east" and "west" replaced the native words ''septentriō'', ''merīdiēs'' (also "noon; midday nap"; cf.
''om – oameni'' "man – men" (Latin ''homo'' – ''homines''); ''corp – corpuri'' "body – bodies" (Latin ''corpus'' – ''corpora'').
Unlike English, the names of months, days of the weeks, and derivatives of proper nouns are usually not capitalized: thus, in Italian one capitalizes ''Francia'' ("France") and ''Francesco'' ("Francis"), but not ''francese'' ("French") or ''francescano'' ("Franciscan").
In Italian, syllabification rules were preserved instead by vowel-final articles, thus feminine ''spada'' as ''la spada'', but instead of rendering the masculine ''*il spaghetto'', ''lo spaghetto'' came to be the norm.
(badiot) ''(Ëila) stluj for l viere dan maië da cëina.''
* Italian 7.7% (23rd)
''Illa claude semper fenestra antequam illa cena.''
This is because unlike most minority-languages, Catalan has not remained linked to tradition and rural culture.
Evidence of this is the fact that Italian has both /ttʃ/ and /tts/ as outcomes of palatalization in different environments, while Western Romance has only /(t)ts/.
Auronzo di Cadore: La sera sempro la fenestra davoi de disnà.
In addition, some languages (e.g.
The concept was first developed in 1903 by Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano, under the title Latino sine flexione.
Gallo-Iberian is split in turn into the Iberian languages (e.g.
''(Le) a saera sempre u barcun primma de cenà.''
During the Empire's decline, and after its fragmentation and collapse in the fifth century, varieties of Latin began to diverge within each local area at an accelerated rate and eventually evolved into a continuum of recognizably different typologies.
A number of synchronically quite irregular differences between nominative and oblique reflect direct inheritances of Latin third-declension nouns with two different stems (one for the nominative singular, one for all other forms), most with of which had a stress shift between nominative and the other forms: ''li ber – le baron'' "baron" (''barō'' – ''barōnem''); ''la suer – la seror'' "sister" (''soror'' – ''sorōrem''); ''li prestre – le prevoire'' "priest" (''presbyter'' – ''presbyterem''); ''li sire – le seigneur'' "lord" (''senior'' – ''seniōrem''); ''li enfes – l'enfant'' "child" (''infāns'' – ''infantem'').
Spanish is an official language in nine countries of South America, home to about half that continent's population; in six countries of Central America (all except Belize); and in Mexico.
''(Ela) barra/tanca sempre/totjorn la fenèstra abans de sopar.''
Peano used Latin as the base of his language, because at the time of his flourishing it was the ''de facto'' international language of scientific communication.
Classical Latin had five short vowels, ''ă, ĕ, ĭ, ŏ, ŭ'', and five long vowels, ''ā, ē, ī, ō, ū'', each of which was an individual phoneme (see the table in the right, for their likely pronunciation in IPA), and four diphthongs, ''ae'', ''oe'', ''au'' and ''eu'' (five according to some authors, including ''ui'').
The dividing line between the two sets of dialects is called the La Spezia–Rimini Line and is one of the most important isoglosses of the Romance dialects.
Similarly, ''mediētātem'' >  >  >  > early Old French ''meitieḍ''  > modern French ''moitié''  "half".
When no quality needs to be indicated, an acute accent is normally used (''ú''), but Italian and Romansh use a grave accent (''ù'').
Portuguese is more conservative in maintaining some intertonic vowels other than /a/: e.g.
Throughout the medieval period, words were borrowed from Classical Latin in their original form (''learned words'') or in something approaching the original form (''semi-learned words''), often replacing the popular forms of the same words.
''iuvāre'' > Italian ''giovare'' "to be of use"); ''vēnārī'' "hunt" > replaced by *''captiāre'' "to hunt", frequentative of ''capere'' "to seize" (Italian ''cacciare'', Portuguese ''caçar'', Romansh ''catschar'', French ''chasser'', etc.
In general, the consonants , , and  are long at the start of a word, while the archiphoneme  is realised as a trill  in the same position.
* The voiced plosives  and  tended to disappear.
Such nouns arose because of the identity of the Latin neuter singular ''-um'' with the masculine singular, and the identity of the Latin neuter plural ''-a'' with the feminine singular.
Interestingly, some of the same nouns with multiple stems in Old French or Old Occitan have come down in Italian in the nominative rather than the accusative (e.g.
In Oceania, Portuguese is the second most spoken Romance language, after French, due mainly to the number of speakers in East Timor.
"furrow") or ''callis'' (orig.
(Gemination is missing, which may be an independent development, and /kt/ develops into /pt/ rather than either of the normal Italo-Western developments.)
French also uses the diaeresis on the second of two adjacent vowels to indicate that both are pronounced separately, as in ''Noël'' "Christmas" and ''haïr'' "to hate".
When no vowel-quality needs distinguishing, French and Catalan use a grave accent (which is otherwise unused in the languages): French ''ou'' "or" vs. ''où'' "where", French ''la'' "the" vs. "là'' "there", Catalan ''ma'' "my" vs. ''mà'' "hand".
A similar class exists in Italian, although it is no longer productive (e.g.
Spanish also has many pairs of identically pronounced words distinguished by an acute accent on the stressed word: ''si'' "if" vs. ''sí'' "yes", ''mas'' "but" vs. ''más'' "more", ''mi'' "my" vs. ''mí'' "me", ''se'' "oneself" vs. ''sé'' "I know", ''te'' "you (object)" vs. ''té'' "tea", ''que/quien/cuando/como'' "that/who/when/how" vs. ''qué/quién/cuándo/cómo'' "what?/who?/when?/how?
* ''carricā́re'' "to load (onto a wagon, cart)" > Portuguese/Catalan ''carregar'' vs. Spanish/Occitan ''cargar'' "to load", French ''charger'', Lombard ''cargà/caregà'', Venetian ''carigar/cargar(e)'' "to load"
The Romance languages inherited from Latin two grammatical numbers, singular and plural; there is no trace of a dual number.
''femme – femmes'' "woman – women", both pronounced ).
)", ''sé'' "seat (of government)", ''dê'' "give!
* '''Vowel length''': French uses a circumflex to indicate what had been a long vowel (although nowadays this rather indicates a difference in vowel quality, if it has any effect at all on pronunciation).
''substratum'' from pre-Roman languages, especially Continental Celtic languages; and ''superstratum'' from later Germanic or Slavic invasions), the phonology, morphology, and lexicon of all Romance languages consist mainly of evolved forms of Vulgar Latin.
The word 'romance' with the modern sense of romance novel or love affair has the same origin.
* The simplest outcome was in Sardinian, where the former long and short vowels in Latin simply coalesced, e.g.
The biggest exception is Romanian, where there is a productive class of "neuter" nouns, which include the descendants of many Latin neuter nouns and which behave like masculines in the singular and feminines in the plural, both in the endings used and in the agreement of adjectives and pronouns (e.g.
There are no case endings and relatively few classes, as in Spanish, but noun endings are generally formed with vowels instead of /s/, as in Romanian: ''amico – amici'' "friend(s) (masc.
before /j/ (from ''-e,i-'' in hiatus)
Note that /ts,dz,dʒ/ eventually became /s,z,ʒ/ in most Western Romance languages.
It also explains why the languages in France (especially standard French) seem to have innovated earlier and more completely than other Western Romance languages.
"to tell parables", cf.
It is clear that Sardinian became linguistically independent from the remainder of the Romance languages at an extremely early date, possibly already by the first century BC.
* '''Stress''': the stressed vowel in a polysyllabic word may be indicated with an accent, when it cannot be predicted by rule.
Spanish, Romanian) have an "accusative preposition" (Romanian ''pe'', Spanish "personal ''a''") along with clitic doubling, which allows for some freedom in ordering the arguments of a verb.
''ae'' became  by the  1st century at the latest.
Portuguese does this consistently as part of notating stress in certain monosyllables, whether or not there is an unstressed homophone (see examples above).
A different type of noun inflection survived into the medieval period in a number of western Romance languages (Old French, Old Occitan, and the older forms of a number of Rhaeto-Romance languages).
In some languages, like Spanish, the hard ''g'' is pronounced as a fricative  after vowels.
Many basic nouns and verbs, especially those that were short or had irregular morphology, were replaced by longer derived forms with regular morphology.
However, the Gallo-Italic languages are somewhere in between.
Already in Vulgar Latin intertonic vowels between a single consonant and a following /r/ or /l/ tended to drop: ''vétulum'' "old" > ''veclum'' > Dalmatian ''vieklo'', Sicilian ''vecchiu'', Portuguese ''velho''.
This change never penetrated far from Rome, however, and the pronunciation /au/ was maintained for centuries in the vast majority of Latin-speaking areas, although it eventually developed into some variety of ''o'' in many languages.
"to tell stories", cf.
prepositions ''con'', ''per'').
Similarly, Portuguese ''orelha'', French ''oreille'', Romanian ''ureche'', and Sardinian ''olícra'', ''orícla'' "ear" must derive from ''oricla'' rather than Classical ''auris'', and the form ''oricla'' is in fact reflected in the Appendix Probi (but Occitan ''aurelha'' reflects ''auricla'', probably influenced by ''ausir'' "to hear").
In Catalan is used for  before ''E'' and ''I'', as in ''metge'' or ''fetge''.
French ''coudre'', Italian ''cucire'', Portuguese ''coser'' "to sew", from ''cōnsuere'' "to sew up", from ''suere'' "to sew", with total loss of the bare stem.
* Iberian Romance: Portuguese, Galician, Mirandese, Asturian, Leonese, Spanish (Castilian), Aragonese, Ladino;
The double consonants in French orthography, however, are merely etymological.
In some cases, terms from common occupations became generalized: ''invenīre'' "to find" replaced by Ibero-Romance ''afflāre'' (orig.
1 Traditional academic transcription in Latin and Romance studies, respectively.
Galician has both ''fiestra'' (from medieval ''fẽestra'', the ancestor of standard Portuguese ''fresta'') and the less frequently used ''ventá'' and ''xanela''.
Cicero's taunt that the populist politician Publius Clodius Pulcher had changed his name from ''Claudius'' to ingratiate himself with the masses.
For example, ''mansiōnātam'' >  >  >  > early Old French ''maisnieḍe''  "household".
Catalan is unusual in that it is not the main language of any nation-state, other than Andorra, where it is official, but nonetheless has been able to compete and even gain speakers at the expense of the dominant language of its nation (Spanish); in fact, Catalan is the only minority European language whose long-term survival is probably not under threat.
Between 350 BC and 150 AD, the expansion of the Empire, together with its administrative and educational policies, made Latin the dominant native language in continental Western Europe.
(imperative)", ''mês'' "month", ''só'' "only", ''nós'' "we" (cf.
With the Renaissance the classical pronunciation &nbsp;– or similar consonant clusters, such as , , or &nbsp;– were frequently reintroduced in latinisms and hellenisms.
In the Middle Ages, the languages of Iberia used this letter to denote the voiceless postalveolar fricative , which is still the case in Modern Catalan and Portuguese.
Centro Cadore: ''La sera sempre la fenestra gnante de disna.
In French, nasal vowels before remaining nasal consonants were subsequently denasalized, but not before causing the vowels to lower somewhat, e.g.
* ''il hotel ej vɛɲiws natsionalizaws'' "the hotel has been nationalized"
The Romance languages eliminated word scrambling and nearly all left-branching constructions, with most languages developing a rigid SVO, right-branching syntax.
The double consonants of Piedmontese exist only after stressed , written ''ë'', and are not etymological: ''vëdde'' (Latin ''vidēre'', to see), ''sëcca'' (Latin ''sicca'', dry, feminine of ''sech'').
Indeed, in Italian prose ''*kilometro'' is properly ''chilometro.''
Romanian ''meriză''), ''oriens'', and ''occidens''.
In Jèrriais, long consonants are marked with an apostrophe: ''S'S'' is a long , ''SS'S'' is a long , and ''T'T'' is a long .
Although Italy also had some colonial possessions before World War II, its language did not remain official after the end of the colonial domination.
Occitan ''parlar'', French ''parler'', Italian ''parlare '') or ''fabulārī'' (orig.
Spanish and Portuguese), and the larger Gallo-Romance languages (stretching from eastern Spain to northeast Italy).
French ''épée'', Spanish ''espada'', Italian ''spada ''and Romanian ''spată''); ''cara'' "face" (Greek: κάρα ''kára'', partly replacing ''faciēs''); ''colpe'' "blow" (Greek: κόλαφος ''kólaphos'', replacing ''ictus'', cf.
:'''SCH''': used in Romansh for  or .
:'''NH''': used in Portuguese and Occitan for , used in official Galician for  .
The changes (instances of diachronic lenition) are as follows:
Thus Latin ''caelum'' (sky, heaven), pronounced  with an initial , became Italian ''cielo'' , Romanian ''cer'' , Spanish ''cielo'' /, French ''ciel'' , Catalan ''cel'' , and Portuguese ''céu'' .
''Ele sere todi li finiesse divant di soper.''
NominativeAccusative
* ''commūnicā́re'' "to take communion" > Romanian ''cumineca'' vs. Portuguese ''comungar'', Spanish ''comulgar'', Old French ''comungier''
''(Elle) à fàrm toujour là fnèt àvan k'à manj.''
In Italian, Portuguese and Catalan, the choice of accent (acute, grave or circumflex) may depend on vowel quality.
''Idda chiui sempri la finestra prima di pistiari/manciari.''
Today, around 800 million people are native speakers worldwide, mainly in Europe and the Americas, but also elsewhere.
* Relative pronouns and interrogatives, with the same forms used for both (similar to English "who" and "which").
''li om – le ome'' "man" (''homō'' – ''hominem'').
Sicilian ''cchiù'' (more), and ''ccà'' (here).
In Africa it is the official language of Equatorial Guinea.
''auris'' "ear" > ''auricula'' (orig.
"big fish") > French ''poisson''.
> ,  > : This produced a simple five-vowel system .
A few of these multi-stem nouns derive from Latin forms without stress shift, e.g.
:'''N-''': used in Piedmontese and Ligurian for  between two vowels.
