The rising trend in population growth continued until the mid-1980s, when the ''comune'' had more than 2.8 million residents.
During the 17th and 18th century the Roman popes reconstructed other ruined Roman aqueducts and built new display fountains to mark their termini, launching the golden age of the Roman fountain.
The main harbour which serves Rome is Port of Civitavecchia, located about 62&nbsp;km northwest of the city.
Other gods and goddesses such as Vesta and Minerva were honoured.
Rome grows +4.4% annually and continues to grow at a higher rate in comparison to any other city in the rest of the country.
By far the most famous composer of the Roman School is Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose name has been associated for four hundred years with smooth, clear, polyphonic perfection.
Of the 1,300 or so commercial premises operating in the district 800 are Chinese-owned; around 300 are run by immigrants from other countries around the world; 200 are owned by Italians.
A third line, the C line, is under construction with an estimated cost of €3&nbsp;billion and will have 30 stations over a distance of .
They were crowded with allegorical figures, and filled with emotion and movement.
Although not as important as Milan, Rome is the fourth most important centre for fashion in the world, according to the 2009 Global Language Monitor after Milan, New York and Paris, and beating London.
The capital of the western Roman Empire became Ravenna.
In that period the pope died, and the cardinals, summoned in Viterbo, could not agree on his successor: the people of the city, angered, unroofed the building where they had met, imprisoning them until they had nominated the new pope: this happening marked the birth of the conclave.
The Villa Borghese garden is the best known large green space in Rome, with famous art galleries among its shaded walks.
Rome is an important centre for music, and it has an intense musical scene, including several prestigious music conservatories and theatres.
Dialectal literature in the traditional form Romanesco includes the works of such authors as Giuseppe Gioachino Belli (one of the most important Italian poets altogether), Trilussa, and Cesare Pascarella.
It is perceived as Rome's Chinatown.
In 1874 a fifteenth rione, Esquilino, was created on the newly urbanised zone of Monti.
December, January and February are the coldest months, with a daily mean temperature of  .Temperatures during these months generally vary between  during the day and between  at night, with colder or warmer spells occurring frequently.
Later, during the Renaissance, Rome became well known as a centre of high-cuisine, since some of the best chefs of the time, worked for the popes.
The state ministries are spread out around the city; these include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is located in Palazzo della Farnesina near the Olympic stadium.
Maxxi features a campus dedicated to culture, experimental research laboratories, international exchange and study and research.
People from all over the Christian world visit Vatican City, within the city of Rome, the seat of the papacy.
The altitude of the central part of Rome ranges from  above sea level (at the base of the Pantheon) to  above sea level (the peak of Monte Mario).
Its average annual temperature is above  during the day and  at night.
This new quarter emerged as a compromise between Rationalist and Novecento architects, the former being led by Giuseppe Pagano.
It had an area of about  and an estimated population of 35,000.
Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 17.00% of the population compared to pensioners who number 20.76%.
In 1870, Rome became the capital city of the new Kingdom of Italy.
The most notable of these are Villa Borghese, Villa Ada, and Villa Doria Pamphili.
:"Only Paris is worthy of Rome; only Rome is worthy of Paris."
Numerous international companies and agencies headquarters, government ministries, conference centres, sports venues, and museums are located in Rome's principal business districts: the Esposizione Universale Roma (EUR); the ''Torrino'' (further south from the EUR); the ''Magliana''; the ''Parco de' Medici-Laurentina'' and the so-called ''Tiburtina-valley'' along the ancient Via Tiburtina.
After the Lombard invasion of Italy, the city remained nominally Byzantine, but in reality the popes pursued a policy of equilibrium between the Byzantines, the Franks and the Lombards.
Due to that, Rome became first one of the major centres of the Italian Renaissance, and then the birthplace of both the Baroque style and Neoclassicism.
Despite recent excavations at the Palatine hill, the view that Rome has been indeed founded with an act of will as the legend suggests in the middle of the 8th century BC (the date of the tradition of Romulus) remains a fringe hypothesis.
Despite some interruptions (such as the Avignon papacy), Rome has for centuries been the home of the Roman Catholic Church and the Bishop of Rome, otherwise known as the Pope.
Metal-work, coin die and gem engraving, ivory carvings, figurine glass, pottery, and book illustrations are considered to be 'minor' forms of Roman artwork.
In this twenty-year period, Rome became one of the greatest centres of art in the world.
The local administration in Rome is commonly referred to as ''"Campidoglio"'', the Italian name of the hill.
The quarter was restored in the 1950s, when the Roman authorities found that they already had the seed of an off-centre business district of the type that other capitals were still planning (London Docklands and La Défense in Paris).
Afterwards, Pope Pius IX declared himself as prisoner in the Vatican, and in 1871 the capital of Italy was finally moved from Florence to Rome.
The city contains some of obelisks in piazzas, such as in Piazza Navona, St Peter's Square, Piazza Montecitorio, and Piazza del Popolo, and others in villas, thermae parks and gardens, such as in Villa Celimontana, the Baths of Diocletian, and the Pincian Hill.
From the beginning of the 2nd century BC, power was contested between two groups of aristocrats: the optimates, representing the conservative part of the Senate, and the populares, which relied on the help of the plebs (urban lower class) to gain power.
The Metropolitan City replaced the old province, which included the city's metropolitan area and extends further north until Civitavecchia.
It surpassed 300,000 in 150 BC.
Although when the ring was completed most part of the inhabited area lay inside it (one of the few exceptions was the former village of Ostia, which lies along the tyrrhenian coast), in the meantime quarters have been built which extend up to  beyond it.
The average relative humidity is 75%, varying from 72% in July to 77% in November.
The third and second century BC saw the establishment of Roman hegemony over the Mediterranean and the East, through the three Punic Wars (264–146 BC) fought against the city of Carthage and the three Macedonian Wars (212–168 BC) against Macedonia.
The Pope is the Bishop of Rome and its official seat is the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran (of which the President of the French Republic is ''ex officio'' the "first and only honorary canon", a title held by the heads of the French state since King Henry IV of France).
The stairs were, reputedly, brought to Rome by St. Helena in the 4th Century.
Ancient Roman cuisine was highly influenced by Ancient Greek culture, and after, the empire's enormous expansion exposed Romans to many new, provincial culinary habits and cooking techniques.
In 846, Muslim Arabs unsuccessfully stormed the city's walls, but managed to loot St. Peter's and St. Paul's basilica, both outside the city wall.
After the abdication of Diocletian and Maximian in 305 and many dynastic conflicts, this system collapsed, and the new ruler, Constantine, centralised power again and, with the Edict of Milan in 313, gave freedom of worship for Christians, pledging himself to give stability to the new religion.
Famous artists, painters, sculptors and architects made Rome the centre of their activity, creating masterpieces throughout the city.
After the fall of Napoleon, the Church State under the pope was reinstated through the Congress of Vienna of 1814.
In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Rome grew by 6.54%, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56%.
The historic centre is divided into 22 ''rioni'', all of which are located within the Aurelian Walls except Prati and Borgo.
Rome is the seat of the European Olympic Committee and of the NATO Defense College.
It is sometimes classified as having sovereignty but does not claim any territory in Rome or anywhere else, hence leading to dispute over its actual sovereign status.
Rome is also widely recognised as a world fashion capital.
This was another nepotistic age: the new noble families (Barberini, Pamphili, Chigi, Rospigliosi, Altieri, Odescalchi) were protected by their respective popes, who built for their relatives huge baroque buildings.
The end of the work was scheduled in 2015, but archaeological findings often delay underground construction work.
Alexander VI, for example, was well known for his decadence, extravagance and immoral life.
The National Gallery of Modern Art has works by Balla, Morandi, Pirandello, Carrà, De Chirico, De Pisis, Guttuso, Fontana, Burri, Mastroianni, Turcato, Kandisky and Cézanne on permanent exhibition.
The ''Romanesco'' spoken during the Middle Ages was a southern Italian dialect, very close to the Neapolitan.
In 1527, the Landsknechts of Emperor Charles V sacked the city, putting to an abrupt end the golden age of the Renaissance in Rome.
They were created for administrative reasons to increase decentralisation in the city.
Rome contains numerous ancient sites, including the Forum Romanum, Trajan's Market, Trajan's Forum, the Colosseum, and the Pantheon, to name but a few.
A commercial district, Esquilino contains restaurants featuring many kinds of international cuisine.
The former in 27 BC became ''princeps civitatis'' and got the title of Augustus, founding the principate, a diarchy between the ''princeps'' and the senate.
Rome is also the location of two American Universities; The American University of Rome and John Cabot University as well as St. John's University branch campus, John Felice Rome Center, a campus of Loyola University Chicago and Temple University Rome, a campus of Temple University.
During those years the centre of the Italian Renaissance moved to Rome from Florence.
the capital of the world, an expression which had already been given in the Republican period.
In 550 BC Rome was the second largest city in Italy, with Tarentum being the largest.
The city's urban area is cut in two by its ring-road, the ''Grande Raccordo Anulare'' ("GRA"), finished in 1962, which circles the city centre at a distance of about .
Rome's cuisine has evolved through centuries and periods of social, cultural, and political changes.
It continued to stagnate or shrink until the Renaissance.
B1 connects to line B at Piazza Bologna and has four stations over a distance of .
In 1266 Charles of Anjou, who was heading south to fight the Hohenstaufen on behalf of the pope, was appointed Senator.
Rome has hosted the final portion of the Giro d'Italia twice, in 1989 and 2000.
When the Kingdom of Italy annexed Rome in 1870, the city had a population of about 200,000.
In this period the city was also shattered by continuous fights among the noble families: Annibaldi, Caetani, Colonna, Orsini, Conti, nested in their fortresses built above ancient Roman edifices, fought each other to control the papacy.
The Roman School was a group of composers of predominantly church music, which were active in the city during the 16th and 17th centuries, therefore spanning the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras.
Contemporary Romanesco is mainly represented by popular actors such as Aldo Fabrizi, Alberto Sordi, Nino Manfredi, Anna Magnani, Gigi Proietti, Enrico Montesano, and Carlo Verdone.
The Papal States were restored in June 1800, but during Napoleon's reign Rome was annexed as a ''Département'' of the French Empire: first as ''Département du Tibre'' (1808–10) and then as ''Département Rome'' (1810–14).
Although the city has its own quarter on the Mediterranean Sea (Lido di Ostia), this has only a marina and a small channel-harbour for fisher boats.
These problems are not helped by the limited size of Rome's metro system when compared to other cities of similar size.
The urban area of Rome extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 3.9 million.
Since 1972 the city has been divided into administrative areas, called ''municipi''  (sing.
As a result of this increase of the local practitioners of the Islamic faith, the ''comune'' promoted the building of the Mosque of Rome, which is the largest mosque in Western Europe, that was designed by architect Paolo Portoghesi and inaugurated on 21 June 1995.
Each ''municipio'' is governed by a president and a council of four members who are elected by its residents every five years.
The  studio complex is  from the centre of Rome and is part of one of the biggest production communities in the world, second only to Hollywood, with well over 5,000 professionals – from period costume makers to visual effects specialists.
All these happenings, which according to the archeological excavations took place more or less around the mid of the 8th century BC, can be considered as the "birth" of the city.
The first section with 15 stations connecting Pantano with the quarter of Centocelle in the eastern part of the city, opened on 9 November 2014.
Rome first became a major artistic centre during ancient Rome, with forms of important Roman art such as architecture, painting, sculpture and mosaic work.
Rome, which had lost its central role in the administration of the empire, was sacked in 410 by the Visigoths led by Alaric I, but also embellished by the construction of sacred buildings by the popes (with the collaboration of the emperors).
One of the best-known symbols of Roman neoclassicism is the Monument of Vittorio Emanuele II or "Altar of the Fatherland", where the Grave of the Unknown Soldier, that represents the 650,000 Italians that fell in World War I, is located.
The driving force behind this renewal was the monk Ildebrando da Soana, who once elected pope under the name of Gregory VII became involved into the Investiture Controversy against Emperor Henry IV.
They are often, due to their status, covered with placards or graffiti expressing political ideas and points of view.
Rome later became a major centre of Renaissance art, since the popes spent vast sums of money for the constructions of grandiose basilicas, palaces, piazzas and public buildings in general.
The team now plays home games at the Stadio Olimpico because the Stadio Flaminio needs works of renovation in order to improve both its capacity and safety.
After the pope's death, Arnaldo was taken prisoner by Adrianus IV, which marked the end of the comune's autonomy.
When the Republic was founded in 509 BC the census recorded a population of 130,000.
As early as the 4th century, there have been alternate theories proposed on the origin of the name Roma.
Rome is well known for its statues but, in particular, the talking statues of Rome.
The republic included the city itself and the immediate surroundings.
For centuries, the ''Scala Santa'' has attracted Christian pilgrims who wished to honour the Passion of Jesus.
According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, the finest ancient bridge remaining in Rome is the Ponte Sant'Angelo, which was completed in 135 AD, and was decorated with ten statues of the angels, designed by Bernini in 1688.
These were the times of Theodora and her daughter Marozia, concubines and mothers of several popes, and of Crescentius, a powerful feudal lord, who fought against the Emperors Otto II and III.
Latin evolved during the Middle Ages into a new language, the ''volgare''.
This increased to 600,000 by the eve of World War I.
During this period, the years of ''la dolce vita'' ("the sweet life"), Rome became a fashionable city, with popular classic films such as ''Ben Hur'', ''Quo Vadis'', ''Roman Holiday'' and ''La Dolce Vita'' filmed in the city's iconic Cinecittà film studios.
However, on 19 July 1943 the San Lorenzo district was bombed by Anglo-American forces, resulting in about 3,000 immediate deaths and 11,000 wounded of which another 1,500 died.
The city hosts also other important international entities such as the IDLO (International Development Law Organisation), the ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property) and the UNIDROIT (International Institute for the Unification of Private Law).
He built several churches, gave the civil power of Rome to Pope Sylvester I and founded in the eastern part a new capital city; Constantinople.
Rome's international airport, Fiumicino, is the largest in Italy, and the city hosts the head offices of the vast majority of the major Italian companies, as well as the headquarters of three of the world's 100 largest companies: Enel, Eni, and Telecom Italia.
Throughout the history of Rome, the urban limits of the city were considered to be the area within the city walls.
Object of pilgrimage are also several catacombs built in the Roman age, in which Christians prayed, buried their dead and performed worship during periods of persecution, and various national churches (among them San Luigi dei francesi and Santa Maria dell'Anima), or churches associated with individual religious orders, such as the Jesuit Churches of Jesus and Sant`Ignazio.
Rome is the seat of the so-called '''Polo Romano''' made up by three main international agencies of the United Nations: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
The interwar period saw a rapid growth in the city's population, which surpassed one million inhabitants.
The most familiar of these myths, and perhaps the most famous of all Roman myths, is the story of Romulus and Remus, the twins who were suckled by a she-wolf.
As a consequence, the density of the ''comune'' is not that high, its territory being divided between highly urbanised areas and areas designated as parks, nature reserves, and for agricultural use.
The A and B lines intersect at Roma Termini station.
Charles founded the Sapienza, the university of Rome.
The city became a major pilgrimage site during the Middle Ages and the focus of struggles between the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire starting with Charlemagne, who was crowned its first emperor in Rome in 800 by Pope Leo III.
This grand approach was designed by architects Piacentini and Spaccarelli, for want of Benito Mussolini and in accordance with the church, after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaty.
Rome outgrew the Servian Wall, but no more walls were constructed until almost 700 years later, when, in 270 AD, Emperor Aurelian began building the Aurelian Walls.
Rome was established as a de facto empire, which reached its greatest expansion in the second century under the Emperor Trajan, Rome was confirmed as caput Mundi, i.e.
Glenn Storey estimates 450,000 people, Whitney Oates estimates 1.2 million, Neville Morely provides a rough estimate of 800,000 and excludes earlier suggestions of 2 million.
In 729, the Lombard king Liutprand donated to the church the north Latium town of Sutri, starting the temporal power of the church.
The term also refers to the music they produced.
More recently, heavy night-time traffic in Trastevere, Testaccio and San Lorenzo has led to the creation of night-time ZTLs in those districts.
Rome today is one of the most important tourist destinations of the world, due to the incalculable immensity of its archaeological and artistic treasures, as well as for the charm of its unique traditions, the beauty of its panoramic views, and the majesty of its magnificent "villas" (parks).
According to the City Brands Index, Rome is considered the world's second most historically, educationally and culturally interesting and beautiful city.
Basilicas dating from the Palaeochristian age include Santa Maria Maggiore and San Paolo Fuori le Mura (the latter largely rebuilt in the 19th century), both housing precious 4th century AD mosaics.
The A line opened in 1980 from Ottaviano to Anagnina stations, later extended in stages (1999–2000) to Battistini.
It boasts a large variety of academies and colleges, and has always been a major worldwide intellectual and educational centre, especially during Ancient Rome and the Renaissance, along with Florence.
Rome, also hosts major international and worldwide political and cultural organisations, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), World Food Programme (WFP), the NATO Defence College and ICCROM, the International Center for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property.
* From ''Rumon'' or ''Rumen'', archaic name of the Tiber, which in turn has the same root as the Greek verb ῥέω (rhèo) and the Latin verb ''ruo'', which both mean "flow";
The city hosted artists like Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli and Bramante, who built the temple of San Pietro in Montorio and planned a great project to renovate the Vatican.
In the late 18th century and early 19th century, the city was one of the centres of the Grand Tour, when wealthy, young English and other European aristocrats visited the city to learn about ancient Roman culture, art, philosophy and architecture.
Rome developed momentously after the war, as one of the driving forces behind the "Italian economic miracle" of post-war reconstruction and modernisation in the 1950s and early 1960s.
The official residences of the President of the Italian Republic and the Italian Prime Minister, the seats of both houses of the Italian Parliament and that of the Italian Constitutional Court are located in the historic centre.
An example of this could be Bartolomeo Scappi, who was a chef, working for Pius IV in the Vatican kitchen, and he acquired fame in 1570 when his cookbook ''Opera dell'arte del cucinare'' was published.
The municipi where originally 20, then 19.
In World War II, due to its art treasuries and the presence of Vatican, Rome largely escaped the tragic destiny of other European cities.
The most representative buildings of EUR are the Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana (1938–1943), the iconic design of which has been labelled the cubic of Square Colosseum, and the Palazzo dei Congressi, example of Rationalist style.
This time was also characterised by the spread of the Christian religion, supposedly preached by Jesus Christ in Judea in the first half of the first century (under Tiberius) and popularized by his apostles through the empire and beyond.
Later, after St Peter and St Paul were martyred in the city, and the first Christians began to arrive, Rome became Christian, and the Old St. Peter's Basilica was constructed in 313 AD.
Rome is also home to other sports teams, including basketball (Virtus Roma), volleyball (M. Roma Volley), handball or waterpolo.
For some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier a modern wall was constructed.
In 1957 the city hosted the signing of the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (predecessor to the European Union), and also played host to the official signing of the proposed European Constitution in July 2004.
The old Roman hippodrome (Circus Maximus) is another large green space: it has few trees, but is overlooked by the Palatine and the Rose Garden ('roseto comunale').
In the third century, at the end of the Antonine dynasty, with the Severan dynasty the ''principatus'' was substituted by a military government, which was soon followed by a destabilising period of military anarchy known as the Crisis of the Third Century.
Construction on the first branch started in the 1930s.
The city suffers from traffic problems largely due to this radial street pattern, making it difficult for Romans to move easily from the vicinity of one of the radial roads to another without going into the historic centre or using the ring-road.
This remained largely confined to Rome until the 19th century, but then expanded to other zones of Lazio (Civitavecchia, Latina), from the beginning of the 20th century, thanks to the rising population of Rome and to better transportation systems.
Forced to flee, Cola could come back among the suite of cardinal Albornoz, in charge of restoring the church power in Italy.
Rome became one of Europe's major centres of Renaissance artwork, second only to Florence, and able to compare to other major cities and cultural centres, such as Paris and Venice.
Among others, a masterpiece of Renaissance architecture in Rome is the Piazza del Campidoglio by Michelangelo.
The city hosts eight ancient Egyptian and five ancient Roman obelisks, together with a number of more modern obelisks; there was also formerly (until 2005) an ancient Ethiopian obelisk in Rome.
Chronic congestion caused by cars during the 1970s and 1980s led to restrictions being placed on vehicle access to the inner city-centre during the hours of daylight.
There lies also the major synagogue in Rome, the ''Tempio Maggiore''.
In parallel, Roman Jews -present in the city since the 1st century BC- developed their own cuisine, the ''cucina giudaico-romanesca''.
During the Roman Empire, in 98 AD, according to Sextus Julius Frontinus, the Roman consul who was named ''curator aquarum'' or guardian of the water of the city, Rome had nine aqueducts which fed 39 monumental fountains and 591 public basins, not counting the water supplied to the Imperial household, baths and owners of private villas.
Rome is the capital of Italy and of the Lazio region.
The middle age boroughs of the city, lying mainly around the Capitol, have been largely pulled down between the end of the 19th century and the fascist period, but many notable buildings still stay.
The convention centre features a huge translucent container inside which is suspended a steel and teflon structure resembling a cloud and which contains meeting rooms and an auditorium with two piazzas open to the neighbourhood on either side.
These were almost  long, and were still the walls the troops of the Kingdom of Italy had to breach to enter the city in 1870.
After that, population started to decline slowly as inhabitants began to move to nearby suburbs of Rome.
Later notable medieval mosaic and fresco art can be also found in the churches of Santa Maria in Trastevere, Santi Quattro Coronati, and Santa Prassede.
Though most famous for Christian burials, they include pagan and Jewish burials, either in separate catacombs or mixed together.
Rome then began a period characterised by internal struggles between patricians (aristocrats) and plebeians (small landowners), and by constant warfare against the populations of central Italy: Etruscans, Latins, Volsci, Aequi, Marsi.
Parallel to it, in the 1920s another style emerged, named "Stile Novecento", characterised by its links with ancient Roman architecture.
The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929.
An idealist and a lover of ancient Rome, Cola dreamed about a rebirth of the Roman Empire: after assuming the power with the title of ''Tribuno'', his reforms were rejected by the populace.
Rome has also had a major impact in music history.
Rome also has an opera house, the Teatro dell'Opera di Roma, as well as several minor musical institutions.
Rome was a major world centre of the Renaissance, second only to Florence, and was profoundly affected by the movement.
Examples of Roman dishes include "''Saltimbocca alla Romana''" – a veal cutlet, Roman-style; topped with raw ham and sage and simmered with white wine and butter; "''Carciofi alla romana''" – artichokes Roman-style; outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; "''Carciofi alla giudia''" – artichokes fried in olive oil, typical of Roman Jewish cooking; outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; "''Spaghetti alla carbonara''" – spaghetti with bacon, eggs and pecorino, and "''Gnocchi di semolino alla romana''" – semolina dumpling, Roman-style, to name but a few.
Rome contains a vast and impressive collection of art, sculpture, fountains, mosaics, frescos, and paintings, from all different periods.
The first gods held sacred by the Romans were Jupiter, the most high, and Mars, god of war, and father of Rome's twin founders, Romulus and Remus, according to tradition.
Villa Doria Pamphili is west of the Gianicolo hill comprising some .
The influence of the Florentine culture during the renaissance, and, above all, the immigration to Rome of many Florentines following the two Medici Popes (Leo X and Clement VII), caused a major shift in the dialect, which began to resemble more the Tuscan varieties.
Rome has been a major Christian pilgrimage site since the Middle Ages.
To accomplish that, the Popes engaged the best artists of the time, including Michelangelo, Perugino, Raphael, Ghirlandaio, Luca Signorelli, Botticelli, and Cosimo Rosselli.
The remaining 4.8% are those with non-European origins, chiefly Filipinos (26,933), Bangladeshis (12,154), and Chinese (10,283).
Universities, national radio and television and the movie industry in Rome are also important parts of the economy: Rome is also the hub of the Italian film industry, thanks to the Cinecittà studios, working since the 1930s.
Rome hosts the Cinecittà Studios, the largest film and television production facility in continental Europe and the centre of the Italian cinema, where a large number of today's biggest box office hits are filmed.
(This loss of confidence then led to major shifts of power away from the Church.)
These originate from the Regiones of ancient Rome, which evolved in the Middle Ages into the medieval rioni.
Rome is the third most visited city in the EU, after London and Paris, and receives an average of 7–10&nbsp;million tourists a year, which sometimes doubles on holy years.
Between 3.2 and 4.2 million people live in the Rome metropolitan area.
This aggregation, signalling the passage from a proto-urban to an urban situation, was allowed by the increase of agricultural productivity above the subsistence level, which allowed the establishment of secondary and tertiary activities: in turn, these boosted the development of trade with the Greek colonies of southern Italy (mainly Ischia and Cumae).
Urganilla, or Plautia Urgulanilla, wife of Emperor Claudius, is thought to have been a speaker of Etruscan many centuries after this date, according to Suetonius' entry on Claudius.
The Treaties of the EU are located in Palazzo della Farnesina, seat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, due the fact that the Italian government is the depositary of the treaties.
Although the economy of Rome is characterised by the absence of heavy industry and it is largely dominated by services, high-technology companies (IT, aerospace, defence, telecommunications), research, construction and commercial activities (especially banking), and the huge development of tourism are very dynamic and extremely important to its economy.
Rome is served by three airports.
The city also played host to the Eurovision Song Contest in 1991 and the MTV Europe Music Awards in 2004.
Rome is a major archaeological hub, and one of the world's main centres of archaeological research.
Founded in 1937 by Benito Mussolini, the studios were bombed by the Western Allies during the Second World War.
