Reagan brought them back to his house, where his mother invited them to stay the night and have breakfast the next morning.
Although "close to death" upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, Reagan was stabilized in the emergency room, then underwent emergency exploratory surgery.
Upon signing the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished Statue of Liberty, Reagan said, "The legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows, without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society.
Nancy Reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states, raising awareness about the dangers of drugs including alcohol.
Reagan said that if his listeners did not write letters to prevent it, "we will awake to find that we have socialism.
He and Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) at the White House, which eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons.
Further following his opposition to government intervention, Reagan cut the budgets of non-military programs including Medicaid, food stamps, federal education programs and the EPA.
His policy of "peace through strength" resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup including a 40% real increase in defense spending between 1981 and 1985.
While he protected entitlement programs, such as Social Security and Medicare, his administration attempted to purge many people with disabilities from the Social Security disability rolls.
As a sitting president, Reagan did not have the highest approval ratings, but his popularity has increased since 1989.
Observers described the Reagans' relationship as close, authentic and intimate.
Complicating the picture, Reagan suffered an episode of head trauma in July 1989, five years before his diagnosis.
Gorbachev and Reagan held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988: the first in Geneva, Switzerland, the second in Reykjavík, Iceland, the third in Washington, D.C., and the fourth in Moscow.
Reagan also fulfilled a 1980 campaign promise to repeal the windfall profits tax in 1988, which had previously increased dependence on foreign oil.
It has been suggested that far fewer would have died, both then and in the decades that followed, if the Reagan administration had applied the same determination in combatting AIDS as the Ford administration had applied to fighting Legionnaires' disease.
The attack was designed to halt Gaddafi's "ability to export terrorism," offering him "incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior."
Though he lost the nomination, he received 307 write-in votes in New Hampshire, 388 votes as an Independent on Wyoming's ballot, and a single electoral vote from a faithless elector in the November election from the state of Washington, which Ford had won over Democratic challenger Jimmy Carter.
In 1986, the Iran–Contra affair became a problem for the administration stemming from the use of proceeds from covert arms sales to Iran during the Iran–Iraq War to fund the Contra rebels fighting against the government in Nicaragua, which had been specifically outlawed by an act of Congress.
The unveiling was supposed to be attended by Reagan's wife, Nancy, but she did not attend; former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf; further to the former First Lady's absence President Reagan's friend, and the sole British Prime Minister during Reagan's presidency, Baroness Thatcher, was also unable to attend due to frail health.
Having been a lifelong Democrat, his views changed.
The scandal resulted in fourteen indictments within Reagan's staff, and eleven convictions.
When Reagan visited Moscow for the fourth summit in 1988, he was viewed as a celebrity by the Soviets.
He often called her "Mommy" and she called him "Ronnie."
After Reagan's death, both major American political parties agreed to erect a statue of Reagan in the place of that of Thomas Starr King.
And if you don't do this, and if I don't do it, one of these days, you and I are going to spend our sunset years telling our children, and our children's children, what it once was like in America when men were free."
While with the First Motion Picture Unit in 1945, he was indirectly involved in discovering actress Marilyn Monroe.
In 2006, Reagan was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum.
On June 9, Reagan's body was flown to Washington, D.C. where he became the tenth United States president to lie in state; in thirty-four hours, 104,684 people filed past the coffin.
By the time President Reagan had given his first speech on the epidemic, some six years into his presidency, 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS and 20,849 had died of it.
Said Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada: "He enters history as a strong and dramatic player in the Cold War."
Republican nominee John McCain frequently said that he came to office as "a foot soldier in the Reagan Revolution."
Reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil which had contributed to energy crises in the early 1970s.
I can't imagine life without him."
(1908–1996), who became an advertising executive.
Public reaction to Reagan was always mixed; the oldest president was supported by young voters, and began an alliance that shifted many of them to the Republican party.
With the approval of Congress, Reagan in 1983 sent forces to Lebanon to reduce the threat of the Lebanese Civil War.
Reagan believed that God had spared his life so that he might go on to fulfill a greater purpose.
Many film critics considered ''Kings Row'' to be his best movie, though the film was condemned by ''New York Times'' critic Bosley Crowther.
Very soon many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and, ultimately, if they choose, they may become Americans."
In January 1987, Reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate which caused further worries about his health.
Citing the economic theories of Arthur Laffer, Reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base, offsetting the revenue loss due to reduced rates of taxation, a theory that entered political discussion as the Laffer curve.
Every year from 2002, California Governors Gray Davis and Arnold Schwarzenegger proclaimed February 6 "Ronald Reagan Day" in the state of California in honor of their most famous predecessor.
He defeated former San Francisco mayor George Christopher in the GOP primary.
Now strongly urged to cancel the visit, the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to Chancellor Kohl.
By the end of the first 12 months of the epidemic, when more than 1,000 people had died of AIDS in the U.S., the CDC had spent less than $1 million on AIDS research.
Throughout his film career, his mother answered much of his fan mail.
His contract required him to tour GE plants sixteen weeks out of the year, often demanding of him fourteen speeches per day.
They were engaged at the Chicago Theatre, and married on January 26, 1940, at the Wee Kirk o' the Heather church in Glendale, California.
Of it, Reagan said, "I won the nickname the great communicator.
The Beirut barracks bombing killed 241 American servicemen and wounded more than 60 others by a suicide truck bomber.
Despite an unsuccessful attempt to recall him in 1968, Reagan was re-elected in 1970, defeating "Big Daddy" Jesse M. Unruh.
In his autobiography, ''An American Life'', Reagan expressed his optimism about the new direction that they charted and his warm feelings for Gorbachev.
He returned to Fort MacArthur, California, where he was separated from active duty on December 9, 1945.
Early in 1967, the national debate on abortion was beginning.
Under a policy that came to be known as the Reagan Doctrine, Reagan and his administration also provided overt and covert aid to anti-communist resistance movements in an effort to "rollback" Soviet-backed communist governments in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
On May 15, 1969, during the People's Park protests at UC Berkeley, Reagan sent the California Highway Patrol and other officers to quell the protests, in an incident that became known as "Bloody Thursday," resulting in the death of student James Rector and the blinding of carpenter Alan Blanchard.
He pled guilty to a misdemeanor federal charge of interfering with the Secret Service, but other felony charges of assault and resisting officers were dropped.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986, another bipartisan effort championed by Reagan, simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax brackets to four and slashing a number of tax breaks.
Reagan determined that the 18-year sentence was excessive compared to what other political figures in similar circumstances had been receiving.
Reagan escalated the Cold War, accelerating a reversal from the policy of détente which began in 1979 after the Soviet war in Afghanistan.
Pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with Reagan's views on social and civil rights policy during his tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988.
After graduating from Eureka in 1932, Reagan drove himself to Iowa, where he held jobs as an announcer at several stations.
An icon among Republicans, he ranks favorably in public and critical opinion of U.S. Presidents, and his tenure constituted a realignment toward conservative policies in the United States.
He was able to start discussions on nuclear disarmament with General Secretary Gorbachev.
Reagan also nominated Vaughn Walker, who would later be revealed to be the earliest known gay federal judge, to the United States District Court for the Central District of California.
In mid-December, after a new government was appointed by the governor-general, U.S. forces withdrew.
He opened his own investigation and appointed two Republicans and one Democrat (John Tower, Brent Scowcroft and Edmund Muskie, known as the "Tower Commission") to investigate the scandal.
Early in his tenure, Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton Jr., of San Diego as the first African American to chair the United States Commission on Civil Rights.
He attended Dixon High School, where he developed interests in acting, sports, and storytelling.
Eager for a larger stage, but not allowed to enter politics by GE, he quit and formally registered as a Republican.
The Clinton presidency (1993–2001) is often treated as an extension of the Reagan Era, as is the Bush presidency (2001–09).
No more appeasement."
Proponents also argue Reagan restored faith in the American Dream with his unabated and passionate love for the United States, after a decline in American confidence and self-respect under Jimmy Carter's perceived weak leadership, particularly during the Iran hostage crisis, as well as his gloomy, dreary outlook for the future of the United States during the 1980 election.
The bill was criticized for promoting significant racial disparities in the prison population and critics also charged that the policies did little to reduce the availability of drugs on the street, while resulting in a great financial burden for America.
With questions about Reagan's age, and a weak performance in the first presidential debate, his ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned.
Consolidating themes he had developed in talks for GE, he argued in "A Time for Choosing" (October 27, 1964):
The 2008 Republican presidential candidates were no exception, for they aimed to liken themselves to him during the primary debates, even imitating his campaign strategies.
The act made it illegal to knowingly hire or recruit illegal immigrants, required employers to attest to their employees' immigration status, and granted amnesty to approximately three million illegal immigrants who entered the United States before January 1, 1982, and had lived in the country continuously.
His first job was as a lifeguard at the Rock River in Lowell Park, near Dixon, in 1927.
For those reasons, David Gergen, former aide to President Reagan, believes that in retrospect, SDI hastened the end of the Cold War.
After calling in the National Guard, the Guard remained in Berkeley for 17 days, camping in People's Park, and demonstrations subsided as the university removed cordoned-off fencing and placed all development plans for People's Park on hold.
Actor William Holden served as best man at the ceremony.
Shortly after the beginning of his term, Reagan tested the presidential waters in 1968 as part of a "Stop Nixon" movement, hoping to cut into Nixon's Southern support and be a compromise candidate if neither Nixon nor second-place Nelson Rockefeller received enough delegates to win on the first ballot at the Republican convention.
According to columnist Chuck Raasch, "Reagan transformed the American presidency in ways that only a few have been able to."
Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech, this would lead to reform and the end of Communism.
Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986.
Because January 20 fell on a Sunday, a public celebration was not held but took place in the Capitol rotunda the following day.
He returned to the First Motion Picture Unit after completing this duty and was promoted to captain on July 22, 1943.
Termed the "Reagan Revolution," his presidency would reinvigorate American morale, reinvigorate the American economy and reduce American reliance upon government.
There was much disbelief surrounding the program's scientific feasibility, leading opponents to dub SDI "Star Wars" and argue that its technological objective was unattainable.
In January 1944, Reagan was ordered to temporary duty in New York City to participate in the opening of the Sixth War Loan Drive.
I wasn't a great communicator, but I communicated great things."
This was largely due to his opposition to affirmative action policies.
Reagan won the election, carrying 44 states with 489 electoral votes to 49 electoral votes for Carter (representing six states and Washington, D.C.).
At the same time, Saudi Arabia increased oil production, which resulted in a drop of oil prices in 1985 to one-third of the previous level; oil was the main source of Soviet export revenues.
Reagan's policies proposed that economic growth would occur when marginal tax rates were low enough to spur investment, which would then lead to higher employment and wages.
Some economists, such as Nobel Prize winners Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell, argue that Reagan's tax policies invigorated America's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s.
In 1981, Reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer.
In 1984, Reagan again raised the issue, asking Congress "why can't the freedom to acknowledge God be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this land?"
According to Paul Krugman, "Over all, the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut; as a share of GDP, the increase was substantially larger than Mr.&nbsp;Clinton's 1993 tax increase."
Reagan's popularity declined from 67% to 46% in less than a week, the greatest and quickest decline ever for a president.
December 27–29, 1988
Reagan's ability to connect with Americans earned him the laudatory moniker "The Great Communicator."
He twice ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination for the U.S. presidency in 1968 and 1976; four years later, he easily won the nomination outright, going on to be elected the oldest President, defeating incumbent Jimmy Carter in 1980.
He was hired as the host of ''General Electric Theater'', a series of weekly dramas that became very popular.
The surgery lasted for more than three hours and was performed under regional anesthesia.
However, the nomination stalled in the Senate, and Walker was not confirmed until he was renominated by Reagan's successor, George H.&nbsp;W. Bush.
Reagan described the new debt as the "greatest disappointment" of his presidency.
It was determined that the cemetery held the graves of forty-nine members of the Waffen-SS.
Lefever performed poorly at his confirmation hearings and the Senate committee rejected his nomination by vote of 4–13; Lefever withdrew his name.
Among the most notable of his jokes was one regarding the Cold War.
After the funeral, the Reagan entourage was flown back to the Ronald W. Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California, where another service was held, and President Reagan was interred.
On June 7, his body was removed and taken to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, where a brief family funeral was held conducted by Pastor Michael Wenning.
Reagan attended Eureka College, a Disciples-oriented liberal arts school, where he became a member of the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity, a cheerleader, and studied economics and sociology.
He emphasized family values in his campaigns and during his presidency, although he was the first president to have been divorced.
After his election as president, residing in the upstairs White House private quarters, Reagan would quip that he was "living above the store again".
President Reagan professed that he was unaware of the plot's existence.
"No," he replied, "I was talking about another time, another era."
As a result of the shootdown, and the cause of KAL 007's going astray thought to be inadequacies related to its navigational system, Reagan announced on September 16, 1983, that the Global Positioning System would be made available for civilian use, free of charge, once completed in order to avert similar navigational errors in future.
His body lay in repose in the Library lobby until June 9; over 100,000 people viewed the coffin.
Dr. John E. Hutton, Reagan's primary physician from 1984 to 1989, said the president "absolutely" did not "show any signs of dementia or Alzheimer's."
His policies and beliefs have been frequently invoked by Republican presidential candidates since 1989.
In 1964, Reagan's speech, "A Time for Choosing", in support of Barry Goldwater's floundering presidential campaign, earned him national attention as a new conservative spokesman.
Senator Ted Kennedy, a Democrat of Massachusetts, strongly condemned Bork, and great controversy ensued.
The significance of Reagan's role in ending the Cold War has spurred contentious and opinionated debate.
During Reagan's presidency, a program was initiated within the United States Intelligence Community to ensure America's economic strength.
For the time, Reagan was unusual in his opposition to racial discrimination, and recalled a time in Dixon when the local inn would not allow black people to stay there.
Former CBS White House correspondent Lesley Stahl recounted that, in her final meeting with the president in 1986, Reagan did not seem to know who Stahl was, and that she came close to reporting that Reagan was senile, but at the end of the meeting, Reagan had regained his alertness.
Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces and implemented new policies towards the Soviet Union: reviving the B-1 Lancer program that had been canceled by the Carter administration, and producing the MX missile.
On January 14, 1943, he was promoted to first lieutenant and was sent to the Provisional Task Force Show Unit of ''This Is the Army'' at Burbank, California.
His final work as a professional actor was as host and performer from 1964 to 1965 on the television series ''Death Valley Days''.
Reagan implemented policies based on supply-side economics, advocating a ''laissez-faire'' philosophy and free-market fiscal policy, seeking to stimulate the economy with large, across-the-board tax cuts.
He was reassigned to the First Motion Picture Unit on November 14, 1944, where he remained until the end of World War II.
Anthony Kennedy was eventually confirmed in his place.
twice, once as a "mystery guest" in 1953 and as a panelist in 1956.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the UK allowed the U.S. Air Force to use Britain's air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the UK was supporting America's right to self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
However, his support of Israel throughout his presidency earned him support from many Jews.
He once wrote to her, "Whatever I treasure and enjoy... all would be without meaning if I didn't have you."
Reagan backed the nation of Poland throughout his presidency, supporting the anti-communist Solidarity movement, along with Pope John Paul II; the Ronald Reagan Park, a public facility in Gdańsk, was named in his honor.
He was among 18 included in Gallup's most admired man and woman poll of the 20th century, from a poll conducted in the U.S. in 1999; two years later,  was christened by Nancy Reagan and the United States Navy.
As governor, Reagan raised taxes, turned a state budget deficit to a surplus, challenged the protesters at the University of California, ordered National Guard troops in during a period of protest movements in 1969, and was re-elected in 1970.
The State Legislature sent the bill to Reagan's desk where, after many days of indecision, he signed it.
...The Soviet economy couldn't endure such competition."
The so-called "Reagan Democrats" were a result of his presidency.
On Reagan's 87th birthday, in 1998, Washington National Airport was renamed Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport by a bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton.
Later, Springer pled guilty to reduced charges and said he hadn't meant to hurt Reagan through his actions.
When legislation that would become Medicare was introduced in 1961, Reagan created a recording for the American Medical Association warning that such legislation would mean the end of freedom in America.
Named after Republican assemblyman Don Mulford, the bill garnered national attention after the Black Panthers marched bearing arms upon the California State Capitol to protest the bill.
A fervent anti-communist, he reaffirmed his commitment to democratic principles, stating, "I never as a citizen want to see our country become urged, by either fear or resentment of this group, that we ever compromise with any of our democratic principles through that fear or resentment."
officer who was knifed in the chest.
After World War II, he resumed service and became 3rd vice-president in 1946.
Other tax increases passed by Congress and signed by Reagan ensured however that tax revenues over his two terms were 18.2% of GDP as compared to 18.1% over the 40-year period of 1970–2010.
Reagan sent in the USS New Jersey battleship to shell Syrian positions in Lebanon.
That year, the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center was dedicated in Washington, D.C.
The price of oil subsequently dropped, and the 1980s did not see the fuel shortages that the 1970s had.
They were instrumental in training, equipping and leading Mujahideen forces against the Soviet Army.
President Harry S. Truman's policy of containment is also regarded as a force behind the fall of the U.S.S.R., and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan undermined the Soviet system itself.
For example, Reagan repeated a toast to Margaret Thatcher, with identical words and gestures, at his 82nd-birthday party on February 6, 1993.
The Reagan administration also backed anti-communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations, such as Efraín Ríos Montt of Guatemala and Hissène Habré of Chad.
To ensure that the United States acquired the maximum benefit from automated innovation, Reagan, during his second term, had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the Project Socrates results on a nationwide basis.
Critics labeled this "trickle-down economics"—the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will create a "trickle-down" effect to the poor.
Upon the approval of the Army Air Force (AAF), he applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the AAF on May 15, 1942, and was assigned to AAF Public Relations and subsequently to the First Motion Picture Unit (officially, the "18th Army Air Force Base Unit") in Culver City, California.
These tensions were later revived in early April 1986, when a bomb exploded in a Berlin discothèque, resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman.
In the late evening of April 15, 1986, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya.
The only execution during Reagan's governorship was on April 12, 1967, when Aaron Mitchell's sentence was carried out by the state in San Quentin's gas chamber.
When the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapped Patty Hearst in Berkeley and demanded the distribution of food to the poor, Reagan joked to a group of political aides about a botulism outbreak contaminating the food.
Reagan was sworn in as president for the second time on January 20, 1985, in a private ceremony at the White House.
In 1967, Reagan signed the Mulford Act, which became California Penal Code  12031 and  171(c).
Reagan won North Carolina, Texas, and California, but the strategy failed, as he ended up losing New Hampshire, Florida, and his native Illinois.
In response to conservative criticism that the State Department lacked hardliners, Reagan in 1981 nominated Ernest W. Lefever as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
Reagan has become an iconic figure in the Republican Party, with praise for his accomplishments part of the standard GOP rhetoric a quarter century after his retirement.
Reagan's family briefly lived in several towns and cities in Illinois, including Monmouth, Galesburg, and Chicago.
On April 13, 1992, Reagan was assaulted by an anti-nuclear protester during a luncheon speech while accepting an award from the National Association of Broadcasters in Las Vegas.
First Lady Nancy Reagan made the War on Drugs her main priority by founding the "Just Say No" drug awareness campaign, which aimed to discourage children and teenagers from engaging in recreational drug use by offering various ways of saying "no."
Reagan and Wyman continued to be friends until his death, with Wyman voting for Reagan in both of his runs and, upon his death, saying "America has lost a great president and a great, kind, and gentle man."
During his term in office, Reagan campaigned vigorously to restore organized prayer to the schools, first as a moment of prayer and later as a Moment of Silence.
Due to his poor eyesight, he was classified for limited service only, which excluded him from serving overseas.
Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate!
During his re-election bid, Reagan campaigned on the notion that it was "Morning in America", winning a landslide in 1984 with the largest electoral college victory in history.
His final public speech was on February 3, 1994, during a tribute to him in Washington, D.C., and his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27, 1994.
He was only able to recognize a few people, including his wife, Nancy.
These factors contributed to a stagnant Soviet economy during Gorbachev's tenure.
Reagan spoke frequently at rallies with a strong ideological dimension; in December 1945, he was stopped from leading an anti-nuclear rally in Hollywood by pressure from the Warner Bros. studio.
In the post-war era, after being separated from almost four years of World War II stateside service with the 1st Motion Picture Unit in December 1945, Reagan co-starred in such films as, ''The Voice of the Turtle'', ''John Loves Mary'', ''The Hasty Heart'', ''Bedtime for Bonzo'', ''Cattle Queen of Montana'', ''Tennessee's Partner'', ''Hellcats of the Navy'' (the only film in which he appears with Nancy Reagan), and the 1964 remake ''The Killers'' (his final film and the only one in which he played a villain).
AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagan's administration, and requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) were routinely denied.
In his first term he survived an assassination attempt, escalated the War on Drugs, and fought public-sector labor.
He moved to WHO radio in Des Moines as an announcer for Chicago Cubs baseball games.
Nancy Reagan, citing what doctors told her, asserted that her husband's 1989 fall hastened the onset of Alzheimer's disease, although acute brain injury has not been conclusively proven to accelerate Alzheimer's or dementia.
It has been alleged that he was overheard telling Israeli foreign minister Yitzhak Shamir in 1983 that he had filmed that footage himself and helped liberate Auschwitz, though this purported conversation was disputed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
Critics argue that the employer sanctions were without teeth and failed to stem illegal immigration.
This "A Time for Choosing" speech was not enough to turn around the faltering Goldwater campaign, but it was the key event that established Reagan's national political visibility.
Reagan's public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease, and as a result, his family decided that he would live in quiet semi-isolation with his wife Nancy.
Margaret Thatcher, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, said of Reagan, "he warned that the Soviet Union had an insatiable drive for military power... but he also sensed it was being eaten away by systemic failures impossible to reform."
A year after "Bloody Thursday," Reagan responded to questions about campus protest movements saying, "If it takes a bloodbath, let's get it over with.
She had been mistaken for another Nancy Davis.
The statue represents the state of California in the National Statuary Hall Collection.
Ronald Wilson Reagan was born in an apartment on the second floor of a commercial building in Tampico, Illinois on February 6, 1911, the son of Nelle Clyde (Wilson) and John Edward "Jack" Reagan.
A separate report by Congress concluded that "If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have."
Rumors began to circulate that he had Alzheimer's disease.
Building a network of supporters, he was elected Governor of California in 1966.
