But to me, that was a way of life; we had no choice but to accept what was the custom.
Parks said, "The driver wanted us to stand up, the four of us.
Parks collaborated with members of the League of Revolutionary Black Workers and the Republic of New Afrika in raising awareness of police abuse during the conflict.
After being found guilty and fined $10, plus $4 in court costs, Parks appealed her conviction and formally challenged the legality of racial segregation.
Parks lived just a mile from the epicenter of the riot that took place in Detroit in 1967, and she considered housing discrimination a major factor that provoked the disorder.
Politically liberal, the Durrs became her friends.
Rosa Parks was born '''Rosa Louise McCauley''' in Tuskegee, Alabama, on February 4, 1913, to Leona (née Edwards), a teacher, and James McCauley, a carpenter.
He admitted guilt and, on August 8, 1995, was sentenced to eight to 15 years in prison.
She learned from a newspaper of the death of Fannie Lou Hamer, once a close friend.
Ralph Abernathy suggested the name "Montgomery Improvement Association" (MIA).
In 1980, Parks—widowed and without immediate family—rededicated herself to civil rights and educational organizations.
Parks said, "My resisting being mistreated on the bus did not begin with that particular arrest...I did a lot of walking in Montgomery."
The black man sitting next to her gave up his seat.
Skipper asked, "Hey, aren't you Rosa Parks?"
In 1957, Raymond and Rosa Parks left Montgomery for Hampton, Virginia; mostly because she was unable to find work.
As the hearse passed the thousands of people who were viewing the procession, many clapped, cheered loudly and released white balloons.
Her heirs and various interest organizations alleged at the time that her financial affairs had been mismanaged.
The 1970s were a decade of loss for Parks in her personal life.
In 1994 the Ku Klux Klan applied to sponsor a portion of United States Interstate 55 in St. Louis County and Jefferson County, Missouri, near St. Louis, for cleanup (which allowed them to have signs stating that this section of highway was maintained by the organization).
In a telephone interview with CNN on October 24, 2005, Conyers recalled, "You treated her with deference because she was so quiet, so serene&nbsp;— just a very special person&nbsp;...
There was only one Rosa Parks."
Later that year, at the urging of her brother and sister-in-law in Detroit, Sylvester and Daisy McCauley, Rosa and Raymond Parks and her mother moved north to join them.
Despite the Jim Crow laws and discrimination by registrars, she succeeded in registering to vote on her third try.
Howard brought news of the recent acquittal of the two men who had murdered Till.
Near the middle of the bus, her row was directly behind the ten seats reserved for white passengers.
When Conyers was elected, he hired her as a secretary and receptionist for his congressional office in Detroit.
Her husband quit his job after his boss forbade him to talk about his wife or the legal case.
The Montgomery Industrial School, founded and staffed by white northerners for black children, was burned twice by arsonists.
She was the first woman and the second black person to lie in state in the Capitol.
At her husband's urging, she finished her high school studies in 1933, at a time when less than 7% of African Americans had a high school diploma.
Parks was deeply saddened and angry at the news, particularly because Till's case had garnered much more attention than any of the cases she and the Montgomery NAACP had worked on—and yet, the two men still walked free.
Repeatedly bullied by white children in her neighborhood, Parks often fought back physically.
In 1992, Parks published ''Rosa Parks: My Story'', an autobiography aimed at younger readers, which recounts her life leading to her decision to keep her seat on the bus.
In 1932, Rosa married Raymond Parks, a barber from Montgomery.
Parks went on to a laboratory school set up by the Alabama State Teachers College for Negroes for secondary education, but dropped out in order to care for her grandmother and later her mother, after they became ill.
She handed him $3 when he demanded money and an additional $50 when he demanded more.
In the 1970s, Parks organized for the freedom of political prisoners in the United States, particularly cases involving issues of self-defense.
Parks was charged with a violation of Chapter 6, Section 11 segregation law of the Montgomery City code, although technically she had not taken a white-only seat; she had been in a colored section.
And the other three people moved, but I didn't."
There she nursed her mother Leona through the final stages of cancer and geriatric dementia until she died in 1979 at the age of 92.
According to the law, no passenger would be required to move or give up his seat and stand if the bus was crowded and no other seats were available.
For years, the black community had complained that the situation was unfair.
Though her health declined as she entered her seventies, Parks continued to make many appearances and devoted considerable energy to these causes.
When her parents separated, she moved with her mother to Pine Level, just outside the state capital, Montgomery.
In 1999 Parks filmed a cameo appearance for the television series ''Touched by an Angel''.
But please, children and grown-ups, don't ride the bus at all on Monday.
Following national outcry around her case, Little succeeded in her defense that she used deadly force to resist sexual assault and was acquitted.
She organized and collaborated with civil rights leaders, including Edgar Nixon, president of the local chapter of the NAACP; and Martin Luther King, Jr., a new minister in town who gained national prominence in the civil rights movement.
I'd see the bus pass every day...
On August 30, 1994, Joseph Skipper, an African-American drug addict, entered her home to rob it and attacked the 81-year-old Parks.
In the end, black residents of Montgomery continued the boycott for 381 days.
When asked how she felt about this honor, she is reported to have commented, "It is always nice to be thought of."
Parks recalled going to elementary school in Pine Level, where school buses took white students to their new school and black students had to walk to theirs:
Blake noted that two or three white passengers were standing, as the front of the bus had filled to capacity.
A memorial service was held there the following morning.
In spite of her fame and constant speaking engagements, Parks was not a wealthy woman.
Blake said, "Why don't you stand up?"
Gary Tyler was finally released in April 2016 after 41 years in prison.
He moved the "colored" section sign behind Parks and demanded that four black people give up their seats in the middle section so that the white passengers could sit.
Although never a member of the Communist Party, she attended meetings with her husband.
By 1962, these policies had destroyed 10,000 structures in Detroit, displacing 43,096 people, 70 percent of them African-American.
Parks suffered two broken bones in a fall on an icy sidewalk, an injury which caused considerable and recurring pain.
Zion AME Zion Church to discuss boycott strategies.
NAACP organizers believed that Parks was the best candidate for seeing through a court challenge after her arrest for civil disobedience in violating Alabama segregation laws, although eventually her case became bogged down in the state courts while the ''Browder v. Gayle'' case succeeded.
Buses had "colored" sections for black people generally in the rear of the bus, although blacks composed more than 75% of the ridership.
Parks was not included as a plaintiff in the Browder decision because the attorney Fred Gray concluded the courts would perceive they were attempting to circumvent her prosecution on her charges working their way through the Alabama state court system.
As a student at the Industrial School for Girls in Montgomery, she took academic and vocational courses.
The driver could move the "colored" section sign, or remove it altogether.
The trial lasted 30 minutes.
Parks later said about being asked to move to the rear of the bus, "I thought of Emmett Till and I just couldn't go back."
Most of the remainder of the 40,000 black commuters walked, some as far as .
She was small as a child and suffered poor health with chronic tonsillitis.
At the time, Parks was secretary of the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP.
That Monday night, 50 leaders of the African-American community gathered to discuss actions to respond to Parks' arrest.
We didn't move at the beginning, but he says, 'Let me have these seats.'
They all were members of the African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME), a century-old independent black denomination founded by free blacks in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in the early nineteenth century.
Before fleeing, Skipper struck Parks in the face.
There Parks was mentored by the veteran organizer Septima Clark.
In the aftermath Mrs.
On November 27, 1955, four days before she would make her stand on the bus, Rosa Parks attended a mass meeting at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery that addressed this case as well as the recent murders of the activists George W. Lee and Lamar Smith.
She later said, "I only knew that, as I was being arrested, that it was the very last time that I would ever ride in humiliation of this kind..."
The name was adopted, and the MIA was formed.
Around the turn of the 20th century, the former Confederate states had adopted new constitutions and electoral laws that effectively disfranchised black voters and, in Alabama, many poor white voters as well.
That evening after the success of the one-day boycott, a group of 16 to 18 people gathered at the Mt.
She grew up on a farm with her maternal grandparents, mother, and younger brother Sylvester.
Parks unless he realizes that eventually the cup of endurance runs over, and the human personality cries out, 'I can take it no longer.'"
After her arrest, Parks became an icon of the Civil Rights Movement but suffered hardships as a result.
In her final years, she suffered from dementia.
As the bus traveled along its regular route, all of the white-only seats in the bus filled up.
A few years later, she published ''Quiet Strength'' (1995), her memoir, which focuses on her faith.
The incident sparked outrage throughout the United States.
She regularly participated in the movement for open and fair housing.
City officials in Montgomery and Detroit announced on October 27, 2005, that the front seats of their city buses would be reserved with black ribbons in honor of Parks until her funeral.
Parks was incapable of managing her own financial affairs by this time due to age-related physical and mental decline.
Upon her death in 2005, she was the first woman and third non-US government official to lie in honor at the Capitol Rotunda.
At that time Parks was introduced but not asked to speak, despite a standing ovation and calls from the crowd for her to speak; when she asked if she should say something, the reply was, "Why, you've said enough."
In 1900, Montgomery had passed a city ordinance to segregate bus passengers by race.
Medical bills and time missed from work caused financial strain that required her to accept assistance from church groups and admirers.
Parks resided in Detroit until she died of natural causes at the age of 92 on October 24, 2005, in her apartment on the east side of the city.
A memorial service was held that afternoon at Metropolitan AME Church in Washington, DC.
It rained that day, but the black community persevered in their boycott.
In a 1992 interview with National Public Radio's Lynn Neary, Parks recalled:
Under the white-established Jim Crow laws, passed after Democrats regained control of southern legislatures, racial segregation was imposed in public facilities and retail stores in the South, including public transportation.
Bus and train companies enforced seating policies with separate sections for blacks and whites.
to which she replied, "Yes."
She paid her fare and sat in an empty seat in the first row of back seats reserved for blacks in the "colored" section.
Speaking to her biographer, Parks noted, "You might just say Maxwell opened my eyes up."
Black people could sit in the middle rows until the white section filled; if more whites needed seats, blacks were to move to seats in the rear, stand, or, if there was no room, leave the bus.
As the officer took her away, she recalled that she asked, "Why do you push us around?"
Dozens of public buses stood idle for months, severely damaging the bus transit company's finances, until the city repealed its law requiring segregation on public buses following the US Supreme Court ruling in ''Browder v. Gayle'' that it was unconstitutional.
Parks was not the first person to resist bus segregation.
The notorious Scottsboro case had been brought to prominence by the Communist Party.
By Parks' account, Blake said, "Y'all better make it light on yourselves and let me have those seats."
She also disagreed with King and other leaders of Montgomery's struggling civil rights movement about how to proceed, and was constantly receiving death threats.
She rode on its integrated trolley.
After his arrest, Skipper said that he had not known he was in Parks' home but recognized her after entering.
She served on a "people's tribunal" on August 30, 1967  investigating the killing of three young men by police during the 1967 Detroit uprising, in what came to be known as the Algiers Hotel Incident.
Since the founding in 1852 of the practice of lying in state in the rotunda, Parks was the 31st person, the first American who had not been a U.S. government official, and the second private person (after the French planner Pierre L'Enfant) to be honored in this way.
In 2002 Parks received an eviction notice from her $1800 per month apartment due to non-payment of rent.
With her body and casket returned to Detroit, for two days, Parks lay in repose at the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History.
Her rent was paid from a collection taken by Hartford Memorial Baptist Church in Detroit.
Doing much of the daily constituent work for Conyers, Parks often focused on socio-economic issues including welfare, education, job discrimination, and affordable housing.
", he replied "I need a secretary and you are a good one."
When recalling the incident for ''Eyes on the Prize'', a 1987 public television series on the Civil Rights Movement, Parks said, "When he saw me still sitting, he asked if I was going to stand up, and I said, 'No, I'm not.'
Robinson believed it important to seize the opportunity and stayed up all night mimeographing over 35,000 handbills announcing a bus boycott.
Please stay off the buses Monday.
Skipper was arrested and charged with various breaking and entering offenses against Parks and other neighborhood victims.
We are...asking every Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest of the arrest and trial ... You can afford to stay out of school for one day.
Some rode in carpools, while others traveled in black-operated cabs that charged the same fare as the bus, 10 cents.
She was survived by her sister-in-law (Raymond's sister), 13 nieces and nephews and their families, and several cousins, most of them residents of Michigan or Alabama.
Over time and by custom, however, Montgomery bus drivers adopted the practice of requiring black riders to move when there were no white-only seats left.
Shortly after the boycott, she moved to Detroit, where she briefly found similar work.
She became an international icon of resistance to racial segregation.
The bus was among the first ways I realized there was a black world and a white world.
Others had taken similar steps, including Bayard Rustin in 1942, Irene Morgan in 1946, Sarah Louise Keys in 1952, and the members of the ultimately successful ''Browder v. Gayle'' 1956 lawsuit (Claudette Colvin, Aurelia Browder, Susie McDonald, and Mary Louise Smith) who were arrested in Montgomery for not giving up their bus seats months before Parks.
McCauley attended rural schools until the age of eleven.
She later said that "As far back as I remember, I could never think in terms of accepting physical abuse without some form of retaliation if possible."
Parks' coffin was flown to Montgomery and taken in a horse-drawn hearse to the St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church, where she lay in repose at the altar on October 29, 2005, dressed in the uniform of a church deaconess.
Although Parks' autobiography recounts early memories of the kindness of white strangers, she could not ignore the racism of her society.
She was of African ancestry, though one of her great-grandfathers was Scots-Irish and one of her great-grandmothers was a slave of Native American descent.
An estimated 50,000 people viewed the casket there, and the event was broadcast on television on October 31, 2005.
Initially, she did not notice that the bus driver was the same man, James F. Blake, who had left her in the rain in 1943.
King said that Parks was regarded as "one of the finest citizens of Montgomery—not one of the finest Negro citizens, but one of the finest citizens of Montgomery."
She helped found  the Detroit chapter of the Joann Little Defense Committee, and also worked in support of the Wilmington 10, the RNA-11, and Gary Tyler.
And he said, 'Well, if you don't stand up, I'm going to have to call the police and have you arrested.'
She held this position until she retired in 1988.
Parks was interred between her husband and mother at Detroit's Woodlawn Cemetery in the chapel's mausoleum.
In Hampton, she found a job as a hostess in an inn at Hampton Institute, a historically black college.
I said, 'You may do that.'"
Parks exited the vehicle and waited for the next bus, determined never to ride with Blake again.
When the Ku Klux Klan marched down the street in front of their house, Parks recalls her grandfather guarding the front door with a shotgun.
After the service, an honor guard from the Michigan National Guard laid the U.S. flag over the casket and carried it to a horse-drawn hearse, which was intended to carry it, in daylight, to the cemetery.
She had recently attended the Highlander Folk School, a Tennessee center for training activists for workers' rights and racial equality.
Rosa took numerous jobs, ranging from domestic worker to hospital aide.
In August 1955, black teenager Emmett Till was brutally murdered after reportedly flirting with a young white woman while visiting relatives in Mississippi.
She herself lived in a neighborhood, Virginia Park, which had been compromised by highway construction and urban renewal.
She decided to move with her mother into an apartment for senior citizens.
Parks responded, "I don't think I should have to stand up."
The group agreed that a new organization was needed to lead the boycott effort if it were to continue.
She also befriended Malcolm X, who she regarded as a personal hero.
They encouraged—and eventually helped sponsor—Parks in the summer of 1955 to attend the Highlander Folk School, an education center for activism in workers' rights and racial equality in Monteagle, Tennessee.
Since the state could not refuse the KKK's sponsorship, the Missouri legislature voted to name the highway section the "Rosa Parks Highway".
When Parks refused to give up her seat, a police officer arrested her.
Schools were effectively segregated, and services in black neighborhoods substandard.
King wrote in his 1958 book ''Stride Toward Freedom'' that Parks' arrest was the catalyst rather than the cause of the protest: "The cause lay deep in the record of similar injustices."
Black people could not sit across the aisle in the same row as white people.
Parks was considered the ideal plaintiff for a test case against city and state segregation laws, as she was seen as a responsible, mature woman with a good reputation.
Parks and other civil rights activists organized the "Committee for Equal Justice for Mrs. Recy Taylor", launching what the ''Chicago Defender'' called "the strongest campaign for equal justice to be seen in a decade."
The City of Detroit attempted to cultivate a progressive reputation, but Parks encountered numerous signs of discrimination against African-Americans.
She also supported and visited the Black Panther school in Oakland.
She then moved to her seat but driver James F. Blake told her to follow city rules and enter the bus again from the back door.
Parks worked as a housekeeper and seamstress for Clifford and Virginia Durr, a white couple.
She was also active in the Black Power movement and the support of political prisoners in the US.
School bus transportation was unavailable in any form for black schoolchildren in the South, and black education was always underfunded.
Years later, in recalling the events of the day, Parks said, "When that white driver stepped back toward us, when he waved his hand and ordered us up and out of our seats, I felt a determination to cover my body like a quilt on a winter night."
Her husband died of throat cancer on August 19, 1977 and her brother, her only sibling, died of cancer that November.
In February 1987 she co-founded, with Elaine Eason Steele, the Rosa and Raymond Parks Institute for Self Development, an institute that runs the "Pathways to Freedom" bus tours which introduce young people to important civil rights and Underground Railroad sites throughout the country.
Parks participated in activism nationally during the mid-1960s, traveling to support the Selma-to-Montgomery Marches, the Freedom Now Party, and the Lowndes County Freedom Organization.
Her situation also opened doors.
Her funeral service was seven hours long and was held on November 2, 2005, at the Greater Grace Temple Church in Detroit.
If white people were already sitting in the front, black people had to board at the front to pay the fare, then disembark and reenter through the rear door.
She also helped form the Virginia Park district council to help rebuild the area.
She donated most of the money from speaking to civil rights causes, and lived on her staff salary and her husband's pension.
One of the speakers, United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, said that if it had not been for Parks, she would probably have never become the Secretary of State.
Parks' act of defiance and the Montgomery Bus Boycott became important symbols of the modern Civil Rights Movement.
She later said, "I was the only woman there, and they needed a secretary, and I was too timid to say no."
The sections were not fixed but were determined by placement of a movable sign.
In her autobiography, '' My Story'' she said:
He was a member of the NAACP, which at the time was collecting money to support the defense of the Scottsboro Boys, a group of black men falsely accused of raping two white women.
Due to economic sanctions used against activists, she lost her job at the department store.
Edgar Nixon, president of the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP and leader of the Pullman Porters Union, and her friend Clifford Durr bailed Parks out of jail the next evening.
Her family was plagued with illness; she and her husband had suffered stomach ulcers for years and both required hospitalization.
Parks also served on the Board of Advocates of Planned Parenthood.
Parks had previously prepared and placed a headstone on the selected location with the inscription "Rosa L. Parks, wife, 1913–."
She was securely married and employed, was regarded as possessing a quiet and dignified demeanor, and was politically savvy.
She and her husband never had children and she outlived her only sibling.
When her rent became delinquent and her impending eviction was highly publicized in 2004, executives of the ownership company announced they had forgiven the back rent and would allow Parks, by then 91 and in extremely poor health, to live rent free in the building for the remainder of her life.
The next day, Parks was tried on charges of disorderly conduct and violating a local ordinance.
When Parks asked "Well, what about me?
After working all day, Parks boarded the Cleveland Avenue bus, a General Motors Old Look bus belonging to the Montgomery City Lines, around 6&nbsp;p.m., Thursday, December 1, 1955, in downtown Montgomery.
