The first regular stage left the Erasmusbrug and went south, towards Brussels.
The architect J. J. P. Oud was a famous Rotterdammer in those days.
Another one, more popular by Rotterdammers, is "Money is earned in Rotterdam, distributed in The Hague and spent in Amsterdam".
It attracts a total of 900.000 visitors.
The system is operated by 5 lines; 3 lines (A, B and C) on the east-west line, and two (D and E) on the north-south line.
MI6 had its main European office on de Boompjes.
As there are many international and American schools scattered across Europe such as ASH (American International School of the Hague) Rotterdam also has its own international/American school by the name AISR (American International School of Rotterdam).
The city annually organises several world-renowned sporting events.
Ashe went on to win the tournament two more times, making him the singles title record holder.
* 10: Historical tram line, only runs in summer and throughout the whole city for tourist information.
Ma Braun later also coached the Rotterdam born, three-times Olympic champion Rie Mastenbroek during the Berlin Olympics in 1936.
In 1974, they were the first Dutch club to win the UEFA Cup and in 2002, Feyenoord won the UEFA Cup again.
For instance, the Prins Alexander Polder in the northeast of Rotterdam extends  below sea level, or rather below Normaal Amsterdams Peil (NAP) or 'Amsterdam Ordnance Datum'.
* Rotterdam Erasmusbrug – Krimpen aan den IJssel Stormpolder – Ridderkerk De Schans – Alblasserdam Kade – Hendrik-Ido-Ambacht Noordeinde – Papendrecht Westeind – Dordrecht Merwekade.
In season 1, episode 2 of The Golden Girls ("Guess Who's Coming to the Wedding?
Ossip Zadkine later attempted to capture the event with his statue ''De Verwoeste Stad'' ('The Destroyed City').
It is regarded as one of the most prestigious art schools in the Netherlands and the number 1 in Advertising and Copywriting.
The Waterbus network consists of seven lines.
Rotterdam was voted 2015 European City of the Year by the Academy of Urbanism.
The newest landmark in Rotterdam is the Markthal, designed by architect firm MVRDV.
On its turn, the Rijnmond conurbation is part of the southern wing (the Zuidvleugel) of the Randstad, which is one of the most important economic and densely populated areas in the north-west of Europe.
It is part of the Rotterdam The Hague Metropolitan Area with a total population of approximately 2.3 million.
Furthermore, Rotterdam has the Dutch headquarters of Allianz, Maersk, Petrobras, Samskip, Louis Dreyfus Group and Aon.
The city centre also has a higher percentage (51% vs 45%) of foreign-born citizens (Dutch: allochtonen).
The main connections:
Nowadays, well-known companies with headquarters in Rotterdam are consumers goods company Unilever, asset management firm Robeco, energy company Eneco, dredging company Van Oord, oil company Shell Downstream, terminal operator Vopak,commodity trading company Vitol and architecture firm Office for Metropolitan Architecture.
Rotterdam is and has been the home to many great football players and coaches, among whom:
It is also home to the regional headquarters of chemical company LyondellBasell, commodities trading company Glencore, pharmaceutical company Pfizer, logistics companies Stolt-Nielsen, electrical equipment company ABB Group and consumer goods company Procter & Gamble.
The stops between Rotterdam and Dordrecht are:
The Rotterdam tramway network offers 9 regular tram lines and 4 special tram lines with a total length of .
Rotterdam hosts several annual events unique to the city.
Overall the demographics differ per city area.
* The city also houses the  tall Euromast, which is a major tourist attraction.
In WWI an average of 25,000 Belgian refugees lived in the city, as well as hundreds of German deserters and escaped Allied POW's.
Rotterdam also organises one race of the Red Bull Air Race World Championship and the car racing event Monaco aan de Maas (Monaco at the Meuse).
Nonetheless, 80% of the homes are rented, not owned.
Seating 51,480, its 1931 stadium, called ''Stadion Feijenoord'' but popularly known as De Kuip ('the Tub'), is the second largest in the country, after the Amsterdam Arena.
Consideration is being given to creating an official Metropolitan region Rotterdam The Hague (''Metropoolregio Rotterdam Den Haag''), which would have a combined population approaching 2.5 million.
In the first decades of the 20th century, some influential architecture in the modern style was built in Rotterdam.
**Rotterdam Marathon
Former Wimbledon winner Richard Krajicek became the tournament director after his retirement in 2000.
De Kuip, located in the southeast of the city, has hosted many international football games, including the final of Euro 2000 and has been awarded a FIFA 5 star ranking.
Schiedam&nbsp;Centrum
The greatest spurt of growth, both in port activity and population, followed the completion of the Nieuwe Waterweg in 1872.
'''Railway stations'''
The city's unemployment rate is 12%, almost twice the national average.
The Anglo-Dutch P&O Nedlloyd was bought by the Danish giant corporation 'AP Moller Maersk' in 2005 and its Dutch operations are still headquartered in the 'Willemswerf'.
One of the goals is to strengthen the international position of culture and art in the Netherlands in the international context.
**Dag van de Romantische Muziek (Romantic music festival)
47.7% of the population are of non Dutch origins or have at least one parent born outside the country.
Line E (Randstadrail) connects Rotterdam with The Hague as of December 2011.
Between the summers of 2003 and 2008, an artificial beach was created at the Boompjeskade along the Nieuwe Maas, between the Erasmus Bridge and the Willems Bridge.
*Rotterdam Zuid – Northern part of the Southern part of Rotterdam
Around the year 1350 , a shipping canal, the ''Rotterdamse Schie'' was completed, which provided Rotterdam access to the larger towns in the north, allowing it to become a local trans-shipment centre between the Netherlands, England and Germany, and to urbanize.
**Bavaria City Race
The prologue was a  individual time trial crossing the centre of the city.
Rotterdam was gradually rebuilt from the 1950s through to the 1970s.
Rotterdam is home to some world-famous architecture from renowned architects like Rem Koolhaas, Piet Blom, Ben van Berkel and others.
Feyenoord, founded in 1908 and the dominant of the three professional clubs, has won fourteen national titles since the introduction of professional football in the Netherlands.
From its inland core, Rotterdam reaches the North Sea by a swathe of predominantly harbour area.
There are concrete plans to build a new stadium with a capacity of at least 80,000 seats.
Another upscale shopping venue is a flagship store of department store De Bijenkorf.
Some 80,000 civilians were made homeless and 900 were killed; a relatively low number given that many had fled the city because of the warfare and bombing going on in Rotterdam since the start of the invasion three days earlier.
* North-Western direction The Hague, Leiden, Amsterdam
In her career as 14 time national champ, she broke 6 world records.
Part of the Willem de Kooning Academy is the Piet Zwart Institute for postgraduate studies and research in Fine Art, Media Design and Retail Design.
It is also the home of Gabber, a type of hardcore electronic music popular in the mid-1990s, with hard beats and samples.
The three ''Hogescholen'' are Hogeschool Rotterdam, Hogeschool INHOLLAND and Hogeschool voor Muziek en Dans (uni for music and dance) which is also known as CodArts.
*Hoogvliet (added on 1 May 1934)
** Night services every hour connecting every day of the week to Delft, The Hague, Leiden, Schiphol airport, Amsterdam, and, with a detour, Utrecht.
* 21: (Schiedam) Woudhoek – Station Schiedam Centrum – Rotterdam Centraal – (Rotterdam) De Esch
In 2008, the year of their 100-year-anniversary, Feyenoord won the KNVB-cup.
The main cultural organisations in Amsterdam, such as the Concertgebouw and Holland Festival, have joint forces with similar organisations in Rotterdam, via A'R'dam.
There is a saying: "Amsterdam to party, Den Haag (The Hague) to live, Rotterdam to work".
Passengers are provided with a cup of "snert"; Rotterdam dialect for erwtensoep (pea soup).
* 23: (Rotterdam) Marconiplein – Rotterdam Centraal – (Rotterdam) Beverwaard
*Charlois (added on 28 February 1895)
Other museums include the tax museum and the natural history museum.
They share the Rotterdam The Hague Airport and a light rail system called RandstadRail.
*Pernis (added on 1 May 1934)
Rotterdam has city and port connections throughout the world.
On 7 July 1340, Count Willem IV of Holland granted city rights to Rotterdam, which then had approximately 2,000 inhabitants.
In 1996 The British band The Beautiful South recorded a song named after this region titled Rotterdam (or Anywhere).,
The majority (70%) of shops are also run by foreign-born citizens.
The Van Nelle Factory has since 2014 the status of UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Southern&nbsp;/&nbsp;western&nbsp;terminus
** Intercity line to Dordrecht, Breda, Tilburg, Eindhoven and Venlo (south east)
The City Hall survived the bombing.
* NS (Dutch Railways): national train services
There are also the International Film Festival in January, the Poetry International Festival in June, the North Sea Jazz Festival in July, the Valery Gergiev Festival in September, September in Rotterdam and the World of the Witte de With.
The Greater Rijnmond area is home to approximately 1.4 million people and the Rotterdam The Hague Metropolitan Area makes for the 168th most populous urban area in the world.
* Veolia: regional bus services.
Well-known streets in Rotterdam are the Lijnbaan (the first set of pedestrian streets of the country, opened in 1953), the Hoogstraat, the Coolsingel with the city hall, and the Weena, which runs from the Central Station to the Hofplein (square).
**North Sea Jazz Festival (second weekend of July)
Since 1986, the city has selected its best sportsman, woman and team at the Rotterdam Sports Awards Election, held in December.
* Frequent services within the Netherlands:
Rotterdam forms the centre of the Rijnmond conurbation, bordering the conurbation surrounding The Hague to the north-west.
*Overschie (added on 1 August 1941)
* 2: (Rotterdam) Charlois – Rotterdam Lombardijen NS – (Rotterdam) Keizerswaard (runs only to the southern part of the city)
Much smaller than the international hub Schiphol Airport, Rotterdam The Hague Airport (formerly known as ''Zestienhoven'') is the third largest airport in the country, behind Schiphol Airport and Eindhoven Airport.
The port's main activities are petrochemical industries and general cargo handling and transshipment.
In the Netherlands, Rotterdam has the highest percentage of foreigners from non-industrialised nations.
The Dutch army was finally forced to capitulate on 15 May 1940, following Hitler's bombing Rotterdam on 14 May and threatening to bomb other Dutch cities.
In the 1990s, the Kop van Zuid was built on the south bank of the river as a new business centre.
Rotterdam is also famous for its Lijnbaan 1952 by architects Broek en Bakema, Peperklip by architect Carel Weeber, Kubuswoningen or cube houses designed by architect Piet Blom 1984.
*Delfshaven (added on 30 January 1886)
* 12: Rotterdam Centraal – Stadion Feyenoord or Rotterdam Centraal – Het Kasteel ('The Castle', Sparta Stadium).
* Rotterdam is also home to the tallest office building 'Maastoren' () which houses Deloitte.
* 7: (Rotterdam) Oostplein – Rotterdam Centraal – (Rotterdam) Willemsplein
The city is home to the Willem de Kooning Academy and Piet Zwart Institute.
The metro network has  of railtracks and there are 62 stations, which makes it the biggest of the Benelux.
A major zoo called Diergaarde Blijdorp is situated at the northwest side of Rotterdam, complete with a walkthrough sea aquarium called the Oceanium.
Rotterdam is home to the most successful European baseball team, Neptunus Rotterdam, winning the most European Cups.
The city and harbor started to expand on the south bank of the river.
*Hillegersberg (added on 1 August 1941)
Swimming was not possible, digging pits was limited to the height of the layer of sand, about .
The extensive distribution system including rail, roads and waterways have earned Rotterdam the nickname '''"Gateway to Europe"''', and, conversely; '''"Gateway to the World"''' in Europe.
The Kruiskade is a more upscale shopping street, with retailers like Michael Kors, 7 For All Mankind, Calvin Klein, Hugo Boss, Tommy Hilfiger and the Dutch well known men's clothier Oger.
The university is also home to Europe's largest student association, STAR Study Association Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University and the world's largest student association, AIESEC, has its international office in the city.
Rotterdam won the selection over the Dutch city of Utrecht.
** The World Port Days
* Western direction Hoek van Holland
The rivers Rhine, Meuse, and Scheldt give waterway access into the heart of Western Europe, including the highly industrialized Ruhr region.
It includes a large kitchen and furniture center.
Rotterdam is part of the yet larger Randstad conurbation with a total population of 7,100,000.
* A fifth alternative train system to the Hague, the Hofplein Line was converted to the light rail system Randstadrail in 2006.
The team included Dutch riders and some English and Australian riders.
The female record was set in 2012, when Tiki Gelana finished the race in 2:18.58.
It hosts the ''Zomercarnaval'' (Summercarnaval), the second largest Caribbean carnival in Europe, originally called the Antillean carnival.
* Arriva Netherlands: regional bus services
Many spies who were arrested and executed in Britain were led by German secret agents operating from Rotterdam.
*Rotterdam Noord – Northern part of Rotterdam
Alternatively people go the beach of Hoek van Holland (which is a Rotterdam district) or one of the beaches in Zeeland: Renesse or the Zuid Hollandse Eilanden: Ouddorp, Oostvoorne.
In 2004 Shanghai took over as the world's busiest port.
The latest edition of the tournament attracted a total of 116.354 visitors.
Groups like Neophyte and Rotterdam Terror Corps (RTC) started in Rotterdam.
Rotterdam has always been one of the main centres of the shipping industry in the Netherlands.
In 1340 Rotterdam was granted city rights by the Count of Holland and slowly grew into a major logistic and economic centre.
'''Rotterdam''' ( or ; ) is a city in the Netherlands, located in South Holland, within the Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt river delta at the North Sea.
The settlement at the lower end of the fen stream ''Rotte'' (or ''Rotta'', as it was then known, from ''rot'', 'muddy' and ''a'', 'water', thus 'muddy water') dates from at least 900 CE.
This hall is also one of Rotterdam's famous architectural landmarks.
Since 1972, Rotterdam hosts the indoor hard court ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament, part of the ATP Tour.
The Woudestein campus houses (among others) Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University.
* Rotterdam has the tallest residential building in the Netherlands: the New Orleans Tower ().
In the 2009 rankings of Masters of Management, the school reached first place with the CEMS Master in Management and a tenth place with its RSM Master in Management.
In 1968, Rotterdam was the first Dutch city to open a metro system.
RET runs buses in the city of Rotterdam and surrounding places like Spijkenisse, Barendrecht, Ridderkerk, Rhoon, Poortugaal, Schiedam, Vlaardingen, Delft and Capelle aan den IJssel.
They form a large part of Rotterdam's multi ethnic and multicultural diversity.
Arriva Netherlands, Connexxion and Veolia run buses from other cities to Rotterdam.
*Rozenburg (added on 18 March 2010)
This resulted in the disappearance of the major music venues Nighttown and WATT and smaller stages such as Waterfront, Exit, and Heidegger.
Located near to the coast, its climate is slightly milder than locations further inland.
In 2006, Rotterdam was the world's seventh largest container port in terms of twenty-foot equivalent units (TEU) handled.
At AISR children receive a multicultural education in a culturally diverse community and it offers the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Program.
Germany's Düsseldorf had previously also expressed interest in hosting.
Its history goes back to 1270 when a dam was constructed in the Rotte river by people settled around it for safety.
During World War II, the German army invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940.
* January: "Zesdaagse van Rotterdam" "(six-day track-cycling race) – Ahoy Rotterdam
In later years Inge de Bruijn became a Rotterdam sport icon as triple Olympic Gold medal winner in 2000 and triple European Gold medal winner in 2001.
* Connexxion: regional bus services
One other area, Pernis, does have an official submunicipality status since 3 March 2010.
Rotterdam's logistic success is based on its strategic location on the North Sea, directly at the mouth of the Nieuwe Maas (New Meuse) channel leading into the Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta.
Recently Rotterdam was listed eighth in The Rough Guide Top 10 Cities to Visit and fifth in Lonely Planet's Best in Travel 2016 and was voted 2015 European City of the Year by the Academy of Urbanism.
Rolling stock is a historical Rotterdam tram from 1968.
According to a recent area analysis, the city centre has a singles population of 70%, between the ages of 20 and 40,  considerably more than other city areas.
There are also three ''Hogescholen'' (Universities of applied sciences) in Rotterdam.
For business travelers, Rotterdam The Hague Airport offers advantages in terms of rapid handling of passengers and baggage.
The port of Rotterdam grew slowly but steadily into a port of importance, becoming the seat of one of the six 'chambers' of the ''Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie'' (VOC), the Dutch East India Company.
The city is home to the largest Dutch Antillean community.
The near-complete destruction of Rotterdam's city centre during World War II (known as the Rotterdam Blitz) has resulted in a varied architectural landscape including sky-scrapers, which are an uncommon sight in other Dutch cities.
A dam on the Rotte or 'Rotterdam' was built in the 1260s and was located at the present-day ''Hoogstraat'' ('High Street').
Being the largest port and one of the largest cities of the country, Rotterdam attracts many people seeking jobs, especially in the cheap labour segment.
* 18: Tramline from Rotterdam Central Station towards Park, runs only at the Dunya Festival and during the Rotterdam World Port Days.
The lowest point in the Netherlands ( below NAP) is situated just to the east of Rotterdam, in the municipality of Nieuwerkerk aan den IJssel.
The heart of Rotterdam was almost completely destroyed by the Luftwaffe.
In field hockey, Rotterdam has the largest hockey club in the Netherlands, HC Rotterdam, with its own stadium in the north of the city and nearly 2,400 members.
From Rotterdam goods are transported by ship, river barge, train or road.
Rotterdam's swimming tradition started with Marie Braun aka Zus (sister) Braun, who was coached to a Gold medal at the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics by her mother Ma Braun, and 3 European titles 3 years later in Paris.
From there the British coordinated espionage in Germany and occupied Belgium.
These schools award their students a professional Bachelor's degree and postgraduate or Master's degree.
Special tram lines:
A modern shopping venue is the Beurstraverse ("Stock Exchange Traverse"), better known by its informal name 'Koopgoot' ('Buying/Shopping Gutter', after its subterranean position), which crosses the Coolsingel below street level).
Currently the city has a few venues for pop music like Rotown, Poortgebouw and Annabel.
Sparta, founded in 1888 and situated in the northwest of Rotterdam, won the national title six times; Excelsior (founded 1902), in the northeast, has never won any.
Notable are the Van Nelle fabriek (1929) a monument of modern factory design by Brinkman en Van der Vlugt, the Jugendstil clubhouse of the Royal Maas Yacht Club designed by Hooijkaas jr. en Brinkman (1909), and Feyenoord's football stadium De Kuip (1936) also by Brinkman en Van der Vlugt.
Adolf Hitler had hoped to conquer the country in just one day, but his forces met unexpectedly fierce resistance.
* Boston & Seattle, two buildings with a height of  each are being built at Kop van Zuid.
Rotterdam also houses several of the tallest structures in the Netherlands.
In 2008, the city had 13 sister cities, 12 partner cities, and 4 sister ports.
The statue stands near the ''Leuvehaven'', not far from the Erasmusbrug in the centre of the city, on the north shore of the river ''Nieuwe Maas''.
On Thursday, Friday and Saturday night services (either direct or via a detour) to Den Bosch, Eindhoven, Tilburg, Roosendaal.
Located a little more to the east is the Markthal, with lots of small retailers inside.
Both these companies were once municipal bodies, now they are autonomous entities, owned by the City.
Unique to the city is the Shipping & Transport College which offers masters, bachelors and vocational diplomas on all levels.
It remained quite windy and open until the city councils from the 1980s on began developing an active architectural policy.
* North-Eastern direction Utrecht and further
In Rotterdam, public transport services are provided by the following companies:
"Towards the end, our house looked like Easter in Rotterdam."
The Rotte river no longer joins the Nieuwe Maas directly.
Tramlines in Rotterdam :
