Also in 1962, he charted with "The Crowd", "Leah" and "Workin' For the Man", which he wrote about working one summer in the oil fields near Wink.
He went to Europe, was presented with an award there, and played a show in Antwerp, where footage for the video for "You Got It" was filmed.
She struck the door of a pickup truck which had pulled out in front of her on South Waters Avenue in Gallatin, Tennessee, and died instantly.
It was lip-synched by an effeminate drug dealer played by Dean Stockwell, after which Booth demanded the song be played over and over, once beating the protagonist while the song played.
He finished the year with a Christmas song written by Willie Nelson titled "Pretty Paper" (U.S. number 15 in 1963/UK number 6 in 1964).
The structure and themes of his songs defied convention, and his much-praised voice and performance style were unlike any other in rock and roll.
Orbison's character was a spy who stole and had to protect and deliver a cache of gold to the Confederate Army during the American Civil War and was outfitted with a guitar that turned into a rifle.
They gave themselves stage names; Orbison chose his from his musical hero, calling himself "Lefty Wilbury" after Lefty Frizzell.
Wesley Rose, at this time acting as Orbison's agent, moved him from Monument Records to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) (though in the UK he remained with Decca's London Records) for a million dollars, and the understanding that he would expand into television and films, as Elvis Presley had done.
Elvis Costello, Orbison's son Wesley and others offered their songs to him.
Orbison was a film enthusiast and, when not touring, writing or recording, would dedicate time to seeing up to three films a day.
In 1978, Orbison signed with Asylum and released one album a year later.
again, Lennon and McCartney prevented Orbison from going on again by physically holding him back.
Now, everyone knows that no one sings like Roy Orbison."
On March 25, 1969, Orbison married German teenager Barbara Jakobs, whom he had met several days before his sons' deaths.
After his first year of college, he returned to Wink and continued performing with the Wink Westerners.
And I think that somewhere between the time of "Ooby Dooby" and "Only the Lonely", it kind of turned into a good voice."
Mick Jagger later remarked, referring to a snapshot he took of Orbison in New Zealand, "a fine figure of a man in the hot springs, he was."
Around this time, Orbison confided in Johnny Cash that he was having chest pains and said he would have to do something about his health, but he never did.
It posthumously rose to number nine in the U.S. and number three in the UK.
On Roy's sixth birthday, his father gave him a guitar.
Orbison determinedly pursued his second chance at stardom, but he expressed amazement at his success: "It's very nice to be wanted again, but I still can't quite believe it."
"Crying" is more complex, changing parts toward the end to be represented as A-B-C-D-E-F-A-B'-C'-D'-E'-F'.
His wife Claudette began having an affair with the contractor who built their home in Hendersonville, Tennessee.
In 1987, Orbison had begun collaborating with Electric Light Orchestra frontman Jeff Lynne on a new album.
He had suffered from duodenal ulcers as early as 1960 and had been a heavy smoker since adolescence.
Finally, when the audience began chanting "We want Roy!"
Back in the studio, seeking a change from the pop sound of "Only the Lonely" and "I'm Hurtin'", Orbison worked on a new song, "Running Scared", based loosely on the rhythm of Ravel's ''Boléro''; the song was about a man on the lookout for his girlfriend's previous boyfriend, who he feared would try to take her away.
He was readily available to sing, however, and often became the focus of attention when he did.
His parents worked in a defense plant and his father would bring a guitar in the evenings and their friends and relatives who had just joined the military would gather, and drink and sing heartily.
The single shot to number two on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 and hit number one in the UK and Australia.
I'd have to be prepared.
Exhausted, he returned to his home in Hendersonville to rest for several days before flying again to London to film two more videos for the Traveling Wilburys.
"I'm Hurtin'", with "I Can't Stop Loving You" as the B-side, rose to number 27 in the U.S. but failed to chart in the UK.
In 1988, he was a member of the  Traveling Wilburys supergroup, along with George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Tom Petty and Jeff Lynne.
While on tour again in the UK in 1965, Orbison broke his foot falling off a motorcycle in front of thousands of screaming fans at a race track and performed his show that evening in a cast.
Music critic Dave Marsh also wrote that these compositions "define a world unto themselves more completely than any other body of work in pop music".
His contributions were highly praised by the press.
This combination became Orbison's trademark sound.
Increasingly frustrated at Sun, he gradually stopped recording.
Orbison was in high demand for concerts and interviews once again, and was thrilled about it.
)", an upbeat song by country songwriter Cindy Walker.
At the same time Lynne was completing production work on George Harrison's ''Cloud Nine'', and all three had lunch one day when Orbison accepted an invitation to sing on a song of Harrison's.
Orbison often excused his motionless performances by saying that his songs did not allow instrumental sections so he could move or dance on stage, although songs like "Mean Woman Blues" did offer that.
However, it would be several more years until this came to fruition.
He gave several interviews a day in a hectic schedule.
Orbison had some success at Sun Records, however, and was introduced to Elvis Presley's social circle, once going to pick up a date for Presley in his purple Cadillac.
Orbison used drama to great effect and he wrote dramatically."
Orbison encountered difficulty when he found himself unable to hit the song's highest note without his voice breaking.
Although Orbison recorded and wrote standard structure songs before "Only the Lonely", he claimed never to have learned how to write them:
His contract with Monument was expiring in June 1965.
Although if you grow up in West Texas, there are a lot of ways to be lonely."
His honors include inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987, the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in the same year, and the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1989.
Dees said, "A pretty woman never needs any money".
Fred Foster then put Orbison in the corner of the studio and surrounded him with coat racks forming an improvised isolation booth to emphasize his voice.
He was signed by Sun Records in 1956, but his greatest success came with Monument Records in the early 1960s.
During a tour of the Midlands in England on September 16, 1968, he received the news that his home in Hendersonville, Tennessee, had burned down and his two eldest sons had died.
Nashville session guitarist Jerry Kennedy stated, "Roy went against the grain.
The cajun favorite "Jole Blon" was one of the first songs he sang in public.
If you think that's easy—try it.
He was very serious.
As the psychedelic rock movement took hold in the late 1960s, Orbison felt lost, later saying "I didn't hear a lot I could relate to so I kind of stood there like a tree where the winds blow and the seasons change, and you're still there and you bloom again."
Carl Perkins, however, toured with Orbison while they were both signed with Sun Records and recalled a specific concert when Orbison covered the Nelson Eddy and Jeanette MacDonald standard "Indian Love Call", and had the audience completely silenced, in awe.
The prop allowed him to deliver the line "I could kill you with this and play your funeral march at the same time", with—according to biographer Colin Escott—"zero conviction".
''Life'' magazine called him an "anonymous celebrity".
On December 6, he spent the day flying model airplanes with his sons and ate dinner at his mother's home in Hendersonville.
Being that he was so grounded and so strong and so gentle and quiet.
Phillips remembered being much more impressed with Orbison's mastery of the guitar than with his voice.
He and Claudette divorced in November 1964 over her infidelities, though they remarried in August 1965.
During the first few songs in a concert, the vibrato in his voice was almost uncontrollable, but afterwards, it became stronger and more dependable.
''Traveling Wilburys Vol.
1'' spent 53 weeks on the U.S. charts, peaking at number three.
The same year he began to open concerts for the Eagles, who started as Linda Ronstadt's backup band.
However, one film in which Orbison refused to allow his music to be used was ''Blue Velvet''.
This image of Orbison as immovable was so associated with him it was parodied by John Belushi on ''Saturday Night Live'', as Belushi dressed as Orbison falls over while singing "Oh, Pretty Woman", and continues to play as his bandmates set him upright again.
He was not confident about his appearance and began dyeing his nearly-white hair black when he was still young.
Lang compared Orbison to a tree, with passive but solid beauty.
Through the tour, however, the two acts quickly learned to get along, a process made easier by the fact that the Beatles admired his work.
Roy Kelton Orbison was born in Vernon, Texas, the middle son of Orbie Lee Orbison (1913–1984), an oil well driller and car mechanic, and Nadine Shultz (1914–1992), a nurse.
Critic Dave Marsh categorizes Orbison's ballads into themes reflecting pain and loss, and dreaming.
He then signed with Mercury in 1974 and only recorded an album there which only got a US Release.
During Orbison's vocal parts in "End of the Line", the video shows a guitar in a rocking chair, next to Orbison's framed photo.
That sense of 'do it for all it's worth and do it now and do it good.'
In high school, Orbison and some friends formed a band, the Wink Westerners.
Orbison and Melson tried to sell it to Elvis Presley and the Everly Brothers but were turned down.
He was known to follow a car that he liked and make the driver an offer on the spot.
Touring in 1963 took a toll on Orbison's personal life.
A few months later, Orbison and Springsteen paired again to film a concert at the Cocoanut Grove nightclub in Los Angeles.
I thought, 'What in the world&nbsp;...?'
In three recording sessions in 1958 and 1959, Orbison and Melson recorded seven songs at RCA Nashville, with Atkins producing, but only two were judged worthy of release by RCA; Wesley Rose brought Orbison to the attention of producer Fred Foster at Monument Records.
He had never heard of them and, annoyed, asked hypothetically, "What's a Beatle anyway?"
He was immensely popular wherever he went, finishing the tour in Ireland and Canada.
Tragedy struck on June 6, 1966, however, when Orbison and Claudette were riding home from Bristol, Tennessee.
During performances, he was known for standing still and solitary, and for wearing black clothes and dark sunglasses, which lent an air of mystery to his persona.
Elton John's songwriting partner and main lyricist Bernie Taupin wrote that Orbison's songs always made "radical left turns", and k.d.
Orbison attempted to sell to RCA Victor his recordings of songs by other writers, working with, and being in awe of, Chet Atkins, who had played guitar with Presley.
In concert, Orbison placed the uptempo songs between the ballads to keep from being too consistently dark or grim.
He signed again with Monument in 1976 recorded "Regeneration" with Fred Foster.
Bruce Springsteen ended his concerts with Orbison songs, and Glen Campbell had a minor hit with a remake of "Dream Baby".
The Nashville sound was developed by producers Chet Atkins, Owen Bradley (who worked closely with Patsy Cline), Sam Phillips and Fred Foster.
Author Peter Lehman would later observe that his absence was a part of the mystery of his persona: "Since it was never clear where he had come from, no one seemed to pay much mind to where he had gone; he was just gone."
He lost some weight to fit his new image and the constant demand of touring, as well as the newer demands of making videos.
He was just there."
The Teen Kings also began writing songs in a rockabilly style, including "Go!
His initial success came as the careers of many of rock and roll's first generation had stalled or been derailed.
In January 1989, Orbison became the first musician since Elvis Presley to have two albums in the Top Five at the same time.
The British Invasion also occurred at the same time, changing the direction of rock music significantly.
Bassist Jerry Scheff, who backed Orbison in his ''A Black and White Night'' concert, wrote about him, "Roy Orbison was like an opera singer.
With Phillips's production, however, the record broke into the ''Billboard'' Hot 100, peaking at number 59 and selling 200,000 copies.
One song he tried was "Seems to Me" by Boudleaux Bryant.
Lang later recounted how humbled Orbison had been by the show of support from so many talented and busy musicians: "Roy looked at all of us and said, 'If there is anything I can ever do for you, please call on me'.
to which John Lennon replied, after tapping his shoulder, "I am".
His major musical influence as a youth was country music.
A third category is his uptempo rockabilly songs such as "Go!
Orbison was unhappy with the first two takes.
Eddie Cochran and fellow Texan Buddy Holly—with both of whom Orbison had previously toured—had, to Orbison's deep astonishment, died.
He considered his voice memorable, if not great.
I liked making it sing, making the voice ring, and I just kept doing it.
In his first session for Monument in Nashville, Orbison recorded a song that RCA had refused, "Paper Boy", backed by "With the Bug", but neither charted.
'''Roy Kelton Orbison''' (April 23, 1936&nbsp;– December 6, 1988), nicknamed '''the Big O''', was an American singer-songwriter and musician, known for his distinctive, impassioned voice, complex compositions and dark emotional ballads.
Orbison's sons played on the track along with Roy's vocals; it was produced by John Carter Cash.
In late 1977 Orbison started feeling unwell and decided to take a holiday in Hawaii to rest.
Influenced by contemporaneous hits such as "Come Back to Me (My Love)" and "Come Softly to Me", Orbison and Joe Melson wrote a song in early 1960 which, using elements from "Uptown", employed strings and the Anita Kerr doo-wop backing singers.
In the 1960s, Orbison refused to splice edits of songs together, and insisted in recording them in single takes with all the instruments and singers together.
A song he recorded, "Life Fades Away", written with his friend Glenn Danzig, was featured in the film ''Less Than Zero''.
(Orbison's producer would later form the Candymen quintet, which was Orbison's backing band from 1965 to 1970, while releasing a few singles and two albums of their own).
lang performed a duet of "Crying" and released it on the soundtrack to ''Hiding Out'', winning a Grammy for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals.
He continued to tour and had previously made some smart real estate investments, so money was never an issue for him again.
Orbison is counted as a rock and roll pioneer and has been cited by numerous critics as one of the genre's most influential musicians, but his style is notable for how it departed from the norm.
The song was originally recorded on a cassette boombox around 1986.
Orbison grew up in Texas and began singing in a rockabilly and country and western band in high school.
He later recalled that by the age of seven, "I was finished, you know, for anything else"; music would be his life.
As "In Dreams" was released in April 1963, Orbison was asked to replace guitarist Duane Eddy on a tour of the UK in top billing with the Beatles, whose popularity was on the rise.
Working the singles era, he could relate a short story, or establish a mood in under three minutes.
Orbison was one of the first recording artists to popularize the "Nashville sound", doing so with a group of session musicians known as the A-Team: guitarists Grady Martin, Harold Bradley, Fred Carter, Jr., Ray Edenton and bassist Bob Moore; pianists Floyd Cramer or Hargus "Pig" Robbins; drummer Buddy Harman; and backup vocals by the Jordanaires or the Anita Kerr Singers.
While Orbison was touring Australia in 1962, an Australian DJ referred to him affectionately as "The Big O", partly based on the big finishes to his dramatic ballads, and the moniker stuck with him thereafter.
They stayed in Phillips's home, sleeping in separate rooms.
Although the video for the Wilburys' "Handle with Care" was filmed with Orbison, the video for "End of the Line" was filmed and released posthumously.
The property was sold to Johnny Cash, who planted an orchard on it.
His music offered an alternative to the postured masculinity that was pervasive in music and culture.
Orbison credited this cover in particular for reviving his memory in the popular mind, if not his career.
In response, Orbison asked Springsteen for a copy of the speech, and said of his induction that he felt "validated" by the honor.
A riff-laden masterpiece that employed a playful growl he got from a Bob Hope movie, the epithet "mercy" Orbison uttered when he was unable to hit a note, and a merging of his vulnerable and masculine sides, it rose to number one in the fall of 1964 in the U.S. and stayed on the charts for 14 weeks.
Peter Lehman, on the other hand, considered Orbison's theme of constant vulnerability an element of sexual masochism.
Playing shows late into the night, and living with his wife and young child in his tiny apartment, Orbison often sought refuge by taking his guitar to his car and writing songs there.
While MGM had included five films in his contract, no more were made.
He was astonished to find he was as popular there as he had been in 1964; he was forced to stay in his hotel room because he was mobbed on the streets of Sofia.
When Orbison toured Britain again in the fall of 1963, she joined him.
Dylan marked Orbison as a specific influence, remarking that there was nothing like him on radio in the early 1960s:
When he arrived in Britain, however, he saw the amount of advertising devoted to the quartet and realized he was no longer the main draw.
and "Mean Woman Blues" that are more thematically simple, addressing his feelings and intentions in a masculine braggadocio.
Orbison's "In Dreams" was a song in seven movements that can be represented as Intro-A-B-C-D-E-F; no sections are repeated.
By that evening, the group had written "Handle with Care", which led to the concept of recording an entire album.
When Presley heard "Only the Lonely" for the first time, he bought a box of copies to pass to his friends.
When compared to the Everly Brothers, who often used the same session musicians, Orbison is credited with "a passionate intensity" that, according to ''The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock and Roll'', made "his love, his life, and, indeed, the whole world seem to be coming to an end—not with a whimper, but an agonized, beautiful bang".
Orbison and Barbara had a son (Roy Kelton) in 1970 and another (Alexander) in 1974.
Three of the five members of the band moved to Odessa, Texas, and two new members were added to the group, which changed its name to the Teen Kings.
His relationship with Joe Melson, however, was deteriorating over Melson's growing concerns that his own solo career would never get off the ground.
He began writing songs and collaborating with many musicians from his past and newer fans, to develop a solo album, ''Mystery Girl''.
Few of Orbison's recordings have these characteristics.
The band ultimately split over disputed writing credits and royalties, but Orbison stayed in Memphis and asked his 16-year-old girlfriend, Claudette Frady, to join him there.
They were joined by Jackson Browne, T Bone Burnett, Elvis Costello, Tom Waits, Bonnie Raitt, Jennifer Warnes, James Burton and k.d.
When Orbison started with "Crying" and hit the high notes, Goodwin stated, "The strings were playing and the band had built up and, sure enough, the hair on the back of my neck just all started standing up.
I mean, you could put workers like Chubby Checker or Bobby Rydell in second-rate shows and they'd still shine through, but not me.
But later, when I was touring, we got the video out and I really got to appreciate what David gave to the song, and what the song gave to the movie—how it achieved this otherworldly quality that added a whole new dimension to 'In Dreams'."
Aged eight, he began singing on a local radio show.
He felt revitalized following the triple bypass, but he continued to smoke, and his weight fluctuated for the rest of his life.
He released an album of his re-recorded hits, titled ''In Dreams: The Greatest Hits''.
He appeared on ''American Bandstand'' and toured the U.S. for three months non-stop with Patsy Cline.
After spending an entire day writing a song, he would make several demo tapes at a time and send them to Wesley Rose, who would try to find musical acts to record them.
He was aware of his unique performance style even in the early 1960s when he commented, "I'm not a super personality—on stage or off.
Also in 1987, Orbison was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and initiated into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Bruce Springsteen, who concluded his speech with a reference to his own album "Born to Run": "I wanted a record with words like Bob Dylan that sounded like Phil Spector — but, most of all, I wanted to sing like Roy Orbison.
Orbison was initially shocked at its use: he saw the film in a theater in Malibu and later said, "I was mortified because they were talking about the 'candy colored clown' in relation to a dope deal&nbsp;...
It was an incredible physical sensation."
While most male rock and roll performers in the 1950s and 1960s projected a defiant masculinity, many of Orbison's songs instead conveyed a quiet, almost desperate, vulnerability.
Expanding on the concept of a traveling band of raucous musicians, Orbison offered a quote about the group's foundation in honor: "Some people say Daddy was a cad and a bounder.
During filming, Lynch asked for the song to be played repeatedly to give the set a surreal atmosphere.
But the image developed of a man of mystery and a quiet man in black somewhat of a recluse, although I never was, really."
They instead recorded the song at RCA's Nashville studio, with sound engineer Bill Porter trying a completely new strategy: building the mix from the top down rather than from the bottom up, beginning with close-miked backing vocals in the foreground, and ending with the rhythm section soft in the background.
By the late 1940s, he was the show's host.
This proved to be a much needed financial windfall for Orbison, as Mathews saw to it that the company paid well to license the use of Orbison's original composition and for Orbison's services.
One of the first musicians he heard in person was Ernest Tubb, who was playing on the back of a flatbed truck in Fort Worth.
Melson and Orbison followed it with the more complex "Blue Angel", which peaked at number nine in the U.S. and number 11 in the UK.
1'' was rising up the charts.
He was backed by an orchestra in the studio and Porter told him he would have to sing louder than his accompaniment because the orchestra was unable to be softer than his voice.
Orbison performed at the Front Row Theater in Highland Heights, Ohio, on December 4.
Bruce Springsteen and Billy Joel both commented on the otherworldly quality of Orbison's voice.
The song served as one of several obsessions of a psychopathic character named Frank Booth (played by  Dennis Hopper).
The Teen Kings went to Sun Studio in Memphis, where Phillips wanted to record "Ooby Dooby" again, in his superior studio.
This also happened with age.
Author Peter Lehman summarized it, writing, "He achieved what he did not by copying classical music but by creating a unique form of popular music that drew upon a wide variety of music popular during his youth."
On the opening night, Orbison opted to go onstage first, although he was the more established act.
Orbison's success was greater in Britain; as ''Billboard'' magazine noted, "In a 68-week period that began on August 8, 1963, Roy Orbison was the ''only'' American artist to have a number-one single in Britain.
His voice melted out of his mouth into the stratosphere and back.
Orbison noticed that he was unable to control the tremor in the late afternoon and evenings, and chose to record in the mornings when it was possible.
For a brief period in the late 1950s Orbison made his living at Acuff-Rose, a songwriting firm concentrating mainly on country music.
"Oh, Pretty Woman" proved the pinnacle of Orbison's career in the 1960s.
The concert was filmed in one take and aired on Cinemax under the title ''Roy Orbison and Friends: A Black and White Night''; it was released on video by Virgin Records, selling 50,000 copies.
In 2002, ''Billboard'' magazine listed Orbison at number 74 in the Top 600 recording artists.
People come to hear my music, my songs.
