Additionally, the Royal Australian Air Force represented around nine percent of all RAF personnel who served in the European and Mediterranean theaters.
In November 2015, the government commitment to order 48 F35B aircraft by 2023, 24 of which will be available for carrier duties.
After the war, the service was drastically cut and its inter-war years were relatively quiet, with the RAF taking responsibility for the control of Iraq and executing a number of minor actions in other parts of the British Empire.
Groups are the subdivisions of operational commands; these are responsible for certain types of operation or for operations in limited geographical areas.
The RAF's naval aviation branch, the Fleet Air Arm, was founded in 1924 but handed over to Admiralty control on 24 May 1939.
Most uncamouflaged training and transport aircraft retain the traditional red-white-blue roundel.
For example, the ''Typhoon F2'' is designated as a fighter by the 'F', and the second variant of the type to be produced.
RAF aircraft trained in low-level tactical flying at CFB Goose Bay, a NATO air force base of the Royal Canadian Air Force.
French and German Air Force pilots achieved only 180 and 150 flying hours across their fleets respectively.
Since June 2008, the Eurofighter Typhoon FGR4 has also been capable of being deployed operationally in the air-to-ground role.
For example, the rank of Squadron Leader derived its name from the RNAS rank of Squadron Commander.
The '''Sentry AEW1''', based at RAF Waddington, provides airborne early warning to detect incoming enemy aircraft and to co-ordinate the aerial battlefield.
Therefore, in October 1914 the French system of three concentric rings was adopted, with the colours reversed to a red disc surrounded by a white ring and an outer blue ring.
On 20 September 2015, ''The Sunday Times'' reported that the number of fast jet squadrons would increase due to threats posed by Islamic State and Russia.
Multi-Engine aircrew, Weapon Systems Officer (WSO) and Weapon Systems Operator (WSOp) students are trained on the '''King Air''' to gain their wings before a posting to an Operational Conversion Unit.
For much of the Cold War the primary role of the RAF was the defence of Western Europe against potential attack by the Soviet Union, with many squadrons based in West Germany.
In November 2015, the Government confirmed in its latest Strategic Defence and Security Review that nine '''Boeing P-8 Poseidon''' aircraft will be purchased for surveillance, anti-submarine and anti-surface ship warfare, filling a capability gap in maritime patrol that had been left since the unexpected cancellation of the Nimrod MRA4 programme in the 2010 SDSR.
These aircraft were formally ordered on 11 July 2016.
In former times, numbered flying wings have existed, but recently they have been created only when required.
The new aircraft entered frontline use within days rather than weeks.
RAF squadrons are somewhat analogous to the regiments of the British Army in that they have histories and traditions going back to their formation, regardless of where they are based, which aircraft they are operating, etc.
3 Flying Training School''' - Elementary Flying Training at RAF Cranwell and RAF Wittering with 57(R) and 16(R) Squadrons and CFS's 115(R) Squadron on the Tutor T.1, as well as Multi-Engine Lead In training on 45(R) Squadron on the King Air as well as training of all non-pilot aircrew.
The 2015 Strategic Defence and Security Review stated the intent for the UK to purchase 138 F-35 aircraft over the life of the programme.
The professional head of the RAF is the Chief of the Air Staff (CAS).
During the war, RAF aircraft were deployed in the mid-Atlantic at RAF Ascension Island and a detachment from No.
This tactical role was continued by the V bombers into the 1980s and until 1998 by Tornado GR1s.
Most of the RAF's aircraft and personnel are based in the UK, with many others serving on operations (principally Afghanistan) or at long-established overseas bases (Ascension Island, Cyprus, Gibraltar, and the Falkland Islands).
The British military operate a number of joint training organisations based at RAF Stations:
In July 2014 the House of Common Defence Select Committee released a report on the RAF future force structure that envisaged a mixture of unmanned and manned platforms, including a UCAV such as Taranis and further orders of F-35s, a service life extension for the Eurofighter (which would otherwise end its service in 2030) or a possible new manned aircraft.
Enforcement of no fly zone in Libya according to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973.
The support helicopters are organised into the tri-service Joint Helicopter Command (JHC), along with helicopters of the British Army and Royal Navy.
The CAS heads the Air Force Board, which is a committee of the Defence Council.
RAF Lossiemouth is home to the reserve 15 Squadron.
RAF helicopters remained to provide support to the United Nations.
At that time it was the largest air force in the world.
On 5 October 2015, it was announced that the Scavenger programme had been replaced by '''"Protector"''', a new requirement for at least 20 systems.
The RAF's mission is to support the objectives of the British Ministry of Defence (MoD), which are to "provide the capabilities needed: to ensure the security and defence of the United Kingdom and overseas territories, including against terrorism; to support the Government’s foreign policy objectives particularly in promoting international peace and security."
In 2006 the RAF adopted a logotype featuring a roundel and the Service's unabbreviated name (shown at the top of this article).
Semi permanent detachment which involved helicopters giving support to the British Army
*'''Defence Elementary Flying Training School''' - EFT for Royal Navy and Army Air Corps students at RAF Barkston Heath, comprising 703 Naval Air Squadron and No.
This aircraft was chosen because it was less expensive to operate than front-line fighters.
1 Flying Training School''' - Basic Fast Jet Training (BFJT) at RAF Linton-on-Ouse using 72(R) Squadron's Tucano T.1 aircraft.
With the introduction of Polaris, the RAF's strategic nuclear role was reduced to a tactical one, using WE.177 gravity bombs.
The RAF and Royal Navy's Westland Sea King fleets, after over 30 years of service, were retired.
Independent Wings are a grouping of two or more squadrons, either flying squadrons or ground support squadrons.
Combat operations within Helmand Province ended on 26 October 2014.
In what is perhaps the most prolonged and complicated air campaign in history, the Battle of Britain contributed significantly to the delay and subsequent indefinite postponement of Hitler's plans for an invasion of the United Kingdom (Operation Sealion).
The first F-35 aircraft arrived at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire on 29 June 2016 after a Transatlantic crossing involving air to air refuelling.
Since then, Music Services has gradually been reduced in size and today comprises:
Although there have been debates among airmen over the years whether the bird was originally meant to be an albatross or an eagle, the consensus is that it was always an eagle.
Advanced jet flying training is now provided on '''Hawk T2''' for fast jet aircrew and helicopter pilots complete a course on the '''Griffin HT1''', before they are sent to their OCU, which trains them on a specific aircraft type in preparation for service with a front-line squadron.
The Latin motto of the RAF, "Per Ardua ad Astra", is usually translated as "Through Adversity to the Stars", but the RAF's official translation is "Through Struggle to the Stars".
The RAF still operates a number of overseas bases to support global operations.
The 14 C-130J-30 extended variants operated by the RAF will remain in service until 2030 at least.
An order for the first 14 aircraft on top of the four already procured for operational test and evaluation is expected later in 2013.
As the Air Force has reduced in size and modernised, the squadrons and aircraft types have tended towards groupings at fewer, larger bases.
Operations continued for the next 12 years until 1960 with aircraft flying out of RAF Tengah and RAF Butterworth.
Additionally there is an expeditionary air group.
Whilst every squadron is different, most flying squadrons are commanded by a wing commander and, for a fast-jet squadron, have an establishment of around 100 personnel and 12 aircraft.
The remaining six aircraft were ordered on 3 November 2015, with expected delivery in 2016.
Since late 2004 six BAe Harriers provided reconnaissance and close air support to the ISAF.
One of the largest actions undertaken by the RAF during the cold war was the air campaign during the 1982 Falklands War, in which the RAF operated alongside the Fleet Air Arm.
RAF enforced no-fly zones over the Balkans in the late 1990s and participated in the NATO interventions in Bosnia and Kosovo.
This is a potential candidate to fulfill a requirement for an ISTAR UAV to enter service after 2015 as part of the RAF's Scavenger programme.
83 Expeditionary Air Group, under the command of the Permanent Joint Headquarters, is active in the Middle East, currently supporting operations over Afghanistan (Operation Herrick) and Operation Shader.
Following the development of the Royal Navy's Polaris submarines, the strategic nuclear deterrent passed to the navy's submarines on 30 June 1969.
Over the years, this structure has seen significant changes: for example, there was once a separate system for those in technical trades, and the ranks of Chief Technician and Junior Technician continue to be held only by personnel in technical trades.
Because of their small size, there are several flying units formed as flights rather than squadrons.
Figures provided by the International Institute for Strategic Studies from 2012 showed that Royal Air Force pilots achieve a relatively high number of flying hours per year when compared with other major NATO allies such as France and Germany.
Three more Shadow aircraft will be procured as per the 2015 Defence Review.
The '''Airbus A400M Atlas''' will replace the RAF's now retired fleet of Hercules C1/C3 (C-130K) transport aircraft.
Additionally Merlin helicopters began tasking in late 2009 following the end of Operation Telic (Iraq).
The squadron is based at RAF Northolt in west London.
Afghanistan and Persian Gulf
The '''Tutor''' equips the fourteen University Air Squadrons, which provide University students an opportunity to undertake an RAF training syllabus based loosely on EFT to get them to and beyond solo standard.
*'''Central Flying School''' – CFS standardises flying training across the air force and ensures standards and safety are maintained.
The Harriers were replaced by an equivalent force of Tornado GR4 in mid-2009.
Two additional BAe 146s were purchased in March 2012 from TNT Airways and were refitted by Hawker Beechcraft on behalf of BAE Systems for tactical freight and personnel transport use.
By 21 May 2013, the Voyager fleet had carried over 50,000 passengers and carried over 3,000 tons of cargo.
The mainstay of the strike fleet are the four squadrons of '''Tornado GR4s'''.
The Voyager received approval from the MoD on 16 May 2013 to begin air-to-air refuelling flights and made its first operational tanker flight on 20 May 2013 as part of a training sortie with Tornado GR4s.
The A400M will be known as the Atlas in RAF service.
The Harrier fleet was withdrawn in December 2010 following the Strategic Defence and Security Review; the Tornado GR4 is due to retire in March 2019 and be replaced by the Eurofighter Typhoon and '''F-35 Lightning&nbsp;II'''.
The Volunteer Gliding Squadrons also provide air experience flying to cadets using the '''Vigilant T1''' motor-glider or the '''Viking TX1''' conventional glider.
Air power is defined as "the ability to project power from the air and space to influence the behaviour of people or the course of events."
These were initially armed with nuclear gravity bombs, later being equipped with the Blue Steel missile.
Following victory in the Second World War, the RAF underwent significant re-organisation, as technological advances in air warfare saw the arrival of jet fighters and bombers.
The RAF played a minor role in the Korean War, with flying boats taking part.
Flying squadrons are often divided into two flights, e.g., "A" and "B", each under the command of a squadron leader.
Since April 2014, the Vigilant and Viking fleets have been grounded due to air-worthiness issues.
1 Group (Air Combat): controls the RAF's combat fast jet aircraft as well as the following stations: RAF Odiham, RAF Benson, RAF Leeming, RAF Coningsby, RAF Marham, RAF Waddington and RAF Lossiemouth in the UK in addition to RAF Unit Goose Bay in Canada, which is used extensively as an operational training base.
A civilian contractor, Bristow Helicopters, has taken over responsibility for UK Search and Rescue, under a Private Finance Initiative with newly purchased Sikorsky S-92 and AgustaWestland AW189 aircraft.
However, RAF helicopters are also used in a variety of other roles, including support of RAF ground units and heavy-lift support for the Royal Marines.
Various helicopters
On 23 November 2015 it was announced that a total of 138 F-35Bs will be ordered.
On the 4th of October 2015, a final stand-down saw the end of more than 70 years of RAF Search and Rescue provision in the UK.
4 Flying Training School''' - Advanced Fast Jet Training (AFJT) at RAF Valley, on the Hawk T.1 with 208(R) Squadron & Hawk T.2 aircraft of 4(R) Squadron.
The EAW comprises the non-formed unit elements of the station that are required to support a deployed operating base, i.e., the command and control, logistics and administration functions amongst others.
As from July 2014, four groups exist.
*Band of the Royal Air Force Regiment
These include the Royal Air Force Leadership Centre and the Royal Air Force Centre for Air Power Studies, both based at RAF Cranwell, and the Air Warfare Centre, based at RAF Waddington and RAF Cranwell.
A total of 14 Voyagers are due to form the fleet, with 9 allocated to sole RAF use.
Since the 1970s, camouflaged aircraft carry low-visibility roundels, either red and blue on dark camouflage, or washed-out pink and light blue on light colours.
Under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan of December 1939, the air forces of British Commonwealth countries trained and formed "Article XV squadrons" for service with RAF formations.
The Tutor, Tucano and King Air training aircraft are due to be replaced in the next few years through the implentation of the UK Military Flying Training System, a public-private partnership which has seen flying training for the Royal Air Force privatised and handed over to a civilian contractor, although military instructors remain.
In RAF service, they will be known as the Airseeker.
38 Group (Air Combat Service Support): engineering, logistics, communications and medical operations units.
6 Flying Training School - Responsible for the University Air Squadrons which fly the Tutor T.1
*Band of the Royal Air Force College
Ten '''MQ-9 Reaper''' Unmanned aerial vehicles have been purchased to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
This was later officially confirmed by the government in its 2015 Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) which outlined the government's commitment to 138 F-35 Lightning IIs and two additional Typhoon squadrons.
"At the start of the scaled QRA response, civilian air traffic controllers might see on their screens an aircraft behaving erratically, not responding to their radio calls, or note that it’s transmitting a distress signal through its transponder.
Following victory over the Central Powers in 1918 the RAF emerged as, at the time, the largest air force in the world.
Typhoon pilot Flight Lieutenant Noel Rees describes how QRA duty works.
The largest RAF effort during the war was the strategic bombing campaign against Germany by Bomber Command.
A flying squadron is an aircraft unit which carries out the primary tasks of the RAF.
Elementary Flying Training, as well as Multi-Engine Lead-In training, is conducted on the '''Tutor T1'''.
On 23 November 2015 it was announced that two additional front-line Typhoon squadrons will be formed consisting of Tranche 1 versions.
660 Squadron AAC on the Squirrel HT.1 for basic helicopter training, which take alternate intakes from all three services, and the RAF's 60(R) Squadron for advanced flying training on the Griffin HT.1.
Publications since April 2013 no-longer report the entire strength of the Regular Reserve, instead they only give a figure for Regular Reserves who serve under a fixed-term reserve contract.
Before Britain developed its own nuclear weapons the RAF was provided with American nuclear weapons under Project E. However following the development of its own arsenal, the British Government elected on 16 February 1960 to share the country's nuclear deterrent between the RAF and submarines of the Royal Navy, first deciding on 13 April to concentrate solely on the air force's V bomber fleet.
Since its formation, the RAF has taken a significant role in British military history, in particular, playing a large part in the Second World War where it fought its most famous campaign, the Battle of Britain.
This will see the introduction of the '''Grob 'Prefect'''', the '''Beechcraft T-6 Texan II''' and the '''Embraer Phenom 100''' into RAF service.
They are independent of flying squadrons, Air Combat Support Units (ACSU) and Air Combat Service Support Units (ACSSU) who are attached to the EAW depending on the task it has been assigned.
Officers hold a commission from the Sovereign, which provides the legal authority for them to issue orders to subordinates.
The OCUs use modified operational aircraft, such as the Typhoon T3, as well as sophisticated simulators and ground training.
The Merlin helicopters were the last RAF aircraft to leave Iraq.
As of March 2016, a 'recovery plan' is in place which will see Viking schools merged and expanded and significant reduction of the Vigilant fleet, which is to be retired by 2019.
Other support units are deployed to Muscat International Airport in Oman, and air bases in the UAE and the Kingdom of Bahrain.
The RAF Schools consist of the squadrons and support apparatus that train new aircrew to join front-line squadrons.
The aircraft, designated as the BAe 146 C Mk 3, arrived in Afghanistan in April 2013.
It was founded on 1 April 1918, with headquarters located in the former Hotel Cecil, during the First World War, by the amalgamation of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) and the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS).
Three '''Britten-Norman Islanders''' are operated by the Station Flight of RAF Northolt, involved in "photographic mapping and light communications roles".
The aircraft will be Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker tankers converted to RC-135W standard in the most complex combined Foreign Military Sales case and co-operative support arrangement that the UK has undertaken with the United States Air Force since the Second World War.
They had a strength of 7,120 personnel in 2014.
The '''Royal Air Force''' ('''RAF''') is the United Kingdom's aerial warfare force.
In their first season, they flew at 65 shows across Europe.
Headquarters Royal Air Force Music Services, located at RAF Northolt, supports 177 professional musicians who attend events around the globe in support of the RAF.
The continuous reduction in aircraft numbers since the end of the Cold War made it uneconomical to support operations at multiple bases.
32 (The Royal) Squadron replaced the Queen's Flight in 1995 and operate the '''Agusta A109''' and '''BAe 146 CC2''' in the general air transport and VIP transport roles.
RAF pilots also flew missions using the Royal Navy's Sea Harriers in the air-to-air combat role.
RAF Unit Goose Bay, Canada
These units are commanded by a Group Captain who is also the parent unit's Station Commander.
Chinooks provided airlift support to coalition forces.
Aircraft serving in the Far East during World War II had the red disc removed to prevent confusion with Japanese aircraft.
All Warrant Officers in the RAF are equal in terms of rank, but the most senior Non-Commissioned appointment is known as the  Chief of the Air Staff's Warrant Officer.
In this scenario the pilot races to the hardened aircraft shelter and does everything short of starting his engines."
More routine strategic airlift transport tasks are carried out by the  '''Airbus A330 MRTT''', known as the Voyager in RAF service.
Other reductions saw total RAF manpower reduced by 5,000 personnel to a trained strength of 33,000 and the early retirement of the Joint Force Harrier aircraft, the Harrier GR7/GR9.
These supersonic aircraft can carry a wide range of weaponry, including Storm Shadow cruise missiles, laser-guided bombs and the ASRAAM missile.
The Konfrontasi against Indonesia in the early 1960s did see use of RAF aircraft, but due to a combination of deft diplomacy and selective ignoring of certain events by both sides, it never developed into a full-scale war.
The RAF describe its mission statement as "... to provide An ''agile'', ''adaptable'' and ''capable'' Air Force that, person for person, is second to none, and that makes a decisive air power contribution in support of the UK Defence Mission."
*Central Band of the Royal Air Force (including the RAF Salon Orchestra)
The large twin-rotor '''Chinook''', based at RAF Odiham provides heavy-lift support and is supported by the '''Puma HC2''' medium-lift helicopter based at RAF Benson.
Their task is to defend UK airspace.
RAF Music Services were established in 1921, although the first RAF Director of Music was appointed in 1918.
The term squadron can be used to refer to a sub-unit of an administrative wing or small RAF station, e.g., Air Traffic Control Squadron, Personnel Management Squadron etc.
The Tornado was previously supplemented by the Harrier GR7/GR9 in the strike and close air support roles, and to counter enemy air defences.
Formed towards the end of the First World War on 1 April 1918, it is the oldest independent air force in the world.
On 24 May 2015 there was a further order for four aircraft, while further contracts will be placed for the remaining six aircraft.
Many individual personnel from these countries, and exiles from occupied Europe, also served with RAF squadrons.
RAF pilots achieve 210 to 290 flying hours per year.
British military aircraft designations generally comprise a ''type name'' followed by a ''mark number'' which includes an alphabetical ''rôle prefix''.
These units are co-located with Air Experience Flights, which share the same aircraft and facilities and provide air experience flying to Air Cadets and CCF cadets.
These were supplemented in 2009 by four ( a fifth was added later) '''Beechcraft Shadow R1''' aircraft equipped for the ISTAR role over Afghanistan.
These were purchased, followed by a fifth delivered on 7 April 2008 and a sixth delivered on 8 June 2008.
The Tornado GR4A is fitted with cameras and sensors in the visual, infra-red and radar ranges of the spectrum.
On 4 December 2015, Chief of the Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Sir Andrew Pulford announced his plans for one more combat squadron, in addition to the three outlined in the SDSR, to bring the total number of combat squadrons to ten.
The '''Eurofighter Typhoon FGR4''' is the RAF's only air defence fighter aircraft, with a total of six squadrons based across RAF Coningsby and RAF Lossiemouth, following the retirement of the Panavia Tornado F3 in late March 2011.
The RAF has three operational Tornado units, with  9 Squadron, 12 Squadron and 31 Squadron based at RAF Marham.
The Suez Crisis in 1956 saw a large RAF role, with aircraft operating from RAF Akrotiri and RAF Nicosia on Cyprus and RAF Luqa and RAF Hal Far on Malta as part of Operation Musketeer.
The mission statement is supported by the RAF's definition of air power, which guides its strategy.
Support aircraft such as the Hercules C130, Puma helicopter and Merlin helicopter stayed in Iraq until the withdrawal in 2009.
All four defence reviews have resulted in steady reductions in manpower and numbers of aircraft, especially combat aircraft such as fast-jets.
Project Taranis is a technology demonstrator programme, possibly leading to a future Strategic Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle (UCAV) for both ground attack and reconnaissance roles.
During the early stages of the Cold War, one of the first major operations undertaken by the Royal Air Force was in 1948 and the Berlin Airlift, codenamed Operation Plainfire.
This largely consists of fixed-wing aircraft, including: fighter and strike aircraft, airborne early warning and control aircraft, ISTAR and SIGINT aircraft, aerial refueling aircraft and strategic and tactical transport aircraft.
In 2007 there were 33,980 Regular Reserves of the Royal Air Force, of which 7,950 served under a fixed-term reserve contract.
*Headquarters Music Services
Historically, for a flying station these were normally Operations Wing, Engineering Wing and Administration Wing and each wing was commanded by an officer of wing commander rank.
The choice of motto is attributed to a junior officer named J S Yule, in response to a request from a commander of the RFC, Colonel Sykes, for suggestions.
Herrick respectively), Al Udeid is currently in use as a Middle Eastern base for the RAF as well as being the headquarters for the RAF contribution against ISIL on Op.
They are designed to be flexible and quickly adaptable for differing operations.
Lossiemouth generally covers the northern sector, while Coningsby provides QRA in the south.
Today the Royal Air Force maintains an operational fleet of various types of aircraft, described by the RAF as being "leading-edge" in terms of technology.
There are also Ground Support Squadrons, e.g., No 2 (Mechanical Transport) Squadron which is located at RAF Wittering.
In October 2007 it was announced that MoD Boscombe Down, RNAS Culdrose and RAF Marham would also be used as Quick Reaction Alert bases from early 2008, offering around-the-clock fighter coverage for the South and South West of UK airspace when a direct threat has been identified.
With the decline of the British Empire, global operations were scaled back, and RAF Far East Air Force was disbanded on 31 October 1971.
The '''Sentinel R1''' (also known as ASTOR – Airborne STand-Off Radar) provides a ground radar-surveillance platform based on the Bombardier Global Express long range business jet.
The RAF inherited the motto from the RFC.
On 31 March 2006, the RAF formed nine Expeditionary Air Wings (EAWs) to support operations.
Three '''Boeing RC-135W Rivet Joint''' have been ordered to replace the Nimrod R1 fleet in the signals intelligence role in 2014.
They can be awarded standards and battle honours for meritorious service.
A flight is a sub-division of a squadron.
All personnel figures exclude the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve and its associated University Air Squadron.
Administrative squadrons on a station are also divided into flights and these flights are commanded by a junior officer, often a flight lieutenant.
22 (Training) Group: responsible for recruiting, personnel management and training, including flying training.
Operation TelicOperation Kipion
Previously used in support of British operations in Iraq and Afghanistan (Op.
RAF other ranks fall into four categories: Warrant Officers, Senior Non-Commissioned Officers, Junior Non-Commissioned Officers and Airmen.
