Steiner defended Goethe's qualitative description of color as arising synthetically from the polarity of light and darkness, in contrast to Newton's particle-based and analytic conception.
As a young man, Steiner was a private tutor and a lecturer on history for the Berlin ''Arbeiterbildungsschule'', an educational initiative for working class adults.
Kogutzki conveyed to Steiner a knowledge of nature that was non-academic and spiritual.
In 1919, Emil Molt invited him to lecture to his workers at the Waldorf-Astoria cigarette factory in Stuttgart.
Steiner believed that at the age of 15 he had gained a complete understanding of the concept of time, which he considered to be the precondition of spiritual clairvoyance.
As a starting point for the book Steiner took a quotation from Goethe, describing the method of natural scientific observation, while in the Preface he made clear that the line of thought taken in this book led to the same goal as that in his earlier work, ''The Philosophy of Freedom''.
The German Section of the Theosophical Society grew rapidly under Steiner's leadership as he lectured throughout much of Europe on his spiritual science.
Many publications have covered his architectural legacy and sculptural work.
His conception of education was influenced by the Herbartian pedagogy prominent in Europe during the late nineteenth century, though Steiner criticized Herbart for not sufficiently recognizing the importance of educating the will and feelings as well as the intellect.
Steiner first began speaking publicly about spiritual experiences and phenomena in his 1899 lectures to the Theosophical Society.
This was intended to be placed in the first Goetheanum.
Beginning in 1910, he described aspects of karma relating to health, natural phenomena and free will, taking the position that a person is not bound by his or her karma, but can transcend this through actively taking hold of one's own nature and destiny.
Steiner designed 17 buildings, including the First and Second Goetheanums.
By 1904, Steiner was appointed by Annie Besant to be leader of the Theosophical ''Esoteric Society'' for Germany and Austria.
However, he consistently and explicitly subordinated race, ethnicity, gender, and indeed all hereditary factors, to individual factors in development.
He references in this regard the fact that the genealogies in these two gospels list twenty-six (Luke) to forty-one (Matthew) completely different ancestors for the generations from David to Jesus.
And when in the community
* Moral intuition: the ability to discover or, preferably, develop valid ethical principles;
He also warned that the traditional name, "Christ", might be used, yet the true essence of this Being of Love ignored.
It is on this basis that spiritual science is possible, with radically different epistemological foundations than those of natural science.
He regarded the observations of spiritual research as more dependable (and above all, consistent) than observations of physical reality.
Thus objective spiritual knowledge always entails creative inner activity.
In 1879, the family moved to Inzersdorf to enable Steiner to attend the Vienna Institute of Technology, where he studied mathematics, physics, chemistry, botany, biology, literature, and philosophy on an academic scholarship from 1879 to 1883, at the end of which time he withdrew from the institute without graduating.
When he was nine years old, Steiner believed that he saw the spirit of an aunt who had died in a far-off town asking him to help her at a time when neither he nor his family knew of the woman's death.
He articulated beliefs that the individual nature of any person stands higher than any racial, ethnic, national or religious affiliation.
Steiner's father, Johann(es) Steiner (1829–1910), left a position as a gamekeeper in the service of Count Hoyos in Geras, northeast Lower Austria to marry one of the Hoyos family's housemaids, Franziska Blie (1834 Horn–1918 Horn), a marriage for which the Count had refused his permission.
Steiner used the term spiritual science to describe a discipline treating the spirit as something actual and real, starting from the premise that it is possible for human beings to penetrate behind what is sense-perceptible.
In 1899 Steiner experienced what he described as a life-transforming inner encounter with the being of Christ; previously he had little or no relation to Christianity in any form.
That same year, Steiner warned against the disastrous effects it would have for Central Europe if the National Socialists came to power.
In 1924, a group of farmers concerned about the future of agriculture requested Steiner's help.
Together with Marie von Sivers, Rudolf Steiner also developed the art of eurythmy, sometimes referred to as "visible speech and song".
visible to spiritual vision and apparent in community life – for increasing numbers of people, beginning around the year 1933.
The School of Spiritual Science included meditative exercises given by Steiner.
* Moral technique: the realization of the intended transformation, depending on a mastery of practical skills.
His work in medicine led to the development of a broad range of complementary medications and supportive artistic and biographic therapies.
Steiner approached the philosophical questions of knowledge and freedom in two stages.
In the context of his ethical individualism, Steiner considered "race, folk, ethnicity and gender" to be general, describable categories into which individuals may choose to fit, but from which free human beings can and will liberate themselves.
The Russian actor and director Michael Chekhov based significant aspects of his ''method'' of acting on Steiner's work.
Once World War I started in 1914, the Goetheanum volunteers could hear the sound of cannon fire beyond the Swiss border, but despite the war, people from all over Europe worked peaceably side by side on the building's construction.
The National Socialist German Workers Party gained strength in Germany after the First World War.
To use Steiner's own words, the "experience culminated in my standing in the spiritual presence of the Mystery of Golgotha in a most profound and solemn festival of knowledge."
Steiner's work has influenced a broad range of noted personalities.
Olav Hammer has criticized as scientism Steiner's claim to use scientific methodology to investigate spiritual phenomena that were based upon his claims of clairvoyant experience.
Steiner emphasized that the resulting movement for the renewal of Christianity was a personal gesture of help to a movement founded by Rittelmeyer and others independently of his anthroposophical work.
At the meeting, a new "General Anthroposophical Society" was established with a new executive board.
Later sections were added for the social sciences, youth and agriculture.
He became part owner of, chief editor of, and an active contributor to the literary journal ''Magazin für Literatur'', where he hoped to find a readership sympathetic to his philosophy.
He continued work on his autobiography during the last months of his life; he died on 30 March 1925.
* reincarnation and karma.
In 1921, pharmacists and physicians gathered under Steiner's guidance to create a pharmaceutical company called Weleda which now distributes natural medical products worldwide.
Steiner entered the village school; following a disagreement between his father and the schoolmaster, he was briefly educated at home.
A central aspect of biodynamics is that the farm as a whole is seen as an organism, and therefore should be a largely self-sustaining system, producing its own manure and animal feed.
It shows a central, free-standing Christ holding a balance between the beings of Lucifer and Ahriman, representing opposing tendencies of expansion and contraction.
Numerous homes for children and adults with developmental disabilities based on his work (including those of the Camphill movement) are found in Africa, Europe, and North America.
Steiner was a critic of his contemporary Theodor Herzl's goal of a Zionist state, and indeed any other ethnically determined state, as he considered ethnicity to be an outmoded basis for social life and civic identity.
The 150th anniversary of Rudolf Steiner's birth was marked by the first major retrospective exhibition of his art and work, 'Kosmos - Alchemy of the everyday'.
When in the mirror of each human soul
He developed this conception further in several books, ''The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World-Conception'' (1886) and ''Goethe's Conception of the World'' (1897), particularly emphasizing the transformation in Goethe's approach from the physical sciences, where experiment played the primary role, to plant biology, where both accurate perception and imagination were required to find the biological archetypes (''Urpflanze''), and postulated that Goethe had sought but been unable to fully find the further transformation in scientific thinking necessary to properly interpret and understand the animal kingdom.
Steiner was then 38, and the experience of meeting the Christ occurred after a tremendous inner struggle.
He believed that through freely chosen ethical disciplines and meditative training, anyone could develop the ability to experience the spiritual world, including the higher nature of oneself and others.
Steiner's description of the nature of human consciousness thus closely parallels that of Solovyov:
In contrast to mainstream Theosophy, Steiner sought to build a Western approach to spirituality based on the philosophical and mystical traditions of European culture.
This stance has come under severe criticism in recent years.
These two buildings, built in Dornach, Switzerland, were intended to house significant theater spaces as well as a "school for spiritual science".
It was also in connection with this society that Steiner met and worked with Marie von Sivers, who became his second wife in 1914.
:"My first acquaintance with Nietzsche's writings belongs to the year 1889.
Spiritual training is to support what Steiner considered the overall purpose of human evolution, the development of the mutually interdependent qualities of love and freedom.
* Steiner occasionally characterized specific races, nations and ethnicities in ways that have been termed racist by critics.
In 1922, Steiner presented these ideas at a conference called for this purpose in Oxford by Professor Millicent Mackenzie.
Förster-Nietzsche introduced Steiner into the presence of the catatonic philosopher; Steiner, deeply moved, subsequently wrote the book ''Friedrich Nietzsche, Fighter for Freedom''.
Steiner's agricultural ideas promptly spread and were put to the test internationally and biodynamic agriculture is now practiced in Europe, North America, Asia and Australasia.
Upon the substance of my ideas as these find expression in ''The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity'', Nietzsche's thought had not the least influence....Nietzsche's ideas of the 'eternal recurrence' and of 'Übermensch' remained long in my mind.
* Throughout his life Steiner consistently emphasized the core spiritual unity of all the world's peoples and sharply criticized racial prejudice.
This article led to an invitation by the Count and Countess Brockdorff to speak to a gathering of Theosophists on the subject of Nietzsche.
Steiner became a well-known and controversial public figure during and after World War I.
Increasingly ill, he held his last lecture in late September, 1924.
In 1897, Steiner left the Weimar archives and moved to Berlin.
Unable to guarantee his safety, Steiner's agents cancelled his next lecture tour.
"A world of spiritual perception is discussed in a number of writings which I have published since this book appeared.
After the First World War, Steiner became active in a wide variety of cultural contexts.
Fueled by a need to find an artistic home for their yearly conferences, which included performances of plays written by Edouard Schuré and Steiner, the decision was made to build a theater and organizational center.
In 1869, when Steiner was eight years old, the family moved to the village of Neudörfl and in October 1872 Steiner proceeded from the village school there to the realschule in Wiener Neustadt.
Towards the end of Steiner's life and after his death, there were massive defamatory press attacks mounted on him by early National Socialist leaders (including Adolf Hitler) and other right-wing nationalists.
Steiner's translators have pointed out that his use of ''Geist'' includes both mind and spirit, however, as the German term ''Geist'' can be translated equally properly in either way.
Steiner's drawings, chiefly illustrations done on blackboards during his lectures, are collected in a separate series of 28 volumes.
Steiner later related that:
Truth, for Steiner, is paradoxically both an objective discovery and yet "a free creation of the human spirit, that never would exist at all if we did not generate it ourselves.
In 1921, Adolf Hitler attacked Steiner on many fronts, including accusations that he was a tool of the Jews, while other nationalist extremists in Germany called for a "war against Steiner".
On New Year's Eve, 1922/1923, the building burned to the ground; contemporary police reports indicate arson as the probable cause.
Some of these were later collected and published as books, such as ''How to Know Higher Worlds'' (1904/5) and ''Cosmic Memory''.
Steiner's view of the second coming of Christ is also unusual.
In contrast to William James' pragmatic approach to religious and psychic experience, which emphasized its idiosyncratic character, Steiner focused on ways such experience can be rendered more intelligible and integrated into human life.
Johann became a telegraph operator on the Southern Austrian Railway, and at the time of Rudolf's birth was stationed in ''Kraljevec'' in the ''Muraköz'' region, then part of the Austrian Empire (present-day Donji Kraljevec, Međimurje region, northernmost Croatia).
This includes descriptions by him of certain races and ethnic groups as flowering, others as backward, or destined to degenerate or disappear.
Steiner later related that as a child he felt "that one must carry the knowledge of the spiritual world within oneself after the fashion of geometry ... for here one is permitted to know something which the mind alone, through its own power, experiences.
From the late 1910s, Steiner was working with doctors to create a new approach to medicine.
Two years later, he published ''Die Philosophie der Freiheit'' (''The Philosophy of Freedom'' or ''The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity''—Steiner's preferred English title) (1894), an exploration of epistemology and ethics that suggested a way for humans to become spiritually free beings.
He encouraged his listeners to verify his suggestions empirically, as he had not yet done.
During the years when Steiner was best known as a literary critic, he published a series of articles attacking various manifestations of antisemitism and criticizing some of the most prominent anti-Semites of the time as "barbaric" and "enemies of culture".
In thinking about perception (the path of natural science) and perceiving the process of thinking (the path of spiritual training), it is possible to discover a hidden inner unity between the two poles of our experience.
Due to the contrast and even contradictions between these elements, "whether a given reader interprets Anthroposophy as racist or not depends upon that reader's concerns".
Graduates receive the Goetheanum diploma which allows them the option to pursue a training in Anthroposophical ''Therapeutic Speech''.
Dissatisfaction with his editorial style eventually led to his departure from the magazine.
His last public lecture course, given in 1924, was on speech and drama.
Central principles of his understanding include:
In an extensive series of lectures from February to September 1924, Steiner presented further research on successive reincarnations of various individualities and described the techniques he used for karma research.
For Steiner, human individuality is centered in a person's unique biography, and he believed that an individual's experiences and development are not bound by a single lifetime or the qualities of the physical body.
''The Philosophy of Freedom'' forms the philosophical basis for these later writings.
He founded a number of schools, the first of which was known as the Waldorf school, which later evolved into a worldwide school network.
In Steiner's chief book on social reform, ''Toward Social Renewal'', he suggested that the cultural, political and economic spheres of society need to work together as consciously cooperating yet independent entities, each with a particular task: political institutions should establish political equality and protect human rights; cultural institutions should nurture the free and unhindered development of science, art, education and religion; and economic institutions should enable producers, distributors and consumers to cooperate to provide efficiently for society's needs.
Many subscribers were alienated by Steiner's unpopular support of Émile Zola in the Dreyfus Affair and the journal lost more subscribers when Steiner published extracts from his correspondence with anarchist John Henry Mackay.
His two Goetheanum buildings have been widely cited as masterpieces of modern architecture, and other anthroposophical architects have contributed thousands of buildings to the modern scene.
In his earliest works, Steiner already spoke of the "natural and spiritual worlds" as a unity.
Many of these lectures focused on practical areas of life such as education.
The building, designed by Steiner, was built to a significant part by volunteers who offered craftsmanship or simply a will to learn new skills.
During this period, Steiner maintained an original approach, replacing Madame Blavatsky's terminology with his own, and basing his spiritual research and teachings upon the Western esoteric and philosophical tradition.
Steiner also posited two different Jesus children involved in the Incarnation of the Christ: one child descended from Solomon, as described in the Gospel of Matthew; the other child from Nathan, as described in the Gospel of Luke.
At around the same time, Dr. Ita Wegman founded a first anthroposophic medical clinic (now the Ita Wegman Clinic) in Arlesheim.
I confirmed for myself by means of geometry the feeling that I must speak of a world 'which is not seen'."
Steiner's blackboard drawings were unique at the time and almost certainly not originally intended as art works.
In a second phase, beginning around 1907, he began working collaboratively in a variety of artistic media, including drama, the movement arts (developing a new artistic form, eurythmy) and architecture, culminating in the building of the Goetheanum, a cultural centre to house all the arts.
His collected lectures, making up another approximately 300 volumes, discuss an extremely wide range of themes.
Steiner termed his work from this period onwards ''Anthroposophy''.
Continuing the evolution that led to humanity being born out of the natural world, the Christ being brings an impulse enabling human consciousness of the forces that act creatively, but unconsciously, in nature.
In Steiner's esoteric cosmology, the spiritual development of humanity is interwoven in and inseparable from the cosmological development of the universe.
He recognized that for those who wished to find more traditional forms, however, a renewal of the traditional religions was also a vital need of the times.
The virtue of each one is living.Compare: "Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole"
His philosophical ideas were affected by Franz Brentano, with whom he had studied, as well as by Fichte, Hegel, Schelling, and Goethe's phenomenological approach to science.
Steiner advocated a form of ethical individualism, to which he later brought a more explicitly spiritual approach.
(Steiner, Philosophy of Freedom, Consequences of Monism)
Steiner responded with a lecture series on an ecological and sustainable approach to agriculture that increased soil fertility without the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
In 1882, one of Steiner's teachers, Karl Julius Schröer, suggested Steiner's name to Joseph Kürschner, chief editor of a new edition of Goethe's works, who asked Steiner to become the edition's natural science editor, a truly astonishing opportunity for a young student without any form of academic credentials or previous publications.
Steiner considered Kant's philosophy of an inaccessible beyond ("Jenseits-Philosophy") a stumbling block in achieving a satisfying philosophical viewpoint.
Just as the eye perceives colours and the ear sounds, so thinking perceives ideas."
Important themes include:
The sculpture is now on permanent display at the Goetheanum.
The 1923 Beer Hall Putsch in Munich led Steiner to give up his residence in Berlin, saying that if those responsible for the attempted coup Hitler and others came to power in Germany, it would no longer be possible for him to enter the country.
* Moral imagination: the imaginative transformation of such principles into a concrete intention applicable to the particular situation (situational ethics); and
He saw such a division of responsibility, which he called the Threefold Social Order, as a vital task which would take up consciously the historical trend toward the mutual independence of these three realms.
It was intended to show, in conscious contrast to Michelangelo's Last Judgment, Christ as mute and impersonal such that the beings that approach him must judge themselves.
Steiner opposed Wilson's proposal to create new European nations based around ethnic groups, which he saw as opening the door to rampant nationalism.
In 1896, Steiner declined an offer from Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche to help organize the Nietzsche archive in Naumburg.
The healthy social life is found
In the years 1903–1908 Steiner maintained the magazine "Lucifer-Gnosis" and published in it essays on topics such as initiation, reincarnation and karma, and knowledge of the supernatural world.
This and other differences, in particular Steiner's vocal rejection of Leadbeater and Besant's claim that Jiddu Krishnamurti was the vehicle of a new ''Maitreya'', or world teacher, led to a formal split in 1912/13, when Steiner and the majority of members of the German section of the Theosophical Society broke off to form a new group, the Anthroposophical Society.
For in these was reflected that which a personality must feel concerning the evolution and essential being of humanity when this personality is kept back from grasping the spiritual world by the restricted thought in the philosophy of nature characterizing the end of the 19th century....What attracted me particularly was that one could read Nietzsche without coming upon anything which strove to make the reader a 'dependent' of Nietzsche's."
Its work is based on a free relationship to the Christ, without dogma or policies.
He expressed this in the following motto:
Steiner's work includes both universalist, humanist elements and historically influenced racial assumptions.
In 1919, a political theorist of this movement, Dietrich Eckart, attacked Steiner and suggested that he was a Jew.
Then and thereafter, his relationship to Christianity remained entirely founded upon personal experience, and thus both non-denominational and strikingly different from conventional religious forms.
He also founded a system of organic agriculture, now known as biodynamic agriculture, which was one of the very first forms of, and has contributed significantly to the development of, modern organic farming.
In his commentaries on Goethe's scientific works, written between 1884 and 1897, Steiner presented Goethe's approach to science as essentially phenomenological in nature, rather than theory- or model-based.
In 1913, construction began on the first Goetheanum building, in Dornach, Switzerland.
In response to the catastrophic situation in post-war Germany, he proposed extensive social reforms through the establishment of a Threefold Social Order in which the cultural, political and economic realms would be largely independent.
– and to every aspect of music – tones, intervals, rhythms, and harmonies.
He understood the Christ as a being that unifies and inspires all religions, not belonging to a particular religious faith.
*Historical forms of Christianity need to be transformed in our times in order to meet the ongoing evolution of humanity.
However, he did consider spiritual research to be fallible and, perhaps surprisingly, held the view that anyone capable of thinking logically was in a position to correct errors by spiritual researchers.
In the third phase of his work, beginning after World War I, Steiner worked to establish various practical endeavors, including Waldorf education, biodynamic agriculture, and anthroposophical medicine.
According to the principles of eurythmy, there are archetypal movements or gestures that correspond to every aspect of speech – the sounds (or phonemes), the rhythms, and the grammatical function – to every "soul quality" – joy, despair, tenderness, etc.
Steiner emphasized the role of evolutionary thinking in Goethe's discovery of the intermaxillary bone in human beings; Goethe expected human anatomy to be an evolutionary transformation of animal anatomy.
'''Rudolf Joseph Lorenz Steiner''' (27 (or 25) February 1861 – 30 March 1925) was an Austrian philosopher, social reformer, architect and esotericist.
Anthony Storr stated about Rudolf Steiner's Anthroposophy: "His belief system is so eccentric, so unsupported by evidence, so manifestly bizarre, that rational skeptics are bound to consider it delusional."
Josef Beuys' work, itself heavily influenced by Steiner, has led to the modern understanding of Steiner's drawings as artistic objects.
Steiner also gave suggestions for many specific social reforms.
Steiner considered that by dint of its shared language and culture, each people has a unique essence, which he called its soul or spirit.
Thinking can be a free deed; in addition, it can liberate our will from its subservience to our instincts and drives.
Steiner offered counsel on renewing the spiritual potency of the sacraments while emphasizing freedom of thought and a personal relationship to religious life.
The task of understanding is not to replicate in conceptual form something that already exists, but rather to create a wholly new realm, that together with the world given to our senses constitutes the fullness of reality."
Steiner argued that a fusion of the three realms had created the inflexibility that had led to catastrophes such as World War I.
Steiner also suggested timing such agricultural activities as sowing, weeding, and harvesting to utilize the influences on plant growth of the moon and planets; and the application of natural materials prepared in specific ways to the soil, compost, and crops, with the intention of engaging non-physical beings and elemental forces.
He emphasized that the spiritual path he articulated builds upon and supports individual freedom and independent judgment; for the results of spiritual research to be appropriately presented in a modern context they must be in a form accessible to logical understanding, so that those who do not have access to the spiritual experiences underlying anthroposophical research can make independent evaluations of the latter's results.
Free deeds, he suggests, are those for which we are fully conscious of the motive for our action; freedom is the spiritual activity of penetrating with consciousness our own nature and that of the world, and the real activity of acting in full consciousness.
In the first, more philosophically oriented phase of this movement, Steiner attempted to find a synthesis between science and spirituality.
The distinction was important to Steiner because he sought with Anthroposophy to create a scientific, not faith-based, spirituality.
In 1899, Steiner married Anna Eunicke; the couple separated several years later.
Before attending the Vienna Institute of Technology, Steiner had studied Kant, Fichte and Schelling.
Steiner remained with the archive until 1896.
The exhibition opened in 2011 at the Kunstmuseum in Stuttgart, Germany,
In collaboration with Marie von Sivers, Steiner also founded a new approach to acting, storytelling, and the recitation of poetry.
Her brother by that time was ''non compos mentis''.
Steiner aimed to apply his training in mathematics, science, and philosophy to produce rigorous, verifiable presentations of those experiences.
* the path of spiritual development;
In 1891, Steiner received a doctorate in philosophy at the University of Rostock, for his dissertation discussing
The whole community finds its reflection,
* spiritual influences on world-evolution and history; and
His belief that race and ethnicity are transient and superficial, and not essential aspects of the individual, was partly rooted in his conviction that each individual reincarnates in a variety of different peoples and races over successive lives, and that each of us thus bears within him or herself the heritage of many races and peoples.
* the human being as body, soul and spirit;
From 1923 on, Steiner showed signs of increasing frailness and illness.
Soon thereafter, he began to articulate his ideas on education in public lectures, culminating in a 1907 essay on ''The Education of the Child'' in which he described the major phases of child development which formed the foundation of his approach to education.
Albert Schweitzer wrote that he and Steiner had in common that they had "taken on the life mission of working for the emergence of a true culture enlivened by the ideal of humanity and to encourage people to become truly thinking beings".
In this feeling I found the justification for the spiritual world that I experienced ...
Steiner followed Wilhelm Dilthey in using the term ''Geisteswissenschaft'', usually translated as "spiritual science".
At 21, on the train between his home village and Vienna, Steiner met a herb gatherer, Felix Kogutzki, who spoke about the spiritual world "as one who had his own experience therein".
*Every religion is valid and true for the time and cultural context in which it was born.
Most importantly, from 1919 on Steiner began to work with other members of the society to found numerous practical institutions and activities, including the first Waldorf school, founded that year in Stuttgart, Germany.
Anthroposophic speech trainings generally last four years and offer an accredited diploma.
In 1888, as a result of his work for the Kürschner edition of Goethe's works, Steiner was invited to work as an editor at the Goethe archives in Weimar.
*The being of Christ is central to ''all'' religions, though called by different names by each.
