Hess convinced him to reduce the ban to one year.
Both men were incarcerated in Landsberg Prison, where Hitler soon began work on his memoir, ''Mein Kampf'' ("My Struggle"), which he dictated to fellow prisoners Hess and Emil Maurice.
Moreover, the autopsy results support the conclusion that Hess had killed himself.
Hess landed at Floors Farm, Eaglesham, south of Glasgow, where he was discovered still struggling with his parachute by local ploughman David McLean.
Hess accompanied Hitler to speaking engagements around the country and became his friend and confidante.
Identifying himself as "''Hauptmann'' Alfred Horn", Hess said he had an important message for the Duke of Hamilton.
When presented by Griffith-Jones with questions about the organisation's spying in several countries, Bohle testified that any warlike activities such as espionage had been done without his permission or knowledge.
Hess, who had prepared extensive notes to use during this meeting, spoke to them at length about Hitler's expansionary plans and the need for Britain to let the Nazis have free rein in Europe, in exchange for being allowed to keep its overseas possessions.
He was taken prisoner and eventually was convicted of crimes against peace, serving a life sentence, until his death by suicide.
Meanwhile, Hess mentally detached himself from what was happening, declining visits from his family and refusing to read the newspapers.
Hess, the oldest of three children, was born on 26 April 1894 in Alexandria, Egypt, into the ethnic German family of Fritz Hess, a prosperous merchant from Bavaria, and Clara Hess (''née'' Münch).
He went to stay with the Haushofers and then fled to Austria, but they convinced him to return.
In October he received promotion to ''Leutnant der Reserve'' and was recommended for, but did not receive, the Iron Cross, first class.
He was thin when he arrived, weighing , and had a poor appetite, but was deemed to be in good health.
From Buchanan Castle, Hess was transferred briefly to the Tower of London and then to Mytchett Place in Surrey, a fortified mansion, designated "Camp Z", where he stayed for the next thirteen months.
Visits to Spandau of half an hour per month were allowed, but Hess forbade his family to visit until December 1969, when he was a patient at the British Military Hospital in West Berlin for a perforated ulcer.
At 22:35 a Boulton Paul Defiant sent from No.
An organiser of the annual Nuremberg Rallies, he usually gave the opening speech and introduced Hitler.
Appointed Deputy Führer to Adolf Hitler in 1933, he served in this position until 1941, when he flew solo to Scotland in an attempt to negotiate peace with the United Kingdom during World War II.
When Hess was allowed to make a statement to the tribunal on 30 November, he admitted that he had faked memory loss as a tactic.
Throughout much of the trial, he claimed to be suffering from amnesia, but later admitted this was a ruse.
He was found not guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
He demonstrated an aptitude for science and mathematics, but his father wished him to join the family business, Hess & Co., so he sent him in 1911 to study at the ''École supérieure de commerce'' in Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
Hess's health problems, both mental and physical, were ongoing during his captivity.
In 1930 Hess became the owner of a BFW M.23b monoplane sponsored by the party newspaper, the ''Völkischer Beobachter''.
Hess was moved to Maindiff Court Hospital on 26 June 1942, where he remained for the next three years.
With the outbreak of World War II, Hess asked Hitler to be allowed to join the Luftwaffe as a pilot, but Hitler forbade it, and ordered him to stop flying for the duration of the war.
Each country supplied guards for the prison for a month at a time on a rotating basis.
It consisted of representatives from four member states: Britain, France, the United States and the Soviet Union.
He was next taken to the police station at Giffnock, arriving sometime after midnight; he was searched and his possessions confiscated.
Almost immediately after his arrival, Hess began exhibiting amnesia, which may have been feigned in the hope of avoiding the death sentence.
He was awarded the Iron Cross, second class, and promoted to ''Gefreiter'' (corporal) in April 1915.
He was wounded several times over the course of the war, and won the Iron Cross, 2nd class, in 1915.
On Hess's instructions, Haushofer wrote to Hamilton in September 1940, but the letter was intercepted by MI5 and Hamilton did not see it until March 1941.
Soon he had been detected by several other stations, and the aircraft was designated as "Raid 42".
The wound was not serious, requiring two stitches.
At 20:58 he changed his heading to 245 degrees, intending to approach the coast of North East England near the town of Bamburgh, Northumberland.
Captain Munro Johnson of the Royal Army Medical Corps, who assessed Hess, noted that another suicide attempt was likely to occur in the near future.
Hess was discharged from the armed forces in December 1918.
Hitler worried that his allies, Italy and Japan, would perceive Hess's act as an attempt by Hitler to secretly open peace negotiations with the British.
Spandau was placed under the control of the Allied Control Council, the governing body in charge of the military occupation of Germany.
Albert Speer later said Hitler described Hess's departure as one of the worst personal blows of his life, as he considered it a personal betrayal.
He was wounded on 23 July and again on 8 August 1917; the first injury was a shell splinter to the left arm, which was dressed in the field, but the second was a bullet wound that entered the upper chest near the armpit and exited near his spinal column, leaving a pea-sized entry wound and a cherry stone-sized exit wound on his back.
He pointed out that the timing of Hess's trip to Scotland, only six weeks before the German invasion of the Soviet Union, could only be viewed as an attempt by Hess to keep the British out of the war.
Churchill sent Hamilton with foreign affairs expert Ivone Kirkpatrick, who had met Hess previously, to positively identify the prisoner, who had been moved to Buchanan Castle overnight.
Lord Simon noted that the prisoner's mental state was not good; Hess claimed he was being poisoned and was being prevented from sleeping.
Within weeks of the outbreak of World War I, Hess enlisted in the 7th Bavarian Field Artillery Regiment.
After additional training at the Munster Training Area, he was promoted to ''Vizefeldwebel'' (senior non-commissioned officer) and received the Bavarian Military Merit Cross.
He noted that Hess could not be held responsible for any events that took place after he left Germany in May 1941.
A third Spitfire sent from Acklington at 22:20 also failed to spot the aircraft; by then it was dark and Hess had dropped to an extremely low altitude, so low that the volunteer on duty at the Royal Observer Corps (ROC) station at Chatton was able to correctly identify it as a Bf 110, and reported its altitude as .
Around the same time, Hitler appointed Hess's chief of staff, Martin Bormann, as his personal secretary, a post formerly held by Hess.
After the meeting, Hamilton examined the remains of the Messerschmitt in the company of an intelligence officer, then returned to Turnhouse, where he made arrangements through the Foreign Office to meet Prime Minister Winston Churchill, who was at Ditchley for the weekend.
Hess was interested in music, enjoyed reading and loved to spend time hiking and climbing in the mountains with Ilse.
He called to the stand Ernst Wilhelm Bohle, the man who had been head of the NSDAP/AO, to testify on Hess's behalf.
Churchill issued orders that Hess was to be treated well, though he was not allowed to read newspapers or listen to the radio.
Another unsuccessful suicide attempt took place in 1977.
Hess joined the NSDAP on 1 July as member number 16.
Some members of the government, including Göring and Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, believed this only made matters worse, because if Hess truly were mentally ill, he should not have been holding an important government position.
Hess, in addition to being disappointed at the apparent failure of his mission, began claiming that his medical treatment was inadequate and that there was a plot afoot to poison him.
Hess joined the NSDAP on 1 July 1920, and was at Hitler's side on 8 November 1923 for the Beer Hall Putsch, a failed Nazi attempt to seize control of the government of Bavaria.
Hess was convicted of crimes against peace and conspiracy with other German leaders to commit crimes and was transferred to Spandau Prison in 1947, where he served a life sentence.
Numerous appeals for Hess's release were launched by his lawyer, Dr Seidl, beginning as early as 1947.
On 30 January 1933 Hitler was appointed Reich Chancellor, his first step in gaining dictatorial control of Germany.
This often entailed sending the person to a concentration camp or simply ordering the person killed.
The inmates were taken for outdoor walks around the prison grounds for an hour each day, separated about  apart.
These were denied, mainly because the Soviets repeatedly vetoed the proposal.
Hess's friend Karl Haushofer and his family were subject to these laws, as Haushofer had married a half-Jewish woman, so Hess issued documents exempting them from this legislation.
Returning to the front lines in November, he fought in Artois, participating in the battle for the town of Neuville-Saint-Vaast.
Wolf Rüdiger Hess repeatedly claimed that his father had been murdered by the British Secret Intelligence Service to prevent him from revealing information about British misconduct during the war.
The commandant of the facility, Colonel Burton C. Andrus of the United States Army, advised him that he would be allowed no special treatment; the samples were sealed and confiscated.
Hess also spoke over the radio and at rallies around the country, so frequently that the speeches were collected into book form in 1938.
He was arrested and sentenced to 18 months in prison for his role in the attempted coup, which later became known as the Beer Hall Putsch.
On 9 November 1914 Hess transferred to the 1st Infantry Regiment, stationed near Arras.
His geopolitics professor was Karl Haushofer, a proponent of the concept of ''Lebensraum'' ("living space"), which Haushofer cited to justify the proposal that Germany should forcefully conquer additional territory in Eastern Europe.
He spoke to the tribunal again on 31 August 1946, the last day of closing statements.
Medical personnel who examined Hess reported he was not insane and was fit to stand trial.
This symptom and some of his increasingly erratic behaviour may have in part been a ruse, because if he were declared mentally ill, he could be repatriated under the terms of the Geneva Conventions.
Hess was nearly out of fuel, so he climbed to  and parachuted out of the plane at 23:06.
Historian Peter Padfield claims the suicide note found on the body appears to have been written when Hess was hospitalised in 1969.
Spandau was located in West Berlin, and its existence gave the Soviets a foothold in that sector of the city.
On 13 May Hitler sent Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop to give the news in person to Mussolini, and the British press was permitted to release full information about events that same day.
McLean helped Hess to his nearby cottage and contacted the local Home Guard unit, who escorted the captive to their headquarters in Busby, East Renfrewshire.
Also around this time, at 22:08, the British Chain Home station at Ottercops Moss near Newcastle upon Tyne detected his presence and passed along this information to the Filter Room at Bentley Priory.
After a final check of the weather reports for Germany and the North Sea, Hess took off at 17:45 on 10 May 1941 from the airfield at Augsburg-Haunstetten in his specially prepared aircraft.
The Four Powers released a statement on 17 September ruling the death a suicide.
He also prepared a letter to the Duke of Hamilton, but it was never delivered, and his repeated requests for further meetings were turned down.
When the German government failed to meet their reparations payments and French troops marched in to occupy the industrial areas along the Ruhr in January 1923, widespread civil unrest was the result.
Hess continued to be interested in aviation, learning to fly the more advanced aircraft that were coming into development at the start of World War II.
By this time Wolf Rüdiger Hess was 32 years old and Ilse 69; they had not seen Hess since his departure from Germany in 1941.
The family fortunes had taken a serious downturn, as their business interests in Egypt had been expropriated by the British.
Hamilton told Hess that he hoped to continue the conversation with the aid of an interpreter; Hess could speak English well, but was having trouble understanding Hamilton.
His daughter-in-law Andrea, who often brought photos and films of his grandchildren, became a particularly welcome visitor.
On 14 October, he was assigned to Jagdstaffel 35b, a Bavarian fighter squadron equipped with Fokker D.VII biplanes.
In the early morning hours of 16 June, Hess rushed his guards and attempted suicide by jumping over the railing of the staircase at Mytchett Place.
Hess, not directly engaged in either of these endeavours, though he felt qualified to do so, became increasingly sidelined from the affairs of the nation and from Hitler's attention; Bormann had successfully supplanted Hess in many of his duties and usurped his position at Hitler's side.
The 600-cell prison continued to be maintained for its lone prisoner from Speer and Schirach's release until Hess's death in 1987, at an estimated cost of DM 800,000.
After his death the prison was demolished to prevent it from becoming a neo-Nazi shrine.
Hess was given the rank of ''Obergruppenführer'' in the ''Schutzstaffel'' (SS) in 1934, the second-highest SS rank.
Hess, stranded, called Ilse Pröhl, who brought him a bicycle so he could return to Munich.
The aircraft crashed at 23:09, about  west of Dungavel House.
On 10 May 1941 he undertook a solo flight to Scotland, where he hoped to arrange peace talks with the Duke of Hamilton, whom he believed to be prominent in opposition to the British government.
Conditions were far more pleasant in the 1980s than in the early years; Hess was allowed to move more freely around the cell block, setting his own routine and choosing his own activities, which included television, films, reading and gardening.
Efforts were made to trigger his memory, including bringing in his former secretaries and showing old newsreels, but he persisted in showing no response to these stimuli.
The ban on the NSDAP and SA was lifted in February 1925, and the party grew to 100,000 members in 1928 and 150,000 in 1929.
The prison had a small library, and inmates were allowed to file special requests for additional reading material.
Hitler was released on parole on 20 December 1924 and Hess ten days later.
For this reason, Hitler ordered that the German press should characterise Hess as a madman who made the decision to fly to Scotland entirely on his own, without Hitler's knowledge or authority.
He injured his foot, either while exiting the aircraft or when he hit the ground.
He was motivated by his loyalty to Hitler and a desire to be useful to him; he did not seek power or prestige or take advantage of his position to accumulate personal wealth.
By early June, Hess was allowed to write to his family.
Edited by publisher Max Amann, Hess and others, the work was published in two parts in 1925 and 1926.
His initial posting was against the British on the Somme; he was present at the First Battle of Ypres.
Hess was obsessed with his health to the point of hypochondria, consulting many doctors and other practitioners for what he described to his captors in Britain as a long list of ailments involving the kidneys, colon, gall bladder, bowels and heart.
Hitler was sentenced to five years imprisonment, and the NSDAP and SA were both outlawed.
Gunfire broke out between the Nazis and the police; fourteen marchers and four police officers were killed.
Spandau Prison was demolished to prevent it from becoming a neo-Nazi shrine.
Hitler was arrested on 11 November.
Despondent that Germany was losing the war, he took no food for the next week, only resuming eating when he was threatened with being force-fed.
The case for Hess's defence was presented from 22–26 March by his lawyer, Dr Alfred Seidl.
He acquired two more Messerschmitt aircraft in the early 1930s, logging many flying hours and becoming proficient in the operation of light single-engine aircraft.
In 1919, Hess enrolled in the University of Munich, where he studied geopolitics under Karl Haushofer, a proponent of the concept of ''Lebensraum'' ("living space"), which later became one of the pillars of Nazi Party (National Socialist German Workers Party; NSDAP) ideology.
Some of the rules became more relaxed as time went on.
Several pieces of the plane are still extant, including the two engines, one of which is at the Royal Air Force Museum London.
Kirkpatrick held two more meetings with Hess over the course of the next few days, while Hamilton returned to his duties.
The campaign was part of a propaganda effort by Goebbels and others to denigrate Hess and to make scapegoats of occult practitioners.
Major Frank Foley, the leading German expert in MI6 and former British Passport Control Officer in Berlin, took charge of a year-long abortive debriefing of Hess, according to Foreign Office files released to the National Archives.
They received only 2.6 per cent of the vote in the 1928 election, but support increased steadily up until the seizure of power in 1933.
Peter Padfield's ''Hess, Hitler and Churchill'' (2013) explores the mystery of Hess's flight to Britain.
Hess settled on fellow aviator Douglas Douglas-Hamilton, the Duke of Hamilton, whom he had never met.
After the inmates were given medical examinations—Hess refused his body search, and had to be held down—they were provided with prison garb and assigned the numbers by which they would be addressed throughout their stay.
He fell onto the stone floor below, fracturing the femur of his left leg.
He began training on the Messerschmitt Bf 110, a two-seater twin-engine aircraft, in October 1940 under instructor Wilhelm Stör, the chief test pilot at Messerschmitt.
He continued to suspect that his food was being poisoned and complained of amnesia.
Hess was found guilty on two counts: crimes against peace (planning and preparing a war of aggression), and conspiracy with other German leaders to commit crimes.
Whilst serving time in jail for this attempted coup, Hess helped Hitler write his book, ''Mein Kampf'', which became a foundation of the political platform of the NSDAP.
When he reached the coast near the Frisian Islands, he turned and flew in an easterly direction for some twenty minutes to stay out of range of British radar.
Still in custody in Spandau, he died by suicide in 1987 at the age of 93.
His mental health remained under the care of Dr Rees.
Retaining his interest in flying after the end of his active military career, Hess obtained his private pilot's licence on 4 April 1929.
He arrived at Maryhill Barracks the next morning, and after examining Hess's effects, he met alone with the prisoner.
Shortly before the war ended, Hess enrolled to train as an aviator, but he saw no action in this role.
Hess and some SA men had taken a few of the dignitaries hostage on the night of the 8th, driving them to a house about  from Munich.
Because of his previous suicide attempts, Hess was handcuffed to a guard whenever he was out of his cell.
He was authorised to increase the sentences of anyone he felt got off too lightly in these cases, and was also empowered to take "merciless action" if he saw fit to do so.
He noted that while Hess accepted responsibility for the many decrees he had signed, he said these matters were part of the internal workings of a sovereign state and thus outside the purview of a war crimes trial.
Hess was with Hitler on the night of 8 November 1923 when he and the SA stormed a public meeting organised by Bavaria's de facto ruler, ''Staatskommissar'' (state commissioner) Gustav von Kahr, in the ''Bürgerbräukeller'', a large beer hall in Munich.
Seidl called two other witnesses, former mayor of Stuttgart Karl Strölin and Hess's brother Alfred, both of whom refuted the allegations that the NSDAP/AO had been spying and fomenting war.
His brother, Alfred, was born in 1897 and his sister, Margarete, was born in 1908.
Germany surrendered unconditionally on 8 May 1945.
As Hess had been born abroad, Hitler had him oversee the NSDAP groups such as the NSDAP/AO that were in charge of party members living in other countries.
He took an extension cord from one of the lamps, strung it over a window latch, and hanged himself.
Meanwhile, problems continued with the economy; hyperinflation caused personal fortunes to be rendered worthless.
Tracked by additional ROC posts, Hess continued his flight into Scotland at high speed and low altitude, but was unable to spot his destination, Dungavel House, so he headed for the west coast to orient himself and then turned back inland.
Brandishing a pistol, Hitler interrupted Kahr's speech and announced that the national revolution had begun, declaring the formation of a new government with World War I General Erich Ludendorff.
He lived in a modest house in Munich.
Like Hitler, Hess was a vegetarian, and he did not smoke or drink.
Other than his stays in hospital, Hess spent the rest of his life in Spandau Prison.
According to an investigation by the British government in 1989, the available evidence did not back up the claim that Hess was murdered, and Solicitor General Sir Nicholas Lyell saw no grounds for further investigation.
As one defendant, Robert Ley, had managed to hang himself in his cell on 24 October, the remaining prisoners were monitored around the clock.
Two Spitfires of No.
He asked the advice of Albrecht Haushofer, who suggested several potential contacts in Britain.
The other engine and a piece of the fuselage are at the Imperial War Museum in London.
In 1919, Hess enrolled in the University of Munich, where he studied history and economics.
In December 1932 Hess was named party Political Central Commissioner.
Although Hess had less influence than other top NSDAP officials, he was popular with the masses.
Hess continued to be interested in aviation.
After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, Hess was appointed Deputy Führer of the NSDAP and received a post in Hitler's cabinet.
After this illness, he allowed his family to visit regularly.
After the Invasion of Poland and the start of World War II in September 1939, Hitler made Hess second in line to succeed him, after Hermann Göring.
On 14 May Ilse Hess finally learned that her husband had survived the trip when news of his fate was broadcast on German radio.
Three intelligence officers were stationed onsite and 150 soldiers were placed on guard.
When Hess left briefly to make a phone call the next day, the hostages convinced the driver to help them escape.
On his arrival in Nuremberg, Hess was reluctant to give up some of his possessions, including samples of food he claimed had been poisoned by the British; he proposed to use these for his defence during the trial.
Hess joined the ''Sturmabteilung'' (SA) by 1922 and helped organise and recruit its early membership.
The injury required that the leg be kept in traction for twelve weeks, with a further six weeks bed rest before he was permitted to walk with crutches.
He was given a life sentence, one of seven Nazis to receive prison sentences at the trial.
Hess was promoted to platoon leader of the 10th Company of the 18th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment, which was serving in Romania.
A report released in 2012 again raised the question of whether Hess was murdered.
He left the armed forces in December 1918 with the rank of ''Leutnant der Reserve''.
Hamilton had been on duty as Wing Commander at RAF Turnhouse near Edinburgh when Hess had arrived, and his station had been one of those that had tracked the progress of the flight.
As the party continued to grow, holding rallies and meetings in ever larger beer halls in Munich, he focused his attention on fundraising and organisational activities.
Hess did not build a power base or develop a coterie of followers.
By quoting from Hess's speeches, he attempted to demonstrate that Hess had been aware of and agreed with Hitler's plans to conduct a war of aggression in violation of international law.
He won an air race in 1934, flying a BFW M.35 in a circuit around Zugspitze Mountain and returning to the airfield at Munich with a time of 29 minutes.
Hitler stripped Hess of all of his party and state offices, and secretly ordered him shot on sight if he ever returned to Germany.
These seven were transported by aircraft to the Allied military prison at Spandau in Berlin on 18 July 1947.
Death occurred by asphyxiation.
On 4 November 1921 he was injured while protecting Hitler when a bomb planted by a Marxist group exploded at the Hofbräuhaus during a party event.
The aeroplane was armed with four machine guns in the nose but carried no ammunition.
The court deliberated for nearly two months before passing judgement on 30 September, with the defendants being individually sentenced on 1 October.
Hess joined the Thule Society, an antisemitic right-wing ''Völkisch'' group, and a ''Freikorps'', one of many such volunteer paramilitary organisations active in Germany at the time.
Writing materials were limited; each inmate would be allowed four pieces of paper per month for letters.
His fellow inmates Konstantin von Neurath, Walther Funk and Erich Raeder were released because of poor health in the 1950s; Karl Dönitz, Baldur von Schirach and Albert Speer served their time and were released, Dönitz in 1956, Schirach and Speer in 1966.
Hitler named Hess his private secretary in April 1925 at a salary of 500 Reichsmarks per month, and named him as personal adjutant on 20 July 1929.
He received basic flight training at Oberschleissheim and Lechfeld Air Base in March to June 1918 and advanced training at Valenciennes in France in October.
A lift was installed so he could more readily access the garden, and he was provided with a medical orderly from 1982 onward.
Abdallah Melaouhi, who served as Hess's medical orderly from 1982 to 1987, was dismissed from his position at his local district parliament's Immigration and Integration Advisory Council after he wrote a self-published book on a similar theme.
Hess became friends with Haushofer and his son Albrecht, a social theorist and lecturer.
By this time some of his captors suspected Hess's true identity, though he continued to insist his name was Horn.
His lawyer, Dr Seidl, felt Hess was too old and frail to have managed to kill himself.
