I was entered as an Apprentice by a member from Brahmo Somaj, a Hindu, passed to the degree of Fellow Craft by a Mohammedan, and raised to the degree of Master Mason by an Englishman.
In 1907, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature after having been nominated in that year by Charles Oman, professor at the University of Oxford.
Partly in response to John's death, Kipling joined Sir Fabian Ware's Imperial War Graves Commission (now the Commonwealth War Graves Commission), the group responsible for the garden-like British war graves that can be found to this day dotted along the former Western Front and all the other locations around the world where troops of the British Empire lie buried.
Kipling's work was unbanned in the Soviet Union in 1941 after Operation Barbarossa and when Britain become a Soviet ally, but his work was banned again, this time for good with the Cold War in 1946.
In contrast to the popular British view of Poincaré as a cruel bully intent on impoverishing Germany by seeking unreasonable reparations, Kipling argued that Poincaré was only rightfully trying to preserve France as a great power in the face of an unfavourable situation.
The collection of ''Barrack-Room Ballads'' was issued in March 1892, first published individually for the most part in 1890, and containing his poems "Mandalay" and "Gunga Din".
Although they would always remain loyal to each other, they seemed now to have fallen into set roles.
Political singer-songwriter Billy Bragg, who attempts to reclaim English nationalism from the right-wing, has reclaimed Kipling for an inclusive sense of Englishness.
By this time, according to several biographers, their marital relationship was no longer light-hearted and spontaneous.
When they arrived in Yokohama, Japan, they discovered that their bank, The New Oriental Banking Corporation, had failed.
Kipling's days of "strong light and darkness" in Bombay ended when he was five years old.
On a visit to the United States in 1899, Kipling and Josephine developed pneumonia, from which she eventually died.
Kipling's use of the swastika was based on the Indian sun symbol conferring good luck and the Sanskrit word meaning "fortunate" or "well-being".
Eliot was aware of the complaints that had been levelled against Kipling and he dismissed them one by one: that Kipling is 'a Tory' using his verse to transmit right wing political views, or 'a journalist' pandering to popular taste; while Eliot writes "I cannot find any justification for the charge that he held a doctrine of race superiority."
Kipling's family became yearly visitors to Simla, and Lockwood Kipling was asked to serve in Christ Church there.
I thought it being the Swastika would be appropriate for your Swastika.
In an article printed in the ''Chums'' boys' annual, an ex-colleague of Kipling's stated that ..."he never knew such a fellow for ink—he simply revelled in it, filling up his pen viciously, and then throwing the contents all over the office, so that it was almost dangerous to approach him".
Between the palms and the sea,
The poet T. S. Eliot edited ''A Choice of Kipling's Verse'' (1941) with an introductory essay.
Some historians and conservationists are also of the view that the bungalow merely marks a site close to the home of his birth, as the bungalow was built in 1882, about 15 years after Kipling's birth.
Kipling received not only the three degrees of Craft Masonry, but also the side degrees of Mark Master Mason and Royal Ark Mariner.
On 7 September 1911, the ''Montreal Daily Star'' newspaper published a front-page appeal to all Canadians against the reciprocity agreement with the United States by Kipling who wrote: "It is her own soul that Canada risks today.
Although ''The Times'' employed a private detective to investigate (and the detective appears to have suspected Kipling himself of being the author), the identity of the hoaxer was never established.
In 1886, he published his first collection of verse, ''Departmental Ditties.''
During the war, he wrote a booklet ''The Fringes of the Fleet'' containing essays and poems on various nautical subjects of the war.
Mother of Cities to me,
Henry James said: "Kipling strikes me personally as the most complete man of genius, as distinct from fine intelligence, that I have ever known."
His children's stories remain popular; and his ''Jungle Books'' have been made into several movies.
Kipling was one of the most popular writers in the United Kingdom, in both prose and verse, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet.
Kipling hoped that the United States would take on a League of Nations mandate for Armenia as the best way of preventing isolationism, and hoped that Theodore Roosevelt, whom Kipling admired, would once again become president.
Send forth the best ye breed—
From all accounts, Kipling loved the outdoors, not least of whose marvels in Vermont was the turning of the leaves each fall.
Over the next week, Kipling's appeal was reprinted in every English newspaper in Canada, and is credited with helping to turn Canadian public opinion against the Liberal government that signed the reciprocity agreement.
By the early 1890s, the United Kingdom and Venezuela were in a border dispute involving British Guiana.
Lockwood Kipling, a sculptor and pottery designer, was the Principal and Professor of Architectural Sculpture at the newly founded Sir Jamsetjee Jeejebhoy School of Art in Bombay.
The American literary scholar David Scott has argued that ''Kim'' disproves the claim made by Edward Said about Kipling as a promoter of Orientalism as Kipling-who was deeply interested in Buddhism-presented Tibetan Buddhism in a fairly sympathetic light and aspects on the novel appeared to reflect the Buddhist understanding of the universe.
He was last seen stumbling through the mud blindly, with a possible facial injury.
In 1922 Kipling also became Lord Rector of St Andrews University in Scotland, a three-year position.
John had initially wanted to join the Royal Navy, but having had his application turned down after a failed medical examination due to poor eyesight, he opted to apply for military service as an Army officer.
Trix fared better at Lorne Lodge; Mrs. Holloway apparently hoped that Trix would eventually marry the Holloway son.
In 1902 Kipling bought Bateman's, a house built in 1634 and located in rural Burwash, East Sussex, England.
The ''Civil and Military Gazette'' in Lahore, the newspaper which Kipling was to call "mistress and most true love", appeared six days a week throughout the year except for one-day breaks for Christmas and Easter.
Children tell little more than animals, for what comes to them they accept as eternally established.
Our Tyler was an Indian Jew."
Far-called, our navies melt away;
At ''The Friend'' he made lifelong friendships with Perceval Landon, H. A. Gwynne and others.
The acclaimed Indian writer R. K. Narayan said, "Kipling, the supposed expert writer on India, showed a better understanding of the mind of the animals in the jungle than of the men in an Indian home or the marketplace."
In response to Eliot, George Orwell wrote a long consideration of Kipling's work for ''Horizon'' in 1942, noting that although as a "jingo imperialist" Kipling was "morally insensitive and aesthetically disgusting", his work had many qualities which ensured that while "every enlightened person has despised him ... nine-tenths of those enlightened persons are forgotten and Kipling is in some sense still there".
It was obligatory for Soviet journals that featured translations of Kipling to begin with an introduction attacking him as a "fascist" and an "imperialist", but such was Kipling's popularity with Russian readers that his works was not banned in the Soviet Union until 1939 with the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact.
During the summer of 1883, Kipling visited Shimla (then known as Simla), a well-known hill station and the summer capital of British India.
1634 over the door—beamed, panelled, with old oak staircase, and all untouched and unfaked.
Hammoneau presented Kipling with the book (with bullet still embedded) and his Croix de Guerre as a token of gratitude.
Kipling was enraged by reports of the Rape of Belgium together with the sinking of the RMS ''Lusitania'' in 1915, which he saw as a deeply inhumane act, which led him to see the war as a crusade for civilisation against barbarism.
Kipling referred to such conflicts, for example: "In the afternoon heats before we took our sleep, she (the Portuguese ''ayah'', or nanny) or Meeta (the Hindu ''bearer'', or male attendant) would tell us stories and Indian nursery songs all unforgotten, and we were sent into the dining-room after we had been dressed, with the caution 'Speak English now to Papa and Mamma.'
He describes this time: "My month’s leave at Simla, or whatever Hill Station my people went to, was pure joy—every golden hour counted.
In a letter to a friend who had become engaged around this time, the 30‑year‑old Kipling offered this sombre counsel: marriage principally taught "the tougher virtues—such as humility, restraint, order, and forethought."
Some of the poems were set to music by English composer Edward Elgar.
But what will be the position in years to come of the young man who has deliberately elected to outcaste himself from this all-embracing brotherhood?
During his time there, Kipling also met and fell in love with Florence Garrard who was boarding with Trix at Southsea (to which Trix had returned).
Kipling's links with the Scouting movements were also strong.
May it bring you even more good fortune."
In 1906 he wrote the song ''"Land of our Birth, We Pledge to Thee"''.
These connections still exist today, such as the continued popularity of "Kim's Game" in the Scouting movement.
The house still stands on Kipling Road, three miles (5&nbsp;km) north of Brattleboro in Dummerston, Vermont: a big, secluded, dark-green house, with shingled roof and sides, which Kipling called his "ship", and which brought him "sunshine and a mind at ease."
Kipling's pamphlets and stories were very popular with the British people during the war with his major themes being glorifying the British military as ''the'' place for heroic men to be, German atrocities against Belgian civilians and the stories of women being brutalised by a horrific war unleashed by Germany, yet surviving and triumphing in spite of their suffering.
Kipling so loved his masonic experience that he memorialised its ideals in his famous poem, "The Mother Lodge", and used the fraternity and its symbols as vital plot devices in his novella, ''The Man Who Would Be King''.
In fact, he tried twice to enlist, but was rejected.
Stephen Wheeler, the editor, worked Kipling hard, but Kipling's need to write was unstoppable.
Kipling's clarity of style, his use of colloquial language and the way in which he used rhythm and rhyme were considered to be major innovations in poetry that appealed to many of the younger Russian poets.
—''The White Man's Burden''
G V Desani, an Indian writer of fiction, had a more negative opinion of Kipling.
His seclusion in Vermont, combined with his healthy "sane clean life", made Kipling both inventive and prolific.
Such was Kipling's popularity that he was asked by his friend Max Aitken to intervene in the 1911 Canadian election on behalf of the Conservatives.
They continued to correspond, and when Hammoneau had a son, Kipling insisted on returning the book and medal.
He also wrote a two-volume history of the Irish Guards, his son's regiment, that was published in 1923 and is considered to be one of the finest examples of regimental history.
With Josephine's arrival, ''Bliss Cottage'' was felt to be congested, so eventually the couple bought land— on a rocky hillside overlooking the Connecticut River—from Carrie's brother Beatty Balestier, and built their own house.
In his 1902 poem ''The Rowers'', Kipling attacked the Kaiser as a threat to Britain and made the first use of the term "Hun" as an anti-German insult, using Wilhelm's own words and the actions of German troops in China to portray Germans as essentially barbarians.
Kipling's views were on the right and though he admired Benito Mussolini to a certain extent for a time in the 1920s, Kipling was against fascism, writing that Oswald Mosley was "a bounder and an ''arriviste''"; by 1935 he called Mussolini a deranged and dangerous egomaniac and in 1933 wrote "The Hitlerites are out for blood".
Kipling arrived unannounced at Twain's home, and later wrote that as he rang the doorbell, "It occurred to me for the first time that Mark Twain might possibly have other engagements other than the entertainment of escaped lunatics from India, be they ever so full of admiration."
Half devil and half child.
The Swedish Academy, in awarding the Nobel Prize in Literature this year to Rudyard Kipling, desires to pay a tribute of homage to the literature of England, so rich in manifold glories, and to the greatest genius in the realm of narrative that that country has produced in our times.
In November 2007 it was announced that Kipling's birth home in the campus of the J J School of Art in Bombay would be turned into a museum celebrating the author and his works.
Although his journalistic stint was to last only two weeks, it was Kipling's first work on a newspaper staff since he left ''The Pioneer'' in Allahabad more than ten years earlier.
Take up the White Man's burden—
The pallbearers at the funeral included Kipling's cousin, the UK Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, and the marble casket was covered by a Union Jack.
Although the cottage bears a plaque stating that this is the site where Kipling was born, the original cottage may have been torn down decades ago and a new one built in its place.
In another letter at the same time, Kipling described the "unfrei peoples of Central Europe" as living in "the Middle Ages with machine guns".
George Orwell called him a "prophet of British imperialism".
Kipling is often quoted in discussions of contemporary political and social issues.
The Kiplings loved life in Vermont and might have lived out their lives there, were it not for two incidents—one of global politics, the other of family discord—that hastily ended their time there.
His most significant contribution to the project was his selection of the biblical phrase "Their Name Liveth For Evermore" (Ecclesiasticus 44.14, KJV) found on the Stones of Remembrance in larger war cemeteries and his suggestion of the phrase "Known unto God" for the gravestones of unidentified servicemen.
Kipling was said to help assuage his grief over the death of his son through reading the novels of Jane Austen aloud to his wife and daughter.
And unless I am mistaken, Kipling's position in this class is not only high, but unique."
At the time, the ''Montreal Daily Star'' was Canada's most read newspaper.
Back in Lahore, some thirty-nine stories appeared in the ''Gazette'' between November 1886 and June 1887.
This raised hackles in the UK, and the situation grew into a major Anglo-American crisis, with talk of war on both sides.
He chose the inscription "The Glorious Dead" on the Cenotaph, Whitehall, London.
On 1 August 1918, a poem—"The Old Volunteer"—appeared under his name in ''The Times''.
Lest we forget—lest we forget!
On fluttered folk and wild—
The school proved rough going for him at first, but later led to firm friendships and provided the setting for his schoolboy stories ''Stalky & Co.'' (1899).
He is regarded as a major innovator in the art of the short story; his children's books are classics of children's literature; and one critic described his work as exhibiting "a versatile and luminous narrative gift".
In London, Kipling had several stories accepted by magazines.
He wrote in a letter that it felt like being "aimed at with a decanter across a friendly dinner table."
In 1920 Kipling co-founded the Liberty League with Haggard and Lord Sydenham.
''Ulster'' generated much controversy with the Conservative MP Sir Mark Sykes-who as an Unionist was opposed to the Home Rule bill-condemning ''Ulster'' in an article in the ''Morning Post'' as "direct appeal to ignorance and a deliberate attempt to foster religious hate".
Go, bind your sons to exile
In his autobiography, published some 65 years later, Kipling recalled the stay with horror, and wondered ironically if the combination of cruelty and neglect which he experienced there at the hands of Mrs. Holloway might not have hastened the onset of his literary life: "If you cross-examine a child of seven or eight on his day’s doings (specially when he wants to go to sleep) he will contradict himself very satisfactorily.
Meanwhile, late in 1891, his collection of short stories about the British in India, ''Life's Handicap'', was published in London.
In September 1914, Kipling was asked by the British government to write propaganda, an offer that he immediately accepted.
In an interview with the French newspaper ''Le Figaro'', the Francophile Kipling called Germany a menace and called for an Anglo-French alliance to stop it.
Kipling then travelled through the United States, writing articles for ''The Pioneer'' that were later published in ''From Sea to Sea and Other Sketches, Letters of Travel''.
Several of his works were collaborations.
Florence became the model for Maisie in Kipling's first novel ''The Light that Failed'' (1891).
In a 1918 poem, Kipling wrote about Soviet Russia that everything good in Russia had now been destroyed by the Bolsheviks and all that was left was "the sound of weeping and the sight of burning fire, and the shadow of a people trampled into the mire".
Many have wondered why he was never made Poet Laureate.
The incident led to Beatty's eventual arrest, but in the subsequent hearing, and the resulting publicity, Kipling's privacy was destroyed, and he was left feeling miserable and exhausted.
In 1911, the major issue in Canada was the reciprocity treaty with the United States signed by the Liberal Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier, and vigorously opposed by the Conservatives under Sir Robert Borden.
In a note to Edward Bok written after the death of Lockwood Kipling in 1911, Rudyard said: "I am sending with this for your acceptance, as some little memory of my father to whom you were so kind, the original of one of the plaques that he used to make for me.
However, wintertime golf was "not altogether a success because there were no limits to a drive; the ball might skid two miles (3&nbsp;km) down the long slope to Connecticut river."
For I was born in her gate,
That year also brought a change of editors at the newspaper; Kay Robinson, the new editor, allowed more creative freedom and Kipling was asked to contribute short stories to the newspaper.
By January 1896, he had decided to end his family's "good wholesome life" in the US and seek their fortunes elsewhere.
Kipling, who was a francophile, argued very strongly for an Anglo-French alliance to uphold the peace, calling Britain and France in 1920 the "twin fortresses of European civilization".
The house, along with the surrounding buildings, the mill and  was purchased for £9,300.
A number of his poems were set to music by Percy Grainger.
He sailed for India on 20 September 1882 and arrived in Bombay on 18 October.
In "The New Army in Training" (1915), Kipling concluded the piece by saying:
whose juvenile protagonists displayed a know-it-all, cynical outlook on patriotism and authority.
In 2003, actor Ralph Fiennes read excerpts from Kipling's works from the study in Bateman's, including, ''The Jungle Book'', ''Something of Myself'', ''Kim'', and ''The Just So Stories'', and poems, including "If... " and "My Boy Jack", for a CD published by the National Trust.
Kipling remembers, "Often and often afterwards, the beloved Aunt would ask me why I had never told any one how I was being treated.
In Allahabad, he worked as the Assistant editor of The Pioneer, and lived in Belvedere house, Allahabad from 1888–89.
Alongside his passionate antipathy towards Germany, Kipling was privately deeply critical of how the war was fought by the British Army as opposed to the war itself, which he ardently supported, complaining as early as October 1914 that Germany should have been defeated by now, and something must be wrong with the British Army.
He was initiated into Hope and Perseverance Lodge No.
However, it is true that Kipling was emotionally devastated by the death of his son.
Eliot finds instead,
As it was, Twain was glad to welcome Kipling and had a two-hour conversation with him on trends in Anglo-American literature and about what Twain was going to write in a sequel to ''Tom Sawyer,'' with Twain assuring Kipling that a sequel was coming; but he had not decided upon the ending: either Sawyer would be elected to Congress or would be hanged.
Kipling was now a famous man, and in the previous two or three years, had increasingly been making political pronouncements in his writings.
These read like modern hard science fiction, and introduced the literary technique known as indirect exposition, which would later become one of Heinlein's trademarks.
Along the same lines, Kipling repeatedly warned against revising the Treaty of Versailles in Germany's favour, which he predicted would lead to a new world war.
He described this moment years later: "So, at sixteen years and nine months, but looking four or five years older, and adorned with real whiskers which the scandalised Mother abolished within one hour of beholding, I found myself at Bombay where I was born, moving among sights and smells that made me deliver in the vernacular sentences whose meaning I knew not.
Taking this loss in their stride, they returned to the US, back to Vermont—Carrie by this time was pregnant with their first child—and rented a small cottage on a farm near Brattleboro for ten dollars a month.
By this time, he had been increasingly thinking about the future.
In 1924, Kipling was opposed to the Labour government of Ramsay MacDonald as "Bolshevism without bullets", but believing that Labour was a Communist front organisation he took the view that "excited orders and instructions from Moscow" would expose Labour as such an organisation to the British people.
The wedding was held at All Souls Church, Langham Place.
Other Indian-born boys have told me how the same thing happened to them."
The next day he wrote to the newspaper to disclaim authorship, and a correction appeared.
Indian writer Khushwant Singh wrote in 2001 that he considers Kipling's "If—" "the essence of the message of The Gita in English", referring to the Bhagavad Gita, an ancient Indian scripture.
He alludes to Kipling in his novel, All About H. Hatterr:
For the next six years from October 1871 to April 1877, the two children lived with the couple, Captain Pryse Agar Holloway, once an officer in the merchant navy, and Mrs Sarah Holloway, at their house, Lorne Lodge at 4 Campbell Road, Southsea.
We have loved it ever since our first sight of it."
The Kiplings had welcomed their first son, John, in August 1897.
An admirer of Raymond Poincaré, Kipling was one of the few British intellectuals who supported the French Occupation of the Ruhr in 1923 at a time when the British government and most public opinion was against the French position.
If each contradiction be set down as a lie and retailed at breakfast, life is not easy.
In the short span of four years, he produced, in addition to the ''Jungle Books'', a collection of short stories (''The Day's Work''), a novel (''Captains Courageous''), and a profusion of poetry, including the volume ''The Seven Seas''.
In 1891, on the advice of his doctors, Kipling embarked on another sea voyage visiting South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and once again India.
Kipling had no sympathy with or understanding of Irish nationalism, and for him Home Rule was an act of treason by the government of the Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith that would plunge Ireland into the Dark Ages and allow the Irish Catholic majority to oppress the Protestant minority.
Kipling included most of these stories in ''Plain Tales from the Hills'', his first prose collection, which was published in Calcutta in January 1888, a month after his 22nd birthday.
In February 1896, Elsie Kipling was born, the couple's second daughter.
He soon made his début in the London literary world—to great acclaim.
Orwell summarised that
A visit to Ireland in 1911 confirmed Kipling's prejudices as he wrote the Irish countryside was beautiful, but was spoiled by what he called the ugly homes of the Irish farmers, with Kipling adding that God had made the Irish into poets because he had "deprived them of love of line or knowledge of colour".
Kipling was favourably impressed by Japan, writing that the Japanese were "gracious folk and fair manners".
In modern-day India, whence he drew much of his material, Kipling's reputation remains controversial, especially amongst modern nationalists and some post-colonial critics.
Your new-caught sullen peoples,
The first was made by producer Alexander Korda, and other films have been produced by the Walt Disney Company.
(from a November 1902 letter).
It had no bathroom, no running water upstairs and no electricity, but Kipling loved it: "Behold us, lawful owners of a grey stone lichened house—A.D.
Kipling was saddened by Roosevelt's death in 1919, believing that his friend was the only American politician capable of keeping the United States in the "game" of world politics.
There was also foreboding in the poems, a sense that all could yet come to naught.
Literary critic Douglas Kerr wrote: "Kipling is still an author who can inspire passionate disagreement and his place in literary and cultural history is far from settled.
Many older editions of Rudyard Kipling's books have a swastika printed on their covers associated with a picture of an elephant carrying a lotus flower, reflecting the influence of Indian culture.
Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of Scouting, used many themes from ''The Jungle Book'' stories and ''Kim'' in setting up his junior movement, the Wolf Cubs.
Kipling's works of fiction include ''The Jungle Book'' (1894), ''Kim'' (1901), and many short stories, including "The Man Who Would Be King" (1888).
They spent a month each Christmas with their maternal aunt Georgiana ("Georgy") and her husband at their house "The Grange" in Fulham, London, which Kipling called "a paradise which I verily believe saved me."
Once that soul is pawned for any consideration, Canada must inevitably conform to the commercial, legal, financial, social and ethical standards which will be imposed on her by the sheer admitted weight of the United States."
Then a wet wind blew, and ruined all the uniforms of that gorgeous army; and the oaks, who had held themselves in reserve, buckled on their dull and bronzed cuirasses and stood it out stiffly to the last blown leaf, till nothing remained but pencil-shadings of bare boughs, and one could see into the most private heart of the woods."
Kipling argued that even before 1914 Germany's larger economy and birthrate had made that country stronger than France, that with much of France devastated by the war and the French suffering heavy losses that the low French birthrate would have trouble replacing while Germany was mostly undamaged and with a higher birth rate, that it was madness for Britain to seek to pressure France to revise Versailles in Germany's favour.
In 1934 he published a short story in ''Strand Magazine'', "Proofs of Holy Writ", which postulated that William Shakespeare had helped to polish the prose of the King James Bible.
John Kipling was sent to Loos two days into the battle in a reinforcement contingent.
He also wrote articles published more widely expressing his views on the conflict.
This arrival changed Kipling, as he explains: "There were yet three or four days’ rail to Lahore, where my people lived.
Throughout their lives, Kipling and his wife Carrie maintained an active interest in Camp Mowglis, which is still in operation and continues the traditions that Kipling inspired.
This short-lived enterprise focused on promoting classic liberal ideals as a response to the rising power of Communist tendencies within Great Britain, or, as Kipling put it, "to combat the advance of Bolshevism".
Kipling was enthusiastic in his response and shortly produced both, formally entitled "The Ritual of the Calling of an Engineer".
"Book-ending" this achievement was the publication of two connected poetry and story collections: ''Puck of Pook's Hill'' (1906), and ''Rewards and Fairies'' (1910).
The couple settled upon a honeymoon that would take them first to the United States (including a stop at the Balestier family estate near Brattleboro, Vermont) and then on to Japan.
His poems include "Mandalay" (1890), "Gunga Din" (1890), "The Gods of the Copybook Headings" (1919), "The White Man's Burden" (1899), and "If—" (1910).
A series of short films based on some of his stories was broadcast by the BBC in 1964.
Other contemporary Indian intellectuals such as Ashis Nandy have taken a more nuanced view of his work.
Kipling's most famous relative was his first cousin, Stanley Baldwin, who was Conservative Prime Minister of the United Kingdom three times in the 1920s and 1930s.
Kipling often referred to the Irish Unionists as "our party".
Once the Nazis came to power and usurped the swastika, Kipling ordered that it should no longer adorn his books.
Kipling was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, northwest London, and his ashes were buried in Poets' Corner, part of the South Transept of Westminster Abbey, next to the graves of Charles Dickens and Thomas Hardy.
His father had been lifelong friends with Lord Roberts, commander-in-chief of the British Army, and colonel of the Irish Guards, and at Rudyard's request, John was accepted into the Irish Guards.
Kipling wrote the poem "''Ulster''" in 1912 reflecting his Unionist politics.
Rudyard Kipling was born on 30 December 1865 in Bombay, in the Bombay Presidency of British India, to Alice Kipling (née MacDonald) and John Lockwood Kipling.
Less than one year before his death Kipling gave a speech (titled "An Undefended Island") to The Royal Society of St George on 6 May 1935 warning of the danger which Nazi Germany posed to Britain.
Back in England, Kipling wrote poetry in support of the British cause in the Boer War and on his next visit to South Africa in early 1900, he became a correspondent for ''The Friend'' newspaper in Bloemfontein, which had been commandeered by Lord Roberts for British troops.
