In winter, temperatures get colder both from south to north and from west to east.
Association football is one of the most popular sports in modern Russia.
This helped somewhat to resolve the housing problem, but created a large quantity of buildings of low architectural quality, much in contrast with the previous bright styles.
Production levels are already higher than in Britain and Germany.
Of the country's 100,000 rivers, the Volga is the most famous, not only because it is the longest river in Europe, but also because of its major role in Russian history.
Growth was primarily driven by non-traded services and goods for the domestic market, as opposed to oil or mineral extraction and exports.
Russia became the 39th member state of the Council of Europe in 1996.
On 22 June 1941, Nazi Germany broke the non-aggression treaty and invaded the Soviet Union with the largest and most powerful invasion force in human history, opening the largest theater of World War&nbsp;II.
Russian synchronized swimming is the best in the world, with almost all gold medals at Olympics and World Championships having been swept by Russians in recent decades.
The Russian central bank announced plans in 2013 to free float the Russian ruble in 2015.
Russia took up the responsibility for settling the USSR's external debts, even though its population made up just half of the population of the USSR at the time of its dissolution.
The later tradition of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era, was continued into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff.
Russian conservatories have turned out generations of famous soloists.
The age of feudalism and decentralization was marked by constant in-fighting between members of the Rurik Dynasty that ruled Kievan Rus' collectively.
73% of the population lives in urban areas while 27% in rural ones.
The latter group includes Nikolai Danilevsky and Konstantin Leontiev, the founders of eurasianism.
Leon Trotsky, the main proponent of world revolution, was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929, and Stalin's idea of Socialism in One Country became the primary line.
The water utilities sector is one of the largest industries in Russia serving the entire Russian population.
After the United States Space Shuttle program ended in 2011, Soyuz rockets became the only provider of transport for astronauts at the International Space Station.
Major sea ports of Russia include Rostov-on-Don on the Azov Sea, Novorossiysk on the Black Sea, Astrakhan and Makhachkala on the Caspian, Kaliningrad and St Petersburg on the Baltic, Arkhangelsk on the White Sea, Murmansk on the Barents Sea, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and Vladivostok on the Pacific Ocean.
The Russian anthem shares its music with the Soviet Anthem, though not the lyrics.
According to the Primary Chronicle, a Varangian from Rus' people, named Rurik, was elected ruler of Novgorod in 862.
Leading authors of this era include such poets as Valery Bryusov, Vyacheslav Ivanov, Alexander Blok, Nikolay Gumilev and Anna Akhmatova, and novelists Leonid Andreyev, Ivan Bunin, and Maxim Gorky.
The early years of the 21st century have brought increased viewership and subsequent prosperity to the industry on the back of the economic revival.
However, Joseph Stalin, an elected General Secretary of the Communist Party, managed to suppress all opposition groups within the party and consolidate power in his hands.
A substantial share of students is enrolled for full pay (many state institutions started to open commercial positions in the last years).
Russian explorers pushed eastward primarily along the Siberian River Routes, and by the mid-17th century there were Russian settlements in Eastern Siberia, on the Chukchi Peninsula, along the Amur River, and on the Pacific coast.
The Russian Academy of Arts was created in 1757 and gave Russian artists an international role and status.
Following the partition of the Soviet Union in 1991, fourteen independent republics emerged from the USSR; as the largest, most populous, and most economically developed republic, the Russian SFSR reconstituted itself as the Russian Federation and is recognized as the continuing legal personality and sole successor state of the Soviet Union.
The Ural Mountains, rich in mineral resources, form a north-south range that divides Europe and Asia.
Catherine&nbsp;II ("the Great"), who ruled in 1762–96, presided over the Age of Russian Enlightenment.
The native Russian national personification is Mother Russia.
In March 2014 the average nominal monthly wages reached 30,000 RUR (or US$980), while tax on the income of individuals is payable at the rate of 13% on most incomes.
The Red Banner continues to be honored, especially the Banner of Victory of 1945.
After the fall of Constantinople in 1453, Moscow claimed succession to the legacy of the Eastern Roman Empire.
The Russian Constitution guarantees free, universal health care for all its citizens.
In June 1991, Boris Yeltsin became the first directly elected President in Russian history when he was elected President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, which became the independent Russian Federation in December of that year.
Two other major Christian holidays are Easter and Trinity Sunday.
All this resulted in a major economic crisis, characterized by a 50% decline in both GDP and industrial output between 1990 and 1995.
The occupation drained economic resources and dragged on without achieving meaningful political results.
Currently many new pipeline projects are being realized, including Nord Stream and South Stream natural gas pipelines to Europe, and the Eastern Siberia – Pacific Ocean oil pipeline (ESPO) to the Russian Far East and China.
The total length of metros in Russia is .
Railway transport in Russia is mostly under the control of the state-run Russian Railways monopoly.
Led by Mikhail Kutuzov and Barclay de Tolly, the Russian army ousted Napoleon from the country and drove through Europe in the war of the Sixth Coalition, finally entering Paris.
: A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community or nation, the Russian Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism and women’s and gay rights.
In an effort to restore the Volga khanates, Crimeans and their Ottoman allies invaded central Russia and were even able to burn down parts of Moscow in 1571.
During this war, which included many of the most lethal battle operations in human history, Soviet military and civilian deaths were 10.6&nbsp;million and 15.9&nbsp;million respectively, accounting for about a third of all World War&nbsp;II casualties.
By total length of pipelines Russia is second only to the United States.
The Russian Federation is recognized in international law as a successor state of the former Soviet Union.
The 2010 census recorded 81% of the population as ethnically Russian, and 19% as other ethnicities: 3.7% Tatars; 1.4% Ukrainians; 1.1% Bashkirs; 1% Chuvashes; 11.8% others and unspecified.
Famous Russian battle tanks include T34, the most heavily produced tank design of World War&nbsp;II, and further tanks of T-series, including the most produced tank in history, T54/55.
The economic development of the country has been uneven geographically with the Moscow region contributing a very large share of the country's GDP.
* 9 krais (territories): essentially the same as oblasts.
Figure skating is another popular sport in Russia, especially pair skating and ice dancing.
The latter events are traditionally referred to as '''baptism of Rus' ''' (, ) in Russian and Ukrainian literature.
University level education is free, with exceptions.
With a large land area the road density is the lowest of all the G8 and BRIC countries.
The rule of the new authorities only aggravated the crisis in the country, instead of resolving it.
Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head of the Church,  endorsed his election in 2012.
The era of the 1970s and the early 1980s was designated later as the Era of Stagnation, a period when economic growth slowed and social policies became static.
In 2009 Russia experienced its highest birth rate since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The coldest month is January (February on the coastline); the warmest is usually July.
Black bread is rather popular in Russia, compared to the rest of the world.
Founded and ruled by a Varangian warrior elite and their descendants, the medieval state of Rus arose in the 9th century.
The 1990s were plagued by armed conflicts in the North Caucasus, both local ethnic skirmishes and separatist Islamist insurrections.
One fourth of the world's fresh surface and groundwater is located in Russia.
Among the best known are violinists Jascha Heifetz, David Oistrakh, Leonid Kogan, Gidon Kremer, and Maxim Vengerov; cellists Mstislav Rostropovich, Natalia Gutman; pianists Vladimir Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, Emil Gilels, Vladimir Sofronitsky and Evgeny Kissin; and vocalists Fyodor Shalyapin, Mark Reizen, Elena Obraztsova, Tamara Sinyavskaya, Nina Dorliak, Galina Vishnevskaya, Anna Netrebko and Dmitry Hvorostovsky.
In the 20th century a number of prominent Soviet aerospace engineers, inspired by the fundamental works of Nikolai Zhukovsky, Sergei Chaplygin and others, designed many hundreds of models of military and civilian aircraft and founded a number of ''KBs'' (''Construction Bureaus'') that now constitute the bulk of Russian United Aircraft Corporation.
The Russian ruble collapsed by 24% from October 2013 to October 2014 entering the level where the central bank may need to intervene to strengthen the currency.
On 17 March, a referendum was held, in which the vast majority of participating citizens voted in favour of changing the Soviet Union into a renewed federation.
The Barents Sea, White Sea, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, East Siberian Sea, Chukchi Sea, Bering Sea, Sea of Okhotsk, and the Sea of Japan are linked to Russia via the Arctic and Pacific.
At the same time, tensions with the United States heightened when the two rivals clashed over the deployment of the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Chess is a widely popular pastime in Russia; from 1927, Russian grandmasters have held the world chess championship almost continuously.
The Asian part of Russia also features a number of major hydropower stations, however the gigantic hydroelectric potential of Siberia and the Russian Far East largely remains unexploited.
* Information technology, including both common products and the products combined with space technology
These points are: in the west, the same spit on the boundary with Poland, and in the east, the Big Diomede Island.
The hammer and sickle and the full Soviet coat of arms are still widely seen in Russian cities as a part of old architectural decorations.
By the early 19th century a modern native tradition had emerged, producing some of the greatest writers in Russian history.
The total length of common-used railway tracks exceeds , second only to the United States.
Russia is home to approximately 116&nbsp;million ethnic Russians and about 20&nbsp;million ethnic Russians live outside Russia in the former republics of the Soviet Union, mostly in Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
This ranks it as the country with the second most attractive personal tax system for single managers in the world after the United Arab Emirates.
The general easement of repressive policies became known later as the Khrushchev Thaw.
Russia has the world's largest forest reserves, known as "the lungs of Europe", second only to the Amazon Rainforest in the amount of carbon dioxide it absorbs.
From north to south the East European Plain, also known as Russian Plain, is clad sequentially in Arctic tundra, coniferous forest (taiga), mixed and broad-leaf forests, grassland (steppe), and semi-desert (fringing the Caspian Sea), as the changes in vegetation reflect the changes in climate.
In the 3rd to 4th centuries AD a semi-legendary Gothic kingdom of Oium existed in Southern Russia until it was overrun by Huns.
Today, Russia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics with Yevgeniya Kanayeva.
Some analysts estimate that WTO membership could bring the Russian economy a bounce of up to 3% annually.
Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev invented the Periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry.
Notwithstanding, various differences split the Muslim population in different groups.
Following the Russian Revolution of 1917 many prominent writers and philosophers left the country, including Bunin, Vladimir Nabokov and Nikolay Berdyayev, while a new generation of talented authors joined together in an effort to create a distinctive working-class culture appropriate for the new Soviet state.
This is a decline from the 2002, when they constituted for more than 86% of the population.
In 1820, a Russian expedition discovered the continent of Antarctica.
It shares maritime borders with Japan by the Sea of Okhotsk and the U.S. state of Alaska across the Bering Strait.
The NATO-Russia Council was established in 2002 to allow the United States, Russia and the 27 allies in NATO to work together as equal partners to pursue opportunities for joint collaboration.
Another problem is modernisation of infrastructure, ageing and inadequate after years of being neglected in the 1990s; the government has said $1&nbsp;trillion will be invested in development of infrastructure by 2020.
According to the survey, most of the Muslims (approximately 6,700,000 or 4.6% of the total population) are "unaffiliated" to any Islamic schools and branches or Islamic organisation, this is mainly because it is not essential for Muslims to be affiliated with any specific sect or organization.
Russia has an extensive coastline of over  along the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, as well as along the Baltic Sea, Sea of Azov, Black Sea and Caspian Sea.
), but public displays of religion outside of such designated areas were prohibited.
The Russian avant-garde was a large, influential wave of modernist art that flourished in Russia from approximately 1890 to 1930.
Further Russian public holidays include Defender of the Fatherland Day (23 February), which honors Russian men, especially those serving in the army; International Women's Day (8 March), which combines the traditions of Mother's Day and Valentine's Day; Spring and Labor Day (1 May); Victory Day; Russia Day (12 June); and Unity Day (4 November), commemorating the popular uprising which expelled the Polish occupation force from Moscow in 1612.
Great ranges of temperature are typical.
There are 23 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Russia, 40 UNESCO biosphere reserves, 41 national parks and 101 nature reserves.
Combining the total medals of the Soviet Union and Russia, the country is second among all nations by number of gold medals both at the Summer Olympics and at the Winter Olympics.
Ivan&nbsp;III married Sophia Palaiologina, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor Constantine&nbsp;XI, and made the Byzantine double-headed eagle his own, and eventually Russia's, coat-of-arms.
Soviet artists often combined innovation with socialist realism, notably the sculptors Vera Mukhina, Yevgeny Vuchetich and Ernst Neizvestny.
Russia has a wide natural resource base, including major deposits of timber, petroleum, natural gas, coal, ores and other mineral resources.
The vast majority of people in the Russian empire were, at the time of the revolution, religious believers, whereas the communists aimed to break the power of all religious institutions and eventually replace religious belief with atheism.
'', are iconic images in Russia and many surrounding countries.
She extended Russian political control over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and incorporated most of its territories into Russia during the Partitions of Poland, pushing the Russian frontier westward into Central Europe.
In 1961–68 Sergey Bondarchuk directed an Oscar-winning film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy's epic ''War and Peace'', which was the most expensive film made in the Soviet Union.
It is governed as a federal semi-presidential republic.
The Grand Duchy of Moscow gradually reunified the surrounding Russian principalities, achieved independence from the Golden Horde, and came to dominate the cultural and political legacy of Kievan Rus'.
In 2014, a book-length study by Professor Karen Dawisha was published concerning corruption in Russian under Putin's government.
Many foreigners worked in Russia for a long time, like Leonard Euler and Alfred Nobel.
On 2 March 2008, Dmitry Medvedev was elected President of Russia while Putin became Prime Minister.
Times remained difficult, with frequent Mongol-Tatar raids.
The Soviet Union played a decisive role in the Allied victory in World War&nbsp;II, and emerged as a recognized superpower and rival to the United States during the Cold War.
In 1803–1806, the first Russian circumnavigation was made, later followed by other notable Russian sea exploration voyages.
It began to experience a rapid decline starting in the mid-1990s.
Recognized as World Cities, they feature such world-renowned museums as the Tretyakov Gallery and the Hermitage, famous theaters like Bolshoi and Mariinsky, ornate churches like Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Saint Isaac's Cathedral and Church of the Savior on Blood, impressive fortifications like the Kremlin and Peter and Paul Fortress, beautiful squares and streets like Red Square, Palace Square, Tverskaya Street and Nevsky Prospect.
The natural gas would begin to flow sometime between 2018 and 2020 and would continue for 30 years at an ultimate cost to China of $400bn.
* 1 autonomous oblast (the Jewish Autonomous Oblast): historically, autonomous oblasts were administrative units subordinated to krais.
The reigns of Catherine the Great and her grandson Alexander&nbsp;I saw the flourishing of Neoclassical architecture, most notably in the capital city of Saint Petersburg.
However, according to a 2012 study by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Government of the Russian Federation, the considerable potential of Russian forests is underutilized and Russia's share of the global trade in forest products is less than four percent.
The privatization largely shifted control of enterprises from state agencies to individuals with inside connections in the government.
Smetana (a heavy sour cream) is often added to soups and salads.
According to the Orthodox Church Tradition, Christianity was first brought to the territory of modern Belarus, Russia and Ukraine by Saint Andrew, the first Apostle of Jesus Christ.
Russia's territorial expansion was achieved largely in the late 16th century under the Cossack Yermak Timofeyevich during the reign of Ivan the Terrible, at a time when competing city-states in the western regions of Russia had banded together to form one country.
In the 2000s, on the wave of a new economic boom, the situation in the Russian science and technology has improved, and the government launched a campaign aimed into modernisation and innovation.
In its further development Russian philosophy was always marked by a deep connection to literature and interest in creativity, society, politics and nationalism; Russian cosmism and religious philosophy were other major areas.
As the successor to a former superpower, Russia's geopolitical status has often been debated, particularly in relation to unipolar and multipolar views on the global political system.
Russia captured 3,191,068 tons of fish in 2005.
According to a stress test conducted by the central bank Russian financial system would be able to handle a currency decline of 25%–30% without major central bank interference.
This period, known also as the Golden Age of Russian Poetry, began with Alexander Pushkin, who is considered the founder of the modern Russian literary language and often described as the "Russian Shakespeare".
Gleb Kotelnikov invented the knapsack parachute, while Evgeniy Chertovsky introduced the pressure suit.
The Soviet national team became the first ever European Champions by winning Euro 1960.
Russia's cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit the Earth, aboard the ''Vostok&nbsp;1'' manned spacecraft on 12 April 1961.
The number of Western visitors dropped in 2014.
While still under the domain of the Mongol-Tatars and with their connivance, Moscow began to assert its influence in the Central Rus' in the early 14th century, gradually becoming the leading force in the process of the Rus' lands' reunification and expansion of Russia.
Slavs are significantly Orthodox Christian, Turkic speakers are predominantly Muslim, and Mongolic peoples are generally Buddhists.
This estimate is an increase of more than US$18 billion on SIPRI's estimate of the Russian military budget for 2011 (US$71.9 billion).
While many reforms made during the Putin presidency have been generally criticized by Western nations as undemocratic, Putin's leadership over the return of order, stability, and progress has won him widespread admiration in Russia.
At the time of the 1917 Revolution, the Russian Orthodox Church was deeply integrated into the autocratic state, enjoying official status.
Recently Grigori Perelman was offered the first ever Clay Millennium Prize Problems Award for his final proof of the Poincaré conjecture in 2002.
However, since the World economic crisis of 2008 and a subsequent drop in oil prices, Russia's economy has stagnated and poverty has again started to rise.
(Source: Vital statistics table below)
The Russian physics school began with Lomonosov who proposed the law of conservation of matter preceding the energy conservation law.
Under Peter the Great, Russia was proclaimed an Empire in 1721 and became recognized as a world power.
Russia has 1,216 airports, the busiest being Sheremetyevo, Domodedovo, and Vnukovo in Moscow, and Pulkovo in St. Petersburg.
Traced back to the Christianization of Kievan Rus' in the 10th century, Russian Orthodoxy is the dominant religion in the country; smaller Christian denominations such as Catholics, Armenian Gregorians and various Protestant churches also exist.
The "territory" designation is historic, originally given to frontier regions and later also to the administrative divisions that comprised autonomous okrugs or autonomous oblasts.
Soviet ballet preserved the perfected 19th century traditions, and the Soviet Union's choreography schools produced many internationally famous stars, including Galina Ulanova, Maya Plisetskaya, Rudolf Nureyev, and Mikhail Baryshnikov.
The world's only fleet of nuclear-powered icebreakers advances the economic exploitation of the Arctic continental shelf of Russia and the development of sea trade through the Northern Sea Route between Europe and East Asia.
In August 1991, a coup d'état attempt by members of Gorbachev's government, directed against Gorbachev and aimed at preserving the Soviet Union, instead led to the end of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
While Hitler conquered Poland and France and other countries acted on a single front at the start of World War&nbsp;II, the USSR was able to build up its military and claim some of the former territories of the Russian Empire, Western Ukraine, Hertza region and Northern Bukovina as a result of the Soviet invasion of Poland, Winter War, occupation of the Baltic states and Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina.
Notable artists from this era include El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich, Wassily Kandinsky, and Marc Chagall.
Becoming the world's second nuclear weapons power, the USSR established the Warsaw Pact alliance and entered into a struggle for global dominance, known as the Cold War, with the United States and NATO.
Alexander Lodygin and Pavel Yablochkov were pioneers of electric lighting, and Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky introduced the first three-phase electric power systems, widely used today.
Some of these make up the Russian federal motorway system.
In 2012, the birth rate increased again.
In 2007, the Russian national basketball team won the European Basketball Championship.
It has the 15th largest economy in the world by nominal GDP and the 6th largest by purchasing power parity (PPP).
Bolsheviks consisted of many people with non-Russian, Communist Russians and influential Jewish backgrounds such as Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, Grigori Sokolnikov who were indifferent towards Christianity and based on the writings of Jewish philosopher Karl Marx with Marxism–Leninism as an ideology went on to form the Communist party.
The Soviet Union won all the Bandy World Championships for men between 1957–79 and some thereafter too.
From 1985 onwards, the last Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who sought to enact liberal reforms in the Soviet system, introduced the policies of ''glasnost'' (openness) and ''perestroika'' (restructuring) in an attempt to end the period of economic stagnation and to democratise the government.
The slave raids of Crimeans, however, did not cease until the late 17th century though the construction of new fortification lines across Southern Russia, such as the Great Abatis Line, constantly narrowed the area accessible to incursions.
The average residential water use was 248 litres per capita per day.
Russian pop music developed from what was known in the Soviet times as ''estrada'' into full-fledged industry, with some performers gaining wide international recognition, such as t.A.T.u., Nu Virgos and Vitas.
The Matryoshka doll is a recognizable symbol of Russia, and the towers of Moscow Kremlin and Saint Basil's Cathedral in Moscow are Russia's main architectural icons.
Later, in 1670–71, the Don Cossacks led by Stenka Razin initiated a major uprising in the Volga Region, but the Tsar's troops were successful in defeating the rebels.
Russian players Valery Kharlamov, Sergei Makarov, Vyacheslav Fetisov and Vladislav Tretiak hold four of six positions in the IIHF ''Team of the Century''.
The Government allocates funding to pay the tuition fees within an established quota or number of students for each state institution.
Similar parades take place in all major Russian cities and cities with the status ''Hero city'' or ''City of Military Glory''.
Many Russian fairy tales and epic bylinas were adapted for animation films, or for feature movies by the prominent directors like Aleksandr Ptushko (''Ilya Muromets'', ''Sadko'') and Aleksandr Rou (''Morozko'', ''Vasilisa the Beautiful'').
State symbols of Russia include the Byzantine double-headed eagle, combined with St. George of Moscow in the Russian coat of arms.
Russian folk songs, as well as patriotic Soviet songs, constitute the bulk of the repertoire of the world-renowned Red Army choir and other popular ensembles.
The Romans settled on the western part of the Caspian Sea, where their empire stretched towards the east.
The imperial motto ''God is with us'' and the Soviet motto ''Proletarians of all countries, unite!''
Primarily they were Vikings of Scandinavian origin, who ventured along the waterways extending from the eastern Baltic to the Black and Caspian Seas.
In the 17th century, the "fiery style" of ornamentation flourished in Moscow and Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque of the 1690s.
In May 2014 on a two-day trip to Shanghai, President Putin signed a deal on behalf of Gazprom for the Russian energy giant to supply China with 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year.
Extending across the entirety of northern Asia and much of Eastern Europe, Russia spans eleven time zones and incorporates a wide range of environments and landforms.
Eisenstein was a student of filmmaker and theorist Lev Kuleshov, who developed the Soviet montage theory of film editing at the world's first film school, the All-Union Institute of Cinematography.
Currently, there is no official census of religion in Russia, and estimates are based on surveys only.
Unaffiliated Muslims constitute significant numbers of over 10% in Kabardino-Balkaria (49%), Bashkortostan (38%), Karachay-Cherkessia (34%), Tatarstan (31%), Yamalia (13%), Orenburg Oblast (11%), Adygea (11%) and Astrakhan Oblast (11%).
Victory Day is the second most popular holiday in Russia; it commemorates the victory over Nazism in the Great Patriotic War.
* 4 autonomous okrugs (autonomous districts): originally autonomous entities within oblasts and krais created for ethnic minorities, their status was elevated to that of federal subjects in the 1990s.
The warm subtropical Black Sea coast of Russia is the site for a number of popular sea resorts, like Sochi, the follow-up host of the 2014 Winter Olympics.
Former President Vladimir Putin had advocated a strategic partnership with close integration in various dimensions including establishment of EU-Russia Common Spaces.
These ''Great Reforms'' spurred industrialization and modernized the Russian army, which had successfully liberated Bulgaria from Ottoman rule in the 1877–78 Russo-Turkish War.
Unlike the federal subjects, the federal districts are not a subnational level of government, but are a level of administration of the federal government.
Monthly government child-assistance payments were doubled to US$55, and a one-time payment of US$9,200 was offered to women who had a second child since 2007.
Russia's total area of cultivated land is estimated at , the fourth largest in the world.
In 2014, after President Viktor Yanukovych of Ukraine fled as a result of a revolution, Putin requested and received authorization from the Russian Parliament to deploy Russian troops to Ukraine.
Sugar imports reportedly dropped 82% between 2012 and 2013 as a result of the increase in domestic output.
Russia won the largest number of medals among the participating nations with 13 gold, 11 silver, and 9 bronze medals for a total of 33 medals.
The Stabilization Fund helped Russia to come out of the global financial crisis in a much better state than many experts had expected.
Russian poets, including Pyotr Yershov and Leonid Filatov, made a number of well-known poetical interpretations of the classical fairy tales, and in some cases, like that of Alexander Pushkin, also created fully original fairy tale poems of great popularity.
Russia has historically ranked low on the index since its inception in 2007.
Ivan&nbsp;III ("the Great") finally threw off the control of the Golden Horde and consolidated the whole of Central and Northern Rus' under Moscow's dominion.
