The Soviet government stood on a platform of antireligion, viewing the church as a "counter-revolutionary" organization and an independent voice with a great influence in society.
There are 261 Russian Orthodox eparchies worldwide (June 2012).
Some others opposed to the Act have joined themselves to other Greek Old Calendarist groups.
By the mid-10th century, there was already a Christian community among Kievan nobility, under the leadership of Byzantine Greek priests, although paganism remained the dominant religion.
In any case, religious beliefs and practices did persist, not only in the domestic and private spheres but also in the scattered public spaces allowed by a state that recognized its failure to eradicate religion and the political dangers of an unrelenting culture war.
The Primate of the ROC is the Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus'.
Within Russia the results of a 2007 VTsIOM poll indicated that about 75% of the population considered themselves Orthodox Christians.
These traditionalists became known as "Old Believers" or "Old Ritualists".
The ROC currently claims its exclusive jurisdiction over the Orthodox Christians, irrespective of their ethnic background, who reside in the former member republics of the USSR, excluding Georgia and Armenia, although this claim is disputed in such countries as Estonia, Moldova and Ukraine and consequently parallel canonical Orthodox jurisdictions exist in those: Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church and Metropolis of Bessarabia, respectively.
Smaller eparchies are usually governed by a single bishop.
Of these, 95,000 were put to death.
Metropolitan Philip, in particular, decried the abuses of Ivan the Terrible, who eventually engineered his deposition and murder.
The four other patriarchs have recognized the Moscow Patriarchate as one of the five honourable Patriarchates.
Another prominent figure within the Old Ritualists' movement, Boyarynya Morozova, was starved to death in 1675.
Alexei's death could well result in an even more conservative church."
Similar status, since 2007, is enjoyed by the Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (previously fully independent and deemed schismatic by the ROC).
The Roman Catholic Church, on the other hand, while acknowledging the primacy of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia, believed that the small Roman Catholic minority in Russia, in continuous existence since at least the 18th century, should be served by a fully developed church hierarchy with a presence and status in Russia, just as the Russian Orthodox Church is present in other countries (including constructing a cathedral in Rome, near the Vatican).
Also apparent was the proliferation of what the Orthodox establishment branded as "sectarianism", including both non-Orthodox Christian denominations, notably Baptists, and various forms of popular Orthodoxy and mysticism.
The sixth sector of the OGPU, led by Yevgeny Tuchkov, began aggressively arresting and executing bishops, priests, and devout worshippers, such as Metropolitan Veniamin in Petrograd in 1922 for refusing to accede to the demand to hand in church valuables (including sacred relics).
Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Kirill has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
One party, led by Nil Sorsky and Vassian Kosoy, called for the secularisation of monastic properties.
Sometimes those translations required the invention of new systems of transcription.
The financial hardship that beset the North American diocese as the result of the Russian Revolution resulted in a degree of administrative chaos, with the result that other national Orthodox communities in North America turned to the churches in their respective homelands for pastoral care and governance.
Patriarch Alexy II, acknowledged that compromises were made with the Soviet government by bishops of the Moscow Patriarchate, himself included, and publicly repented of these compromises
No less evident were non-conformist paths of spiritual searching known as "God-Seeking".
By 1987 the number of functioning churches in the Soviet Union had fallen to 6893 and the number of functioning monasteries to just 18.
At the meeting, prior to the departure of the Russian delegation, there were also substantive disagreements about the wording of a proposed joint statement among the Orthodox representatives.
An implicit ban on religious propaganda on state TV was finally lifted.
Although he tried to keep away from practical work of the dissident movement intending to better fulfil his calling as a priest, there was a spiritual link between Fr Aleksandr and many of the dissidents.
It also exercises ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the autonomous Church of Japan and the Orthodox Christians resident in the People's Republic of China.
After resuming communication with Moscow in early 1960s, and being granted autocephaly in 1970, the Metropolia became known as the Orthodox Church in America.
In 1700, after Patriarch Adrian's death, Peter the Great prevented a successor from being named, and in 1721, following the advice of Feofan Prokopovich, Archbishop of Pskov, the Holy and Supreme Synod was established under Archbishop Stephen Yavorsky to govern the church instead of a single primate.
Patriarch Kirill endorsed Putin's  election in 2012, stating Putin's terms were like "a miracle of God."
As time passed, the Russians widened the vocabulary of types and styles far beyond anything found elsewhere in the Orthodox world.
These Greek-Catholics were received into Orthodoxy into the existing North American diocese of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Many thousands of victims of persecution became recognized in a special canon of saints known as the "new martyrs and confessors of Russia".
A fascination with primitive feeling, with the unconscious and the mythic was apparent, along with visions of coming catastrophes and redemption.
The sovereign's position fluctuated, but eventually he threw his support to Joseph.
The Chinese Orthodox Church and the Japanese Orthodox Churches were granted full autonomy by the Moscow Patriarchate, but this autonomy is not universally recognized.
The year 1917 was a major turning point in Russian history, and also the Russian Orthodox Church.
Patriarchal ''locum tenens'' (acting Patriarch) Metropolitan Sergius (Stragorodsky, 1887–1944), going against the opinion of a major part of the church's parishes, in 1927 issued a declaration accepting the Soviet authority over the church as legitimate, pledging the church's cooperation with the government and condemning political dissent within the church.
At a conference at the Moscow State University on September 2012 Patriarch Kirill said church is not interested in obtaining state powers or even a state status "as in certain European countries".
When the glorification of a saint exceeds the limits of an eparchy, then the patriarch and Holy Synod decides about their canonization on the Church level.
Both of these metropolitans continued to entertain relations intermittently with the synod in Karlovci.
This was the situation until shortly after the Russian Revolution of 1917, at which time the Local Council (more than half of its members being lay persons) adopted the decision to restore the Patriarchy.
The unity was not merely theoretical, but was a reality, since there was then no other diocese on the continent.
Russians sometimes speak of an icon as having been "written", because in the Russian language (like Greek, but unlike English) the same word (''pisat''', писать in Russian) means both to paint and to write.
After the departure of the Russian delegation, the remaining Orthodox delegates approved the form which had been advocated by the representatives of the Ecumenical Patriarchate.
It treasures this independence.
Archbishop Ireland's refusal to accept Fr.
But like last year in Belgrade, all Moscow achieved was to isolate itself once more since no other Orthodox Church followed its lead, remaining instead faithful to Constantinople."
However, according to a poll published by the highly respected church related journal Pravmir in December 2012, only 41% of the Russian population identified itself with the Russian Orthodox Church.
He made Russia a formidable political power.
"A true icon is one that has 'appeared', a gift from above, one opening the way to the Prototype and able to perform miracles".
Canon Michael Bourdeaux, former president of the Keston Institute, said in January 2008 that "the Moscow Patriarchate acts as though it heads a state church, while the few Orthodox clergy who oppose the church-state symbiosis face severe criticism, even loss of livelihood."
The signing took place on the May 17, 2007, followed immediately by a full restoration of communion with the Moscow Patriarchate, celebrated by a Divine Liturgy at the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow, at which the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia Alexius II and the First Hierarch of ROCOR concelebrated for the first time.
It continues to be governed by its Council of Bishops and its Synod, the Council's permanent executive body.
In emulation of Stephen of Perm, they learned local languages and translated gospels and hymns.
Religion is opium for the people.
In the periods between the Councils the highest administrative powers are exercised by the Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church, which includes seven permanent members and is chaired by the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia, Primate of the Moscow Patriarchate.
Icons considered miraculous were said to "appear."
The followers of Sergius founded four hundred monasteries, thus greatly extending the geographical extent of the Grand Duchy of Moscow.
The Ecumenical See's representative in Ravenna said that Hilarion's position "should be seen as an expression of authoritarianism whose goal is to exhibit the influence of the Moscow Church.
Based on an ''ukase'' (decree) issued by Patriarch Tikhon, which stated that ''dioceses'' of the Church of Russia that were cut off from the governance of the highest Church authority (i.e.
Ecclesiastiacally, the ROC is organized in a hierarchical structure.
Anti-religious propaganda was openly sponsored and encouraged by the government, which the Church was not given an opportunity to publicly respond to.
The ROC, as well as the primate thereof, officially ranks fifth in the Orthodox order of precedence, immediately below the four ancient Patriarchates of the Greek Orthodox Church, those of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem.
Aleksey Khomyakov, Ivan Kireevsky and other lay theologians with Slavophile leanings elaborated some key concepts of the renovated Orthodox doctrine, including that of ''sobornost''.
Similarly, the saints of other Orthodox Churches were added to the Church calendar: in 1962 St. John the Russian, in 1970 St. Herman of Alaska, in 1993 Silouan the Athonite, the elder of Mount Athos, already canonized in 1987 by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
Although the Patriarch of Moscow enjoys extensive administrative powers, unlike the Pope, he has no direct canonical jurisdiction outside the diocese of Moscow, nor does he have single-handed authority over matters pertaining to faith as well as issues concerning the entire Orthodox Christian community such as the Catholic-Orthodox split.
The leaders of the Russian Church saw this action as a throwback to prior attempts by the Vatican to proselytize the Russian Orthodox faithful to become Roman Catholic.
New sects sprang up, some of which showed a tendency to revert to Mosaic law: for instance, the archpriest Aleksei converted to Judaism after meeting a certain Zechariah the Jew.
On November 5 (according to the Julian calendar) a new patriarch, Tikhon, was named through casting lots.
It was impossible to build new churches.
Among the prominent figures of that time were Father Dmitri Dudko and Father Aleksandr Men.
During the 2000 Council of the Russian Orthodox Church, the greatest general canonization in the history of the Orthodox Church took place: not only regarding the number of saints but also as in this canonization, all unknown saints were mentioned.
The Orthodox priests Gleb Yakunin, Sergiy Zheludkov and others spent years in Soviet prisons and exile for their efforts in defending freedom of worship.
The Church and the government remained on unfriendly terms until 1988.
Theological schools were closed, and church publications were prohibited.
The monks in the monasteries had a slightly higher status; they were not allowed to marry.
Gleb Yakunin, a critic of the Moscow Patriarchate who was one of those who briefly gained access to the KGB archive documents in the early 1990s, argued that the Moscow Patriarchate was "practically a subsidiary, a sister company of the KGB".
These administrative measures were followed by brutal state-sanctioned persecutions that included the wholesale destruction of churches, as well as the arrest and execution of many clerics.
They bluntly repudiated the materialism and atheism that had dominated the thought of the intelligentsia for generations as leading inevitably to failure and moral disaster.
Toth's credentials as a priest induced Fr.
After receiving the Synod’s support and the patriarch’s blessing, the question of glorification of a particular saint on the scale of the entire Church is given for consideration to the Local Council of the Russian Orthodox Church.
For instance, he insisted that Russian Christians cross themselves with three fingers, rather than the then-traditional two.
The task of believers of the local eparchy is to record descriptions of miracles, to create the hagiography of a saint, to paint an icon, as well as to compose a liturgical text of a service where the saint is glorified.
Some Russian icons were made of copper.
One of the first decrees of the new Communist government (issued in January 1918) declared freedom from "religious and anti-religious propaganda".
The ROCOR was instituted in the 1920s by Russian communities outside then Communist Russia, which refused to recognize the authority of the Moscow Patriarchate then ''de facto'' headed by Metropolitan Sergius Stragorodsky.
In the time between 1927 and 1940, the number of Orthodox Churches in the Russian Republic fell from 29,584 to less than 500.
Peter was not religious and had a low regard for the Church, so he put it under tight governmental control.
In 1977, St. Innocent of Moscow (1797–1879), the Metropolitan of Siberia, the Far East, the Aleutian Islands, Alaska, and Moscow was also canonized.
The ROC branches in Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Moldova and Ukraine since the 1990s enjoy various degrees of self-government, albeit short of the status of formal ecclesiastical autonomy.
In the following two centuries, missionary efforts stretched out across Siberia into Alaska.
It is independent in its administrative, pastoral, and property matters.
Such a view is backed up by other observers of Russian political life.
During the reign of Tsar Fyodor I his brother-in-law Boris Godunov contacted the Ecumenical Patriarch, who "was much embarrassed for want of funds," with a view to establishing a patriarchal see in Moscow.
There is evidence that the first Christian bishop was sent to Novgorod from Constantinople either by Patriarch Photius or Patriarch Ignatios, c. 866–67.
One of its effects was a flood of refugees from Russia to the United States, Canada, and Europe.
This transfer coincided with a great movement of Greek-Catholics to the Orthodox Church in the East of the United States.
Critics charge that the archives showed the extent of active participation of the top ROC hierarchs in the KGB efforts overseas.
The official Christianization of Kievan Rus' widely seen as the birth of the ROC is believed to have occurred in 988 through the baptism of the Kievan prince Vladimir and his people by the clergy of the Ecumenical Patriarchate whose constituent part the ROC remained for the next six centuries, while the Kievan see remained in the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate until 1686.
During the Schism of the Russian Church, the Old Ritualists were separated from the main body of the Orthodox Church.
The use and making of icons entered Kievan Rus' following its conversion to Orthodox Christianity in AD 988.
However, among the general population, large numbers remained religious.
Konstanin Kharchev, former chairman of the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs, explained: "Not a single candidate for the office of bishop or any other high-ranking office, much less a member of Holy Synod, went through without confirmation by the Central Committee of the CPSU and the KGB".
Under Patriarch Aleksey, there were difficulties in the relationship between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Vatican, especially since 2002, when Pope John Paul II created a Catholic diocesan structure for Russian territory.
There were 805 monasteries and 30 theological schools.
However, it also treasures the dialogue that it has with the modern state.
ROCOR bishops participate in the Council of Bishops of the entire Russian Church.
In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.
Levy of ''The New York Times'' wrote in April 2008: "Just as the government has tightened control over political life, so, too, has it intruded in matters of faith.
Politically, the church was impotent.
This movement, which increased the numbers of Orthodox Christians in America, resulted from a conflict between John Ireland, the politically powerful Roman Catholic Archbishop of Saint Paul, Minnesota; and Alexis Toth, an influential Ruthenian Catholic priest of St. Mary's church in Minneapolis.
Orthodox priests and believers were variously tortured and sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals.
The Revolution of 1918 severed large sections of the Russian church&mdash;dioceses in America, Japan, and Manchuria, as well as refugees in Europe&mdash;from regular contacts with the main church.
When Tikhon died in 1925, Soviet authorities forbade patriarchal elections to be held.
The main target of the anti-religious campaign in the 1920s and 1930s was the Russian Orthodox Church, which had the largest congregation.
Icons are considered to be the Gospel in paint, and therefore careful attention is paid to ensure that the Gospel is faithfully and accurately conveyed.
and a similar percentage of Belarusians and Ukrainians identify themselves as "Orthodox".
At the urging of the Zealots of Piety, in 1652 Patriarch Nikon resolved to centralize power that had been distributed locally, while conforming Russian Orthodox rites and rituals to those of the Greek Orthodox Church, as interpreted by pundits from the Kiev Ecclesiastical Academy.
In 1989 the Holy Synod established the Synodal Commission for canonization.
In the 1980s the Russian Orthodox Church re-established the process for canonization; a practice that had ceased for half a century.
The group further claimed to speak as a synod for the entire "free" Russian church.
However, when viewed from the extremely small base remaining in 1988 when just 6893 churches and 16 monasteries were functioning in the whole of the USSR, there was an obvious and immediate need to rebuild and restore as many places of worship as were needed by the population.
the Holy Synod and the Patriarch) should be managed independently until such time as normal relations with the highest Church authority could be resumed; and on this basis, the North American diocese of the Russian Orthodox Church (known as the "Metropolia") continued to exist in a ''de facto'' autonomous mode of self-governance.
The controversial transfer brought millions of faithful and half a dozen dioceses under the pastoral and administrative care of the Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus', leading to the significant Ukrainian domination of the Russian Orthodox Church, which continued well into the 18th century, with Theophanes Prokopovich, Epiphanius Slavinetsky, Stephen Yavorsky and Demetrius of Rostov being among the most notable representatives of this trend.
The late 18th century saw the rise of ''starchestvo'' under Paisiy Velichkovsky and his disciples at the Optina Monastery.
Currently both the OCA and ROCOR, since 2007, are in communion with the ROC.
Some Orthodox believers and even priests took part in the dissident movement and became prisoners of conscience.
Such holy figures as Sergius of Radonezh and Metropolitan Alexis helped the country to withstand years of Tatar oppression, and to expand both economically and spiritually.
Archpriest Avvakum Petrov and many other opponents of the church reforms were burned at the stake, either forcibly or voluntarily.
Practising Orthodox Christians were restricted from prominent careers and membership in communist organizations (the party, the Komsomol).
Among the peasantry there was widespread interest in spiritual-ethical literature and non-conformist moral-spiritual movements, an upsurge in pilgrimage and other devotions to sacred spaces and objects (especially icons), persistent beliefs in the presence and power of the supernatural (apparitions, possession, walking-dead, demons, spirits, miracles and magic), the renewed vitality of local "ecclesial communities" actively shaping their own ritual and spiritual lives, sometimes in the absence of clergy, and defining their own sacred places and forms of piety.
According to one of the legends, Andrew reached the future location of Kiev and foretold the foundation of a great Christian city.
In 863–69, the Byzantine Greek monks Saint Cyril and Saint Methodius, both from Greek Macedonia, translated parts of the Bible into Old Church Slavonic language for the first time, paving the way for the Christianization of the Slavs and Slavicized peoples of Eastern Europe, the Balkans, and Southern Russia.
During the next half a century, when the tsardom was weak, the patriarchs (notably Hermogenes and Philaret) would help run the state along with (and sometimes instead of) the tsars.
The 1990 Local Council of the Russian Orthodox Church gave an order for the Synodal Commission for Canonisation to prepare documents for canonization of new martyrs who had suffered from the 20th century Communist repressions.
The two groups eventually went their separate ways.
All parishes in a geographical region belong to an eparchy ( &mdash; equivalent to a Western diocese).
The Church has close ties with the Kremlin including the patronage of Vladimir Putin, who has mobilized religion both inside and outside Russian borders.
ROCOR, which moved its headquarters to North America after the Second World War, claimed but failed to establish jurisdiction over all parishes of Russian origin in North America.
In cultural and social affairs Putin has collaborated closely with the Church.
During the final decades of the imperial order in Russia many educated Russians sought to return to the church and tried to bring their faith back to life.
Others escaped from the government persecutions to Siberia.
The resurgence of Eastern Orthodoxy was reflected in Russian literature, an example is the figure of Starets Zosima in Fyodor Dostoyevsky's ''Brothers Karamazov''.
Russian traders settled in Alaska during the 18th century.
By the end of the first millennium AD, eastern Slavic lands started to come under the cultural influence of the Eastern Roman Empire.
The First-Hierarch and bishops of the ROCOR are elected by its Council and confirmed by the Patriarch of Moscow.
For the first time in the history of the Soviet Union, people could see live transmissions of church services on television.
Moreover, in the 1929 elections, the Orthodox Church attempted to formulate itself as a full-scale opposition group to the Communist Party, and attempted to run candidates of its own against the Communist candidates.
After World War II the Patriarchate of Moscow made unsuccessful attempts to regain control over these groups.
The aim was to bring about a decline in the power and influence of the Church by separating it from the people, especially the younger generations.
This aroused antipathy among a substantial section of believers, who saw the changed rites as heresy, although the extent to which these changes can be regarded as minor or major ritual significance remains open to debate.
Several years after the Council of Pereyaslav (1654) that heralded the subsequent incorporation of eastern regions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth into the Tsardom of Russia, the see of the Metropolitan of Kiev and all Rus' was transferred to the Moscow patriarchate (1686).
In January 1918 Patriarch Tikhon proclaimed anathema to the Bolsheviks (without explicitly naming them), which further antagonized relations.
The Russian Orthodox Church today has ecclesiastical missions in Jerusalem and some other countries around the world.
In 1987 in the Russian SFSR, between 40% and 50% of newborn babies (depending on the region) were baptized.
Thus the Russian Orthodox Church found itself without official state backing for the first time in its history.
But the new Soviet government soon declared the separation of church and state and also nationalized all church-held lands.
However the support of multicandidate elections was retracted several months before the elections were held and in neither 1929 nor 1937 were any candidates of the Orthodox Church elected.
Professor Nathaniel Davis points out: "If the bishops wished to defend their people and survive in office, they had to collaborate to some degree with the KGB, with the commissioners of the Council for Religious Affairs, and with other party and governmental authorities.".
Seminaries were closed down, and the church was restricted from using the press.
In 1978 it was proclaimed that the Russian Orthodox Church had created a prayer order for Meletius of Kharkov, which practically signified his canonization because that was the only possible way to do it at that time.
Under the Act, the ROCOR remains a self-governing entity within the Church of Russia.
In February the Tsar was forced to abdicate, the Russian empire was dissolved and the Tsarist government - which had granted the Church numerous privileges - was overthrown.
On 5 December 2008, the day of Patriarch Alexy's death, the ''Financial Times'' said: "While the church had been a force for liberal reform under the Soviet Union, it soon became a center of strength for conservatives and nationalists in the post-communist era.
The ROC should also not be confused with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (also known as the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, or ROCOR), headquartered in New York, New York, U.S.A.
However, the liturgical texts in honor of a saint are not published in all Church books but only in local publications.
In Ukraine, ROC (represented by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church) has tensions with schismatic groups supported by the current government, while it enjoys the position of numerically dominant religious organisation.
According to figures released on March 2, 2011, the Church had 164 dioceses, 217 bishops, and 30,675 parishes served by 28,934 priests and 3,625 deacons.
This marked a beginning of a significant spiritual revival in the Russian Church after a lengthy period of modernization, personified by such figures as Demetrius of Rostov and Platon of Moscow.
Then the patriarch gives his blessing and the local hierarch performs the act of canonization at the local level.
By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active.
Such rights belong to the ruling hierarch and it can only happen when the blessing of the patriarch is received.
However, the Moscow Prince Vasili II rejected the act of the Council of Florence brought to Moscow by Isidore in March 1441.
It is possible to see a similarly renewed vigor and variety in religious life and spirituality among the lower classes, especially after the upheavals of 1905.
Many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were also subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions.
The ROC is often said to be the largest of the Eastern Orthodox churches in the world.
The Russian Church also sought to fill the ideological vacuum left by the collapse of Communism and even, in the opinion of some analysts, became "a separate branch of power".
Religion is a sort of spiritual booze, in which the slaves of capital drown their human image, their demand for a life more or less worthy of man..."
For this reason, Ireland is sometimes ironically remembered as the "Father of the Orthodox Church in America".
Most parish priests were sons of priests, were very poorly educated, and very poorly paid.
The essays created a sensation.
Russian icons are typically paintings on wood, often small, though some in churches and monasteries may be much larger.
… This close alliance between the government and the Russian Orthodox Church has become a defining characteristic of Mr. Putin's tenure, a mutually reinforcing choreography that is usually described here as working 'in symphony'."
The Russian metropolitanate remained effectively vacant for the next few years due largely to the dominance of Uniates in Constantinople then.
While the Soviet Union officially claimed religious tolerance, in practice the government discouraged organized religion and did much to remove religious influence from Soviet society.
Reinforced by these reforms, the Moscow Church felt powerful enough to occasionally challenge the policies of the tsar.
The Moscow Theological Academy Seminary, which had been closed since 1918, was re-opened.
Thousands of churches and monasteries were taken over by the government and either destroyed or converted to secular use.
On September 4, 1943, Metropolitans Sergius, Alexy and Nikolay had a meeting with Stalin and received a permission to convene a council on September 8, 1943, which elected Sergius Patriarch of Moscow and all the Rus'.
After Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort.
Toward that end, the Communist regime confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools.
The Patriarchate of Moscow thereby renounced its former canonical claims in the United States and Canada; it also acknowledged an autonomous church established in Japan that same year.
At this time all Orthodox Christians in North America were united under the ''omophorion'' (church authority and protection) of the Patriarch of Moscow, through the Russian Church's North American diocese.
A diocese was established, whose first bishop was Saint Innocent of Alaska.
Following the tribulations of the Mongol invasion, the Russian Church was pivotal in the survival and life of the Russian state.
Her grandson, Vladimir of Kiev, made Rus' officially a Christian state.
