However, Austro-Hungarian forces allied to Germany were driven back deep into the Galicia region by the end of the year.
Rasputin is killed by Prince Yusupov.
October Revolution is launched as MRC directs armed workers and soldiers to capture key buildings in Petrograd.
The outcome of all this, however, was a growing criticism of the government rather than any war-weariness.
On 7 November 1917, Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin led his leftist revolutionaries in a revolt against the ineffective Provisional Government (Russia was still using the Julian Calendar at the time, so period references show a 25 October date).
Lenin and his associates, however, had to agree to travel to Russia in a sealed train: Germany would not take the chance that he would foment revolution in Germany.
Troops from 181st Regiment help striking Russkii Renault workers fight against the Police.
Winter Palace attacked at 9:40pm and captured at 2am.
The poor conditions only aggravated the situation, with the number of strikes and incidents of public disorder rapidly increasing in the years shortly before World War I.
This was mainly because, as the war progressed, many of the officers who were loyal to the Tsar were killed, and were replaced by discontented conscripts from the major cities, who had little loyalty to the Tsar.
Strikers shot at in Ivánovo-Voznesénsk; casualties.
The main problems were food shortages and rising prices.
Because of late industrialization, Russia's workers were highly concentrated.
Strikes, mutinies, street demonstrations lead to the fall of autocracy.
In the second revolution that October, the Provisional Government was removed and replaced with a Bolshevik (Communist) government.
The soldiers refused to follow the new orders.
In 1916, reports of fraternizing with the enemy started to circulate.
Growing numbers of socialists and lower-class Russians viewed the government less and less as a force in support of their needs and interests.
Trotsky and others freed.
The Bolsheviks executed the tsar and his family on 16 July 1918.
Between 1890 and 1910, the population of the capital, Saint Petersburg, swelled from 1,033,600 to 1,905,600, with Moscow experiencing similar growth.
This issue is subject to conflicting views on the communist history by various Marxist groups and parties.
There were many encouragements to expect more from life.
Leon Trotsky said that the goal of socialism in Russia would not be realized without the success of the world revolution.
At the same time, urban industrial life was full of benefits, though these could be just as dangerous, from the point of view of social and political stability, as the hardships.
Meanwhile, the Social Democrat leaders in exile, now mostly in Switzerland, had been the glum spectators of the collapse of international socialist solidarity.
The war also developed a weariness in the city, owing to a lack of food in response to the disruption of agriculture.
Bolshevik majority in Petrograd Soviet elects Bolshevik Presidium and Trotsky as chairman.
When the Provisional Government chose to continue fighting the war with Germany, the Bolsheviks and other socialist factions campaigned for stopping the conflict.
An elementary theory of property, believed by many peasants, was that land should belong to those who work on it.
Local industrial committees proliferated.
Conscription swept up the unwilling across Russia.
While many notable historical events occurred in Moscow and Petrograd, there was also a visible movement in cities throughout the state, among national minorities throughout the empire and in the rural areas, where peasants took over and redistributed land.
In the aftermath, Lenin fled to Finland under threat of arrest while Trotsky, among other prominent Bolsheviks, was arrested.
These ideals were championed most vociferously by Russia’s liberals, although populists, Marxists, and anarchists also claimed to support democratic reforms.
(On arrival back in Russia, these soldiers were either imprisoned or sent straight back into the front.)
Though Lenin was the leader of the Bolshevik Party, it has been argued that since Lenin was not present during the actual takeover of the Winter Palace, it was really Trotsky's organization and direction that led the revolution, merely spurred by the motivation Lenin instigated within his party.
Since the fall of Communism in Russia in 1991, the Western-Totalitarian view has again become dominant and the Soviet-Marxist view has practically vanished.
In August 1917 the Kerensky government evacuated the Romanovs to Tobolsk in the Urals, to protect them from the rising tide of revolution during the Red Terror.
There was also no running water, and piles of human waste were a threat to the health of the workers.
The Russian Civil War, which broke out in 1918 shortly after the revolution, brought death and suffering to millions of people regardless of their political orientation.
Lenin was of the opinion that taking power should occur in both St. Petersburg and Moscow simultaneously, parenthetically stating that it made no difference which city rose up first, but expressing his opinion that Moscow may well rise up first.
It was for this reason that when, on , the Tsar ordered the army to suppress the rioting by force, troops began to mutiny.
In February 1917, striking workers elected deputies to represent them and socialist activists began organizing a citywide council to unite these deputies with representatives of the socialist parties.
Russia consisted mainly of poor farming peasants, with 1.5% of the population owning 25% of the land.
Change was facilitated by the physical movement of growing numbers of peasant villagers who migrated to and from industrial and urban environments, but also by the introduction of city culture into the village through material goods, the press, and word of mouth.
Conscription stripped skilled workers from the cities, who had to be replaced with unskilled peasants, and then, when famine began to hit due to the poor railway system, workers abandoned the cities in droves seeking food.
Central government begins to seize up.
They also believed Russia was not ready for socialism.
The representatives of the Provisional Government agreed to "take into account the opinions of the Soviet of Workers' Deputies", though they were also determined to prevent "interference in the actions of the government", which would create "an unacceptable situation of dual power."
World War I added to the chaos.
When the Tsar finally reached his destination, the Army Chiefs and his remaining ministers (those who had not fled under pretense of a power-cut) suggested in unison that he abdicate the throne.
They met in the same building as the emerging Provisional Government not to compete with the Duma Committee for state power but to best exert pressure on the new government, to act, in other words, as a popular democratic lobby.
It stated that, inevitably, a terrible disaster would grip the country unless a constitutional form of government was put in place.
Acquiring new skills gave many workers a sense of self-respect and confidence, heightening expectations and desires.
In December, a small group of nobles assassinated Rasputin, and in January 1917 the Tsar's uncle, Grand Duke Nicholas, was asked indirectly by Prince Lvov whether he would be prepared to take over the throne from his nephew, Tsar Nicholas II.
Students, white-collar workers and teachers joined the workers in the streets and at public meetings.
Begins when the commander-in-chief of the Russian army, General Lavr Kornilov, demands (or is believed by Kerensky to demand) that the government give him all civil and military authority and moves troops against Petrograd.
The Bolsheviks firstly assumed power in Petrograd, expanding their rule outwards.
Also, the problem of shortages was largely solved by a major effort to increase domestic production.
To end Russia’s participation in the First World War, the Bolshevik leaders signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany in March 1918.
Whereas, in February 1917, the Bolsheviks were limited to only 24,000 members, by September 1917 there were 200,000 members of the Bolshevik faction.
Furthermore, the Bolshevik-controlled Moscow Regional Bureau of the Party also controlled the Party organizations of the thirteen (13) provinces around Moscow.
The Kornilov Affair failed largely due to the efforts of the Bolsheviks, whose influence over railroad and telegraph workers proved vital in stopping the movement of troops.
By , virtually every industrial enterprise in Petrograd had been shut down, together with many commercial and service enterprises.
Over the course of the spring, public dissatisfaction with the Provisional Government and the war, in particular among workers, soldiers and peasants, pushed these groups to radical parties.
In July 1915, a Central War Industries Committee was established under the chairmanship of a prominent Octobrist, Guchkov, and including ten workers' representatives.
Dissatisfaction with Russian autocracy culminated in the huge national upheaval that followed the Bloody Sunday massacre of January 1905, in which hundreds of unarmed protesters were shot by the Tsar's troops.
In the October Revolution (November in the Gregorian calendar), the Bolshevik party, led by Vladimir Lenin, and the workers' Soviets overthrew the Provisional Government in Petrograd and established the Russian SFSR, eventually shifting the capital to Moscow in 1918.
The sailors and soldiers, along with Petrograd workers, took to the streets in violent protest, calling for "all power to the Soviets."
The  peasantry were consequently faced with the higher cost of purchases, but made no corresponding gain in the sale of their own produce, since this was largely taken by the middlemen on whom they depended.
When delegates representing the Kronstadt sailors arrived at Petrograd for negotiations, they raised 15 demands primarily pertaining to the Russian right to freedom The Government firmly denounced the rebellions and labelled the requests as a reminder of the Social Revolutionaries, a political party that was popular among Soviets before Lenin, but refused to cooperate with the Bolshevik Army.
Thus, Lenin remained the ''enfant terrible'' of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, although at this point in the war his following in Russia was as few as 10,000 and he must have seemed no more than the leader of an extremist wing of a bankrupt organization.
The Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government competed for power over Russia.
Critics on the Right have long argued that the financial and logistical assistance of German intelligence via their key agent, Alexander Parvus was a key component as well, though historians are divided, since there is little evidence supporting that claim.
Six days later, Nicholas, no longer Tsar and addressed with contempt by the sentries as "Nicholas Romanov", was reunited with his family at the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo.
Russian offensive ends.
Religious faith helped bind all of these tenets together as a source of comfort and reassurance in the face of difficult conditions and as a means of political authority exercised through the clergy.
speech in reconvened Duma.
Shops closed early or entirely for lack of bread, sugar, meat and other provisions, and lines lengthened massively for what remained.
According to Edvard Radzinsky and Dmitrii Volkogonov, the order came directly from Lenin and Sverdlov in Moscow.
Kerensky flees Petrograd.
The women workers marched to nearby factories bringing out over 50,000 workers on strike.
Early in that year, Guchkov had been taking soundings among senior army officers and members of the Central War Industries Committee about a possible coup to force the abdication of the Tsar.
In November, Pavel Milyukov in the Duma openly accused the government of contemplating peace negotiations with Germany.
In the chaos, members of the Imperial parliament or Duma assumed control of the country, forming the Russian Provisional Government.
Soviet membership was initially freely elected, but many members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, anarchists, and other leftists created opposition to the Bolsheviks through the soviets themselves.
In Finland, Lenin had worked on his book ''State and Revolution'' and continued to lead his party, writing newspaper articles and policy decrees.
Government officials responsible for public order worried about how long people's patience would last.
Arrest of Bolshevik leaders ordered.
Trotsky and Lunacharskii arrested.
Nicholas II was a deeply conservative ruler and maintained a strict authoritarian system.
These men, usually of peasant or working-class backgrounds, were to play a large role in the politicization of the troops in 1917.
The Bolsheviks' role in stopping the attempted coup further strengthened their position.
Since the autumn of 1914, he had insisted that "from the standpoint of the working class and of the labouring masses from the lesser evil would be the defeat of the Tsarist Monarchy"; the war must be turned into a civil war of the proletarian soldiers against their own governments, and if a proletarian victory should emerge from this in Russia, then their duty would be to wage a revolutionary war for the liberation of the masses throughout Europe.
Despite initial hopes for success in the German Revolution of 1918–19, in the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic and others like it, no other Marxist movement at the time succeeded in keeping power in its hands.
With his coup failing, Kornilov surrendered and was relieved of his position.
Joseph Stalin later rejected this idea, stating that socialism was possible in one country.
Individuals and society in general were expected to show self-restraint, devotion to community, deference to the social hierarchy and a sense of duty to the country.
The events of Bloody Sunday triggered a line of protests.
George Orwell's classic novella ''Animal Farm'' is an allegory of the Russian Revolution.
A period of dual power ensued, during which the Provisional Government held state power while the national network of Soviets, led by socialists, had the allegiance of the lower classes and the political left.
The huge losses on the battlefields were not limited to men.
The effective power of the Provisional Government was challenged by the authority of an institution that claimed to represent the will of workers and soldiers and could, in fact, mobilize and control these groups during the early months of the revolution&nbsp;– the Petrograd Soviet Council of Workers' Deputies.
In August, poor or misleading communication led General Lavr Kornilov, the recently appointed Supreme Commander of Russian military forces, to believe that the Petrograd government had already been captured by radicals, or was in serious danger thereof.
He was placed under house arrest with his family by the Provisional Government.
Strikers in Petrograd protest at the deaths in Ivánovo-Voznesénsk.
Ultimately, Nicholas's inept handling of his country and the war destroyed the Tsar and ended up costing him both his reign and his life.
Demonstrations were organised to demand bread, and these were supported by the industrial working force who considered them a reason for continuing the strikes.
By 1916, however, the situation had improved in many respects.
The Russian Empire collapsed with the abdication of Emperor Nicholas II, and the old regime was replaced by a provisional government during the first revolution of February 1917 (March in the Gregorian calendar; the older Julian calendar was in use in Russia at the time).
During this chaotic period there were frequent mutinies, protests and many strikes.
With Lenin's arrival, the popularity of the Bolsheviks increased steadily.
The execution may have been carried out on the initiative of local Bolshevik officials, or it may have been an option pre-approved in Moscow should White troops approach Yekaterinburg.
He did so on , on behalf of himself, and then, having taken advice, on behalf of his son, the Tsarevich.
Russian troops stopped retreating, and there were even some modest successes in the offensives that were staged that year, albeit at great loss of life.
Increasing peasant disturbances and sometimes actual revolts occurred, with the goal of securing ownership of the land they worked.
As the counter revolutionary White movement gathered force, leading to full-scale civil war by the summer, the Romanovs were moved during April and May 1918 to Yekaterinburg, a militant Bolshevik stronghold.
Even after the 1905 revolution spurred the Tsar to decree limited civil rights and democratic representation, he worked to limit even these liberties in order to preserve the ultimate authority of the crown.
The Tsar took a train back towards Petrograd, which was stopped on , by a group of disloyal troops.
Casualty rates were the most vivid sign of this disaster.
The historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three camps: the Soviet-Marxist view, the Western-Totalitarian view, and the Revisionist view.
The Bolsheviks appointed themselves as leaders of various government ministries and seized control of the countryside, establishing the Cheka to quash dissent.
After the entry of the Ottoman Empire on the side of the Central Powers in October 1914, Russia was deprived of a major trade route through Ottoman Empire, which followed with a minor economic crisis, in which Russia became incapable of providing munitions to their army in the years leading to 1917.
The problem was further compounded by the failure of Sergei Witte's land reforms of the early 20th century.
Lenin had consolidated the principle of state penetration of the whole society, its economy and its culture.
The officer class also saw remarkable changes, especially within the lower echelons, which were quickly filled with soldiers rising up through the ranks.
This created a new 'proletariat' which, due to being crowded together in the cities, was much more likely to protest and go on strike than the peasantry had been in previous times.
In early March, the Provisional Government placed Nicholas and his family under house arrest in the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoe Selo,  south of Petrograd.
It continued for several years, during which the Bolsheviks defeated both the Whites and all rival socialists.
Hostility toward the Kaiser and the desire to defend their land and their lives did not necessarily translate into enthusiasm for the Tsar or the government.
Third coalition government formed.
Food and fuel shortages and high prices.
Average annual strikes
French and German Social Democrats had voted in favour of their respective governments.
This armed uprising was fought against the antagonizing Bolshevik economic policies that farmers were subjected to, including seizures of grain crops by the Communists.
The "July Days"; mass armed demonstrations in Petrograd, encouraged by the Bolsheviks, demanding "All Power to the Soviets".
She was intensely unpopular, owing, in part, to her German origin and to the influence that Rasputin, an unsavoury "monk", exercised over her.
At the same time, peasant life and culture was changing constantly.
Lenin had been living in exile in neutral Switzerland and, due to democratization of politics after the February Revolution, which legalized formerly banned political parties, he perceived the opportunity for his Marxist revolution.
Although return to Russia had become a possibility, the war made it logistically difficult.
The war was fought mainly between the Red Army ("Reds"), consisting of the uprising majority led by the Bolshevik minority, and the "Whites"&nbsp;– army officers and cossacks, the "bourgeoisie", and political groups ranging from the far Right to the Socialist Revolutionaries who opposed the drastic restructuring championed by the Bolsheviks following the collapse of the Provisional Government to the soviets (under clear Bolshevik dominance).
The crisis in morale (as was argued by Allan Wildman, a leading historian of the Russian army in war and revolution) "was rooted fundamentally in the feeling of utter despair that the slaughter would ever end and that anything resembling victory could be achieved."
He also sought help from the Petrograd Soviet, which called upon armed Red Guards to "defend the revolution".
The Government then responded with an armed suppression of these revolts and suffered 10 thousand casualties before entering the city of Kronstadt.
With good reason, the soldiers did not feel that they were being treated as human beings, or even as valuable soldiers, but rather as raw materials to be squandered for the purposes of the rich and powerful.
Great Britain and France promise Russia Istanbul and other Turkish lands.
The October revolution ended the phase of the revolution instigated in February, replacing Russia's short-lived provisional parliamentary government with government by soviets, local councils elected by bodies of workers and peasants.
Nicholas also sought to foster a greater sense of national unity with a war against a common and ancient enemy.
The indirect reason was that the government, in order to finance the war, had been printing millions of ruble notes, and by 1917 inflation had made prices increase up to four times what they had been in 1914.
Food scarcity had become a considerable problem in Russia, but the cause of this did not lie in any failure of the harvests, which had not been significantly altered during wartime.
The Russian Empire was an agglomeration of diverse ethnicities that had shown significant signs of disunity in the years before the First World War.
This idealized vision of the Romanov monarchy blinded him to the actual state of his country.
Far sooner than expected, barely trained recruits had to be called up for active duty, a process repeated throughout the war as staggering losses continued to mount.
In fact, this was precisely what was being created, though this "dual power" (dvoevlastie) was the result less of the actions or attitudes of the leaders of these two institutions than of actions outside their control, especially the ongoing social movement taking place on the streets of Russia’s cities, in factories and shops, in barracks and in the trenches, and in the villages.
It describes the dictator Stalin as a big Berkshire boar by the name of Napoleon.
The political group that proved most troublesome for Kerensky, and would eventually overthrow him, was the Bolshevik Party, led by Vladimir Lenin.
Miliukov gives his 'Is this stupidity or treason?'
Workers responded to the massacre with a crippling general strike, forcing Nicholas to put forth the October Manifesto, which established a democratically elected parliament (the State Duma).
A series of political crises&nbsp;– see the chronology below&nbsp;– in the relationship between population and government and between the Provisional Government and the soviets (which developed into a nationwide movement with a national leadership, The All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK)) undermined the authority of the Provisional Government but also of the moderate socialist leaders of the Soviet.
The July Days confirmed the popularity of the anti-war, radical Bolsheviks, but their unpreparedness at the moment of revolt was an embarrassing gaffe that lost them support among their main constituent groups: soldiers and workers.
The fortunes of war may have improved, but the fact of the war, still draining away strength and lives from the country and its many individuals and families, remained an oppressive inevitability.
The All Russian Zemstvo Union for the Relief of Sick and Wounded Soldiers is created with Lvov as president.
Russia declared a republic.
Progressive Bloc formed.
Inevitably Vladimir Lenin, supported by Zinoviev and Radek, strongly contested them.
Although few actively joined the rioting, many officers were either shot or went into hiding; the ability of the garrison to hold back the protests was all but nullified, symbols of the Tsarist regime were rapidly torn down around the city, and governmental authority in the capital collapsed – not helped by the fact that Nicholas had prorogued the Duma that morning, leaving it with no legal authority to act.
Liberal and monarchist forces, loosely organized into the White Army, immediately went to war against the Bolsheviks' Red Army, in a series of battles that would become known as the Russian Civil War.
The Bolsheviks had undergone a spectacular growth in membership.
The February Revolution (March 1917) was a revolution focused around Petrograd (now Saint Petersburg), then capital of Russia.
The most notable instances of this anti-Bolshevik mentality were expressed in the Tambov rebellion, 1919–1921, and the Kronstadt rebellion in March 1921.
Serious defeats, Nicholas II declares himself Commander in Chief.
As discontent grew, the State Duma issued a warning to Nicholas in November 1916.
Third State Duma, until 1912.
This was a naval mutiny engineered by Soviet Baltic sailors, former Red Army soldiers, and the people of Kronstadt.
At least 180,000 troops were available in the capital, but most were either untrained or injured.
Elects Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK), headed by Mensheviks and SRs.
The rapid industrialization of Russia also resulted in urban overcrowding and poor conditions for urban industrial workers (as mentioned above).
Nevertheless, by the end of 1916, morale among soldiers was even worse than it had been during the great retreat of 1915.
* There was enormous discontent with Russia's involvement in the war, and many were calling for an end to it.
Reacting to war failures and a hostile Duma, the Tsar takes over as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, prorogues the Duma and moves to military headquarters at Mogilev.
Unfulfilled hopes of democracy fueled revolutionary ideas and violent outbursts targeted at the monarchy.
Germany declares war on Russia.
Petersburg and Moscow behind the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, by September the Bolsheviks were in the majority in both cities.
More important, though, was a deeper fragility: although many ordinary Russians joined anti-German demonstrations in the first few weeks of the war, the most widespread reaction appears to have been skepticism and fatalism.
However, the problems were merely administrative, and not industrial as Germany was producing great amounts of munitions whilst constantly fighting on two major battlefronts.
The war devastated not only soldiers.
Second Congress of Soviets: Mensheviks and right SR delegates walk out in protest against the previous day's events.
Nicholas nominated his brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich, to succeed him.
The Tsar undermined this promise of reform but a year later with Article 87 of the 1906 Fundamental State Laws, and subsequently dismissed the first two Dumas when they proved uncooperative.
Radzinsky noted that Lenin's bodyguard personally delivered the telegram ordering the execution and that he was ordered to destroy the evidence.
The Tsar rejected these proposals.
Reports of corruption and incompetence in the Imperial government began to emerge, and the growing influence of Grigori Rasputin in the Imperial family was widely resented.
The Duma's bourgeois parties form the 'Progressive bloc' to push for better government and reform; includes the Kadets, Octobrist groups and Nationalists.
Soon after, the government ordered soldiers to go to the front, reneging on a promise.
The response of the Duma, urged on by the liberal bloc, was to establish a Temporary Committee to restore law and order; meanwhile, the socialist parties establish the Petrograd Soviet to represent workers and soldiers.
Instead of restoring Russia's political and military standing, World War I led to the horrifying slaughter of Russian troops and military defeats that undermined both the monarchy and society in general to the point of collapse.
After passing through the front, he arrived in Petrograd in April 1917.
None of these incidents were in themselves the immediate cause of the February Revolution, but they do help to explain why the monarchy survived only a few days after it had broken out.
As minister of war and later Prime Minister, Kerensky promoted freedom of speech, released thousands of political prisoners, did his very best to continue the war effort and even organised another offensive (which, however, was no more successful than its predecessors).
