To ensure partisan balance, there would be seven Democrats and seven Republicans, with Justice David Davis, an independent respected by both parties, as the fifteenth member.
He also proposed a reduction in state taxes and reform of the state prison system.
His opinion in ''Yick Wo v. Hopkins'' in 1886 advanced his and Hayes' views on the protection of ethnic minorities' rights.
All of his efforts were in vain; Hayes failed to convince the South to accept the idea of racial equality and failed to convince Congress to appropriate funds to enforce the civil rights laws.
Hayes was elected, but Reconstruction was finished.
Biographer Ari Hoogenboom says his greatest achievement was to restore popular faith in the presidency and to reverse the deterioration of executive power that had set in after Abraham Lincoln's death.
The first vacancy occurred when David Davis resigned to enter the Senate during the election controversy of 1876.
Congress passed a new law to that effect, the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, after Hayes left office.
He urged Congress, unsuccessfully, to pass a bill written by Senator Henry W. Blair that would have allowed federal aid for education for the first time.
Hayes's success in Ohio immediately elevated him to the top ranks of Republican politicians under consideration for the presidency in 1876.
Critics charged Hayes with parsimony, but Hayes spent more money (which came out of his personal budget) after the ban, ordering that any savings from eliminating alcohol be used on more lavish entertainment.
Despite his message of conciliation, many Democrats never considered Hayes's election legitimate and referred to him as "Rutherfraud" or "His Fraudulency" for the next four years.
The election laws remained in effect, but the funds to enforce them were curtailed for the time being.
Two years later, some Republicans proposed Hayes to fill a vacancy on the bench and he considered accepting the appointment until the office of city solicitor also became vacant.
He also managed some real estate he had acquired in Duluth, Minnesota.
However, Hayes was dismayed at drunken behavior at receptions hosted by ambassadors around Washington, leading him to follow his wife's temperance leanings.
Hayes declined the offers, preferring to preserve party unity and retire to private life.
A staunch abolitionist, Hayes found his work on behalf of fugitive slaves personally gratifying as well as politically useful, as it raised his profile in the newly formed Republican Party.
In July of that year, workers from the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad walked off the job in Martinsburg, West Virginia, to protest their reduction in pay.
Also like Hayes, Tilden was a hard-money man and supported civil service reform.
He died ten weeks before Rutherford's birth.
Concerned about a repetition of French adventurism in Mexico, Hayes interpreted the Monroe Doctrine firmly.
Hayes courted his future wife, Lucy Webb, during his time there.
That September, Hayes's regiment was called east to reinforce General John Pope's Army of Virginia at the Second Battle of Bull Run.
He emphasized the need for vocational, as well as academic, education: "I preach the gospel of work," he wrote, "I believe in skilled labor as a part of education."
They lost much of their land through later sales to unscrupulous white speculators.
As Cincinnati was just across the Ohio River from Kentucky, a slave state, it was a destination for escaping slaves and many such cases were tried in its courts.
The convention then selected Representative William A. Wheeler of New York for Vice President, a man about whom Hayes had recently asked, "I am ashamed to say: who is Wheeler?"
Because March 4, 1877 fell on a Sunday, Hayes took the oath of office privately on Saturday, March 3, in the Red Room of the White House, the first president to do so in the Executive Mansion.
The balance was upset when Democrats in the Illinois legislature elected Davis to the Senate, hoping to sway his vote.
War with the Ute tribe broke out in 1879 when the Utes killed Indian agent Nathan Meeker, who had been attempting to convert them to Christianity.
Hayes's leadership and bravery drew the attention of his superiors, with Ulysses S. Grant later writing of Hayes that "his conduct on the field was marked by conspicuous gallantry as well as the display of qualities of a higher order than that of mere personal daring."
In 1880 Hayes embarked on a 71-day tour of the American West, becoming the first sitting President to travel west of the Rocky Mountains.
Hayes submitted the nomination in October 1877, but it aroused some dissent in the Senate because of Harlan's limited experience in public office.
To further complicate matters, one of the three electors from Oregon (a state Hayes had won) was disqualified, reducing Hayes's total to 165, and raising the disputed votes to 20.
Hayes kept his pledge not to run for re-election, retired to his home in Ohio, and became an advocate of social and educational reform.
The situation calmed as Díaz and Hayes agreed to jointly pursue bandits and Hayes agreed not to allow Mexican revolutionaries to raise armies in the United States.
After the Confederates had fired on Fort Sumter, Hayes resolved his doubts and joined a volunteer company composed of his Literary Society friends.
Hayes was determined to preserve the law protecting black voters, and he vetoed the appropriation.
Hayes was wounded five times, most seriously at the Battle of South Mountain; he earned a reputation for bravery in combat and was promoted to the rank of major general.
The Specie Payment Resumption Act of 1875 required the treasury to redeem any outstanding greenbacks in gold, thus retiring them from circulation and restoring a single, gold-backed currency.
The following year, Hayes recorded his thoughts on that subject in his diary:
Hayes's later attempts to protect the rights of southern blacks were ineffective, as were his attempts to rebuild Republican strength in the South.
Hayes, an attorney in Ohio, was city solicitor of Cincinnati from 1858 to 1861.
In one case, he used a form of the insanity defense that saved the accused from the gallows; the woman was instead confined to a mental institution.
Hayes declined to seek re-election in 1880, keeping his pledge that he would not run for a second term.
Although no federal troops had killed any of the strikers, or been killed themselves, clashes between state militia troops and strikers resulted in deaths on both sides.
The primary concession Hayes promised would be the withdrawal of federal troops from the South and an acceptance of the election of Democratic governments in the remaining "unredeemed" states of the South.
He took the oath publicly on the following Monday on the East Portico of the United States Capitol.
Hayes awarded the disputed land in the Gran Chaco region to Paraguay, and the Paraguayans honored him by renaming a city (Villa Hayes) and a department (Presidente Hayes) in his honor.
His first cousin, Mary Jane Noyes Mead, was the mother of sculptor Larkin Goldsmith Mead and architect William Rutherford Mead.
Instead, Hayes wrote several letters to the voters explaining his political positions and was elected by a 2,400-vote majority over the incumbent Democrat Alexander Long.
After a month of training, Hayes and the 23rd Ohio set out for western Virginia in July 1861 as a part of the Kanawha Division.
He pledged to support "wise, honest, and peaceful local self-government" in the South, as well as reform of the civil service and a full return to the gold standard.
Hayes died of complications of a heart attack at his home on January 17, 1893.
Only two states were still under Reconstruction's sway when Hayes assumed the Presidency and, without troops to enforce the voting rights laws, these soon fell.
He believed that education was the best way to heal the rifts in American society and allow individuals to improve themselves.
Can't something be done by education of strikers, by judicious control of capitalists, by wise general policy to end or diminish the evil?
After briefly reading law in Columbus, Ohio, Hayes moved east to attend Harvard Law School in 1843.
Hayes led a charge against an entrenched position and was shot through his left arm, fracturing the bone.
The Nez Perce war was not the last conflict in the West, as the Bannock rose up in Spring 1878 and raided nearby settlements before being defeated by Howard's army in July of that year.
He became a member of the Sons of the American Revolution based on his descent from Daniel Austin and Elias Birchard.
Hayes feared that the Act would cause inflation that would be ruinous to business, effectively impairing contracts that were based on the gold dollar, as the silver dollar proposed in the bill would have an intrinsic value of 90 to 92 percent of the existing gold dollar.
The Ponca were awarded compensation for their land rights, which had been previously granted to the Sioux.
He enjoyed his time at Kenyon, and was successful scholastically; while there, he joined several student societies and became interested in Whig politics.
John Humphrey Noyes, the founder of the Oneida Community, was also a first cousin.
Hayes also advocated better prison conditions.
In 1873, the Coinage Act of 1873 stopped the coinage of silver for all coins worth a dollar or more, effectively tying the dollar to the value of gold.
Hayes became an advocate for educational charities, advocating federal education subsidies for all children.
As a result, the money supply contracted and the effects of the Panic of 1873 grew worse, making it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had contracted when currency was less valuable.
Hayes's political views were more moderate than the Republican party's platform, although he agreed with the proposed amendment to the Ohio state constitution that would guarantee suffrage to black male Ohioans.
After two trials, the defendants were found not guilty in 1883.
The Senate's Commerce Committee, which Conkling chaired, voted unanimously to reject the nominees, and the full Senate rejected Roosevelt and Prince by a vote of 31–25, confirming Merritt only because Sharpe's term had expired.
After a few days, Hayes resolved to send in troops to protect federal property wherever it appeared to be threatened and gave Major General Winfield Scott Hancock overall command of the situation, marking the first use of federal troops to break a strike against a private company.
Business leaders praised Hayes, but his own opinion was more equivocal; as he recorded in his diary: "The strikes have been put down by ''force;'' but now for the ''real'' remedy.
Cedar Creek marked the end of the campaign.
Those Acts, passed during Reconstruction, made it a crime to prevent someone from voting because of his race.
The result was the Compromise of 1877, in which the Democrats acquiesced to Hayes's election and Hayes ended all U.S. military involvement in Southern politics.
Three months after taking office, Hayes granted the Army the power to pursue bandits, even if it required crossing into Mexican territory.
In June 1876, the convention assembled with James G. Blaine of Maine as the favorite.
Hayes also had a horse shot out from under him, and the army was defeated.
The Nez Perce, led by Chief Joseph, began an uprising in June 1877 when Major General Oliver O. Howard ordered them to move on to a reservation.
In September 1877, Hayes demanded the three men's resignations, which they refused to give.
Asked by friends in Cincinnati to leave the army to campaign, Hayes refused, saying that an "officer fit for duty who at this crisis would abandon his post to electioneer for a seat in Congress ought to be scalped."
Sophia took charge of the family, bringing up Hayes and his sister, Fanny, the only two of their four children to survive to adulthood.
He vetoed the Bland–Allison Act, which would have put silver money into circulation and raised prices, insisting that maintenance of the gold standard was essential to economic recovery.
Choosing not to seek re-election, Hayes looked forward to retiring from politics in 1872.
In 1873, Lucy gave birth to another son, Manning Force Hayes.
The veto drew praise among eastern liberals, but Hayes was bitterly denounced in the West.
Hayes vetoed the bill, believing that the United States should not abrogate treaties without negotiation.
Tilden was considered a formidable adversary who, like Hayes, had a reputation for honesty.
Outside of the Western hemisphere, Hayes's biggest foreign policy concern dealt with China.
Hayes attempted, unsuccessfully, to fill a third vacancy in 1881.
Even among Republicans, devotion to continued military Reconstruction was fading in the face of persistent Southern insurgency and violence.
Howard's men defeated the Nez Perce in battle, and the tribe began a 1700-mile retreat into Canada.
His mother had encouraged him to get to know Lucy years earlier, but Hayes had believed she was too young and focused his attention on other women.
The Democratic nominee was Samuel J. Tilden, the Governor of New York.
Porfirio Díaz, the Mexican president, protested the order and sent troops to the border.
Advancing into southwestern Virginia, they destroyed Confederate salt and lead mines there.
Not entirely removed from politics, Hayes held out some hope of a cabinet appointment, but was disappointed to receive only an appointment as assistant U.S. treasurer at Cincinnati, which he turned down.
But, the public blamed the railroads for the strikes and violence, and they were compelled to improve working conditions and make no further cuts.
Hayes visited Washington, D.C. that May and observed the Grand Review of the Armies, after which he and the 23rd Ohio returned to their home state to be mustered out of the service.
Finally, Hayes signed an appropriation without the offensive rider, but Congress refused to pass another bill to fund federal marshals, who were vital to the enforcement of the Enforcement Acts.
Although supporters have praised his commitment to civil service reform and defense of civil rights, Hayes is generally listed among the bottom half in historians' rankings of U.S. presidents.
At Cedar Creek, Hayes sprained his ankle after being thrown from a horse and was struck in the head by a spent round, which did not cause serious damage.
Hayes was forced to wait until July 1878 when, during a Congressional recess, he sacked Arthur and Cornell and replaced them by recess appointments of Merritt and Silas W. Burt, respectively.
Hayes left Congress to run for Governor of Ohio and was elected to two consecutive terms, from 1868 to 1872, and then to a third term, from 1876 to 1877.
Alcohol was not served again in the Hayes White House.
She influenced her husband's views on those issues, although he never formally joined her church.
John Sherman, the Treasury Secretary, ordered John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House, which was stacked with Conkling's spoilsmen.
The following year, when James A. Garfield entered the White House, he re-submitted Matthews's nomination to the Senate, which this time confirmed Matthews by one vote, 24 to 23.
When the 39th Congress assembled in December 1865, Hayes was sworn in as a part of a large Republican majority.
Senators of both parties were accustomed to being consulted about political appointments and turned against Hayes.
He implemented modest civil service reforms that laid the groundwork for further reform in the 1880s and 1890s.
With a Republican legislature, Hayes's second term was more enjoyable.
Business remained meager on his return to Lower Sandusky, and Hayes decided to move to Cincinnati.
The Ohio delegation to the 1876 Republican National Convention was united behind him, and Senator John Sherman did all in his power to bring Hayes the nomination.
Hunter believed the troops at Lynchburg were too powerful, however, and Hayes and his brigade returned to West Virginia.
He did, however, defeat Congress's efforts to curtail federal power to monitor federal elections.
By railroad and stagecoach, the party traveled north to Oregon, arriving in Portland, and from there to Vancouver, Washington.
Hayes and his brigade moved to the Shenandoah Valley for the Valley Campaigns of 1864.
He ordered federal troops to crush the Great Railroad Strike of 1877.
His earliest American ancestor emigrated to Connecticut from Scotland in 1625.
Hayes stopped granting new star route contracts, but let existing contracts continue to be enforced.
He graduated with highest honors in 1842 and addressed the class as its valedictorian.
Hayes moved to Cincinnati in 1850, and opened a law office with John W. Herron, a lawyer from Chillicothe.
He wrote that "the soul had left Spiegel Grove" when she died.
Over the next five years, Lucy gave birth to three sons: Birchard Austin (1853), Webb Cook (1856), and Rutherford Platt (1858).
In accordance with the custom of the time, the campaign was conducted by surrogates, with Hayes and Tilden remaining in their respective home towns.
Woods served six years on the Court, ultimately proving a disappointment to Hayes as he interpreted the Constitution in a manner more similar to that of Southern Democrats than to Hayes's own preferences.
As the Southern states started to secede after Lincoln's election to the Presidency in 1860, Hayes was lukewarm on the idea of a civil war to restore the Union.
As historian Hans L. Trefousse later wrote, Hayes "hardly knew the chief suspect Brady and certainly had no connection with the star route corruption."
Re-elected in 1866, Hayes returned to the lame-duck session to vote for the Tenure of Office Act, which ensured that Johnson could not remove administration officials without the Senate's consent.
Hayes nominated William Burnham Woods, a carpetbagger Republican circuit court judge from Alabama.
In 1880, Schurz and Senator John A. Logan asked Hayes to shut down the "star route" rings, a system of corrupt contract profiteering in the Postal Service, and to fire Second Assistant Postmaster-General Thomas J. Brady, the alleged ring leader.
Jay's report suggested that the New York Custom House was so overstaffed with political appointees that 20% of the employees were expendable.
The strike quickly spread to workers of the New York Central, Erie, and Pennsylvania railroads, with the strikers soon numbering in the thousands.
In a message to Congress in February 1881, Hayes insisted he would "give to these injured people that measure of redress which is required alike by justice and by humanity."
Early's army surprised them at Kernstown on July 24, where Hayes was slightly wounded by a bullet to the shoulder.
They worked to reject Johnson's vision of Reconstruction and to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1866.
A popular Congressman and former Army officer, Hayes was considered by Ohio Republicans to be an excellent standard-bearer for the 1867 election campaign.
That same year, the Panic of 1873 hurt business prospects across the nation, including Hayes's.
That June, Governor William Dennison appointed several of the officers of the volunteer company to positions in the 23rd Regiment of Ohio Volunteer Infantry.
The second issue concerned United States Notes (commonly called greenbacks), a form of fiat currency first issued during the Civil War.
The Republicans emphasized the danger of letting Democrats run the nation so soon after southern Democrats provoked the Civil War and, to a lesser extent, the danger a Democratic administration would pose to the recently won civil rights of southern blacks.
The major legislative effort of the Congress was the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, for which Hayes voted and which passed both houses of Congress in June 1866.
Hayes then toured several southwestern states before returning to Ohio in November, in time to cast a vote in the 1880 Presidential Election.
President Andrew Johnson, who succeeded to office following Lincoln's assassination, to the contrary wanted to re-admit the seceded states quickly without first ensuring that they adopted laws protecting the newly freed slaves' civil rights; he also granted pardons to many of the leading former Confederates.
As the returns were tallied on election day, it was clear that the race was close: Democrats had carried most of the South, as well as New York, Indiana, Connecticut, and New Jersey.
He was also pleased at the progress of the political career of William McKinley, his army comrade and political protégé.
Democrats accused Hayes of delaying proper investigation so as not to injure Republican chances in the 1880 elections but did not press the issue in their campaign literature, as members of both parties were implicated in the corruption.
Hayes believed in meritocratic government, equal treatment without regard to race, and improvement through education.
Hayes was promoted to major, and his friend and college classmate Stanley Matthews was appointed lieutenant colonel.
Conkling opposed the appointees' confirmation when the Senate reconvened in February 1879, but Merritt was approved by a vote of 31–25, as was Burt by 31–19, giving Hayes his most significant civil service reform victory.
Democratic Representative Richard P. Bland of Missouri proposed a bill that would require the United States to coin as much silver as miners could sell the government, thus increasing the money supply and aiding debtors.
The United States cannot consent to the surrender of this control to any European power or any combination of European powers."
There was considerable debate about which person or house of Congress was authorized to decide between the competing slates of electors, with the Republican Senate and the Democratic House each claiming priority.
They followed up the victory with another at Fisher's Hill on September 22, and one more at Cedar Creek on October 19.
Lucy, a Methodist, was a teetotaler and abolitionist.
Hayes and his wife Lucy were known for their policy of keeping an alcohol-free White House, giving rise to her nickname "Lemonade Lucy."
As the March 4 inauguration day neared, Republican and Democratic Congressional leaders met at Wormley's Hotel in Washington to negotiate a compromise.
Hayes's great-grandfather, Ezekiel Hayes, was a militia captain in Connecticut in the American Revolutionary War, but Ezekiel's son (Hayes's grandfather, also named Rutherford) left his Branford home during the war for the relative peace of Vermont.
In order to make up for financial losses suffered since the panic of 1873, the major railroads cut their employees' wages several times in 1877.
Blaine started with a significant lead in the delegate count but could not muster a majority.
Hayes's father, a Vermont storekeeper, took the family to Ohio in 1817.
On April 3, Hayes ordered the Secretary of War George W. McCrary to withdrawal federal troops stationed at the South Carolina State House to their barracks.
In his inaugural address, Hayes attempted to soothe the passions of the past few months, saying that "he serves his party best who serves his country best".
In 1880, Hayes quickly forced Secretary of Navy Richard W. Thompson to resign office after Thompson had accepted a $25,000 salary for a nominal job offered by French engineer Ferdinand de Lesseps to promote a French canal in Panama.
The campaign against Democratic nominee William Allen focused primarily on Protestant fears of the possibility of state aid to Catholic schools.
Many Senators objected to the appointment, believing that Matthews was too close to corporate and railroad interests, especially those of Jay Gould, and the Senate adjourned without voting on the nomination.
In October, after a decisive battle at Bear Paw, Montana, Chief Joseph surrendered and General William T. Sherman ordered the tribe transported to Kansas, where they were forced to remain until 1885.
Four years later, Hayes began to spend more time with Lucy.
His mother's ancestors arrived in Vermont at a similar time, and most of his close relatives outside Ohio continued to live there.
Hayes especially looked forward to spending time with his children, two of whom (daughter Fanny and son Scott) had been born in the past five years.
They became engaged in 1851 and married on December 30, 1852, at the house of Lucy's mother.
In the subsequent furor, Democrats in the House of Representatives attempted to impeach him, but narrowly failed when Republicans prevented a quorum by refusing to vote.
Joining the regiment as a private was William McKinley, another future president.
In retirement, Hayes was troubled by the disparity between the rich and the poor, saying in an 1886 speech that "free government cannot long endure if property is largely in a few hands and large masses of people are unable to earn homes, education, and a support in old age."
Returning from there, Hayes and his uncle Sardis made a long journey to Texas, where Hayes visited with Guy M. Bryan, a Kenyon classmate and distant relative.
Rutherford Birchard Hayes was born in Delaware, Ohio, on October 4, 1822, the son of Rutherford Hayes, Jr. and Sophia Birchard.
Hayes, along with congressional Republicans, disagreed.
Hayes attended the common schools in Delaware, Ohio, and enrolled in 1836 at the Methodist Norwalk Seminary in Norwalk, Ohio.
In October, he was promoted to colonel and assigned to command of the first brigade of the Kanawha Division as a brevet brigadier general.
His last words were "I know that I'm going where Lucy is."
The Democrats did not have enough votes to override the veto, but they passed a new bill with the same rider.
The allotment system was favored by liberal reformers at the time, including Schurz, but instead proved detrimental to American Indians.
Hayes also dealt with corruption in the postal service.
Nominated for a second term in 1869, Hayes campaigned again for equal rights for black Ohioans and sought to associate his Democratic opponent, George H. Pendleton with disunion and racism.
In 1880, a second seat became vacant upon the resignation of Justice William Strong.
Immediately, Hayes's call for reform brought him into conflict with the Stalwart, or pro-spoils, branch of the Republican party.
Hayes had begun his law practice dealing primarily with commercial issues but won greater prominence in Cincinnati as a criminal defense attorney, defending several people accused of murder.
Although he could not convince Congress to outlaw the spoils system, Hayes issued an executive order that forbade federal office holders from being required to make campaign contributions or otherwise taking part in party politics.
Justice Noah Haynes Swayne resigned with the expectation that Hayes would fill his seat by appointing Stanley Matthews, who was a friend of both men.
In 1868, the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China, allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese immigrants into the country.
Hayes identified with the moderate wing of the party, but was willing to vote with the radicals for the sake of party unity.
The Democrats agreed, and on March 2, the filibuster was ended.
Hayes continued to vote with the majority in the 40th Congress on the Reconstruction Acts, but resigned in July 1867 to campaign for governor of Ohio.
Once the public was confident that they could redeem greenbacks for specie (gold), however, few did so; when the Act took effect in 1879, only $130,000 out of the $346,000,000 outstanding dollars in greenbacks were actually redeemed.
A former candidate for governor of Kentucky, Harlan had been Benjamin Bristow's campaign manager at the 1876 Republican convention, and Hayes had earlier considered him for Attorney General.
The railroad strikers, as a rule, are good men, sober, intelligent, and industrious."
