In recent years Rwanda has seen improvement on a number of key health indicators:
The city of Kigali is a provincial-level authority, which coordinates urban planning within the city.
Other attractions include Nyungwe Forest, home to chimpanzees, Ruwenzori colobus and other primates, the resorts of Lake Kivu, and Akagera, a small savanna reserve in the east of the country.
Christianity is the largest religion in the country; the principal language is Kinyarwanda, spoken by most Rwandans, with English and French serving as official languages.
Rwanda's mining industry is an important contributor, generating US$93&nbsp;million in 2008.
The constitution mandates a multi-party system of government, with politics based on democracy and elections.
Rwanda today has low corruption compared with neighbouring countries, although human rights organisations report suppression of opposition groups, intimidation and restrictions on freedom of speech; the government says it's protecting its country as any other government may do in its situation.
According to the 2012 census, the second largest city is Gisenyi, which lies adjacent to Lake Kivu and the Congolese city of Goma, and has a population of 126,000.
The Rwandan government, through its Sports Development Policy, promotes sport as a strong avenue for "development and peace building", and the government has made commitments to advancing the use of sport for a variety of development objectives, including education.
Since 2000 Rwanda's economy, tourist numbers, and Human Development Index have grown rapidly; between 2006 and 2011 the poverty rate reduced from 57% to 45%, while life expectancy rose from 46.6 years in 2000 to 59.7 years in 2015.
The population coalesced first into clans and then into kingdoms.
Inhabitants of Rwanda's Nkombo Island speak Amashi, a language closely related to Kinyarwanda.
Under the RPF government, however, Rwanda has sought closer ties with neighbouring countries in the East African Community and with the English-speaking world.
These are Northern Province, Southern Province, Eastern Province, Western Province, and the Municipality of Kigali in the centre.
The most famous traditional dance is a highly choreographed routine consisting of three components: the ''umushagiriro'', or cow dance, performed by women; the ''intore'', or dance of heroes, performed by men; and the drumming, also traditionally performed by men, on drums known as ''ingoma''.
Many Rwandans view the Christian God as synonymous with the traditional Rwandan God ''Imana''.
The RPF is seen as a Tutsi-dominated party but receives support from across the country, and is credited with ensuring continued peace, stability, and economic growth.
Despite these improvements, however, the country's health profile remains dominated by communicable diseases, and the United States Agency for International Development has described "significant health challenges", including the rate of maternal mortality, which it describes as "unacceptably high", as well as the ongoing HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Rwanda is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Francophonie, East African Community, and the Commonwealth of Nations.
There is no public water transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu, although a limited private service exists and the government has initiated a programme to develop a full service.
Strategic Foresight also characterise Rwanda as a fast warming country, with an increase in average temperature of between 0.7&nbsp;°C to 0.9&nbsp;°C over fifty years.
, peace has been restored and relations are improving.
Article 101 of the current constitution limits presidents to two terms in office, but  there is a motion underway in the Rwandan parliament to amend this and allow Kagame to run for a third term.
Tension escalated between the Tutsi, who favoured early independence, and the Hutu emancipation movement, culminating in the 1959 Rwandan Revolution: Hutu activists began killing Tutsi, forcing more than 100,000 to seek refuge in neighbouring countries.
The constitution provides for two types of courts: ordinary and specialised.
The upper chamber is the 26-seat Senate, whose members are selected by a variety of bodies.
The capital, Kigali, is located near the centre of Rwanda.
, mobile phone penetration in the country is 72.6%, up from 41.6% in 2011.
The cuisine of Rwanda is based on local staple foods produced by subsistence agriculture such as bananas, plantains (known as ''ibitoke''), pulses, sweet potatoes, beans, and cassava (manioc).
One of these, the Kingdom of Rwanda, ruled by the Tutsi Nyiginya clan, became increasingly dominant from the mid-eighteenth century.
Global warming has caused a change in the pattern of the rainy seasons.
Rainfall varies geographically, with the west and northwest of the country receiving more precipitation annually than the east and southeast.
This, coupled with increased demand as the economy grew, precipitated a shortfall in 2004 and widespread loadshedding.
Kagame subsequently won elections in 2003 and 2010, although human rights organisations have criticised these elections as being "marked by increasing political repression and a crackdown on free speech".
Revenue from tourism was US$303&nbsp;million in 2014, up from just US$62&nbsp;million in 2000.
Amnesty International is also critical; in its 2014/15 report Amnesty said that laws against inciting insurrection or trouble among the population had been used to imprison people "for the legitimate exercise of their rights to freedom of association or of expression".
Rwanda has a temperate tropical highland climate, with lower temperatures than are typical for equatorial countries because of its high elevation.
The economy is managed by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc; in August 2015, the exchange rate was 755 francs to the United States dollar.
Partners In Health described the health gains "among the most dramatic the world has seen in the last 50 years".
President Kagame has made healthcare one of the priorities for the Vision 2020 development programme, boosting spending on health care to 6.5% of the country's gross domestic product in 2013, compared with 1.9% in 1996.
A number of films have been produced about the Rwandan Genocide, including the Golden Globe-nominated ''Hotel Rwanda'', ''Shake Hands with the Devil'', ''Sometimes in April'', and ''Shooting Dogs'', the last two having been filmed in Rwanda and having featured survivors as cast members.
Before colonisation, the King (''Mwami'') exercised control through a system of provinces, districts, hills, and neighbourhoods.
In 1935, Belgium introduced identity cards labelling each individual as either Tutsi, Hutu, Twa or Naturalised.
Rwabugiri conquered several smaller states, expanded the kingdom west and north, and initiated administrative reforms; these included ''ubuhake'', in which Tutsi patrons ceded cattle, and therefore privileged status, to Hutu or Tutsi clients in exchange for economic and personal service, and ''uburetwa'', a corvée system in which Hutu were forced to work for Tutsi chiefs.
The CIA ''World Factbook'' gives estimates that the Hutu made up 84% of the population in 2009, the Tutsi 15% and Twa 1%.
The five provinces act as intermediaries between the national government and their constituent districts to ensure that national policies are implemented at the district level.
Products manufactured include cement, agricultural products, small-scale beverages, soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles and cigarettes.
There are 670 bird species in Rwanda, with variation between the east and the west.
The country's oldest telecommunications group, Rwandatel, went into liquidation in 2011, having been 80% owned by Libyan company LAP Green.
Drums are of great importance; the royal drummers enjoyed high status within the court of the King (''Mwami'').
Vegetation in the Volcanoes National Park is mostly bamboo and moorland, with small areas of forest.
The kingdom reached its greatest extent during the nineteenth century under the reign of King Kigeli Rwabugiri.
It makes legislation and is empowered by the constitution to oversee the activities of the President and the Cabinet.
Premiums under the scheme were initially US$2 per annum; since 2011 the rate has varied on a sliding scale, with the poorest paying nothing, and maximum premiums rising to US$8 per adult.
Many Twa were also killed, despite not being directly targeted.
While schooling is fee-free, there is an expectation that parents should contribute to the cost of their children's education by providing them with materials, supporting teacher development and making a contribution to school construction.
The international response to the genocide was limited, with major powers reluctant to strengthen the already overstretched UN peacekeeping force.
A combination of below average rainfall and human activity, including the draining of the Rugezi wetlands for cultivation and grazing, caused the two lakes' water levels to fall from 1990 onwards; by 2004 levels were reduced by 50%, leading to a sharp drop in output from the power stations.
The country bid unsuccessfully to host the 2013 tournament.
Over the course of approximately 100 days, between 500,000 and 1,000,000 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu were killed in well-planned attacks on the orders of the interim government.
In 2013, the public University of Rwanda (UR) was created out of a merger of the former National University of Rwanda and the country's other public higher education institutions.
*incidence of tuberculosis has dropped from 101 to 69 per 100,000 people.
Music and dance are an integral part of Rwandan culture, particularly drums and the highly choreographed ''intore'' dance.
Woven baskets and bowls are especially common.
Mountains dominate central and western Rwanda.
Nonetheless, publications in Kinyarwanda, English, and French critical of the government are widely available in Kigali.
The Parliament consists of two chambers.
Eastern Rwanda, by contrast, features savanna birds such as the black-headed gonolek and those associated with swamps and lakes, including storks and cranes.
This lake occupies the floor of the Albertine Rift along most of the length of Rwanda's western border, and with a maximum depth of , it is one of the twenty deepest lakes in the world.
Shortages of land and water, insufficient and poor-quality feed, and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output.
According to the 2012 census, Roman Catholics represented 43.7% of the population, Protestants (excluding Seventh-day Adventists) 37.7%, Seventh-day Adventists 11.8%, and Muslims 2.0%; 0.2% claimed no religious beliefs and 1.3% did not state a religion.
The explorer Gustav Adolf von Götzen was the first European to significantly explore the country in 1894; he crossed from the south-east to Lake Kivu and met the king.
''Ubugari'' (or ''umutsima'') is a paste made from cassava or maize and water to form a porridge-like consistency that is eaten throughout the African Great Lakes.
In rural areas, many bars have a brochette seller responsible for tending and slaughtering the goats, skewering and barbecuing the meat, and serving it with grilled bananas.
While it had previously been possible for particularly wealthy Hutu to become honorary Tutsi, the identity cards prevented any further movement between the classes.
Article 54 states that "political organizations are prohibited from basing themselves on race, ethnic group, tribe, clan, region, sex, religion or any other division which may give rise to discrimination".
Scholars disagree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi; some believe differences are derived from former social castes within a single people, while others believe the Hutu and Tutsi arrived in the country separately, and from different locations.
Television access is limited, with most homes not having their own set.
Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country, although most originated as functional items rather than purely for decoration.
Swahili, the lingua franca of the African Great Lakes, and the official language of the East African Community, is also spoken by some as a second language, particularly returned refugees from Kenya and Tanzania.
The Germans did not significantly alter the social structure of the country, but exerted influence by supporting the king and the existing hierarchy and delegating power to local chiefs.
the country has no railways, but there is a project underway, in conjunction with Burundi and Tanzania, to extend the Tanzanian Central Line into Rwanda; the three countries have invited expressions of interest from private firms to form a public private partnership for the scheme.
Archaeological excavations have revealed evidence of sparse settlement by hunter gatherers in the late stone age, followed by a larger population of early Iron Age settlers, who produced dimpled pottery and iron tools.
Minerals mined include cassiterite, wolframite, gold, and coltan, which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones.
Rwanda's population of lions was destroyed in the aftermath of the genocide of 1994, as national parks were turned into camps for displaced people and remaining animals were poisoned by cattle herders.
Public officials (including the President) are required by the constitution to declare their wealth to the Ombudsman and to the public; those who do not comply are suspended from office.
The country has a number of institutions of tertiary education.
Major export markets include China, Germany, and the United States.
Tourism is one of the fastest-growing economic resources and became the country's leading foreign exchange earner in 2007.
The judiciary is independent of the executive branch, although the President and the Senate are involved in the appointment of Supreme Court judges.
A mid-2015 UNDP report noted that the country was not on target to meet goal 4 on infant mortality, despite it having "fallen dramatically"; the country is "making good progress" towards goal 5, which is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio, while goal 6 is not yet met as HIV prevalence has not started falling.
Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices.
The government has devolved the financing and management of healthcare to local communities, through a system of health insurance providers called ''mutuelles de santé''.
Under this theory, the Hutu and Tutsi distinction arose later and was a class distinction rather than a racial one.
Internet penetration is low but rising rapidly; in 2015 there were 12.8 internet users per 100 people, up from 2.1 in 2007.
In 2013, the gross enrolment ratio for tertiary education in Rwanda was 7.9%, from 3.6% in 2006.
In spite of the genocide's legacy, the country is increasingly perceived internationally as a safe destination.
The current constitution divides Rwanda into provinces (), districts (), cities, municipalities, towns, sectors (), cells (), and villages (); the larger divisions, and their borders, are established by Parliament.
The highest peaks are found in the Virunga volcano chain in the northwest; this includes Mount Karisimbi, Rwanda's highest point, at .
Other drinks include a traditional beer called ''urwagwa'', made from sorghum or bananas, which features in traditional rituals and ceremonies.
Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials; circular or rectangular mud homes with grass-thatched roofs (known as ''nyakatsi'') are the most common.
Rwanda's highest domestic football competition is the Rwanda National Football League; , the dominant team is APR FC of Kigali, having won 13 of the last 17 championships.
There are many private schools across the country, some church-run, which follow the same syllabus but charge fees.
In 2010, the United Nations released a report accusing the Rwandan army of committing wide scale human rights violations and crimes against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the First and Second Congo Wars, charges denied by the Rwandan government.
Rwanda's economy suffered heavily during the 1994 genocide, with widespread loss of life, failure to maintain infrastructure, looting, and neglect of important cash crops.
Rwanda is linked by road to other countries in the East African Community, namely Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi and Kenya, as well as to the eastern Congolese cities of Goma and Bukavu; the country's most important trade route is the road to the port of Mombasa via Kampala and Nairobi, which is known as the Northern Corridor.
Rwanda has been a unified state since pre-colonial times, and the population is drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group, the Banyarwanda; this contrasts with most modern African states, whose borders were drawn by colonial powers and did not correspond to ethnic boundaries or pre-colonial kingdoms.
Drummers play together in groups of varying sizes, usually between seven and nine in number.
Naturally occurring vegetation is now mostly restricted to the three National Parks, with terraced agriculture dominating the rest of the country.
Germany colonised Rwanda in 1884 as part of German East Africa, followed by Belgium, which invaded in 1916 during World War I.
Cricket has been growing in popularity, as a result of refugees returned from Kenya, where they had learned to play the game.
The largest contributor to this revenue was mountain gorilla tracking, in the Volcanoes National Park; Rwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely; the gorillas attract thousands of visitors per year, who are prepared to pay high prices for permits.
Rwanda's electricity supply was, until the early 2000s, generated almost entirely from hydroelectric sources; power stations on Lakes Burera and Ruhondo provided 90% of the country's electricity.
The country has been governed by an ordered administrative hierarchy since pre-colonial times; there are five provinces delineated by borders drawn in 2006.
The country's literacy rate, defined as those aged 15 or over who can read and write, was 71% in 2009, up from 38% in 1978 and 58% in 1991.
The country has also participated in the Commonwealth Games since joining the Commonwealth in 2009.
Tourism is a fast-growing sector and is now the country's leading foreign exchange earner.
The Ministry of Infrastructure is also investigating the feasibility of linking Rwanda to Lake Victoria via shipping on the Akagera River.
The Rwandan government prioritised funding of water supply development during the 2000s, significantly increasing its share of the national budget.
The present borders were drawn in 2006 with the aim of decentralising power and removing associations with the old system and the genocide.
Rwanda has been governed by a strict hierarchy since precolonial times.
The population is young: in the 2012 census, 43.3% of the population were aged 15 and under, and 53.4% were between 16 and 64.
They massacred numerous Tutsi and ultimately established an independent, Hutu-dominated state in 1962.
As an emergency measure, the government installed diesel generators north of Kigali; by 2006 these were providing 56% of the country's electricity, but were very costly.
, more than 90% of the population was covered by the scheme.
Amnesty International also claims that the RPF rules Rwanda "without
The country's water infrastructure consists of urban and rural systems that deliver water to the public, mainly through standpipes in rural areas and private connections in urban areas.
The national carrier is RwandAir, and the country is served by seven foreign airlines.
The country's national basketball team has been growing in prominence since the mid-2000s, with the men's team qualifying for the final stages of the African Basketball Championship four times in a row since 2007.
Nyungwe, the largest remaining tract of forest, contains 200 species of tree as well as orchids and begonias.
The most popular sports in Rwanda are association football, volleyball, basketball, athletics and Paralympic sports.
Ordinary courts are the Supreme Court, the High Court, and regional courts, while specialised courts are military courts and a system of commercial courts created in 2011 to expedite commercial litigations.
Largely composed of former Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) soldiers, it includes the Rwanda Land Force, Rwanda Air Force and specialised units.
Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export.
The potato, thought to have been introduced to Rwanda by German and Belgian colonialists, is very popular.
Nyungwe Forest, in the west, has 280 recorded species, of which 26 are endemic to the Albertine Rift; endemic species include the Ruwenzori turaco and handsome francolin.
The largest faith in Rwanda is Roman Catholicism, but there have been significant changes in the nation's religious demographics since the genocide, with many conversions to Evangelical Christian faiths and, to a lesser degree, Islam.
Rwanda's population had increased from 1.6&nbsp;million people in 1934 to 7.1&nbsp;million in 1989, leading to competition for land.
Many of the country's moral values and details of history have been passed down through the generations.
This caused a large drop in GDP and destroyed the country's ability to attract private and external investment.
Only 18% of the population had access to electricity in 2012, though this had risen from 10.8% in 2009.
Rwandans have been competing at the Olympic Games since 1984, and the Paralympic Games since 2004.
Subsistence crops grown in the country include matoke (green bananas), which occupy more than a third of the country's farmland, potatoes, beans, sweet potatoes, cassava, wheat and maize.
, the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda estimates Rwanda's population to be 11,262,564.
In June 2015, two South African parks donated seven lions to Akagera National Park, reestablishing a lion population in Rwanda.
Both changes have caused difficulty for farmers, decreasing their productivity.
In 2012, this started to be expanded to 12 years.
Farming techniques are basic, with small plots of land and steep slopes.
The sector rebounded in 2010, becoming the country's largest sector by economic output and contributing 43.6% of the country's GDP.
Despite rainfall exceeding  annually in most of the country, little use is made of rainwater harvesting, and residents are forced to use water very sparingly, relative to usage in other African countries.
The President is elected by popular vote every seven years, and appoints the Prime Minister and all other members of Cabinet.
Many Rwandans do not eat meat more than a few times a month.
Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country.
The most popular genre is hip hop, with a blend of rap, ragga, R&B and dance-pop.
Rwanda has a presidential system of government.
Modern human settlement of what is now Rwanda dates from, at the latest, the last glacial period, either in the Neolithic period around 8000 BC, or in the long humid period which followed, up to around 3000 BC.
The Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front launched a civil war in 1990.
The Berlin Conference of 1884 assigned the territory to Germany as part of German East Africa, marking the beginning of the colonial era.
''Isombe'' is made from mashed cassava leaves and served with dried fish.
It lies a few degrees south of the equator and is landlocked.
, Liquid Telecom provides landline service to 30,968 subscribers, with mobile operator MTN Rwanda serving an additional 15,497 fixed line subscribers.
Both the Germans and the Belgians promoted Tutsi supremacy, considering the Hutu and Tutsi different races.
Rwandan clubs participate in the Kagame Interclub Cup for Central and East African teams, sponsored since 2002 by President Kagame.
Most Rwandans have access to radio; during the 1994 genocide, the radio station Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines broadcast across the country, and helped to fuel the killings through anti-Tutsi propaganda.
According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, travelers to Rwanda are highly recommended to take preventive malaria medication as well as make sure they are up to date with vaccines such as yellow fever.
The president is Paul Kagame of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), who took office in 2000.
All adult resident citizens are members of their local cell council, from which an executive committee is elected.
The principal private hire vehicle is the motorcycle taxi; in 2013 there were 9,609 registered motorcycle taxis in Rwanda, compared with just 579 taxicabs.
Kinyarwanda is the language of government and English is the primary educational medium.
The entire country is at a high altitude: the lowest point is the Rusizi River at  above sea level.
The lower chamber is the Chamber of Deputies, which has 80 members serving five-year terms.
The country has an international airport at Kigali that serves several international destinations, the busiest routes being those to Nairobi and Entebbe; there is one domestic route, between Kigali and Kamembe Airport near Cyangugu.
Mobile provider MTN also runs a wireless internet service accessible in most areas of Kigali via pre-paid subscription.
East African Breweries also operate in the country, importing Guinness, Tusker, and Bell, as well as whisky and spirits.
Rwanda was separated from Burundi and gained independence in 1962.
According to the government, these costs should not be a basis for the exclusion of children from education, however.
The Twa were better off than in pre-Kingdom days, with some becoming dancers in the royal court, but their numbers continued to decline.
The climate is temperate to subtropical, with two rainy seasons and two dry seasons each year.
Defence spending continues to represent an important share of the national budget, largely due to continuing security problems along the frontiers with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, and lingering concerns about Uganda's intentions towards its former ally.
In areas not served by these systems, hand pumps and managed springs are used.
This funding, along with donor support, caused a rapid increase in access to safe water; in 2015, 74% of the population had access to safe water, up from about 55% in 2005; the government has committed to increasing this to 100% by 2017.
Lunch is usually a buffet known as ''mélange'', consisting of the above staples and sometimes meat.
Neither side was able to gain a decisive advantage in the war, but by 1992 it had weakened Habyarimana's authority; mass demonstrations forced him into a coalition with the domestic opposition and eventually to sign the 1993 Arusha Accords with the RPF.
A 2015 study suggests that while enrolment rates in primary schools are "near ubiquity", rates of completion are low and repetition rates high.
The team have failed to qualify for the competition since, and have never qualified for the World Cup.
These early inhabitants were the ancestors of the Twa, aboriginal pygmy hunter-gatherers who remain in Rwanda today.
The most famous Rwandan literary figure was Alexis Kagame (1912–1981), who carried out and published research into oral traditions as well as writing his own poetry.
The principal form of public transport in the country is the minibus, accounting for more than half of all passenger carrying capacity.
The earliest form of social organisation in the area was the clan (''ubwoko'').
Coach services are available to various destinations in neighbouring countries.
Anthropologist Jean Hiernaux contends that the Tutsi are a separate race, with a tendency towards "long and narrow heads, faces and noses"; others, such as Villia Jefremovas, believe there is no discernible physical difference and the categories were not historically rigid.
The government has also enacted laws criminalising genocide ideology, which can include intimidation, defamatory speeches, genocide denial and mocking of victims.
*under-5 mortality decreased from 106.4 to 52.0 per 1,000 live births,
Cycling, traditionally seen largely as a mode of transport in Rwanda, is also growing in popularity as a sport; and Team Rwanda have been the subject of a book, ''Land of Second Chances: The Impossible Rise of Rwanda's Cycling Team'' and a film, ''Rising from Ashes''.
The week following Genocide Memorial Day on 7 April is designated an official week of mourning.
Nyungwe Forest boasts thirteen primate species including chimpanzees and Ruwenzori colobus arboreal monkeys; the Ruwenzori colobus move in groups of up to 400 individuals, the largest troop size of any primate in Africa.
Cycles of violence followed, with exiled Tutsi attacking from neighbouring countries and the Hutu retaliating with large-scale slaughter and repression of the Tutsi.
Human Rights Watch have praised the Rwandan government for progress made in the delivery of justice including the abolition of the death penalty, but also allege interference in the judicial system by members of the government, such as the politically motivated appointment of judges, misuse of prosecutorial power, and pressure on judges to make particular decisions.
This initiative aimed to help get the most necessary materials for prevention of malaria to the most rural areas of Rwanda, such as mosquito nets and medication.
Other sizeable lakes include Burera, Ruhondo, Muhazi, Rweru, and Ihema, the last being the largest of a string of lakes in the eastern plains of Akagera National Park.
