All major towns in Sabah also provide public transportation services such as buses, taxis and vans.
At the time, the British considered the native populations was too small to boost North Borneo economy.
The state government also plans to implement seasonal huntings as part of its conservation efforts to prevent the continuous lose of its endangered wildlife species while maintaining the state indigenous hunting traditions.
Prior to this, there has been a frequent calls to the government to restore the freedom of religion in the state and to respecting each other's religion to prevent any further religious tensions which affecting the harmonious that have long been practised in the state.
The English Tea House and Restaurant in Sandakan is another attraction promoting the British tea culture.
Other major towns in Sabah include Sandakan and Tawau.
Since the abolishment of headhunting by the British, many of them have served as a police and soldiers for the British.
The Muruts have a great knowledge of botanical healers with each of their community has their own herbalist that can cure such illness ranging from diarrhoea, diabetes and high blood pressure.
Sabah also seen a great increase in the number of expatriates, with most of them comes from China, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Australia and Europe.
The arrival of the company bring many prosperity to the northern Borneo residents as the company allowing every indigenous community to continue their traditional lifestyles, while imposing laws by banning headhunting practice, ethnic feuds, slave trade and controlling piracy.
Sabah state government also emphasises pre-school education in the state.
The state currently has a total of eight ports with two in Sepanggar while each one in Kota Kinabalu, Sandakan, Tawau, Kudat, Kunak and Lahad Datu that was operated and maintained by the Sabah Ports Authority owned by Suria Group.
Kota Marudu, Kudat, Pitas
Moreover, the illegal activities of the extraction of river sand and gravel in the rivers of Padas, Papar and Tuaran had become the latest concern along with the wildlife and marine hunting and poaching.
Like the Kadazan-Dusun, they are also once known for their headhunting practice, and now as a farmer and hunters.
The project is divided into two packages, with the first package covering the West Coast area will complete in 2021, while the second covering the East Coast area will finished in 2022.
The state government of Sabah ceded Labuan to the Malaysian federal government, and Labuan became a federal territory on 16 April 1984.
The first Christian missionary in northern Borneo is by a Spanish mariner known as Carlos Cuarteron, although at the time the British had establish their presence in the island of Labuan.
While the Paitanic are found along the eastern rivers of Paitan, Kinabatangan and Segama.
Notable dishes in Sabah include the Beaufort mee, bosou, hinava, ngiu chap, pinasakan, Sipitang satay, Tuaran mee, and tuhau.
The legislature is based on the Westminster system and therefore the chief minister is appointed based on his or her ability to command the majority of the state assembly.
As a counter-measure, the Malaysian Ministry of Domestic Trade, Co-operatives and Consumerism (MDTCAC) has temporarily cancelled all permits to sell gas cylinders into neighbouring countries with a new policy will be implemented to control such illegal activities.
Following the expansion of the Peninsular-based company on 1 January 1968, Sabah Posts and Telecommunication Department was merged with the Peninsular telecommunication department to formed Telecommunications Department Malaysia.
Under the Tenth Malaysia Plan (10MP), infrastructure in the rural areas was given attention with the increase of rural water, electricity supply and road coverage.
While the population percentage of both Animist and Pagans were significantly decrease prior to the controversial political motivated demographic change.
Sabah is also one of the producer of seaweed, with most of the farms are located in the seas around Semporna.
This was enforced then although facing numerous opposition from Filipino resident on the nearest Philippine islands due to the raise of the living cost in their region after the ban as well from the Malaysian opposition parties, while receiving positive welcomes by Sabahans residents and politicians.
By 1980, the state population saw a sudden increase to over 1,011,000 following the influx of refugees who fleeing a conflict in the neighbouring southern Philippines.
The second largest indigenous group is the Bajau.
In addition, of the total of 17,488 Javanese labourers brought in by the Japanese during the occupation, only 1,500 survived mainly due to starvation, harsh working conditions and maltreatment.
British Army senior officer Michael Carver then reminded the Philippines that Britain would honour its obligations under the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement (AMDA) if fighting broke out.
Most of Sabah's biodiversity is located in the forest reserve areas, which formed half of its total landmass of 7.34&nbsp;million hectares.
While Philippines President Diosdado Macapagal have begun filing a claim to Sabah since 22 June 1962 on the basis of a historical context in relation to the Sultanate of Sulu.
Bodgaya is gazetted as a forest reserve, while Boheydulang as a bird sanctuary.
In the coastal areas, Sabahan culture has been influenced by the Bruneian Malays and West Coast Bajaus on the west coast side while in the east coast it is influenced by either East Coast Bajau, Bugis and Suluk cultures with Islam being the important part of their lives.
To prevent further dispute with Spain and German intervention, the governments of the United Kingdom, Spain and German signed the Madrid Protocol in 1885, which recognised the sovereignty of Spanish East Indies over the Sulu Archipelago in return for the relinquishment of all Spanish claims over northern Borneo.
But following the argument between the association and Sabah Sports Board, Sabah FA was suspended by the state sports council on 15 January 1998 and the management was put under the national sport ministry.
The complicate estimate was as a result of frequent "controversial regularisation" with the illegal immigrants and refugees changed their status into "legal citizen".
Rampant fish bombing have destroyed many coral reefs and affecting fisheries production in the state.
After a series of transfers, Overbeck tried to sell the territory to German Empire, Austria-Hungary and the Kingdom of Italy but all turned his offer.
Since the colonial period, various Christian groups from the West have actively engaging to Christianise the native Animists indigenous people of North Borneo.
However, the links between northern Borneo and China could be much longer since during the Han dynasty.
It is believed that this was happened when the demand of the indigenous people was not protected when the constitution was to be amended.
Beside that, the state of Sabah is also known for batik production though the industry are still small than the major batik producer states in the East Coast of Peninsular Malaysia.
As both of them are traditionally rice farmers, they celebrate an annual harvest festival known as the Kaamatan.
Overbeck agreed with the co-operation, especially with the counterclaims of the Sultan of Sulu, which part of their territory in the Sulu Archipelago have been occupied by Spain.
In 1971, the state government of Sabah under Mustapha Harun submitted an enactment recognising Malaysian language as the state's official language.
Although recently the seaweed industry was heavily affected by spate of kidnappings perpetrated by the southern-Philippine-based Abu Sayyaf militant group.
The water in Liwagu River also reported the presence of heavy metal which was believed to be originated from the Mamut Copper Mine.
The only water supply dam in the state is the Babagon Dam which holds 21,000 million litres of water.
The river begins from the western ranges and snakes its way through the central region towards the east coast out into the Sulu Sea.
The electrical grid is divided into two of West Coast and East Coast which has been integrated since 2007.
The Sabah state government managed to increase the state fund from RM6&nbsp;million to RM12&nbsp;billion and poverty was down by almost half to 33.1% in 1980.
With its richness in biodiversity, the state is offering ecotourism.
The President sees the attempt to integrate Sabah, Sarawak and Brunei into the Federation of Malaysia as "trying to impose authority of Malaya into these states" while believing that Sabah is a proprietary ownership of the Sultanate of Sulu.
Prior to the formation of Malaysia in 1963, the then North Borneo interim government submitted a 20-point agreement to the Malayan government as conditions before North Borneo would join to formed the federation.
While Buddhism, Taoism and other Chinese folk religion as well Indian religion of Hinduism and Sikhism arrived as a result of the migration of Chinese and Indian into northern Borneo.
Since the 9MP, various road projects has been undertaken under the SDC and around RM50 million has been spent to repairs Sabah main roads since the 8MP.
The statistics in 1970 reported the population of Sabah with only 653,600, with both the state and its neighbour of Sarawak has about the same number of foreign nationals.
The central and eastern portion of Sabah are generally lower mountain ranges and plains with occasional hills.
An environmental report released in 1994 reported the presence of heavy metal at the Damit/Tuaran River that exceeded the water quality safe levels for consumption.
As part of the BIMP-EAGA, Sabah also continued to position itself as a main gateway for regional investments.
There is also ferry services from Sandakan to Zamboanga City and from Kudat to Buliluyan, Bataraza of Palawan in the Philippines, but both services were terminated at the moment due to lack of security enforcement from the Philippine side prior to the persistent attack by pirates and kidnapping by militant groups based in the Sulu Archipelago of the southern Philippines.
The island is now part of the Tiga Island National Park together with Kalampunian Besar and Kalampunian Damit islands as a tourist attractions, with a mud bath tourism.
There are also several other disputes yet to be settled with Indonesia over the overlapping claims on the Ambalat continental shelf in the Celebes Sea and land border dispute between Sabah and North Kalimantan.
File:Lahad-Datu Sabah Panoramic-view-from-Tower-of-Heaven-02.jpg|Lahad Datu sea panoramic view
Their migration to northern Borneo is noticeable during the rule of the Sultanate of Brunei.
Sabah is situated in northern Borneo, bordering the state of Sarawak to the southwest, Kalimantan to the south, while separated by sea from the Federal Territory of Labuan in the west and the Philippines to the north and east.
Other international shops and restaurants such as for Western food, Middle Eastern food, Bruneian food, Indonesian food, Filipino food, Japanese food, Korean food, Taiwanese food, Thai food and Vietnamese food have their presence here.
People from Sabah are generally called Sabahans and identify themselves as such.
Most trunk roads was then constructed from the 1970s until the 1980s under the World Bank loans.
The state was also featured in a 2014 American documentary of "Sacred Planet" and featured again in a new edition of "The Amazing Race" as well on a Korean reality show programme titled the "Law of the Jungle", both in 2014.
Located not far from the tree there is two rivers of Liwagu and Gelibang, which become the route where their community spread to all over interior places in Sabah.
However, by 2000, the state started to become the poorest as it still dependent on natural resources as its primary sources of income comparing to those secondary sector producer states.
While high land areas and interior are inhabited mostly by the Kadazan-Dusun peoples, Murut and their sub-groups as farmers and hunters.
It came under the influence of the Bruneian Empire in the 15th century and the Sultanate of Sulu between the 17th–18th centuries.
The Malaysian federal government operates one television channel, TVi and two state radio channels for the state, known as Sabah FM and Sabah vFM along with district channels such as Sandakan FM, Tawau FM and Keningau FM.
The areas in the west coast has a large freshwater wetlands, with the Klias Peninsula hosts a large area of tidal wetlands.
After discussion culminating in the Malaysia Agreement and 20-point agreement, on 16 September 1963 North Borneo (as Sabah) was united with Malaya, Sarawak and Singapore, to form the independent Federation of Malaysia.
It claims that the territory is connected with the Sultanate of Sulu and was only leased to the North Borneo Chartered Company in 1878 with the Sultanate's sovereignty never being relinquished.
This led to great disparity between roads in the state with those in the Peninsular, with only 38.9% are sealed while 89.4% have been sealed in the Peninsular.
There are also other telecommunication companies operating in the state although only providing cellular phone facilities.
Beside that, there is a frequent report that villagers were tricked to follow other religion by certain non-governmental organisations from the Peninsular Malaysia, as well the conversion of students in schools by teachers from the Peninsular without their parents acknowledgement.
While local authorities being fully appointed by the state government owing to the suspension of local elections by the federal government.
The East Coast Bajau are also known as good divers of which they can spend more than five minutes in the waters without using oxygen tank.
Sabah Museum houses a number of collection of various artefacts, brassware and ceramics covering the diverse culture of Sabah, natural history, trade history and Islamic civilisation together with an ethnobotanical garden and science and technology centre.
The Sama–Bajau are concentrated along coastal areas in both West Coast and East Coast.
The mobile telecommunications in Sabah are mostly use 4G and 3G and there is free rural Wi-Fi services provided by the federal government known as the ''Kampung Tanpa Wayar 1Malaysia'' (KTW) although Malaysia's public internet speeds are among the slower than many other countries.
Sabah State Library are the main public library in the state.
In addition, the need for development and basic necessities also became an issue while to preserving the nature.
From before the formation of Malaysia until 1966, Indonesia adopted a hostile policy towards the British backed Malaya, and after union to Malaysia that led to the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation.
Sabah has its own slang for Malay which originated either from indigenous words, Brunei Malay, Suluk, Cocos Malay and Indonesian language.
Currently, the tertiary sector plays an important part to the state economy, especially in tourism and services.
Other important wildlife regions in Sabah include the Maliau Basin, Danum Valley, Tabin, Imbak Canyon and Sepilok.
The forests surrounding the river valley of Kinabatangan River is the largest forest-covered floodplain in Malaysia.
The Sabah Handicraft Centre (part of Yayasan Group) was established in 2012 by the state government to preserving, promoting as well to popularise state handicraft to the local and international markets.
These islands are formed by Quaternary pyroclastic material that was ejected during explosive volcanic activities.
Majority of the tourists come from China (60.3%), followed by South Korea (33.9%), Australia (16.3%) and Taiwan (8.3%).
The traditional Malays in the state are the Bruneian Malays who mostly inhabit the area in south-west coast.
Most of the park area are covered in dense forest and important as a water catchment area with its headwater connecting to five major rivers in the west coast area.
The combined cycle power plant called Kimanis Power Plant was completed in 2014, supplying 300 MW, with 285 MW nominal capacity.
In the same year, the state capital name of "Jesselton" was renamed to "Kota Kinabalu".
Sabah then held its first state election in 1967.
Overbeck then go to Brunei and meet the Temenggong to renewed the concession.
Although the indigenous community are also involved in hunting, they hunt based on their spiritual believes and practice, and on a small scale, which differentiates them from poachers.
The 1Malaysia submarine cable system would also linking the state capital with Miri, Bintulu and Kuching in Sarawak together with Mersing in Johor that will increase the bandwidth capacity up to 12 terabyte per second.
Mining activities had directly released pollutants of heavy metals into rivers, reservoirs, ponds and affecting groundwater through the leaching of mine tailings.
Both coastal areas in the west coast and east coast are entirely dominating by sand beaches, while in sheltered areas the sand was mixed with mud.
''Sabah'' ('صباح') is also an Arabic word which means sunrise.
The jungles of Sabah host a diverse array of plant and animal species.
Another theory suggests that it came from the Malay word ''sabak'' which means a place where palm sugar is extracted.
The state is known for its traditional musical instrument, the sompoton.
They formed a resistance known as Kinabalu Guerillas that was led by Albert Kwok with broader supports from various ethnic groups in northern Borneo such as Dusun, Murut, Suluk and Illanun peoples.
From 2010 to 2011, the state experienced a slower growth due to weaker performance on the oil and gas sector.
The Muruts are once living in a longhouse, but today they have adapt a modern housing although the Muruts in the north of Sabah still living in a longhouse.
The Yang di-Pertua Negeri sits at the top of the hierarchy followed by the state legislative assembly and the state cabinet.
File:Bisaya House.JPG|Bisaya house
File:Kota Kinabalu Pu Tho Si Tempel 0019.jpg|Pu Tuo Si Temple
The Chinese represented by Philip Lee who part of the resistance movement against the Japanese eventually support the transfer of power to the Crown colony.
In 2006, the state has the lowest Direct Exchange Line (DEL) penetration rate, with cellular and internet dial-up penetrations rate only 6.5 per 100 inhabitants.
One theory is that during the time it was part of the Bruneian Sultanate, it was referred to as ''Saba'' because of the presence a variety of banana called ''pisang saba'' (also known as ''pisang menurun''), which is grown widely on the coast of the region and popular in Brunei.
Sabah culture is diverse due to a wide range of different ethnicity.
Most ethnic community leaders of Sabah, namely, Mustapha Harun representing the native Muslims, Donald Stephens representing the non-Muslim natives, and Khoo Siak Chew representing the Chinese, would eventually support the union.
File:KotaKinabalu Sabah CityMosque-07.jpg|City Mosque
Sabah is also represented in the federal parliament by 25 members elected from the same number of constituencies.
In addition with the spread of Islamic teachings from Sulu and Sulawesi into the coastal areas of eastern Borneo.
Sabahan DJs are mostly hired and local state songs will be played to meet Sabahan listeners taste and slang.
This practice has since stopped with power now held by majority in the state assembly by the UMNO party, which also holds a majority in the national parliament.
Since the 1950s, rubber and copra are the main source of agricultural economy of North Borneo.
The state coastline is covered with mangrove and nipah forests.
The Chinese community are mainly use Standard Chinese although they can speak in their own dialects of Hakka, Cantonese and Hokkien.
Other main industries are agriculture and ecotourism.
On 31 December 1996, the board been split into Sport Authority of Sabah and Sabah Cultural Board with a new board been established as the Sabah Sports Board that was maintained until present.
In the east coast located the Kinabatangan River, which is the second longest river in Malaysia after Rajang River in Sarawak with a length of 560 kilometres.
On 31 August 1963, North Borneo attained self-government.
While all ports in the northern and eastern Sabah served to handle palm oil related products such as fertiliser, palm kernel as well for general cargo.
From 1942 to 1945, Japanese forces occupied North Borneo, along with most of the island as part of the Empire of Japan.
Since the post-World War II timber boom driven by the need of raw materials from industrial countries, Sabah forests have been gradually eroded by uncontrolled timber exploitation and the conversion of Sabah forest lands into palm oil plantations.
In 2000, the state capital Kota Kinabalu was granted city status, making it the 6th city in Malaysia and the first city in the state.
A sister of the Governor of the Chinese settlement, Huang Senping (Ong Sum Ping) then married with Muhammad Shah (the founder of the Sultanate of Brunei after embracing Islam).
In addition, it also received two inter-monsoon season from April to May and September to October.
In addition, the cession of Labuan island to federal government by the Sabah state government under BERJAYA rule and unequal sharing and exploitation of Sabah's resources of petroleum also become the political contention often raised by Sabahans until today which has resulted in strong anti-federal sentiments and even occasional call for secession from the federation amongst the people of Sabah.
Due to this, SDC was implemented to expand the road coverage in Sabah along with the construction of Pan-Borneo Highway.
In 1765, Dalrymple managed to obtained the island by having concluded a Treaty of Alliance and Commerce with the Sultan of Sulu.
The earliest documentation of Chinese settlement in Sabah dates back in the 7th century on the Kinabatangan river banks.
The East Coast Bajau on the other side are still living in traditional ways, with fishing became the main source of income.
Machinery and transportation equipment accounted for most of the imported products followed by fuel, mineral lubricants and others.
Based on 2014 survey, Sabah GDP recorded a 5.0% growth and remained as the largest contributor in agriculture sector with 18.1%, followed by Sarawak, Johor, Pahang and Perak.
The federal government targeted to eradicate hardcore poverty by the end Ninth Malaysia Plan (9MP) with overall poverty halved from 23% in 2004 to 12% in 2010 and 8.1% in 2012.
Since 1970, forestry sector have contributed for over 50% of the state revenue, of which a study conducted in 1997 revealed the state had almost depleted all of its virgin forests outside the conservation areas.
The timber industry start to emerged in the 1960s due to high demand of raw materials from industrial countries.
The assembly meets at the state capital, Kota Kinabalu.
Abu Bakar Ellah (popularly known as Ampal) then became the leading artist of Sabah comedy film with his film titled "Orang Kita".
Forest fire also have become the latest concern due to drought and fires set by irresponsible farmers or individuals such as what happened in the 2016 forest fires where thousand hectares of forest reserve areas in Binsuluk of the west coast Sabah are lost.
Many Brunei Malays migrated to this region during this period, although the migration has begun as early as the 15th century after the Brunei conquest of the territory.
Malaysia however, considers this dispute as a "non-issue", as it interprets the 1878 agreement as that of cession and that it deems that the residents of Sabah had exercised their right to self-determination when they joined to form the Malaysian federation in 1963.
The plant is a joint venture between Petronas and NRG Consortium that also includes facilities such as gas pipeline.
Orang Asal refers to all the indigenous groups in Malaysia excluding Malays.
In addition with the discovery of Đông Sơn drum in Bukit Timbang Dayang on Banggi Island that had existed between 2,000–2,500 years ago.
Unlike the case of Vietnamese refugees in the Peninsular Malaysia, where most of the Vietnamese were successfully repatriated to maintain the racial balance for the Malays there, the Filipino refugees in Sabah are welcomed by certain politicians in the state mostly by USNO, BERJAYA's as well the dominant federal government political party of UMNO to increase the racial balance in favour to the Malays with the state autonomy in immigration being manipulated for political gains.
Before the formation of Malaysia, the state together with Sarawak only has rudimentary road systems.
This complicated Federal-State relations hence become a source of major contention in Sabah politics.
This was followed by Spanish soon after Ferdinand Magellan death in 1521, when they sailed to the islands of Balambangan and Banggi in the northern tip Borneo and later led to a conflict known as the Castilian War.
Further attempts by several Filipino politicians such as Ferdinand Marcos to "destabilise" Sabah proved to be futile and led to the Jabidah massacre in Corregidor Island, Philippines.
Every ethnic group has its own cuisine with different styles of preparing, cooking, and the way they serving and eating the food.
Before the arrival of Islam and Christianity, the indigenous of North Borneo are mainly practising Animism and Paganism.
Bumiputera (son of the soil) refers to the Malays and other indigenous groups in Peninsular Malaysia, Sarawak and Sabah.
at a cost of about RM850 million through the Private Funding Initiative (PFI).
Other small number of workers come from Bangladesh and Cambodia, although the intake for workers from Bangladesh has been restricted since 2015.
File:KotaKinabalu Sabah GurudwaraSahib-02.jpg|Gurudwara Sahib
Sabah has seen several territorial disputes with Malaysia's neighbours Indonesia and the Philippines.
(a wholly owned subsidiary of Sabah Tourism Board) feature various souvenirs and handicrafts from ethnic groups such as Kadazan-Dusun, Bajau, Murut, Brunei Malay and Rungus that are ready for buy.
In addition with the perception among non-Chinese parents that Chinese schools provide a better quality education and were more disciplined along with the rise of China as a new global economic powers that forced the need to mastered Chinese languages.
The AMDA treaty have since been replaced by the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) although the present treaty does not include East Malaysian states as its main priority, British security protection intervention can still be included over the two states.
Every ethnic groups also known for their traditional dances; both Kadazan-Dusun were known for their ''Sumazau'' dance, the Murut with their ''Magunatip'', the Rungus with their ''Monigol Sumundai'', the Brunei Malays with their Adai-Adai, the West Coast Bajau with their ''Limbai'' and ''Kuda Pasu'', the East Coast Bajau and Suluk with their ''Pangalay'' (also known as ''Daling-Daling'' or ''Mengalai''), Bisaya with their ''Liliput'' and the Cocos Malays with their ''Dansa'' and ''Nona Mansaya'' along with many other dances from other sub-ethnic groups.
The first Governor Yang di-Pertua Negara (which later changed to Yang di-Pertua Negeri in 1976) was Mustapha Harun.
An additional allocation of RM333.51&nbsp;million was given in the same year, making it a total of RM1.13&nbsp;billion with the project will start in 2017.
They mostly settled the area from Kota Belud, Kota Kinabalu, Tuaran and Papar.
Instead during the Song dynasty, they referring the whole island as Po Ni (also called as Bo Ni), which is the same name been used to referring the Sultanate of Brunei at the time.
Subsequently, North Borneo legislative assembly agreed on the formation of Malaysia on the conditions that North Borneo rights will be safeguarded.
File:Sacred Heart RC Church.jpg|Sacred Heart Cathedral
This undeclared war stems from what Indonesian President Sukarno perceive as an expansion of British influence in the region and his intention to wrest control over the whole of Borneo under the Greater Indonesian concept.
While a Spanish-based creole, Zamboangueño, a dialect of Chavacano, has spread into one village of Sabah in Semporna prior to the migration of people from the southern Philippines.
"Bat*21" (1988), another American film depicting the Vietnam War was shot at various locations in the suburbs north of Kota Kinabalu, including Menggatal, Telipok, Kayu Madang and Lapasan.
In 1761, Alexander Dalrymple, an officer of the British East India Company, concluded an agreement with the Sultan of Sulu to allow him to set up a trading post for the first time in the northern Borneo area, although it proved to be failure.
Among the proposals by Sabahan parties during the commission is to re-call all identity card (ICs) issued in the state and issue a new IC only for eligible Sabahan citizen which will also to ensure the integrity of Malaysian identity cards systems.
Since then, Chinese junks come to northern Borneo with cargoes of spices, bird nests, shark fins, camphor, rattan and pearls.
In 2001, the state was featured in a 2001 Filipino documentary titled "Sabah: Ang Bagong Amerika?"
2001), as well in the DVD film, Buckaroo's archenemy Hanoi Xan is said to have his secret base in Sabah, in a "relic city of caves".
Kadazan-Dusun is the largest indigenous group in Sabah, comprising the blending of two groups with 40 sub-groups.
The Crocker Range National Park is the largest national park in the state, covering an area of 139,919 hectares.
File:KotaKinabalu Sabah Rumah-Brunei-01.jpg|Brunei Malay house
A small British factory was then established in 1773 on Balambangan Island, a tiny island situated off the north coast of Borneo.
Most of the immigrants issues has been perceived by the locals as politically motivated to systematically change the demography of the state; citing a case of a local woman who had been denied citizenship until present.
The Crown colony government established many departments to oversee the welfare of its residents as well to revive the economy of North Borneo after the war.
Beyond the coasts of Sabah lie a number of islands rich with coral reefs such as Ligitan, Sipadan, Selingaan, Tiga and Layang-Layang (Swallow Reef).
Operating with 73 water treatments plants, an average of 1.19&nbsp;billion litres of water are distibuted daily to meet Sabahan residents demands.
The total land area of Sabah is nearly  surrounded by the South China Sea in the west, Sulu Sea in the northeast and Celebes Sea in the southeast.
While in the same time facing hard task to control such activities although there is laws to prevent it.
There is high controversial issues when the indigenous natives who been either Christian or no religion was marked as a Muslim when they receive their identity card after applying for it.
