And his most famous ''Neu-gepflanzte Thüringische Lust-Garten..'' (1657–65) contains several sacred works with 3 or 4 trombones, including ''Magnificat a 8'' for SATB soloists, cornett, 3 trombones and continuo and ''Herr nun lässestu deinen Diener a 5'' for bass, 4 trombones and continuo.
There are many examples of evidence for this:
There are two theories for the sources: it is either derived from the Middle French ''sacquer'' (to pull) and ''bouter'' (to push) or from the Spanish ''sacar'' (to draw or pull) and ''bucha'' (a tube or pipe).
Monteverdi ushers sackbuts into the first great opera, 'L'Orfeo' 1607.
He was greatly influential in Venetian composers in other churches and confraternities, and his early baroque and cori spezzati style is seen in contemporaries like Giovanni Picchi and Giovanni Battista Grillo.
It comes from Cesare's collection ''Musicali Melodie per voci et instrumenti a una, due, tre, quattro, cinque, e sei'' published in Munich 1621 of 28 pieces for a mixture of violins, cornetts, trombone, vocal soloists and organ continuo.
The first two ensemble directors—''maestro di concerti''—Girolamo Dalla Casa (1568–1601) and Giovanni Bassano (1601–1617)—were cornett players and the nucleus of the group was two cornetts and two trombones, although for the larger ceremonies many extra players were hired.
* Praetorius describes an alto in D, tenor in A, and bass in D.
Other pieces that specify trombones (according to Grove) are (grouped by the collection they were published in): Concert mit 11 Stimmen (1618): SWV 21, in ''Psalmen Davids'' (Psalms of David) Op.
Unlike the earlier slide trumpet from which it evolved, the sackbut possesses a ''double'' slide, which allows for playing scales in a lower range.
A similar ensemble accompanies 8 vocal lines in his ''Lux perpetua'' (c1673), and three more similar works in the 1690s.
Johann Sebastian Bach uses trombones in fourteen of his church cantatas—BWV 2, 3, 4, 21, 23, 25, 28, 38, 64, 68, 96, 101, 121, 135—as well as motet BWV 118.
Vienna's Imperial court used trombones in church music:
* Aurelio Virgiliano's ''Il dolcimelo'' (c. 1600) teaches trombonists that first position gives A, E, A, C, E and G.
In Germany, the original word was ''Posaune'', appearing about 1450 and is still used today.
There is also ''Hochzeitsgesang für Daniel Sartorius: Es ist nicht gut, dass der Mensch allein sei'' for 5 voices, 2 vn, 2 trbn, bn and bc.
The first records of it being used are around 1440, but it is not clear whether this was just a nickname for a trumpet player.
This flexibility lends itself to a vocal style of playing and facilitates very characterful phrasing.
The sackbut differs from modern trombones by its smaller, more cylindrically-proportioned bore, its less-flared bell, and in the lack of a leadpipe, water key, slide lock, and tuning slide on the bell curve.
Modern copies with a tuning slide in the bell can need more support for operation of the slide, so either an extra stay by the tuning slide is provided or a joint without play in only one axis is employed.
An English work of note from this period is Matthew Locke's ''Music for His Majestys Sagbutts and Cornetts'', a suite for Charles II's coronation 1661.
His ''Fili me, Absalon'' (SWV 269) and ''Attendite, popule meus'' (SWV 270), are both scored for bass voice, four trombones (of which two are optionally violins) and basso continuo, are well known.
Of particular interest is ''Maria, gegrüsset seist du, Holdselige,'' which uses soprano and tenor voices, alto trombone, 2 tenor trombones and on the bass line "trombone grosso," which goes down to pedal A, and a couple of diatonic scale passages from bottom C.
Johann Pezel wrote for Stadtpfeifer with his ''Hora decima musicorum'' (1670), containing sonatas, as well as ''Fünff-stimmigte blasende Music'' (1685) with five-part intradas and dance pieces.
They are part of his first ''Symphoniae Sacrae'' collection dating from 1629 and commentators have noted that the style reflects his studies in Venice with Giovanni Gabrieli 1609-1612.
Well known pieces from Germany includes Samuel Scheidt's ''Ludi Musici'' (1621) and Johann Hermann Schein's ''Banchetto musicale'' (1617).
Piffari usually contained a mix of wind, brass and percussion instruments and sometimes viols.
For example, ''Gott fähret auf mit Jauchzen'' (BuxWV33 from CW v, 44) is scored for SSB voices, 2 vn, 2 va, trbn, 2 cornetts, 2 tpt, bn and bc.
It is also worth noting that Rognoni's "Suzanne ung jour" setting descends repeatedly to BB, which is a tone lower than the lowest note playable on a bass in F; on a bass in D, it falls in (modern) fifth position.
Original instruments have a hinge joint.
The collection also contains ''La Bavara'' for four trombones.
Dieterich Buxtehude specifies trombones in a few sacred concertos using style derived from polychoral Venetian works and one secular piece.
These old tunings can come naturally on a sackbut.
The cantatas were either composed in Leipzig during 1723-1725, or (for BWV 4, 21 & 23) the trombone parts were added to the existing cantata during the same period.
Composers include the likes of Leopold Mozart, Georg Christoph Wagenseil, Johann Albrechtsberger, Michael Haydn and Johann Ernst Eberlin.
Later in the 17th century, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber composed sacred works for voices and orchestra featuring trombones.
In Scotland in 1538 the slide instrument is referred to as ''draucht trumpet'' (drawn trumpet) as opposed to a ''weir trumpet'' (war trumpet), which had a fixed length.
Psalm'' for 9 voices, 5 tpt, 3 trbn, 5 va and bc (Freiberg, 1652).
Among his output are two Holy Week settings as Da Capo arias: ''Deh sciogliete, o mesti lumi'' for soprano, unison violins, bassoon, two trombones and organ and ''Dio, qual sia'' for soprano, trombone, bassoon and basso continuo.
The stays on period sackbuts are flat.
In fact, Speer says, “Once you have found a good C (third position), this is also the place you will find your F.” Playing C and F in exactly the same position on a modern orchestra sounds out of tune, but it tunes perfectly well on a sackbut if everyone plays meantone.
Indeed, the groups that would perform them would often be full of multi-instrumentalists.
Johann Joseph Fux was Hofkapellmeister in Vienna from 1715 until 1741.
Some modern sackbut reproductions use glue as a compromise to give a loose fitting for high resonance without risk of falling apart.
But the focus of the text is for playing rapid notes “similar to the gorgia of the human voice” with “soft and smooth” double tonguing (“lingua riversa”) using “le re le re”.
Each is for 3-8 voices with 3 violins (apart from SV261), the trombones/violas and basso continuo.
With virtuosic semiquaver passages across the range of the instrument, it reflects Praetorius' comments about the large range of the tenor and bass trombones, and good players of the Quartposaune (bass trombone in F) could play fast runs and leaps like a viola bastarda or cornetto.
Although most diminutions are written for organ, string instruments or cornett, Suzanne is "per violone over Trombone alla bastarda".
Dario Castello, a wind player at St. Mark's Venice in the early 17th century had two books of ''Sonate Concertate'' published in 1621 and 1629.
A loose connection between the bell stay and the bell is thought key to a resonant bell, and thus a better sackbut sound.
2 (1619): SWV 38, 40-46, Symphoniae Sacrae I Op.6 (1629): SWV 259, 269-271, 274, Symphoniae Sacrae II Op.10 (1647): SWV 344, Symphoniae Sacrae III Op.
Trombonists were in the regular ensemble at St. Mark's Venice from its formation in 1568 until they left the payroll in 1732.
The treatises discuss the various strengths of consonants from “le” through “de” to “te”.
Modern manufacturers now draw the tubes.
Johann Hermann Schein specified trombones in some of his sacred vocal works in the ''Opella nova, ander Theil, geistlicher Concerten'' collection (Leipzig, 1626).
Each of the six confraternities in Venice also had their own independent piffari groups too, which would all play at a lavish procession on the feast of Corpus Domini.
The first English piece scored for trombone is John Adson's ''Courtly Masquing Ayres'' (1611).
Seville Cathedral's records show employment of trombonists in 1526, followed by several other Spanish cathedrals during the 16th century, used not only for ceremonial music and processionals, but also for accompaniment of the liturgical texts as well, doubling voices.
In 1487 a writer links the words ''trompone'' and ''sacqueboute'' and mentions the instrument as playing the contratenor part in a danceband.
The title has been suggested was chosen to try and capture some of Castello's success.
The second edition in 1697 provides two three part sonatas for trombones.
This includes the Requiem (K626, 1791), Great Mass in C minor (K423, 1783), ''Coronation Mass (C major)'' (K317, 1779), several other masses, ''Vesperae Solennes de Confessore'' (K339, 1780), ''Vesperae de Dominica'', his arrangement of Handel's ''Messiah'' plus two of his three great operas: ''Don Giovanni'' (K527, 1787) and ''Die Zauberflöte'' (K620, 1791).
Another integral part of the early music sound-world is the musical temperament.
The next word to appear in the 15th century that implied a slide was the ''sackbut'' group of words.
In many towns in Germany and Northern Italy, 'piffari' bands were employed by local governments throughout the 16th century to give regular concerts in public squares and would lead processions for festivals.
From the 15th to the 19th centuries, the instrument designs changed very little overall, apart from a slight widening of the bell in classical era.
The natural ‘pairing’ of notes these articulations provide is similar to the instructions for string players who are instructed to slur (“lireggiar”) pairs of eighth notes with one bow stroke per quarter beat.
His motets published in Nova ac diversimoda sacrarum cantionum composition, seu motettae (Vienna, 1613) are in a similar tradition to Gabrieli's music.
He also uses the trombone in smaller motets and antiphons, such as his setting of ''Alma Redemptoris mater'' for soprano, alto trombone, strings and continuo.
To read these it one needs to become familiar with the old clefs, time signatures, ligatures and notational conventions of the era.
Since ensembles had flexible instrumentation at this time, there is relatively little music before Giovanni Gabrieli's publication ''Symphoniae sacrae'' (1597) that specifically mentions trombones.
Also in the Vienna court was Antonio Caldara, vice-kapellmeister 1717–1736.
There was a transition around the 18th century when trombones started to be thought of in B at around 440&nbsp;Hz.
12 (1650): SWV 398a, Historia (1664): SWV 435, 448, 449, 453, 461, 452, 466-470, 473, 474-476, Schwanengesang Psalm 119 (1671): SWV 500, although many others are suitable for trombones too.
This slide trumpet was known as a "trompette des ménestrels" in the alta capella bands.
During the 17th century, Well temperament began to become more and more popular as the range of keys increased.
Monteverdi also leaves the option to use trombones as part of the "sex instrumentis" of the ''Dixit Dominus'' and in the instrumental ''Ritornello a 5'' between verses of ''Ave maris stella''.
Closely related to ''sackbut'' was the name used in France: ''sacqueboute'' and in Spain, where it was ''sacabuche''.
In 1687, Speer published the first written instruction in sackbut (and several other instruments) playing: ''Grund-richtiger/kurtz/leicht und noethiger Unterricht der Musicalischen Kunst''.
These terms were used in England and France until the 18th century.
There are a few vocal works involving trombones in works by Andreas Hammerschmidt.
On many modern reproductions round slide stays are much more comfortable to play and easier to make.
This (as well as ''bason'') derives from ''busine,'' which is Latinate and meant straight trumpet.
This ensemble was used extensively by Giovanni Gabrieli in pieces substantially for brass, voices and organ in Venice up until his death in 1612.
The tenor trombones that survive are pitched closest to B at A=440&nbsp;Hz, which is the same as A at A=466&nbsp;Hz.
The interval of a third was used as a clash until the Renaissance, when it became consonant in compositions, which went hand-in-hand with the widespread use of meantone temperament.
The giant Octav-Posaun / double bass trombone / contra-bass trombone in the style of the those made in 16th/17th centuries is represented by only a few existing instruments.
Another light collection suitable for including trombones is Anthony Holborne's ''Pavans, Galliards, Allmains, and other short Aeirs both Grave and Light in Five Parts for Viols, Violins or Other Musicall Winde Instruments'' (1599).
German composer Johann Rudolf Ahle wrote some notable sacred pieces for voices and trombones.
For more information, see Herbert (2006).
''Missa SS Trinitatis'' uses two choirs, which again points to the traditions going back to Gabrieli.
This change did not require a change in the instrument, merely a new set of slide positions for each note.
Francesco Rognoni was another composer who specified the trombone in a set of divisions (variations) on the well-known song ''Suzanne ung jour'' (London Pro Musica, REP15).
The numerous reprints during the 17th century affirm his popularity then, as perhaps now.
The water key was added in the 19th century, but modern reproductions often have them.
In 1631 he published a number of masses, which were much more baroque, with basso continuo, rhetorical word painting and obligato usage of instruments.
A '''sackbut''' is a type of trombone from the Renaissance and Baroque eras, characterised by a telescopic slide that is used to vary the length of the tube to change pitch.
Giovanni Martino Cesare wrote ''La Hieronyma,'' (Musikverlag Max Hieber, MH6012) the earliest known piece for accompanied solo trombone.
Temperament affects the colour of a composition, and therefore modern performances, typically employing equal temperament, may not be true representations of the composers' intentions.
It was one of the most important instruments in Baroque polychoral works, along with the cornett and organ.
These groups are in addition to the musicians employed by St. Mark's to play in the balconies with the choir (the piffari would play on the main level).
Until some time in the 18th century, the trombone was in A and the pitch of that A was about a half-step higher than it is today—460–480&nbsp;Hz.
From 1375 the iconography sees trumpets being made with bends, and some in 'S' shapes.
Monteverdi also specified trombones in two more sacred works: SV198 Laetatus sum (i) (1650) for 6 voices, 2 violins, 2 trombones and bassoon and SV272 Laudate Dominum omnes gentes I (1641) for 5 voices ‘concertato’, 4 voice chorus ad lib, 4 viola da braccio or trombones and basso continuo.
Of the c.40 items in this collection, six specify three or four trombones (or viola da braccio, ad lib): SV268 Beatus vir I, SV263 Dixit Dominus I, SV263 Dixit Dominus II, SV261 Et iterum venturus est, SV258 Gloria in excelsis Deo, SV281 Magnificat I.
Sackbuts adjust tuning at the joint between the bell and slide.
The flat rims and shallow cups of the older mouthpieces are instrumental in providing the player with a much wider palette of articulations and tonal colours.
A "Sonata a3 in C" is published by Musica Rara and attributed to Biber, although the authorship is unclear and it is more likely to have been written by Bertali.
There are no other documented groups or performances with trombone players in England at this time, and it has been suggested that the premiers took place with a visiting group from Germany, as was the custom in Paris at this time.
While the bell stay remained flat, from about 1660 the slide stays became tubular.
Around 1400 we see the "loop"-shaped trumpet appear in paintings and at some point in the 15th century, a single slide was added.
His ''Requiem'' mass (1692) uses an orchestra of strings, 3 trombones and basso continuo.
In addition, Ewald Meinl has made a modern copy of this instrument, and it is currently owned and played by Wim Becu.
Graces such as the accento, portar della voce, tremolo, groppo, trillo, esclamationo and intonatio  are all to be considered by performers of any music in this period.
It also was used in church music both for instrumental service music and as a doubling instrument for choral music.
For instance ''Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schar'' is scored for soprano, tenor, SSATB choir, 2 violins, 2 violas, 2 cornetts, 3 trombones, 2 trumpets, timpani, basso continuo, and ''Lobe den Herrn, meine Seele'' is for two choirs of SSATB and similar instruments to the previous work.
Bottrigari, Venice 1594
He uses the trombone sound to reflect the (by now) archaic sounds of the Renaissance trombones doubling voices (with cornett playing the soprano line), yet he also uses them independently, which John Eliot Gardiner says prepares the way for their use in Beethoven's ''Symphony No.
Giuseppe Scarani joined St. Mark's Venice in 1629 as a singer and in the following year published ''Sonate concertate'', a volume of works for 2 or 3 (unspecified) instruments (and b.c.).
During a mass attended by the Doge, evidence suggests they would have played a canzona in the Gradual after the Epistle and the Agnus Dei, a sonata in the Offertory as well as reinforcing vocal parts or substituting for absent singers.
From around 1617, when the ''maestro de' concerti'' at St. Marks changed to violinist Francesco Bonfante and correspondingly the ensemble changed from basically a brass ensemble to being more evenly mixed with brass, wind and string instruments.
Along with the improvisation, many of these tutors discuss articulation.
This is opposed to using “te che te che,” which is described as “harsh, barbarous and displeasing”.
The other solo trombone piece of the 17th century, ''Sonata trombone & basso'' (modern edition by H Weiner, Ensemble Publications), was written around 1665.
In Italy it was (and remains) ''trombone'', which derived from trumpet in the Latin ''tromba'' or ''drompten'', used in the Low Countries.
For works for trombone post-1800, please see trombone.
(Little imagination is needed to see how it could be reassembled—with an extra tube—into something approaching a natural trumpet.)
Since the 19th century, trombone bore sizes and bells have increased significantly.
Publishers such as SPES and Arnaldo Forni Edition provide facsimile copies of plenty of music for trombone from this era.
The suggestions for producing effective ornaments without disrupting the line and harmony are discussed alongside countless examples in the 16th and early 17th century Italian division tutors.
Tiburtio Massaino wrote a Canzona for eight trombones, published in Raverio's 1608 collection.
Many of his masses use the choir strengthened by strings, cornetts and trombones, often with independent moments for the instrumentalists and sometimes.
Music in the middle-ages favours intervals of the fourth and fifth, which is why Pythagorean tuning was used.
One such ''Sonata a 3'' is freely available in facsimile form from the Düben Collection website hosted by Uppsala universitet.
The sound is characterized by a more delicate, vocal timbre.
The cornett and trombone parts would have been played by the Stadtpfeifer.
For example, ''Uns ist ein Kind geboren'' is scored for violino, traversa, alto trombone, tenor voice, fagotto and basso continuo.
It is suggested that Monteverdi wrote his ''Vespro della Beata Vergine'' (1610) as a pitch for employment at St. Mark's as successor to Giovanni Gabrieli.
Daniel Speer published a four-part sonata in ''Neu-gebachene Taffel-Schnitz'' (1685).
Antonio Bertali wrote several trio sonatas for 2 violins, trombone and bass continuo in the mid-17th century.
These adjusted intervals make chords ring and are the basis of meantone.
The orchestra at the first performance, as shown in the first publication, the list of "stromenti" at the front of the score specifies four trombones, but at one point in Act 3, however, the score calls for five trombones.
Of the sixteen motets in the collection, all are titled "concerto" apart from the "sonata" ''Expectans Expectavi Dominum'' for 6 trombones, cantus voice and tenor voice.
Mersenne wrote in 1636, "It should be blown by a skillful musician so that it may not imitate the sounds of the trumpet, but rather assimilate itself to the sweetness of the human voice, lest it should emit a warlike rather than a peaceful sound."
As the bell is smaller than a modern trombone, the harmonic series is closer to a perfect harmonic series, which is the basis for just tuning.
Without adjusting the slide, the first to second harmonic is a perfect octave, second to third harmonic is a fifth slightly wider than equal temperament and fourth to fifth harmonic is a major third slightly narrower than in equal temperament.
These include ''Lob- und Danck Lied aus dem 84.
Some of his chamber music involves trombones, as do many of his operas, used as an obbligato instrument.
''Höre, Gott'' uses five favoriti singers, two ripieno choirs (which double other parts at intense moments) and seven trombones, with basso continuo.
''Mach dich auf, werde licht, Zion'' uses Canto 1: violino, cornetto, flauto picciolo e voce, Canto 2: voce e traversa, Alto: Trombone e Voce, Tenore: Voce e Trombone, Basso: Fagotto Trombone e Voce and Basso Continuo, during which solos for each of the trombonists are specified.
Thomas Sonata' because it was kept in the library of the Saint Thomas Augustinian Monastery in Brno, Czech Republic.
The lesser known Austrian composer Christoph Strauss, Kapellmeister to the Habsburg Emperor Mathias 1616-1620, wrote two important collections for trombones, cornetts and voices.
Non-serious music, often based on dances for festive occasions, rarely had specified instrumentation.
Crooks are still used, as are variously sized bell bow sections for larger changes.
The sackbut also responds very well to rather soft playing—more so than a modern trombone.
In addition, modern made slides are usually made of nickel silver with chrome plating, giving a smoother finish and quieter action than simply the brass that would have originally been used.
His highly successful Requiem is for five vocal parts, two cornetts, two trombones, strings and continuo.
“Cornetts and trombones...play divisions that are neither scrappy, nor so wild and involved that they spoil the underlying melody and the composer's design: but are introduced at such moments and with such vivacity and charm that they give the music the greatest beauty and spirit”
There is a debate as to whether they used tight fittings, wax or another joining substance.
Mersenne has a diagram.
Johann Schelle has numerous sacred vocal works that use trombones.
Plenty of musical understanding can be gathered from reading the original music print.
Rognoni was a master violin and gamba player whose treatise ''Selva di Varie passaggi secondo l'uso moderno'' (Milan 1620 and facsimile reprint by Arnaldo Forni Editore 2001) details improvisation of diminutions and Suzanne is given as one example.
These traditions continued into the baroque with musicians expected to give expression to the written music by ornamenting with a mixture of one-note “graces” and whole passage “divisions” (also known as “diminutions”).
The sacred use of trombones was brought to a fine art by the Andrea Gabrieli, Giovanni Gabrieli and their contemporaries c.1570-1620 Venice and there is also evidence of trombonists being employed in churches and cathedrals in Italy at times during the second half of the 16th century in Bologna, Rome, Padua, Mantua and Modena.
* Fellow church instruments that are fixed pitch—cornetts and organs—were pitched at approximately A=460–480&nbsp;Hz ("Chorton") across Europe in the Renaissance and baroque eras.
High pitch is also seen in Renaissance wind bands.
Francesco Rognoni in 1620 describes the tonguing as the most important part of producing “a good and beautiful effect in playing wind instruments, and principally the cornett” (which of course had a very similar role to the trombone).
The term "bastarda" describes a technique that made variations on all the different voices of a part song, rather than just the melody or the bass: "considered illegitimate because it was not polyphonic".
* In 1687, Daniel Speer's ''Grund-richtiger'' concurs with these notes for the slide all the way in (while describing pushing the slide out a bit to get the C).
Modern reproductions often have a bell bow tuning slide or telescopic slide between the slide and bell sections.
In England, George Frideric Handel includes trombones in three of his oratorios: ''Saul'' (1738), ''Israel in Egypt'' (1738) and ''Samson'' (1741).
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart uses trombones in connection with death or the supernatural.
Mozart's first use of the trombone was an obligato line in the oratorio ''Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots'' (K35, 1767)
The original way to make the slide tubes was to roll a flat piece of metal around a solid cylinder mandrel, and the joining edges soldered together.
Johann Heinrich Schmelzer wrote several sonatas that included trombones—such as his ''Sonata à 7'' for two cornetts, two trumpets, three trombones, and basso continuo.
The only example currently known is the music by Francesco Corteccia for the Medici wedding 1539.
Some original instruments could be disassembled into the constituent straight tubes, bowed tubes, bell flare, and stays, with ferrules at the joints.
The earliest clear evidence of a double slide instrument is in a fresco painting by Filippino Lippi in Rome, ''The Assumption of the Virgin'', dating from 1488–93.
Venice's doge had his own piffari company and they gave an hour-long concert in the Piazza each day, as well as sometimes performing for services in St. Mark's.
In addition to the Magnificat, two movements specify trombones: the opening "Deus in adiutorium" is for six voices, two violins, two cornetts, three trombones, five viole da braccio and basso continuo; Sonata sopra "Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis" is for soprano, two violins, two cornetts, three trombones (one of which can be a viola da braccio), viola da braccio and basso continuo.
This anonymous piece is also known as the 'St.
Monteverdi arrived at St. Mark's in 1613 and it is unsurprising that he includes trombones and strings for several more sacred works during his time here, published in his ''Selva Morale e Spirituale'' 1641.
Tuning slides came in during the very late 18th century.
Modern sackbut reproductions are usually soldered together.
Early trombonists adjusted pitch with the slide, and by adding variously shaped and sized crooks.
Some chamber music in this period includes trombone in an obligato role with voice, and also as a concerto instrument with string orchestra.
There is an original instrument made by Georg Nicolaus Oller built in Stockholm in 1639 and housed in the Musikmuseet.
Christoph Willibald Gluck includes trombones in five of his operas: ''Iphigénie en Aulide'' (1774), Orfeo ed Euridice (1774), ''Alceste'' (1776), ''Iphigénie en Tauride'' (1779) and ''Echo et Narcisse'' (1779), as well as ballet ''Don Juan'' (1761).
The first record of trombones being used in churches was in Innsbruck 1503.
The sonatas of 1-4 parts with bass continuo often specify trombones, as well as cornett, violin and bassoon.
Another key use of the trombone was in ceremonies, in conjunction with the trumpet.
The term survives in numerous English spelling variations including sacbut, sackbutte, sagbut, shagbolt, sacabushe, shakbusse and shakbusshe.
But it does mean that the baroque and renaissance repertoire was intended to be played at the higher pitch.
The Lorenzo da Lucca was said to have had "in his playing a certain grace and lightness with a manner so pleasing".
They also tend to have stockings, which were only invented around 1850.
The treble and high alto parts were most often played by cornetts or shawms, with the violin sometimes replacing the cornett in 17th century Italian music.
A prolific composer for trombones in Germany in the 17th century was Heinrich Schütz.
Many groups now perform at A=466&nbsp;Hz for the sake of greater historical accuracy.
So what we now think of as a tenor trombone with B in first position, pitched at A=440 was actually thought of as a trombone in A (in first position), pitched at A=466.
