He never knew his father, Hussein 'Abid al-Majid, who disappeared six months before Saddam was born.
Qasim's chauffeur was killed, and Qasim was hit in the arm and shoulder.
After secondary school Saddam studied at an Iraqi law school for three years, dropping out in 1957 at the age of 20 to join the revolutionary pan-Arab Ba'ath Party, of which his uncle was a supporter.
I wanted the people to know this.
His mother, Subha Tulfah al-Mussallat, named her newborn son ''Saddam'', which in Arabic means "One who confronts".
His execution was carried out on 30 December 2006.
The bloody eight-year war ended in a stalemate.
Bush stated that "The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas, and nuclear weapons for over a decade&nbsp;... Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror."
The ten children were originally believed to have been among the 96 executed, but they had in fact been imprisoned near the city of Samawah.
Yasso to present the key to the city of Detroit to Saddam Hussein.
She, like her sister, fled to Jordan and has stood up for her father's rights.
British tabloid newspaper ''The Sun'' posted a picture of Saddam wearing white briefs on the front cover of a newspaper.
During this period Saddam was interrogated by FBI agent George Piro.
Iraq signed an aid pact with the Soviet Union in 1972, and arms were sent along with several thousand advisers.
Shortly afterwards, he convened an assembly of Ba'ath party leaders on 22 July 1979.
Saddam was a leading member of the operation.
Uprisings erupted in the Kurdish north and Shi'a southern and central parts of Iraq, but were ruthlessly repressed.
Cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union made possible the passage of resolutions in the United Nations Security Council giving Iraq a deadline to leave Kuwait and approving the use of force if Saddam did not comply with the timetable.
Later that year, the Ba'ath Party leadership was planning to assassinate Qasim.
The Mount Holyoke International Relations Program also provides a free-access document briefing on U.S.–Iraq relations (1904–present); this can be accessed on line at .
Saddam also commissioned the production of a "Blood Qur'an", written using 27 litres of his own blood, to thank God for saving him from various dangers and conspiracies.
Revolutionary sentiment was characteristic of the era in Iraq and throughout the Middle East.
In foreign affairs, Saddam sought to have Iraq play a leading role in the Middle East.
We know that you can harm us although we do not threaten you.
The choice of Saddam was, according to historian Con Coughlin, "hardly surprising".
On 16 March 1988, the Kurdish town of Halabja was attacked with a mix of mustard gas and nerve agents, killing 5,000 civilians, and maiming, disfiguring, or seriously debilitating 10,000 more.
Saddam reached out to other Arab governments for cash and political support during the war, particularly after Iraq's oil industry severely suffered at the hands of the Iranian navy in the Persian Gulf.
She is believed to have mothered Saddam's sixth child.
In 1972, Saddam signed a 15-year Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union.
She was originally the wife of an Iraqi Airways executive, but later became the mistress of Saddam.
With war still looming on 24 February 2003, Saddam Hussein took part in an interview with CBS News reporter Dan Rather.
* The assassinations and attempts on the lives of several of Saddam's lawyers.
Health Minister Dr. Riyadh Ibrahim suggested that Saddam temporarily step down to promote peace negotiations.
The Ba'ath Party, secular by nature, adopted Pan-Arab ideologies which in turn were problematic for significant parts of the population.
However, after Saddam had negotiated the 1975 treaty with Iran, the Shah withdrew support for the Kurds, who suffered a total defeat.
Her father arranged for her to marry General Kamal Mustafa Abdallah Sultan al-Tikriti in 1998.
It appeared that any enemy of the Baghdad regime was a potential ally of the United States."
He also conducted two show elections, in 1995 and 2002.
According to historian Charles R. H. Tripp, the Ba'athist coup of 1968 upset "the US-sponsored security system established as part of the Cold War in the Middle East.
Although Saddam was al-Bakr's deputy, he was a strong behind-the-scenes party politician.
At this point, Saddam asked his ministers for candid advice.
The real reason was to help them succeed in the war against Iran."
Instead Iraq received economic and military support from its allies, who conveniently overlooked Saddam's use of chemical warfare against the Kurds and the Iranians and Iraq's efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
Saddam initiated Iraq's nuclear enrichment project in the 1980s, with French assistance.
* Saddam had allegedly married a third wife, Nidal al-Hamdani, the general manager of the Solar Energy Research Center in the Council of Scientific Research.
Consequently, many viewed Iraq as "an agent of the civilized world".
He made a state visit to France in 1975, cementing close ties with some French business and ruling political circles.
Ostensibly, this was because of improvement in the regime's record, although former United States Assistant Secretary of Defense Noel Koch later stated, "No one had any doubts about the Iraqis' continued involvement in terrorism ...
It was later claimed by the head guard at the tomb where his remains lay that Saddam's body had been stabbed six times after the execution.
Her sister Rana also remarked, "He had so many feelings and he was very tender with all of us."
He was married once and had three children.
Relationships with fellow party members were carefully cultivated, and Saddam soon accumulated a powerful circle of support within the party.
There were hundreds of thousands of casualties with estimates of up to one million dead.
Positions of power in the country were mostly filled with Sunni Arabs, a minority that made up only a fifth of the population.
Saddam was notable for using terror against his own people.
In 2002, a resolution sponsored by the European Union was adopted by the Commission for Human Rights, which stated that there had been no improvement in the human rights crisis in Iraq.
Because Saddam Hussein rarely left Iraq, Tariq Aziz, one of Saddam's aides, traveled abroad extensively and represented Iraq at many diplomatic meetings.
That they rallied not so much to Saddam Hussein as to the bipolar nature of the confrontation (the West versus the Arab Muslim world) and the issues that Saddam proclaimed: Arab unity, self-sufficiency, and social justice."
At the center of this strategy was Iraq's oil.
Al-Bakr was the older and more prestigious of the two, but by 1969 Saddam clearly had become the moving force behind the party.
Yasso said that Saddam made donations to Chaldean churches all over the world, and even went on record as saying "He's very kind to Christians."
Abd ar-Rahman al-Bazzaz became acting president for three days, and a power struggle for the presidency occurred.
The Jordanian royal family refused to hand her over.
Of the 16 members of Qasim's cabinet, 12 were Ba'ath Party members; however, the party turned against Qasim due to his refusal to join Gamal Abdel Nasser's United Arab Republic.
In 2003, a coalition led by the U.S. invaded Iraq to depose Saddam, in which U.S. President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair accused him of possessing weapons of mass destruction and having ties to al-Qaeda.
Osirak was destroyed on 7 June 1981 by an Israeli air strike (Operation Opera).
Also during the 1990s, President Bill Clinton maintained sanctions and ordered air strikes in the "Iraqi no-fly zones" (Operation Desert Fox), in the hope that Saddam would be overthrown by political enemies inside Iraq.
Yasso said that Saddam Hussein donated US$250,000 to his church, which is made up of at least 1,200 families of Middle Eastern descent.
On 2 August 1990, Saddam invaded Kuwait, initially claiming assistance to "Kuwaiti revolutionaries," thus sparking an international crisis.
Asked if she wanted to give a message to her father, she said: "I love you and I miss you."
Saddam was buried at his birthplace of Al-Awja in Tikrit, Iraq, 3&nbsp;km (2&nbsp;mi) from his sons Uday and Qusay Hussein, on 31 December 2006.
Saddam implemented a national infrastructure campaign that made great progress in building roads, promoting mining, and developing other industries.
The United States, which had urged Iraqis to rise up against Saddam, did nothing to assist the rebellions.
* The replacement of the chief presiding judge, midway through the trial.
The 96 executed included four men mistakenly executed after having been found not guilty and ordered released.
Saddam's officers looted Kuwait, stripping even the marble from its palaces to move it to Saddam's own palace.
After the inquiry, Saddam then donated another $200,000 to Chaldean Sacred Heart Church.
Saddam formally rose to power in 1979, although he had been the ''de facto'' head of Iraq for several years prior.
The Iranians, demanding that the international community should force Iraq to pay war reparations to Iran, refused any suggestions for a cease-fire.
In August 2003, Saddam's daughters Raghad and Rana received sanctuary in Amman, Jordan, where they are currently staying with their nine children.
Electricity was brought to nearly every city in Iraq, and many outlying areas.
Aflaq, the leader of the Ba'athist movement, organised the expulsion of leading Iraqi Ba'athist members, such as Fuad al-Rikabi, on the grounds that the party should not have initiated the attempt on Qasim's life.
Other photographs inside the paper show Saddam washing his trousers, shuffling, and sleeping.
Various sightings of Saddam were reported in the weeks following the war, but none was authenticated.
The resistance of the much-weakened Iraqi Army either crumbled or shifted to guerrilla tactics, and it appeared that Saddam had lost control of Iraq.
Syrian President Hafez al-Assad would become deputy leader in a union, and this would drive Saddam to obscurity.
Two days before the first attacks, Saddam reportedly offered Egypt's Hosni Mubarak 50 million dollars in cash, "ostensibly for grain".
Lending was based on cronyism.
Wafa is the daughter of Abdul Tawab el-Mullah Howeish, a former minister of military industry in Iraq and Saddam's last deputy Prime Minister.
Ba'athist leaders were appointed to the cabinet and Abdul Salam Arif became president.
When Iran and Iraq signed the Algiers Agreement in 1975, the support ceased.
Following his capture on 13 December 2003, the trial of Saddam took place under the Iraqi Interim Government.
The couple had no children.
That's just the way I am."
In the October 15, 2002 referendum he officially achieved 100% of approval votes and 100% turnout, as the electoral commission reported the next day that every one of the 11,445,638 eligible voters cast a "Yes" vote for the president.
The Iraqi government and military collapsed within three weeks of the beginning of the U.S.-led 2003 invasion of Iraq on 20 March.
Talking for more than three hours, he denied possessing any weapons of mass destruction, or any other weapons prohibited by UN guidelines.
During the assembly, which he ordered videotaped, Saddam claimed to have found a fifth column within the Ba'ath Party and directed Muhyi Abdel-Hussein to read out a confession and the names of 68 alleged co-conspirators.
The verdict and sentencing were both appealed, but subsequently affirmed by Iraq's Supreme Court of Appeals.
The U.S. sent aerial planes and combat ships to the Persian Gulf in response to these threats.
He was second in command of the military (behind his father) and ran the elite Iraqi Republican Guard and the SSO.
We have now grasped the reality of the situation.
Development went forward at such a fevered pitch that two million people from other Arab countries and even Yugoslavia worked in Iraq to meet the growing demand for labor.
The allies ultimately rejected any linkage between the Kuwait crisis and Palestinian issues.
After the oil crisis of 1973, France had changed to a more pro-Arab policy and was accordingly rewarded by Saddam with closer ties.
Relations between Iraq and Egypt violently ruptured in 1977, when the two nations broke relations with each other following Iraq's criticism of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat's peace initiatives with Israel.
By 1 August 1979, hundreds of high-ranking Ba'ath party members had been executed.
Neither side had achieved what they had originally desired and at the borders were left nearly unchanged.
Bremer presented video footage of Saddam in custody.
During the ambush it is claimed that Saddam began shooting prematurely, which disorganised the whole operation.
:"So what can it mean when America says it will now protect its friends?
From 1973-5, the CIA colluded with Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran to finance and arm Kurdish rebels in the Second Kurdish–Iraqi War in an attempt to weaken al-Bakr.
After the September 11 attacks, Vladimir Putin began to tell the United States that Iraq was preparing terrorist attacks against the United States.
Israel, though subjected to attack by Iraqi missiles, refrained from retaliating in order not to provoke Arab states into leaving the coalition.
Saddam Hussein Abd al-Majid al-Tikriti was born in the town of Al-Awja, 13&nbsp;km (8&nbsp;mi) from the Iraqi town of Tikrit, to a family of shepherds from the al-Begat clan group, a sub-group of the Al-Bu Nasir (البو ناصر) tribe.
The video was leaked to electronic media and posted on the Internet within hours, becoming the subject of global controversy.
I also call on you not to hate the peoples of the other countries that attacked us and differentiate between the decision-makers and peoples.
These chemical weapons were developed by Iraq from materials and technology supplied primarily by West German companies as well as as using dual-use technology imported following the Reagan administration's lifting of export restrictions.
Within three days of their return in February 1996, both of the Kamel brothers were attacked and killed in a gunfight with other clan members who considered them traitors.
In Iraq progressives and socialists assailed traditional political elites (colonial era bureaucrats and landowners, wealthy merchants and tribal chiefs, and monarchists).
Both economies, previously healthy and expanding, were left in ruins.
Al-Bazzaz was unsuccessful, and Abdul Rahman Arif was elected president.
As one U.S. Muslim observer noted: "People forgot about Saddam's record and concentrated on America&nbsp;... Saddam Hussein might be wrong, but it is not America who should correct him."
Saddam escaped from prison in 1967.
Saddam's welfare programs were part of a combination of "carrot and stick" tactics to enhance support for Saddam.
Among the many challenges of the trial were:
Those arrested who were found not guilty were either exiled if relatives of the convicted or released and returned to Dujail.
Shortly before he invaded Kuwait, he shipped 100 new Mercedes 200 Series cars to top editors in Egypt and Jordan.
Not long before the execution, Saddam's lawyers released his last letter.
The campaign takes its name from Surat al-Anfal in the Qur'an, which was used as a code name by the former Iraqi Ba'athist administration for a series of attacks against the ''peshmerga'' rebels and the mostly Kurdish civilian population of rural Northern Iraq, conducted between 1986 and 1989 culminating in 1988.
During the late 1990s, the UN considered relaxing the sanctions imposed because of the hardships suffered by ordinary Iraqis.
After the Ba'athists took power in 1968, Saddam focused on attaining stability in a nation riddled with profound tensions.
After the war, Raghad fled to Amman, Jordan where she received sanctuary from the royal family.
Saddam's self-aggrandising propaganda, with himself posing as the defender of Arabism against Jewish or Persian intruders, was heavy-handed, but consistent as a drumbeat.
The United States now maintains that Saddam ordered the attack to terrorize the Kurdish population in northern Iraq, but Saddam's regime claimed at the time that Iran was responsible for the attack which some including the U.S. supported until several years later.
In addition to refusing the request, Kuwait spearheaded the opposition in OPEC to the cuts that Saddam had requested.
Saddam fled to Egypt in 1959, and he continued to live there until 1963.
To the great nation, to the people of our country, and humanity,
This belief was one of the few articles of faith uniting the political scene in a nation rife with sharp social, ethnic, religious, and ideological divides.
Saddam was shown with a full beard and hair longer than his familiar appearance.
On the other hand, Washington foreign policymakers, along with Middle East experts, military critics, and firms heavily invested in the region, were extremely concerned with stability in this region.
But we have no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts, like your border disagreement with Kuwait.
* Wafa el-Mullah al-Howeish is rumoured to have married Saddam as his fourth wife in 2002.
During the period of negotiations and threats following the invasion, Saddam focused renewed attention on the Palestinian problem by promising to withdraw his forces from Kuwait if Israel would relinquish the occupied territories in the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and the Gaza Strip.
In the video Saddam's son Uday advised al-Ali about hires in Al-Jazeera: "During your last visit here along with your colleagues we talked about a number of issues, and it does appear that you indeed were listening to what I was saying since changes took place and new faces came on board such as that lad, Mansour."
But we too can harm you.
Remember that God has enabled you to become an example of love, forgiveness and brotherly coexistence&nbsp;...
As tensions between Washington and Saddam began to escalate, the Soviet Union, under Mikhail Gorbachev, strengthened its military relationship with the Iraqi leader, providing him military advisers, arms and aid.
Long before Saddam, Iraq had been split along social, ethnic, religious, and economic fault lines: Sunni versus Shi'ite, Arab versus Kurd, tribal chief versus urban merchant, nomad versus peasant.
They returned to Iraq when they received assurances that Saddam would pardon them.
There had also been bitter enmity between Saddam and Khomeini since the 1970s.
The Iranians, despite the widespread Shi'ite rebellions, had no interest in provoking another war, while Turkey opposed any prospect of Kurdish independence, and the Saudis and other conservative Arab states feared an Iran-style Shi'ite revolution.
On 30 December 2006, Saddam was hanged.
The assassins believed they had killed him and quickly retreated to their headquarters, but Qasim survived.
Additional clarification note:
Later (probably to appeal for support from the United States and most Western nations), he would make toppling the Islamic government one of his intentions as well.
However, Egypt's strong material and diplomatic support for Iraq in the war with Iran led to warmer relations and numerous contacts between senior officials, despite the continued absence of ambassadorial-level representation.
He is always referred to by this personal name, which may be followed by the patronymic and other elements.
Very little information is known about her.
* Saddam married his first wife and cousin Sajida Talfah (or Tulfah/Tilfah) in 1958 in an arranged marriage.
He was elected to the Regional Command, as the story goes, with help from Michel Aflaq—the founder of Ba'athist thought.
As a result, Saddam Hussein appealed to many people for the same reasons that attracted more and more followers to Islamic revivalism and also for the same reasons that fueled anti-Western feelings.
He was last seen in a video which purported to show him in the Baghdad suburbs surrounded by supporters.
The Al-Anfal Campaign was a genocidal campaign against the Kurdish people (and many others) in Kurdish regions of Iraq led by the government of Saddam Hussein and headed by Ali Hassan al-Majid.
The result was brutal fighting between the government and Kurdish groups and even Iraqi bombing of Kurdish villages in Iran, which caused Iraqi relations with Iran to deteriorate.
In the first meeting of the Defense Council and cabinet to elect a president, Al-Bazzaz needed a two-thirds majority to win the presidency.
The major instruments for accomplishing this control were the paramilitary and police organizations.
On 5 November 2006, Saddam Hussein was found guilty of crimes against humanity and sentenced to death by hanging.
He was the ''de facto'' leader of Iraq some years before he formally came to power in 1979.
In a US bid to open full diplomatic relations with Iraq, the country was removed from the US list of State Sponsors of Terrorism.
They were married in Egypt during his exile.
The campaign helped Iraq's energy industries.
Sometimes he would also be portrayed as a devout Muslim, wearing full headdress and robe, praying toward Mecca.
The United States also supplied Iraq with "satellite photos showing Iranian deployments".
Qusay was believed to have been Saddam's later intended successor, as he was less erratic than his older brother and kept a low profile.
Uday, while originally Saddam's favorite son and raised to succeed him he eventually fell out of favour with his father due to his erratic behavior; he was responsible for many car crashes and rapes around Baghdad, constant feuds with other members of his family, and killing his father's favorite valet and food taster Kamel Hana Gegeo at a party in Egypt honoring Egyptian first lady Suzanne Mubarak.
It was his first interview with a U.S. reporter in over a decade.
As vice president under the ailing General Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, and at a time when many groups were considered capable of overthrowing the government, Saddam created security forces through which he tightly controlled conflict between the government and the armed forces.
Talfah, the father of Saddam's future wife, was a devout Sunni Muslim and a veteran of the 1941 Anglo-Iraqi War between Iraqi nationalists and the United Kingdom, which remained a major colonial power in the region.
The desire for stable rule in a country rife with factionalism led Saddam to pursue both massive repression and the improvement of living standards.
His face could be seen on the sides of office buildings, schools, airports, and shops, as well as on Iraqi currency.
Some of the plotters quickly managed to leave the country for Syria, the spiritual home of Ba'athist ideology.
The only exception was the Soviet Union, who initially refused to supply Iraq on the basis of neutrality in the conflict, although in his memoirs, Mikhail Gorbachev claimed that Leonid Brezhnev refused to aid Saddam over infuriation of Saddam's treatment of Iraqi communists.
On 9 December 1996, Saddam's government accepted the Oil-for-Food Programme that the UN had first offered in 1992.
Saddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq "would not accept death".
When Baghdad fell to U.S.-led forces on 9 April, marked symbolically by the toppling of his statue by iconoclasts, Saddam was nowhere to be found.
With the support of the Arab states, the United States, and Europe, and heavily financed by the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, Saddam Hussein had become "the defender of the Arab world" against a revolutionary Iran.
His tomb was reported to have been destroyed in March 2015.
In the 1995 referendum, conducted on 15 October, he reportedly received 99.96% of the votes in a 99.47% turnout, getting only 3052 negative votes among an electorate of 8.4 million.
He erected statues around the country, which Iraqis toppled after his fall.
Despite several calls for a ceasefire by the United Nations Security Council, hostilities continued until 20 August 1988.
His stepfather, Ibrahim al-Hassan, treated Saddam harshly after his return.
In addition to the People's Army, the Department of General Intelligence was the most notorious arm of the state-security system, feared for its use of torture and assassination.
The oil reserves of Kuwait (with a population of 2 million next to Iraq's 25) were roughly equal to those of Iraq.
The couple had five children.
Shortly afterward, Saddam's 13-year-old brother died of cancer.
He was widely known for his paranoia and his obsession with torturing people who disappointed him in any way, which included tardy girlfriends, friends who disagreed with him and, most notoriously, Iraqi athletes who performed poorly.
They are inspired by America to undermine Arab interests and security."
However, repressive measures were taken against its opponents.
Taken together, Iraq and Kuwait sat on top of some 20 percent of the world's known oil reserves; as an article of comparison, Saudi Arabia holds 25 percent.
