Real Spanish-grown La Mancha saffron has PDO protected status and this is displayed on the product packaging.
Sargol and coupé saffron would typically fall into ISO 3632 category I. Pushal and mancha would probably be assigned to category II.
Afterwards, and with no further manure application, corms were planted.
cartwrightianus'' was subjected to extensive artificial selection by growers seeking longer stigmata.
It can be used to aromatise wine."
Ancient perfumers in Egypt, physicians in Gaza, townspeople in Rhodes, and the Greek ''hetaerae'' courtesans used saffron in their scented waters, perfumes and potpourris, mascaras and ointments, divine offerings, and medical treatments.
The Minoans portrayed saffron in their palace frescoes by 1600–1500 BC; they hint at its possible use as a therapeutic drug.
Only in mid-autumn do they flower.
All plants bloom within a window of one or two weeks.
The world's finest samples (the selected, most red-maroon, tips of stigmata picked from the finest flowers) receive colouring strengths in excess of 250, making such saffron over three times more powerful than category IV saffron.
Monks' robes are dyed the same colour to show equality with each other, and turmeric or ochre were the cheapest, most readily available dyes.
Saffron's colouring strength can range from lower than 80 (for all category IV saffron) up to 200 or greater (for category I).
cartwrightianus'', then it may have emerged via plant breeding, which would have selected for elongated stigmata, in late Bronze Age Crete.
Saffron crocus grows to  and bears up to four flowers, each with three vivid crimson stigmata, which are the distal end of a carpel.
In Western countries, the average retail price in 1974 was $1,000 per pound, or US$2,200 per kilogram.
Microscale production of saffron can be found in Australia (mainly the state of Tasmania), China, Egypt, England (the village of Burnham Norton) France, Israel, Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden (Gotland), Turkey (mainly around the town of Safranbolu), California, and Central Africa.
Saffron was also used as a fabric dye in such Levantine cities as Sidon and Tyre in Lebanon.
It also contains a carotenoid pigment, crocin, which imparts a rich golden-yellow hue to dishes and textiles.
More style included means the saffron is less strong gram for gram, because the colour and flavour are concentrated in the red stigmata.
The word "mancha" in the Spanish classification can have two meanings: a general grade of saffron or a very high quality Spanish-grown saffron from a specific geographical origin.
The other continents, except Antarctica, produce smaller amounts.
Competing theories state that saffron only returned to France with 8th-century AD Moors or with the Avignon papacy in the 14th century AD.
The saffron crocus probably resulted when ''C.
The resultant α-crocin is a carotenoid pigment that may comprise more than 10% of dry saffron's mass.
sativus'' bears eight chromosomal bodies per set, making for 24 in total.
The 14th-century Black Death caused demand for saffron-based medicaments to peak, and Europe imported large quantities of threads via Venetian and Genoan ships from southern and Mediterranean lands such as Rhodes.
Saffron has a long history of use in traditional medicine.
The absorbance reading of crocin is known as the "colouring strength" of that saffron.
Egyptian healers used saffron as a treatment for all varieties of gastrointestinal ailments.
Thus, in India, high-grade Kashmiri saffron is often sold and mixed with cheaper Iranian imports; these mixes are then marketed as pure Kashmiri saffron, a development that has cost Kashmiri growers much of their income.
Its recorded history is attested in a 7th-century BC Assyrian botanical treatise compiled under Ashurbanipal, and it has been traded and used for over four millennia.
It is used for religious purposes in India, and is widely used in cooking in many cuisines, ranging from the Milanese ''risotto'' of Italy, the ''paella'' of Spain, the ''bouillabaisse'' of France, to the ''biryani'' with various meat accompaniments in South Asia.
Trade with the Caribbean later collapsed in the aftermath of the War of 1812, when many saffron-bearing merchant vessels were destroyed.
''Safranum'' comes from the Persian intercessor ''za'farān''.
Saffron was detailed in a 7th-century BC Assyrian botanical reference compiled under Ashurbanipal.
Grading standards are set by the International Organization for Standardization, a federation of national standards bodies.
However, an influx of more exotic spices—chocolate, coffee, tea, and vanilla—from newly contacted Eastern and overseas countries caused European cultivation and usage of saffron to decline.
The evidence for this comes from several angles including tithe records, estate records and field names.
It must, therefore, be stored away in air-tight containers to minimise contact with atmospheric oxygen.
Conflicting theories explain saffron's arrival in South Asia.
Crocetin is a conjugated polyene dicarboxylic acid that is hydrophobic, and thus oil-soluble.
Some was also grown in Gloucestershire and other "Westerlie Parts" according to one source.
sativus'' is a mutant form of ''C.
Strength is related to several factors including the amount of style picked along with the red stigma.
The two esterified gentiobioses make α-crocin ideal for colouring water-based and non-fatty foods such as rice dishes.
The bitter glucoside picrocrocin is responsible for saffron's flavour.
Saffron's taste and iodoform or hay-like fragrance result from the chemicals picrocrocin and safranal.
The conflict and resulting fear of rampant saffron piracy spurred corm cultivation in Basel; it thereby grew prosperous.
Consumers may regard certain cultivars as "premium" quality.
In February 2013, a retail bottle containing 0.06 ounces could be purchased for $16.26 or the equivalent of $4,336 per pound or as little as about $2,000/pound in larger quantities.
When crocetin is esterified with two water-soluble gentiobioses, which are sugars, a product results that is itself water-soluble.
One of the most esteemed use for saffron is in the preparation of the ''Golden Ham'', a precious dry-cured ham made with saffron from San Gimignano.
Formerly there was also category IV, which was below category III.
ISO 3632 deals exclusively with saffron and establishes three categories: III (poorest quality), II, and I (finest quality).
Only in southern France, Italy, and Spain did the clone significantly endure.
Iran is responsible for around 90–93% of global production, and much of their produce is exported.
Picrocrocin (chemical formula: ; systematic name: 4-(β-D-glucopyranosyloxy)-2,6,6- trimethylcyclohex-1-ene-1-carboxaldehyde) is a union of an aldehyde sub-element known as safranal (systematic name: 2,6,6-trimethylcyclohexa-1,3-diene-1-carboxaldehyde) and a carbohydrate.
Another legend tells of Crocus and Smilax, whereby Crocus is bewitched and transformed into the first saffron crocus.
Common saffron substitutes include safflower (''Carthamus tinctorius'', which is often sold as "Portuguese saffron" or "açafrão"), annatto, and turmeric (''Curcuma longa'').
Kashmiri and Chinese accounts date its arrival anywhere between 2500–900 years ago.
Only in October, after most other flowering plants have released their seeds, do its brilliantly hued flowers develop; they range from a light pastel shade of lilac to a darker and more striated mauve.
Traditionally credited to the fabled ''Yan'' ("Fire") Emperor () Shennong, it discusses 252 phytochemical-based medical treatments for various disorders.
Persistently damp and hot conditions harm the crops, and rabbits, rats, and birds cause damage by digging up corms.
Being sterile, the purple flowers of ''C.
Some historians believe that saffron came to China with Mongol invaders from Persia.
One limited meta-analysis concluded that saffron supplementation improved symptoms in patients with major depressive disorders and a review indicated that it helped with mild to moderate depression.
However, an important omission in a botanical book published in the 1790s meant that the true extent of saffron growing in the eastern counties has been long overlooked .
Almost all saffron grows in a belt from Spain in the west to India in the east.
The Essex town of Saffron Walden, named for its new speciality crop, emerged as a prime saffron growing and trading centre.
Ancient Greek legends told of sea voyages to Cilicia, where adventurers sought what they believed were the world's most valuable threads.
Repeated droughts, blights, and crop failures in Kashmir combine with an Indian export ban, contribute to its prohibitive overseas prices.
It might stem from the 12th-century Old French term ''safran'', which comes from the Latin word '''' or from Arabic, ''az-za'faran'', having unknown origin.
Saffron has also been used as a fabric dye, particularly in China and India, and in perfumery.
During his Asian campaigns, Alexander the Great used Persian saffron in his infusions, rice, and baths as a curative for battle wounds.
As for other spices or dried foods, the nutrient content of dried saffron in a 100 gram amount shows richness of nutritional value across B vitamins and dietary minerals (table).
These data are measured through spectrophotometry reports at certified testing laboratories worldwide.
This crocin is trans-crocetin di-(β-D-gentiobiosyl) ester; it bears the systematic (IUPAC) name 8,8-diapo-8,8-carotenoic acid.
The theft of one such shipment by noblemen sparked the fourteen-week-long ''Saffron War''.
Dry saffron is highly sensitive to fluctuating pH levels, and rapidly breaks down chemically in the presence of light and oxidising agents.
Saffron-based pigments have indeed been found in 50,000-year-old depictions of prehistoric places in northwest Iran.
Non-Persians also feared the Persians' usage of saffron as a drugging agent and aphrodisiac.
Saffron is widely used in Persian, Indian, European, Arab, and Turkish cuisines.
Yet the Pennsylvania Dutch continued to grow lesser amounts of saffron for local trade and use in their cakes, noodles, and chicken or trout dishes.
Artisan producers in Europe and New Zealand have offset their higher labour charges for saffron harvesting by targeting quality, only offering extremely high grade saffron.
As a genetically monomorphic clone, it was slowly propagated throughout much of Eurasia and was later brought to parts of North Africa, North America, and Oceania.
Aulus Cornelius Celsus prescribes saffron in medicines for wounds, cough, colic, and scabies, and in the mithridatium.
Harvests are by necessity a speedy affair: after blossoming at dawn, flowers quickly wilt as the day passes.
Safranal is less bitter than picrocrocin and may comprise up to 70% of dry saffron's volatile fraction in some samples.
Components of α–crocin:
Iran now accounts for approximately 90% of the world production of saffron.
It also has many nonvolatile active components, many of which are carotenoids, including zeaxanthin, lycopene, and various α- and β-carotenes.
Roughly 150 flowers together yield  of dry saffron threads; to produce  of dried saffron (or  moist and freshly harvested),  of flowers are needed;  yields  of dried saffron.
A degree of uncertainty surrounds the origin of the English word "saffron".
In Norfolk, customs records show locally grown saffron was exported to the Low Countries .
pallasii'' are other possible precursors.
'''Saffron''' (pronounced  or ) is a spice derived from the flower of ''Crocus sativus'', commonly known as the "saffron crocus".
Safranal is treated slightly differently and rather than there being threshold levels for each category, samples must give a reading of 20–50 for all categories.
''Crocus sativus'' thrives in the Mediterranean maquis, an ecotype superficially resembling the North American chaparral, and similar climates where hot and dry summer breezes sweep semi-arid lands.
It has insecticidal and pesticidal properties, and may comprise up to 4% of dry saffron.
It can nonetheless survive cold winters, tolerating  frosts as low as  and short periods of snow cover.
However, many growers, traders, and consumers reject such lab test numbers.
thomasii'' and ''C.
Planting is mostly done in June in the Northern Hemisphere, where corms are lodged  deep; its roots, stems, and leaves can develop between October and February.
Saffron is somewhat more resistant to heat.
Vivid crimson colouring, slight moistness, elasticity, and lack of broken-off thread debris are all traits of fresh saffron.
By 1730, the Pennsylvania Dutch cultivated saffron throughout eastern Pennsylvania.
Prohibitively high labour costs and abundant Iranian imports mean that only select locales continue the tedious harvest in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland—among them the Swiss village of Mund, whose annual output is a few kilograms.
However, often there is no clear grading information on the product packaging and little of the saffron readily available in UK is labelled with ISO category.
Church members had grown it widely in Europe.
Various "boutique" crops are available from New Zealand, France, Switzerland, England, the United States, and other countries—some of them organically grown.
However, ISO 3632 grade and colouring strength information allow consumers to make instant comparisons between the quality of different saffron brands, without needing to purchase and sample the saffron.
As with France, the spread of Islamic civilisation may have helped reintroduce the crop to Spain and Italy.
The domesticated saffron crocus, ''Crocus sativus'', is an autumn-flowering perennial plant unknown in the wild.
Some people prefer a more holistic method of sampling batches of threads for taste, aroma, pliability, and other traits in a fashion similar to that practised by experienced wine tasters.
However, powdered saffron is more prone to adulteration, with turmeric, paprika, and other powders used as diluting fillers.
The Sumerians later used wild-growing saffron in their remedies and magical potions.
Saffron, long among the world's most costly spices by weight, is native to Southwest Asia and was probably first cultivated in or near Greece.
Picrocrocin is a truncated version of the carotenoid zeaxanthin that is produced via oxidative cleavage, and is the glycoside of the terpene aldehyde safranal.
Fields that slope towards the sunlight are optimal (i.e., south-sloping in the Northern Hemisphere).
In autumn, purple buds appear.
The plant grows to a height of , and sprouts 5–11 white and non-photosynthetic leaves known as cataphylls.
In 2005, the second-ranked Greece produced , while Morocco (the Berber region of Taliouine), and India (Kashmir), tied for third rank, each producing .
A second element underlying saffron's aroma is 2-hydroxy-4,4,6-trimethyl-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-one, which produces a scent described as saffron, dried hay-like.
But the biggest saffron cultivation in Italy is in San Gavino Monreale, Sardinia, where it is grown on 40 hectares, representing 60% of Italian production; it too has unusually high crocin, picrocrocin, and safranal content.
Planting depth and corm spacing, in concert with climate, are critical factors in determining yields.
The saffron crocus, unknown in the wild, probably descends from ''Crocus cartwrightianus'', which originated in Crete; ''C.
Countries producing less saffron do not have specialised words for different grades and may only produce one grade.
It was first introduced to Italy by a Dominican monk from Inquisition-era Spain.
Confectioneries and liquors also often include saffron.
Varieties (not varieties in the botanical sense) from Spain, including the tradenames "Spanish Superior" and "Creme", are generally mellower in colour, flavour, and aroma; they are graded by government-imposed standards.
sativus'' prefers friable, loose, low-density, well-watered, and well-drained clay-calcareous soils with high organic content.
Age of the saffron is also a factor.
Its floral axes, or flower-bearing structures, bear bracteoles, or specialised leaves, that sprout from the flower stems; the latter are known as pedicels.
The documented history of saffron cultivation spans more than three millennia.
sativus'', likely emerged in late Bronze Age Crete.
Saffron prices at wholesale and retail rates range from US$500 to US$5,000 per pound, or US$1,100–11,000/kg.
Yet saffron is mentioned in ancient Chinese medical texts, including the forty-volume pharmacopoeia titled ''Shennong Bencaojing'' (: "Shennong's Great Herbal", also known as ''Pen Ts'ao'' or ''Pun Tsao''), a tome dating from 300–200 BC.
The plants fare poorly in shady conditions; they grow best in full sunlight.
A three-pronged style emerges from each flower.
Safranal, a volatile oil, gives saffron much of its distinctive aroma.
Italian varieties are slightly more potent than Spanish.
Human cultivators bred wild specimens by selecting for unusually long stigmata; thus, a sterile mutant form of ''C.
The flowers possess a sweet, honey-like fragrance.
The saffron crocus is a triploid that is "self-incompatible" and male sterile; it undergoes aberrant meiosis and is hence incapable of independent sexual reproduction—all propagation is by vegetative multiplication via manual "divide-and-set" of a starter clone or by interspecific hybridisation.
Despite attempts at quality control and standardisation, an extensive history of saffron adulteration, particularly among the cheapest grades, continues into modern times.
Crocins themselves are a series of hydrophilic carotenoids that are either monoglycosyl or diglycosyl polyene esters of crocetin.
Documentation of saffron's use over the span of 4,000 years in the treatment of some 90 illnesses has been uncovered.
Grades of Spanish saffron are "coupé" (the strongest grade, like Iranian sargol), "mancha" (like Iranian pushal), and in order of further decreasing strength "rio", "standard" and "sierra" saffron.
The last grower in England appears to have been John Knott of Duxford in Cambridgeshire, who delivered his crop to London apothecaries until around 1818 .
Greek, Moroccan, and Spanish growers employ distinct depths and spacings that suit their locales.
Grades of Iranian saffron are: "sargol" (red stigma tips only, strongest grade), "pushal" or "pushali" (red stigmata plus some yellow style, lower strength), "bunch" saffron (red stigmata plus large amount of yellow style, presented in a tiny bundle like a miniature wheatsheaf) and "konge" (yellow style only, claimed to have aroma but with very little, if any, colouring potential).
A pound contains between 70,000 and 200,000 threads.
On many saffron packaging labels, neither the ISO 3632 category nor the colouring strength (the measurement of crocin content) is displayed.
Wan also reflected on how it was used in his time: "The flower withers after a few days, and then the saffron is obtained.
sativus'' cataphylls are suspected by some to manifest prior to blooming when the plant is irrigated relatively early in the growing season.
Saffron's aroma is often described by connoisseurs as reminiscent of metallic honey with grassy or hay-like notes, while its taste has also been noted as hay-like and sweet.
A few of Iran's drier eastern and southeastern provinces, including Fars, Kerman, and those in the Khorasan region, glean the bulk of modern global production.
In the US, Pennsylvania Dutch saffron—known for its "earthy" notes—is marketed in small quantities.
Yet ''Bacillus subtilis'' inoculation may provide some benefit to growers by speeding corm growth and increasing stigma biomass yield.
When saffron is dried after its harvest, the heat, combined with enzymatic action, splits picrocrocin to yield D–glucose and a free safranal molecule.
Adulteration can also consist of selling mislabelled mixes of different saffron grades.
Rain immediately preceding flowering boosts saffron yields; rainy or cold weather during flowering promotes disease and reduces yields.
Ancient Persians cultivated Persian saffron (''Crocus sativus'' 'Hausknechtii') in Derbena, Isfahan, and Khorasan by the 10th century BC.
These membrane-like structures cover and protect the crocus's 5 to 11 true leaves as they bud and develop.
The latter are thin, straight, and blade-like green foliage leaves, which are 1–3&nbsp;mm in diameter, which either expand after the flowers have opened ("hysteranthous") or do so simultaneously with their blooming ("synanthous").
thomasii'' and ''C.
This lack of information makes it hard for customers to make informed choices when comparing prices and buying saffron.
Spanish growers fought hard for Protected Status because they felt that imports of Iranian saffron re-packaged in Spain and sold as "Spanish Mancha saffron" were undermining the genuine La Mancha brand.
Higher absorbances imply greater levels of crocin, picrocrocin and safranal, and thus a greater colouring potential and therefore strength per gram.
Gamboge is now used to dye the robes.
(The crop has recently been re-introduced to Norfolk and award-winning ISO 3632 category I saffron is grown at Burnham Norton.
Samples are assigned categories by gauging the spice's crocin and picrocrocin content, revealed by measurements of specific spectrophotometric absorbance.
To glean  of dry saffron requires the harvest of 50,000–75,000 flowers; a kilogram requires 110,000–170,000 flowers.
Adulteration was first documented in Europe's Middle Ages, when those found selling adulterated saffron were executed under the ''Safranschou'' code.
Kashmiri saffron is recognisable by its dark maroon-purple hue; it is among the world's darkest, which hints at strong flavour, aroma, and colouring effect.
North Norfolk (especially the area around Walsingham), southern Cambridgeshire and a small area of west Suffolk also produced saffron.
After aestivating in spring, the plant sends up its true leaves, each up to  in length.
It is valued for its uniform yellow colour.
Alexander's troops imitated the practice from the Persians and brought saffron-bathing to Greece.
Nematodes, leaf rusts, and corm rot pose other threats.
Spanish colonies in the Caribbean bought large amounts of this new American saffron, and high demand ensured that saffron's list price on the Philadelphia commodities exchange was equal to gold.
In a typical serving of one tablespoon (2 grams), however, only manganese is present as 28% of the Daily Value while other nutrients are negligible.
Saffron is not all of the same quality and strength.
Forty hours of labour are needed to pick 150,000 flowers.
cartwrightianus'', ''C.
In addition to descriptions based on how the saffron is picked, saffron may be categorised under the international standard ISO 3632 after laboratory measurement of crocin (responsible for saffron's colour), picrocrocin (taste), and safranal (fragrance or aroma) content.
Buddhist monks wear saffron-coloured robes; however, the robes are not dyed with costly saffron but turmeric, a less expensive dye, or jackfruit.
Market prices for saffron types follow directly from these ISO categories.
Saffron contains more than 150 volatile and aroma-yielding compounds.
The crop seems to have been initially grown in monastic gardens for medicinal use, only being planted in the less kind conditions of open fields many decades later.
Corms also bear vertical fibres, thin and net-like, that grow up to 5&nbsp;cm above the plant's neck.
According to Chinese herbalist Wan Zhen, "the habitat of saffron is in Kashmir, where people grow it principally to offer it to the Buddha."
Under ISO 3632, determination of non-stigma content ("floral waste content") and other extraneous matter such as inorganic material ("ash") are also key.
Another is the "Mongra" or "Lacha" saffron of Kashmir (''Crocus sativus'' 'Cashmirianus'), which is among the most difficult for consumers to obtain.
The crop then spread to Nuremberg, where endemic and insalubrious adulteration brought on the ''Safranschou'' code—whereby culprits were variously fined, imprisoned, and executed.
In late Hellenistic Egypt, Cleopatra used saffron in her baths so that lovemaking would be more pleasurable.
However, saffron's golden yellow-orange colour is primarily the result of α-crocin.
What makes this possible is the timing of the local wet seasons; generous spring rains and drier summers are optimal.
In 2014,  were produced worldwide.
Its progenitors are possibly the eastern Mediterranean autumn-flowering ''Crocus cartwrightianus'', which is also known as "wild saffron" and originated in Greece.
