A remarkable film shot by famous aviator Captain René Wauthier documents the first crossing by a large truck convoy from Algiers to Tchad, across the Sahara.
The rainfall is very unreliable and erratic in the Sahara as it may vary considerably year by year.
In the '''West Saharan montane xeric woodlands''', several volcanic highlands provide a cooler, moister environment that supports Saharo-Mediterranean woodlands and shrublands.
The trade across the desert intensified.
The Sahel and southern Sahara regions were home to several independent states or to roaming Tuareg clans.
Unlike neighboring West Africa and the central governments of the states that comprise the Sahara, the French language bears little relevance to inter-personal discourse and commerce within the region, its people retaining staunch ethnic and political affiliations with Tuareg and Berber leaders and culture.
Still, it is true that winter nights can be cold as it can drop to the freezing point and even below, especially in high-elevation areas.
The '''Sahara Desert ecoregion''' covers the hyper-arid central portion of the Sahara where rainfall is minimal and sporadic.
The prevailing air mass lying above the Sahara is the continental tropical (cT) air mass, which is hot and dry.
A significant slave trade crossed the desert.
The flora of the Sahara is highly diversified based on the bio-geographical characteristics of this vast desert.
Most of the desert enjoys more than 3,600 h of bright sunshine annually or over 82% of the time and a wide area in the eastern part experiences in excess of 4,000 h of bright sunshine a year or over 91% of the time, and the highest values are very close to the theoretical maximum value.
The sky is usually clear above the desert and the sunshine duration is extremely high everywhere in the Sahara.
Plants such as acacia trees, palms, succulents, spiny shrubs, and grasses have adapted to the arid conditions, by growing lower to avoid water loss by strong winds, by storing water in their thick stems to use it in dry periods, by having long roots that travel horizontally to reach the maximum area of water and to find any surface moisture and by having small thick leaves or needles to prevent water loss by evapo-transpiration.
This trade through Sahara persisted for several centuries until the development in Europe of the caravel allowed ships, first from Portugal and soon from all of Western Europe, to sail around the desert and gather the resources from the source in Guinea.
Other notable gazelles include the rhim gazelle and dama gazelle.
Archaeologists have found eight major towns and many other important settlements in the Garamantes territory.
The northern limit also corresponds to the  isohyet of annual precipitation.
The highest officially recorded average high temperature was  in a remote desert town in the Algerian Desert called Bou Bernous with an elevation of 378 meters above sea level.
For example, Biskra, Algeria and Ouarzazate, Morocco are found in this zone.
To the south, the Sahara is bounded by the Sahel, a belt of dry tropical savanna with a summer rainy season that extends across Africa from east to west.
These rains sustain summer pastures of grasses and herbs, with dry woodlands and shrublands along seasonal watercourses.
In the post-World War II era, several mines and communities have developed to utilize the desert's natural resources.
The '''South Saharan steppe and woodlands''' ecoregion is a narrow band running east and west between the hyper-arid Sahara and the Sahel savannas to the south.
The lowest values are found along the coastal regions due to high humidity and are often even lower than , while the highest values are found in inland desert areas where the humidity is the lowest, mainly in the southern Sahara.
Indeed, the extreme aridity of the Sahara can not be only explained by the subtropical high pressure.
Egypt and Britain lost control of the Sudan from 1882 to 1898 as a result of the Mahdist War.
The Carthaginians explored the Atlantic coast of the desert, but the turbulence of the waters and the lack of markets caused a lack of presence further south than modern Morocco.
The '''Saharan halophytics''' is an area of seasonally flooded saline depressions which is home to halophytic (salt-adapted) plant communities.
These include large deposits of oil and natural gas in Algeria and Libya and large deposits of phosphates in Morocco and Western Sahara.
From 1517 Egypt was a valued part of the Ottoman Empire, ownership of which provided the Ottomans with control over the Nile Valley, the east Mediterranean and North Africa.
The effects of local surface low pressure are extremely limited because upper-level subsidence still continues to block any form of air ascent.
Unusual landforms include the Richat Structure in Mauritania.
It was long believed that the region had been this way since about 1600 BCE, after shifts in the Earth's axis increased temperatures and decreased precipitation, which led to the abrupt desertification of North Africa about 5,400 years ago.
Mediation of disputes and inter-agency communication was served by interpreters contracted by the French government, who, according to Keenan, "documented a space of intercultural mediation," contributing much to preserving the indigenous cultural identities in the region.
There are even hotter spots in the Sahara, but they are located in extremely remote areas, especially in the Azalai, lying in northern Mali.
The sinking air prevents evaporating water from rising and, therefore, prevents the adiabatic cooling, which makes cloud formation extremely difficult to nearly impossible.
The Saharan cheetah (northwest African cheetah) lives in Algeria, Togo, Niger, Mali, Benin, and Burkina Faso.
The permanent dissolution of clouds allows unhindered light and thermal radiation.
Movements of the equatorial Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) bring summer rains during July and August which average  but vary greatly from year to year.
It has been estimated that from the 10th to 19th centuries some 6,000 to 7,000 slaves were transported north each year.
European colonialism in the Sahara began in the 19th century.
The benefit of the Ottoman Empire was the freedom of movement for citizens and goods.
Among them the Amaziɣ including the Turūq, various Arabized Amaziɣ groups such as the Hassaniya-speaking Sahrawis, whose populations include the Znaga, a tribe whose name is a remnant of the pre-historic Zenaga language.
Nowhere else on Earth has air been found as dry and evaporative as in the Sahara region.
The southern central part of the desert experiences up to six or seven months when the average high temperature strictly exceeds  which shows the constancy and the length of the really hot season in the Sahara.
It stretches from the Red Sea in the east and the Mediterranean in the north to the Atlantic Ocean in the west, where the landscape gradually changes from desert to coastal plains.
There are also small desert crocodiles in Mauritania and the Ennedi Plateau of Chad.
Raids from the nomadic Berber people of the desert were of constant concern to those living on the edge of the desert.
Fossils of dinosaurs, including ''Afrovenator'', ''Jobaria'' and ''Ouranosaurus'', have also been found here.
By the 5th millennium BCE, the people who inhabited what is now called Nubia, were full participants in the "agricultural revolution", living a settled lifestyle with domesticated plants and animals.
It covers  in Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco,and Tunisia.
Arabic dialects are the most widely spoken languages in the Sahara.
The southern limit of the Sahara is indicated botanically by the southern limit of ''Cornulaca monacantha'' (a drought-tolerant member of the Chenopodiaceae), or northern limit of ''Cenchrus biflorus'', a grass typical of the Sahel.
Burial items included pottery, jewelry, farming and hunting equipment, and assorted foods including dried meat and fruit.
The harsh climate of the Sahara is characterized by extremely low, unreliable, highly erratic rainfall; extremely high sunshine duration values; high temperatures year-round; negligible rates of relative humidity, a significant diurnal temperature variation and extremely high levels of potential evaporation which are the highest recorded worldwide.
The deathstalker scorpion can be  long.
The highest peak in the Sahara is Emi Koussi, a shield volcano in the Tibesti range of northern Chad.
Stone arrowheads, knives and scrapers from the era are commonly found.
The Saharan flora comprises around 2800 species of vascular plants.
Ergs (large areas covered with sand dunes) form only a minor part, but many of the sand dunes are over  high.
The Tuareg nomads continue, to the present day, to inhabit and move across wide Sahara surfaces.
Ground temperatures of  have been recorded in the Adrar of Mauritania and a value of 75&nbsp;°C (167&nbsp;°F) has been measured in Borkou, northern Chad.
The '''North Saharan steppe and woodlands''' is along the northern desert, next to the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions of the northern Maghreb and Cyrenaica.
The Sahara has a huge potential for solar energy production.
The central Sahara is estimated to include five hundred species of plants, which is extremely low considering the huge extent of the area.
The Berber people occupied (and still occupy) much of the Sahara.
However, they traded with the Garamantes, and a Roman bath has been found in the Garamantes capital of Garama.
The Saharan silver ant is unique in that due to the extreme high temperatures of their habitat and the threat of predators, the ants are active outside their nest for only about ten minutes per day.
The Saharan halophytics cover 54,000&nbsp;km2 (20,800&nbsp;mi2), including the Qattara and Siwa depressions in northern Egypt, the Tunisian salt lakes of central Tunisia, Chott Melghir in Algeria, and smaller areas of Algeria, Mauritania, and The southern part of Morocco.
et al., 2011) have reported that Saharan soil may have bio-available iron and also some essential macro and micro nutrient elements suitable for use as fertilizer for growing wheat.
Important cities located in the Sahara include Nouakchott, the capital of Mauritania; Tamanrasset, Ouargla, Béchar, Hassi Messaoud, Ghardaïa, and El Oued in Algeria; Timbuktu in Mali; Agadez in Niger; Ghat in Libya; and Faya-Largeau in Chad.
The subsidence of the Sahara High nearly reaches the ground during the coolest part of the year while it is confined to the upper troposphere during the hottest periods.
Greek traders spread along the eastern coast of the desert, establishing trading colonies along the Red Sea.
Centralized states thus surrounded the desert on the north and east; it remained outside the control of these states.
Some examples of this are Bilma, Niger and Faya-Largeau, Chad.
Sometime between 633 BCE and 530 BCE, Hanno the Navigator either established or reinforced Phoenician colonies in Western Sahara, but all ancient remains have vanished with virtually no trace.
Each of these highways is partially complete, with significant gaps and unpaved sections.
The ancient Greeks and the Romans knew of the Garamantes and regarded them as uncivilized nomads.
The subtropical ridge is the predominate factor that explains the hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification ''BWh'') of this vast region.
The primary source of rain in the Sahara is the Intertropical Convergence Zone, a continuous belt of low-pressure systems near the equator which bring the brief, short and irregular rainy season to the Sahel and southern Sahara.
Vegetation is rare, and this ecoregion consists mostly of sand dunes (''erg, chech, raoui''), stone plateaus (''hamadas''), gravel plains (''reg''), dry valleys (''wadis''), and salt flats.
The Garamantes Berbers built a prosperous empire in the heart of the desert.
A number of Trans-African highways have been proposed across the Sahara, including the Cairo–Dakar Highway along the Atlantic coast, the Trans-Sahara Highway from Algiers on the Mediterranean to Kano in Nigeria, the Tripoli – Cape Town Highway from Tripoli in Libya to N'Djamena in Chad, and the Cairo – Cape Town Highway which follows the Nile.
The thin northern fringe of the desert receives more winter cloudiness and rainfall due to the arrival of low pressure systems over the Mediterranean Sea along the polar front, although very attenuated by the rain shadow effects of the mountains and the annual average rainfall ranges from 100&nbsp;mm (3,93 in) to 250&nbsp;mm (9,84 in).
Megaliths found at Nabta Playa are overt examples of probably the world's first known archaeoastronomy devices, predating Stonehenge by some 2,000 years.
Several species of fox live in the Sahara, including the fennec fox, pale fox and Rüppell's fox.
In 1912, Italy captured parts of what was to be named Libya from the Ottomans.
As a result of this aridification, it became a largely impenetrable barrier to humans, with the remaining settlements mainly being concentrated around the numerous oases that dot the landscape.
It is the world’s highest recorded average high temperature and only Death Valley, California rivals it.
The Sahara can be divided into several regions, including the western Sahara, the central Ahaggar Mountains, the Tibesti Mountains, the Aïr Mountains, the Ténéré desert, and the Libyan Desert.
To the south, it is bounded by the Sahel, a belt of semi-arid tropical savanna around the Niger River valley and the Sudan Region of Sub-Saharan Africa.
The rainfall inhibition and the dissipation of cloud cover are most accentuated over the eastern section of the Sahara rather than the western.
To the north, the Sahara skirts the Mediterranean Sea in Egypt and portions of Libya, but in Cyrenaica and the Maghreb, the Sahara borders the Mediterranean forest, woodland, and scrub ecoregions of northern Africa, all of which have a Mediterranean climate characterized by hot summers and cool and rainy winters.
Arabic continued as the local language and Islamic culture was much reinforced.
The Sahara covers large parts of Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Western Sahara, Sudan and Tunisia.
The annual average direct solar irradiation is around 2,800 kWh/(m2 year) in the Great Desert.
However, it is currently extinct in the wild in Egypt and Libya.
Dromedary camels and goats are the domesticated animals most commonly found in the Sahara.
There remain fewer than 250 mature cheetahs, which are very cautious, fleeing any human presence.
During daytime, the sand temperature is extremely high as it can easily reach  or more.
Egypt, under Muhammad Ali and his successors, conquered Nubia in 1820–22, founded Khartoum in 1823, and conquered Darfur in 1874.
Its venom contains large amounts of agitoxin and scyllatoxin and is very dangerous; however, a sting from this scorpion rarely kills a healthy adult.
After its capture by British troops in 1898, the Sudan became an Anglo-Egyptian condominium.
According to the botanical criteria of Frank White and geographer Robert Capot-Rey, the northern limit of the Sahara corresponds to the northern limit of date palm cultivation and the southern limit of the range of esparto, a grass typical of the Mediterranean climate portion of the Maghreb and Iberia.
Floristically, the Sahara has three zones based on the amount of rainfall received – the Northern (Mediterranean), Central and Southern Zones.
Spain captured present-day Western Sahara after 1874, although Rio del Oro remained largely under Tuareg influence.
Little trade or commerce is known to have passed through the interior in subsequent periods, the only major exception being the Nile Valley.
Other hot spots in Algeria such as Adrar, Timimoun, In Salah, Ouallene, Aoulef, Reggane with an elevation between 200 and 400 meters above sea level get slightly lower summer average highs around  during the hottest months of the year.
By 3400 BCE, the Sahara was as dry as it is today, due to reduced precipitation and higher temperatures resulting from a shift in the Earth's orbit.
Burial in desert environments appears to enhance Egyptian preservation rites, and dead were buried facing due west.
They are unusually pale.
Subsistence in organized and permanent settlements in predynastic Egypt by the middle of the 6th millennium BCE centered predominantly on cereal and animal agriculture: cattle, goats, pigs and sheep.
The Garamantes grew populous and strong, conquering their neighbors and capturing many slaves (which were put to work extending the tunnels).
The people of the Sahara are of various origins.
For example, Timbuktu, Mali and Agadez, Niger are found in this zone.
The cheetah avoids the sun from April to October, seeking the shelter of shrubs such as balanites and acacias.
Human activities are more likely to affect the habitat in areas of permanent water (oases) or where water comes close to the surface.
The remaining populations of large mammals have been greatly reduced by hunting for food and recreation.
Central Sahara is hyperarid, with sparse vegetation.
The annual average daily temperature exceeds  everywhere and can approach  in the hottest regions year-round.
Other animals include the monitor lizards, hyrax, sand vipers, and small populations of African wild dog, in perhaps only 14 countries and red-necked ostrich.
The frequency of subfreezing winter nights in the Sahara is strongly influenced by the North Atlantic Oscillation, with warmer winter temperatures during negative NAO events and cooler winters with more frosts when the NAO is positive.
There are approximately 2000 mature individuals left in the wild.
It established regular air links from Toulouse (HQ of famed Aéropostale), to Oran and over the Hoggar to Timbuktu and West to Bamako and Dakar, as well as trans-Sahara bus services run by La Companie Transsaharienne (est.
As a consequence, the weather tends to be sunny, dry and stable with a minimal risk of rainfall.
The area is located in the horse latitudes under the subtropical ridge, a significant belt of semi-permanent subtropical warm-core high pressure where the air from upper levels of the troposphere tends to sink towards the ground.
In the central, hyperarid region, there are many subdivisions of the great desert: Tanezrouft, the Ténéré, the Libyan Desert, the Eastern Desert, the Nubian Desert and others.
The constantly high position of the sun, the extremely low relative humidity, the lack of vegetation and rainfall, make the Great Desert the hottest continuously large area worldwide and the hottest place on Earth during summertime in some spots.
Researchers from Hacettepe University (Yücekutlu,N.
The stability of the atmosphere above the desert prevents any convective overturning, thus making rainfall virtually non-existent.
In full contrast to the negligible annual rainfall amounts, the annual rates of potential evaporation are extraordinarily high, roughly ranging from 2,500&nbsp;mm/year to more than 6,000&nbsp;mm/year in the whole desert.
Hot, dry air masses primarily form over the North-African desert from the heating of the vast continental land area, and it affects the whole desert during most of the year.
The average high temperature exceeds  during the hottest month nearly everywhere in the desert except at very high altitudes.
Saharan rock art of cattle and herdsmen suggests the presence of a cattle cult like those found in Sudan and other pastoral societies in Africa today.
The Sahara was rapidly marginalized.
Plant leaves may dry out totally and then recover.
The Garamantes civilization eventually collapsed after they had depleted available water in the aquifers and could no longer sustain the effort to extend the tunnels further into the mountains.
About half of these species are common to the flora of the Arabian deserts.
Rainfall in this giant desert has to overcome the physical and atmospheric barriers that normally prevent the production of precipitation.
If all areas with a mean annual precipitation of less than 250&nbsp;mm were included, the Sahara would be .
Tanning of animal skins, pottery and weaving were commonplace in this era also.
The lowering of air is the strongest and the most effective over the eastern part of the Great Desert, in the Libyan Desert which is the sunniest, the driest and the most nearly rainless place on the planet rivaling the Atacama Desert, lying in Chile and Peru.
By the beginning of the 20th century, the trans-Saharan trade had clearly declined because goods were moved through more modern and efficient means, such as airplanes, rather than across the desert.
The annual average rainfall is virtually zero over a wide area of some 1,000,000&nbsp;km2 in the eastern Sahara comprising deserts of Libya, Egypt and Sudan (Tazirbu, Kufra, Dakhla, Kharga, Farafra, Siwa, Asyut, Sohag, Luxor, Aswan, Abu Simbel, Wadi Halfa) where the long-term mean approximates 0.5&nbsp;mm per year.
The Sahara was then a much wetter place than it is today.
Most of the Saharan states achieved independence after World War II: Libya in 1951, Morocco, Sudan, and Tunisia in 1956, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger in 1960, and Algeria in 1962.
There exist other animals in the Sahara (birds in particular) such as African silverbill and black-faced firefinch, among others.
The Sahara is mainly rocky hamada.
Salah, well known in Algeria for its extreme heat, has average high temperatures of , ,  and  in June, July, August and September respectively.
The Atlas Mountains, found in Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia also help to enhance the aridity of the northern part of the desert.
It covers 4,639,900 square km (1,791,500 square miles) of Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, and Sudan.
Subsiding, diverging, dry air masses associated with subtropical high-pressure systems are extremely unfavorable for the development of convectional showers.
The addax, a large white antelope, can go nearly a year in the desert without drinking.
By 500 BCE, Greeks arrived in the desert.
Egypt, including the Sudan, became a British protectorate in 1882.
Metal objects replaced prior ones of stone.
These schemes often lead to soil degradation and salinization.
By the end of 641 all of Egypt was in Muslim hands.
However, this theory has recently been called into dispute, when samples taken from several 7 million year old sand deposits led scientists to reconsider the timeline for desertification.
France conquered the regency of Algiers from the Ottomans in 1830, and French rule spread south from Algeria and eastwards from Senegal into the upper Niger to include present-day Algeria, Chad, Mali then French Sudan including Timbuktu, Mauritania, Morocco (1912), Niger, and Tunisia (1881).
This is because the weaker clockwise flow around the eastern side of the subtropical anticyclone during negative NAO winters, although too dry to produce more than negligible precipitation, does significantly reduce the flow of dry, cold air from higher latitudes of Eurasia into the Sahara.
Diplomacy with local clients was primarily conducted in Arabic, which was the traditional language of bureaucratic affairs.
It covers , amounting to  31% of Africa.
The major part of the desert experiences around three to five months when the average high strictly exceeds .
Of the 9,000,000&nbsp;km2 of desert land in the Sahara, an area of about 2,800,000&nbsp;km2 (about 31% of the total area) receives an annual average rainfall amount of 10&nbsp;mm (0.39&nbsp;in) or less, while some 1,500,000&nbsp;km2 (about 17% of the total area) receive an average of 5&nbsp;mm or less.
Higher and more regular rainfall and cooler temperatures support woodlands and shrublands of palms, acacias, myrtle, oleander, tamarix, and several rare and endemic plants.
Spain withdrew from Western Sahara in 1975, and it was partitioned between Mauritania and Morocco.
According to climatic criteria, the southern limit of the Sahara corresponds to the  isohyet of annual precipitation (this is a long-term average, since precipitation varies annually).
By 6000 BCE predynastic Egyptians in the southwestern corner of Egypt were herding cattle and constructing large buildings.
With such an evaporative power, the Sahara can only be desiccated and dried out further more and the moisture deficit is tremendous.
Trade exploited the Ottoman land routes to handle the spices, gold and silk from the East, manufactures from Europe, and the slave and gold traffic from Africa.
Here, the local pressure on natural resources can be intense.
In recent years development projects have started in the deserts of Algeria and Tunisia using irrigated water pumped from underground aquifers.
The average diurnal temperature range is typically between .
The dorcas gazelle is a north African gazelle that can also go for a long time without water.
An urban civilization, the Garamantes, arose around 500 BCE in the heart of the Sahara, in a valley that is now called the Wadi al-Ajal in Fezzan, Libya.
The Sahara High represents the eastern continental extension of the Azores High, centered over the North Atlantic Ocean.
The legacy of the French colonial era administration is primarily manifested in the territorial reorganization enacted by the Third and Fourth republics, which engendered artificial political divisions within a hitherto isolated and porous region.
Sand and ground temperatures are even more extreme.
Due to lack of cloud cover and very low humidity, the desert usually features high diurnal temperature variations between days and nights.
However, it is a myth that the nights are cold after extremely hot days in the Sahara.
These major mountain ranges act as a barrier causing a strong rain shadow effect on the leeward side by dropping much of the humidity brought by atmospheric disturbances along the polar front which affects the surrounding Mediterranean climates.
People lived on the edge of the desert thousands of years ago since the last ice age.
This ecoregion covers 1,101,700&nbsp;km2 (425,400&nbsp;mi2) in Algeria, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Sudan.
The northern and southern reaches of the desert, along with the highlands, have areas of sparse grassland and desert shrub, with trees and taller shrubs in wadis, where moisture collects.
The name 'Sahara' is derived from the plural Arabic language word for desert ( '''' ).
The Sahara is the world's largest low-latitude hot desert.
These extremely arid areas often receive no rain for years.
Winter rains sustain shrublands and dry woodlands that form a transition between the Mediterranean climate regions to the north and the hyper-arid Sahara proper to the south.
However, most of the desert has a value in excess of .
A value of 4,300 h or 98% of the time would be recorded in Upper Egypt (Aswan, Luxor) and in the Nubian Desert (Wadi Halfa).
The ecoregion covers 82,200&nbsp;km2 (31,700&nbsp;mi2) in the Tibesti of Chad and Libya, and Jebel Uweinat on the border of Egypt, Libya, and Sudan.
Most of the rivers and streams in the Sahara are seasonal or intermittent, the chief exception being the Nile River which, from its origins in central Africa, crosses the desert underground before emptying into the Mediterranean, although aquifers sometimes surface, forming oases.
The Byzantine Empire ruled the northern shores of the Sahara from the 5th to the 7th centuries.
The other cheetah subspecies (northeast African cheetah) lives in Chad, Sudan and the eastern region of Niger.
The southern fringe of the desert along the border with the Sahel receives summer cloudiness and rainfall due to the arrival of the Intertropical Convergence Zone from the south and the annual average rainfall ranges from 100&nbsp;mm (3.93&nbsp;in) to 250&nbsp;mm (9.84&nbsp;in).
After the Muslim conquest of Arabia (Arabian peninsula) the Muslim conquest of North Africa began in the mid-7th to early 8th centuries, Islamic influence expanded rapidly on the Sahara.
The '''Tanezrouft''' is one of the harshest regions on Earth as well as one of the hottest and driest parts of the Sahara, with no vegetation and very little life.
It is one of three distinct physiographic provinces of the African massive physiographic division.
