In heavy winds, a boat with its bow too low may capsize by pitching forward over its bow (pitch-pole) or dive under the waves (submarine).
Sailboat racing ranges from single person dinghy racing to large boats with 10 or 20 crew and from small boats costing a few thousand dollars to multimillion-dollar America's Cup or Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race campaigns.
Lines (generally steel cables) that support masts are stationary and are collectively known as a vessel's standing rigging, and individually as ''shrouds'' or ''stays''.
At more extreme angles of heel, the boat will spontaneously 'round up' into the wind during gusts, i.e.
This is called the "slot effect".
The boomed sails must be hauled in and made fast before the stern reaches the eye of the wind, so that they are amidship and controlled as the stern passes through the eye of the wind, and then let out quickly under control and adjusted to the new point of sail.
Easing the sheets on aft-most sails, such as the mainsail in a sloop or cutter can have an immediate effect, especially to help with maneuvering.
When sailing close to the wind the force generated by the sail acts at 90° to the sail.
It is also easier to handle than going wing and wing, as the main sail is not set and does not disturb the air flow to the head sails.
Wind shear affects sailboats in motion by presenting a different wind speed and direction at different heights along the mast.
They specify the safety equipment needed, the emergency procedures to be used appropriate to the boat's size and its sailing range, and requirements for passage planning with regard to weather and safety.
Since the solo circumnavigation of Joshua Slocum in the 1890s, long-distance cruising under sail has inspired thousands of otherwise normal people to explore distant seas and horizons.
If in light wind, a jibe is the better choice as there's less danger of the wind tipping the boat.
A very thick line is considered a ''cable.''
In the case of a standard catamaran, there are two similarly-sized and -shaped slender hulls connected by beams, which are sometimes overlaid by a deck superstructure.
Examples include the 29er, J/24, Laser, and RS Feva.
Two main skills of sailing are trimming the sails correctly for the direction and strength of the wind, and maintaining a course relative to the wind that suits the sails once trimmed.
The effect of wind shear can be factored into the selection of twist in the sail design, but this can be difficult to predict since wind shear may vary widely in different weather conditions.
These US certificates are often required to charter a boat, but are not required by any federal or state law.
However, boats propelled by sails cannot sail directly into the wind.
#The sailing vessel on port tack gives way to the sailing vessel on starboard tack (Rule 12)
Sailors may also adjust the trim of the sail to account for wind gradient, for example, using a boom vang.
Sailors are required to be aware not only of the requirements for their own boat, but of all the other lights, shapes and flags that may be shown by other vessels, such as those fishing, towing, dredging, diving etc., as well as sound signals that may be made in restricted visibility and at close quarters, so that they can make decisions under the COLREGS in good time, should the need arise.
The actual design of the boat may be at fault.
Stays running aft are backstays or after stays.
In addition to the COLREGS, CEVNI and/or any specific racing rules that apply to a sailing boat, there are also
Under these conditions, sailboat racing can be comparable to or less expensive than sports such as golf and skiing.
When a ship or boat leans over to one side, from the action of waves or from the centrifugal force of a turn or under wind pressure or from amount of exposed topsides, it is said to 'heel'.
The stand-on vessel must hold a steady course and speed but be prepared to take late avoiding action to prevent an actual collision if the other vessel does not do so in time.
When sailing downwind, the sails no longer generate aerodynamic lift and airflow is stalled, with the wind push on the sails giving drag only.
In this case adding a bow sprit, re-cutting the main sail, or moving the mast forward may all be part of the solution.
Gaff-rigged sloops have quadrilateral mainsails with a gaff (a small boom) at their upper edge (the "head" of the sail).
Reefing means reducing the area of a sail without actually changing it for a smaller sail.
Sailboat racing is one of the few sports in which people of all ages and genders can regularly compete with and against each other.
The straight-line distance is the hypotenuse value of  √2
* altering sail shape to make it flatter in high winds
To execute the tack the command "Lee-ho" or "Hard-to-lee" is given.
Sailing for pleasure can involve short trips across a bay, day sailing, coastal cruising, and more extended offshore or 'blue-water' cruising.
For light craft such as a Hobie Cat (which has little mass) coming into the wind should only be attempted when moving very quickly such as >8 knots.
Fastnet Race, Commodore's Cup, Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, Bermuda Race, etc.)
For general sailing, during such course changes, there is work that needs to be done.
Sailing vessels may proceed on their own, or be part of a flotilla with other like-minded voyagers.
The crew may move their personal weight to the high (upwind) side of the boat, this is called ''hiking'', which also changes the centre of gravity & produces a righting lever to reduce the degree of heeling.
The crew gets ready at their positions.
In most countries sailing is enjoyed as a recreational activity or as a sport.
A style of casual coastal cruising called gunkholing is a popular summertime family recreational activity.
In many small boats, weight too far aft can cause drag by submerging the transom, especially in light to moderate winds.
*Maintain a proper lookout at all times
; Handicap : Where boats of different types sail against each other and are scored based on their handicaps which are calculated either before the start or after the finish.
There were improvements in sails, masts and rigging; improvements in marine navigation including the cross tree and charts, of both the sea and constellations, allowed more certainty in sea travel.
Some sailing craft are propelled by kites, as with kitesurfing, which uses a tethered airfoil.
In general, regardless of the activity, every sailor must
As a general rule, the former are called dinghies, the latter keelboats.
The timing of the crew shift is also critical when coming into the wind.
Loss of attention by the helmsperson can lead to an accidental jibe, causing injury to the boat or crew.
Options for maneuvering are also reduced.
The stay running forward from a mast to the bow is called the ''forestay'' or ''headstay''.
* raking the mast when going upwind (to tilt the sail towards the rear, this being more stable)
#If both sailing vessels are on the same tack, the windward boat gives way to the leeward one (Rule 12)
Also, having the sails and boom(s) perpendicular to the boat throws weight and some wind force to that side, making the boat harder to balance.
The box-rule might specify only a few parameters such as maximum length, minimum weight, and maximum sail area,  thus allowing creative engineering to develop the fastest boat within the constraints.
The air interacting with the sails of a sailing vessel creates various forces, including reaction forces.
Vertical spars are masts, horizontal spars are booms (if they can hit the sailor), yards, gaffs (if they are too high to reach) or poles (if they cannot hit the sailor).
The important voyages of Robin Lee Graham, Eric Hiscock, Don Street and others have shown that, while not strictly racing, ocean voyaging carries with it an inherent sense of competition, especially that between man and the elements.
One such example is the wind turbine boat, also called the windmill boat,  which uses a large windmill to extract energy from the wind, and a propeller to convert this energy to forward motion of the hull.
Lines that are attached to sails to control their shapes are called ''sheets'', as in ''mainsheet''.
Of course this happens under strong wind.
More detailed aspects include specific control of the sail's shape, e.g.
Another catamaran variation is the proa.
From the 15th century onwards, European ships went further north, stayed longer on the Grand Banks and in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and eventually began to explore the Pacific Northwest and the Western Arctic.
Some lines are referred to as ropes:
Walls are called ''bulkheads'' or ''ceilings'', while the surfaces referred to as ceilings on land are called ''overheads'' or ''deckheads''.
The most basic control of the sail consists of setting its angle relative to the wind.
Where there is a difference in motion, then there is energy to be extracted at the interface.
When the waves are steep, it may be necessary to sail closer to the wind to avoid waves directly on the beam, which create the danger of capsizing.
Every vessel in coastal and offshore waters is subject to the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (the COLREGS).
It is also possible for a sloop to be square rigged (having large square sails like a Napoleonic Wars-era ship of the line).
This method rolls the sail up around a vertical foil either inside a slot in the mast, or affixed to the outside of the mast.
At the other end of the extreme are the development classes based on a box-rule.
When a vessel is subject to a heeling force (such as wind pressure), vessel buoyancy & beam of the hull will counter-act the heeling force.
If the sails are properly oriented with respect to the wind, then the net force on the sails will move the vessel forward.
Floors are called ''soles'' or ''decks''.
Each class has its own set of class rules, and some classes are more restrictive than others.
Finer controls adjust the overall shape of the sail.
#If an approaching vessel remains on a steady bearing, and the range is decreasing, then a collision is likely.
A sloop is any boat that has a single mast and usually a single headsail (generally a jib) in addition to the mainsail (Bermuda rig but c.f.
A schooner may have any number of masts provided the second from the front is the tallest (called the "main mast").
But if it shifts against the sailor's, called a ''header'', then the opposite tack may become the more favorable course.
In dinghies the single line from the bow is referred to as the ''painter''.
* a foot rope (for sailors on square riggers to stand on while reefing or furling the sails), and
* a bolt rope (attached to the edge of a sail for extra strength),
If the sheet is too loose the sail will flap in the wind, an occurrence that is called "luffing."
Dock lines need to be thrown and handled safely and correctly when coming alongside, up to a buoy, and when anchoring, as well as when casting off and getting under way.
The choice of which strategy to use (coming-about or jibing) depends on the conditions, sail configuration, and the craft.
In addition sea conditions can also falsely seem milder than they are as the waves ahead are being viewed from behind making white caps less apparent.
In some high-performance racing yachts, water ballast or the angle of a canting keel can be changed to provide additional righting force to counteract heeling.
(Usually, the luff is the leading edge, such as when close-hauled.)
470, 49er, Contender, Farr 40, Laser, Lido 14, RS Feva, Soling, Star, Thistle, etc.)
Thus, a difference in true wind creates a different apparent wind at different heights.
Sail trim may also be controlled with smaller lines attached to the forward section of a boom such as a cunningham; a line used to hold the boom down is called a ''vang'', or a ''kicker'' in the United Kingdom.
For most modern sailboats, that is boats with fore-and-aft sails, reaching is the fastest way to travel.
Throughout history sailing has been instrumental in the development of civilization, affording humanity greater mobility than travel over land, whether for trade, transport or warfare, and the capacity for fishing.
Licensing regulations vary widely across the world.
By this method of zig-zagging into the wind, known as beating, it is possible to reach any upwind destination.
Two or more sails are frequently combined to maximize the smooth flow of air.
Class racing can be further subdivided.
Tacking is essential when sailing upwind.
Running is generally the most unstable point of sail for a fore-and-aft rigged vessel, but the easiest for a novice to grasp conceptually, making it a common downfall for beginners.
This method allows for standard- or full-length horizontal battens.
*Adjust speed to suit the conditions
If weather helm builds further, it can limit the ability of the helmsperson to steer the boat, which can be turned towards but not effectively away from the wind.
In larger boats the weight of a person has less effect on the hull trim, but it can be adjusted by shifting gear, fuel, water, or supplies.
Here the main sail is placed on the windward side of the boat, leading to a heightened risk of gybing.
The toilet is traditionally called the ''head'', the kitchen is the ''galley''.
*around 80° for square riggers and similar vessels due to the sail shape which is relatively inefficient when sailing upwind
It consists of taking a series of day sails to out of the way places and anchoring overnight while enjoying such activities as exploring isolated islands, swimming, fishing, etc.
For example, the European Union issues the International Certificate of Competence, which is required to operate pleasure craft in most inland waterways within the union.
However, there are inexpensive ways to get involved in sailboat racing, such as at community sailing clubs, classes offered by local recreation organizations and in some inexpensive dinghy and small catamaran classes.
The latter is a direct order to the helmsperson to push the tiller hard to the leeward side of the boat making the bow of the boat come up and quickly turn through the eye of the wind to prevent the boat being caught in irons.
Reducing or reefing the total sail area will have the same effect and many boats will sail faster with less sail in a stiff breeze due to the reduction in underwater drag.
In most cases, ''rope'' is the term used only for raw material.
Small amounts (≤5 degrees) of weather helm are generally considered desirable because of the consequent aerofoil lift effect from the rudder.
Such rigid sails are typically made of thin plastic fabric held stretched over a frame.
However, up until the adoption of the Racing Rules of Sailing, any vessel racing under sail was considered a yacht, be it a multi-masted ship-rigged vessel (such as a sailing frigate), a sailboard (more commonly referred to as a windsurfer) or remote-controlled boat, or anything in between.
For the naming of sails, see sail-plan.
Gaff-rigged vessels may also have another sail, called a topsail, above the gaff.
These regulations place the obligations for safety on the owners and operators of any boat including sailboats.
The command "Jibe-ho" is given to execute the turn.
To enable maximum forward speed, the force needs to be cancelled out, perhaps using human ballast, leaving only a smaller forward resultant force.
They must tack (turn the boat through the eye of the wind) back and forth in order to progress directly upwind (see below "Beating").
Weight too far forward can cause the bow to dig into the waves.
If a boat has two masts, it may be a schooner, a ketch, or a yawl, if it is rigged fore-and-aft on all masts.
the wind relative to a stationary object) and the wind that occurs due to the forward motion of the boat.
Any action that reduces the angle of heel of a boat that is reaching or beating to windward will help reduce excessive weather helm.
Lee helm, the opposite of weather helm, is generally considered to be dangerous because the vessel turns away from the wind when the helm is released, thus increasing forces on the sail at a time when the helmsperson is not in control.
#If a vessel on port tack is unable to determine the tack of the other boat, she should be prepared to give way (Rule 12)
These classes allows some variation, but the boats are still substantially similar.
* The IALA International Association of Lighthouse Authorities standards for lateral marks, lights, signals, and buoyage and rules designed to support safe navigation.
In smaller boats, death rolls can build up and lead to capsize.
Before jibing the command "Ready to jibe" is given.
This also assumes a tacking angle of 90°.
A sailor manages the force of the wind on the sails by adjusting their angle with respect to the moving sailing craft and sometimes by adjusting the sail area.
A boat can be 'worked to windward', to arrive at an upwind destination, by sailing close-hauled with the wind coming from one side, then tacking (turning the boat through the eye of the wind) and sailing with the wind coming from the other side.
An old adage describes beating as sailing for twice the distance at half the speed and three times the discomfort.
Just before tacking the command "Ready about" is given, at which point the crew must man the sheet lines which need to be changed over to the other tack and the helmsperson gets ready.
The classical slab-reefing method is the most widely used.
Examples include the Moth (dinghy), the A Class Catamaran, and the boats used in the America's Cup, Volvo Ocean Race, and Barcelona World Race.
#Sailing vessels must give way to vessels engaged in fishing, those not under command, those restricted in their ability to manoeuvre and should avoid impeding the safe passage of a vessel constrained by her draft.
Lines and halyards need to be coiled neatly for stowage and reuse.
An important safety aspect of sailing is to adjust the amount of sail to suit the wind conditions.
*Know whether to 'stand on' or 'give way' in any close-quarters situation.
The sails are adjusted to create a smooth laminar flow over the sail surfaces.
On a small boat with only jib and mainsail this is done by furling the jib and by partially lowering the mainsail, a process called 'reefing the main'.
Long-distance voyaging, such as that across oceans and between far-flung ports, can be considered the near-absolute province of the cruising sailboat.
The give-way vessel must take early, positive and obvious avoiding action, without crossing ahead of the other vessel.
But one of the great benefits to sailboat ownership is that one may at least imagine the type of adventure that the average affordable powerboat could never accomplish.
In stronger winds, rolling increases as there is less rolling resistance provided by the sails, as they are eased out.
Note that a "sloop of war", in the naval sense, may well have more than one mast, and is not properly a sloop by the modern meaning.
One of the most common dinghy hulls in the world is the Laser hull.
The best strategy is to stay on the favorable tack as much as possible.
Wind shear occurs because of friction above a water surface slowing the flow of air.
Jibing is often necessary to change course when sailing off the wind or downwind.
*In-mast (or on-mast) roller-reefing.
Depending on the efficiency of the rig and hull, the angle of travel relative to the true wind can be as little as 35° or may need to be 80° or greater.
The main boom then can be rigged as a whisker pole too, to stabilize one of the head sails.
Cruising can include extended offshore and ocean-crossing trips, coastal sailing within sight of land, and daysailing.
This condition has a braking effect on the vessel but has the safety effect in that an excessively hard pressed boat will try and turn into the wind therefore reducing the forces on the sail.
A professional skipper and even crew may be hired along with the boat in some cases.
Many nearby local waters on rivers, bays, sounds, and coastlines can become great natural cruising grounds for this type of recreational sailing.
How closely a boat can sail into the wind depends on the boat's design, sail shape and trim, the sea state, and the wind speed.
Different hull trim efforts are required for different kinds of boats and different conditions.
This can be the most comfortable point of sail, but requires constant attention.
*about 35° for modern racing yachts which have been optimized for upwind performance (like America's Cup yachts)
Others use an airfoil on a pivoting spar, as with windsurfers.
Reaching may, however, put the boat on a course parallel with the crests of the waves.
A cutter (boat) also has a single mast, set further aft than a sloop and more than one headsail.
This force can be considered as split into a small force acting in the direction of travel, as well as a large sideways force that heels (tips) the boat.
Besides improving sailing skills, all the other normal needs of everyday living must also be addressed.
(See Dinghy sailing.)
Polynesian oceanfarers traveled vast distances of open ocean in outrigger canoes using navigation methods such as stick charts.
However, as the size of the boat increases, the benefits of mainsail roller furling increase dramatically.
A preventer can be rigged to reduce danger and damage from accidental jibes.
With modern technology, "wings", that is rigid sails, may be used in place of fabric sails.
An estimate of the correct tacking distance can be obtained (and thereby the time taken to travel it at various boat speeds) by using Pythagoras' theorem with equal tacks (assume a value of 1).
*about 50 to 60° for cruisers and work boats with inefficient keels, inefficient hull shapes, or low draught, when compared to craft designed for sailing performance, and for boats carrying two or more masts (since the forward sails adversely affect the windward ability of sails further aft when sailing upwind)
Sails in different sail plans have unchanging names, however.
Most modern yachts of 25–55 feet long, propelled solely by mechanical powerplants, cannot carry the fuel sufficient for a point-to-point voyage of even 250–500 miles without needing to resupply; but a well-prepared sail-powered yacht of similar length is theoretically capable of sailing anywhere its crew is willing to guide it.
An example of this would be the International C-Class Catamaran Championship and the yacht USA 17 that won the 2010 America's Cup.
* The SOLAS (International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea) regulations, specifically Chapter V, which became mandatory for all leisure craft users of the sea from 1 July 2002.
The combined sails fit into an imaginary aerofoil outline, so that the most forward sails are more in line with the wind, whereas the more aft sails are more in line with the course followed.
Thus, the physical portion of the boat that is below water can be regarded as functioning as a "second sail."
It was designed with speed and simplicity in mind.
As one gets into three or more masts the number of combinations rises and one gets barques, barquentines, and full rigged ships.
The COLREGS go on to describe the lights to be shown by vessels under way at night or in restricted visibility.
As more heeling force causes more heel, weather helm may be experienced.
Steering a boat within roughly 30 degrees either side of dead downwind is called a run.
The combined efficiency of this sail plan is greater than the sum of each sail used in isolation.
Mainsail furling has an additional disadvantage in that its complicated gear may somewhat increase weight aloft.
Driving both the asymmetric heeling hull form and the angled rudder through the water produces drag that slows the boat down.
In the case of trimarans, which have an unballasted centre hull similar to a monohull, two smaller amas are situated parallel to the centre hull to resist the sideways force of the wind.
