Kirov Stadium (now demolished) was one of the largest stadiums in the world and home to FC Zenit Saint Petersburg from 1950 to 1993 and again in 1995.
The first General Governor of the city Menshikov is maybe also the author of the first nickname of Petersburg which he called ''Петри'' (''Petri'').
Saint Petersburg is home to The Hermitage, one of the largest art museums in the world.
The city was built by conscripted peasants from all over Russia; a number of Swedish prisoners of war were also involved in some years under the supervision of Alexander Menshikov.
Since the prefix 'Saint' was omitted, this act also changed the eponym and the "patron" of the city, from Apostle Peter to Peter the Great, its founder.
The law on election of the City Governor was changed, breaking the tradition of democratic election by a universal suffrage.
In September and October 1917, German troops invaded the West Estonian archipelago and threatened Petrograd with bombardment and invasion.
He wrote the symphony while in the city during the siege of Leningrad.
Obvodny Canal (dug in 1769–1833) became the southern limit of the city.
The names of saints Peter and Paul, bestowed upon original city's citadel and its cathedral (from 1725—a burial vault of Russian emperors) coincidentally were the names of the first two assassinated Russian Emperors, Peter&nbsp;III (1762, supposedly killed in a conspiracy led by his wife, Catherine the Great) and Paul&nbsp;I (1801, Nicholas Zubov and other conspirators who brought to power Alexander&nbsp;I, the son of their victim).
For the first half of 2007, the birth rate was 9.1 per 1000.
Current regulations forbid construction of high buildings in the city centre.
Later, the city became the centre of the Saint Petersburg Governorate.
International cruise liners have been served at the passenger port at Morskoy Vokzal on the south-west of Vasilyevsky Island.
Based on the 2010 census results the current population is over 4.8 million.
Several historic sports arenas were built for equestrianism since the 18th century, to maintain training all year round, such as the Zimny Stadion and Konnogvardeisky Manezh, among others.
''Sankt-'' in these toponyms is merely a Germanized form of .
The siege lasted 872 days, from September 1941 to January 1944.
Saint Petersburg has three large cargo seaports: Bolshoi Port Saint Petersburg, Kronstadt, and Lomonosov.
After the siege, some of the evacuees returned, but most influx was due to migration from other parts of the Soviet Union.
The entire elite leadership of Leningrad was destroyed, including the former mayor Kuznetsov, the acting mayor Pyotr Sergeevich Popkov, and all their deputies; overall 23 leaders were sentenced to the death penalty, 181 to prison or exile (exonerated in 1954).
An explanation that the origin of "Saint-" in ''Saint Petersburg'' is due to Peter the Great's contact with Dutch culture is a common misconception.
The Imperial Choral Capella was founded and modeled after the royal courts of other European capitals.
After her resignation, Georgy Poltavchenko was appointed as the new acting governor the same day.
The effect of life in Saint Petersburg on the plight of the poor clerk in a society obsessed with hierarchy and status also became an important theme for authors such as Pushkin, Gogol and Dostoyevsky.
Constructivist architecture flourished around that time.
Pulkovo airport was opened to passengers as a small aerodrome in 1931. , the Pulkovo airport, which handles over 12 million passengers annually, is the 3rd busiest in Russia after Moscow's Sheremetyevo and Domodedovo.
Law enforcement authorities consider this was associated with an increased number of people from some CIS republics who live in Saint Petersburg illegally.
In 1935 a new general plan was outlined, whereby the city should expand to the south.
Anna Akhmatova became an important leader for Russian poetry.
Due to the intricate web of canals, Saint Petersburg is often called ''Venice of the North''.
is set in Saint Petersburg and pokes fun at Soviet city planning.
A sharp spike in the crime level occurred in the late 1980s/early 1990s as a result of the Perestroika-time turmoils (redistribution of property, privatization, decline of living standards, decrease of the effectiveness of militsiya etc.)
Sosnovka is the largest park within the limits of the city proper, occupying 240 ha.
The project was not completed, but is evident in the layout of the streets.
Tens of thousands of serfs died building the city.
It was a product of rivalry between Stalin's potential successors where one side was represented by the leaders of the city Communist Party organization—the second most significant one in the country after Moscow.
Many others were eventually evacuated or escaped, so the city became largely depopulated.
Despite St. Petersburg's northern location, its winters are warmer than Moscow's due to Gulf of Finland.
The rivers and canals in the city centre are lined with granite embankments.
Spartak won two championships in the USSR Premier League (1975 and 1992), two USSR Cups (1978 and 1987), and a Russian Cup title (2011).
Meteor hydrofoils link the city centre to the coastal towns of Kronstadt, Lomonosov, Petergof, Sestroretsk and Zelenogorsk from May through October.
It remained the seat of the Romanov dynasty and the Imperial Court of the Russian Tsars, as well as the seat of the Russian government, for another 186 years until the communist revolution of 1917.
Situated on the Neva River, at the head of the Gulf of Finland on the Baltic Sea, it was founded by Tsar Peter the Great on May .
''Onegin'' (1999) is based on the Pushkin poem and showcases many tourist attractions.
Leningrad gave its name to the Leningrad Affair (1949–1952), a notable event in the postwar political struggle in the USSR.
The Saint Petersburg Mosque, the largest mosque in Europe when opened in 1913, is situated on the right bank nearby.
After the assassinations of City Property Committee Chairman and vice-Governor Mikhail Manevich (1997), State Duma deputy Galina Starovoytova (1998), acting City Legislature Speaker Viktor Novosyolov (1999) and a number of prominent businesspeople, Saint Petersburg was dubbed ''Capital of Crime'' in the Russian press.
Due to location at ca.
The '''Siege of Leningrad''' proved one of the longest, most destructive, and most lethal sieges of a major city in modern history.
Moreover, "Saint-" in the Dutch language is ''Sint-'' and not ''Sankt-''.
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has already backed her for the position of Speaker to the Federation Council of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation and her election qualifies her for that job.
Zenit currently play their home games at Petrovsky Stadium.
The largest of the public higher education institutions is Saint Petersburg State University, enrolling approximately 32,000 undergraduate students; and the largest non-governmental higher education institutions is the Institute of International Economic Relations, Economics and Law.
The grotesque and often nightmarish image of the city is featured in Pushkin's last poems, the Petersburg stories of Gogol, the novels of Dostoyevsky, the verse of Alexander Blok and Osip Mandelshtam, and in the symbolist novel ''Petersburg'' by Andrey Bely.
The 1948 general plan for Leningrad featured radial urban development in the north as well as in the south.
Some of them were turned into museums, including the cruiser ''Aurora''&nbsp;– a symbol of the October Revolution and the oldest ship in the Russian Navy.
It is purportedly designed to protect minors.
Remaining faithful to the classical basis (he was a choreographer in Vaganova Academy of Dance), he combined classical ballet with the avant-garde style, and then, in turn, with acrobatics, rhythmic gymnastics, dramatic expressiveness, cinema, color, light, and finally with spoken word.
The city's long-time basketball team is BC Spartak Saint Petersburg, which launched the career of Andrei Kirilenko.
With 68% living in shared flats in the 1930s, Leningrad was the city in the USSR with the largest number of ''kommunalkas''.
The budget deficit amounted to about 42&nbsp;billion rubles.
According to Lotman in his chapter, 'The Symbolism of Saint Petersburg' in ''Universe and the Mind'', these writers were inspired by symbolism from within the city itself.
The federal subject's gross regional product  was 667.905&nbsp;billion Russian rubles (about 23.611 billion US$ at 2005 exchange rates), ranked 4th in Russia, after Moscow, Tyumen Oblast, and Moscow Oblast, or 145,503.3 rubles per capita (about 5,143.6 US$ at 2005 exchange rates), ranked 12th among Russia's federal subjects, contributed mostly by wholesale and retail trade and repair services (24.7%) as well as processing industry (20.9%) and transportation and telecommunications (15.1%).
Another notable suburb is Kronstadt with its 19th-century fortifications and naval monuments, occupying the Kotlin Island in the Gulf of Finland.
However, after the death of Stalin in 1953, the perceived ornamental excesses of the Stalinist architecture were abandoned.
Housing became a government-provided amenity; many "bourgeois" apartments were so large that numerous families were assigned to what were called "communal" apartments (''kommunalkas'').
Saint Petersburg has been home to the newest movements in popular music in the country.
The frost-free period in the city lasts on average for about 135 days.
Other movies include ''GoldenEye'' (1995), ''Midnight in Saint Petersburg'' (1996), ''Brother'' (1997) and Tamil romantic thriller film-''Dhaam Dhoom'' (2008).
SKA Saint Petersburg is one of the most popular KHL, consistently being at or near the top of the league in attendance, despite the fact that they have never won the championship.
* Jean-Baptiste Vallin de la Mothe (Imperial Academy of Arts, Small Hermitage, Gostiny Dvor, New Holland Arch, Catholic Church of St. Catherine)
In 1956 the popular ensemble Druzhba was founded by Aleksandr Bronevitsky and Edita Piekha to become the first popular band in the USSR during the 1950s.
It is politically incorporated as a federal subject (a federal city).
The first jazz band in the Soviet Union was founded here by Leonid Utyosov in the 1920s, under the patronage of Isaak Dunayevsky.
In the park 300 trees of valuable sorts, 300 decorative apple-trees, 70 limes.
About 2,000 ranking officials across the USSR were expelled from the party and the Komsomol and removed from leadership positions.
However, there was a controversial project endorsed by the city authorities, and known as the Okhta Center, to build a  supertall skyscraper.
The official portal of the Government of Saint Petersburg provided data on significant improvements in the crime situation.
* Jean-François Thomas de Thomon (Spit of Vasilievsky Island)
The Neva River within the city limits usually freezes up in November–December and break-up occurs in April.
Traffic jams are common in the city due to daily commuter traffic volumes, intercity traffic and excessive winter snow.
With the emancipation of the peasants undertaken by Alexander&nbsp;II in 1861 and an industrial revolution, the influx of former peasants into the capital increased greatly.
Besides the Neva and its tributaries, other important rivers of the federal subject of Saint Petersburg are Sestra, Okhta and Izhora.
In 1914, the name was changed from Saint Petersburg to '''Petrograd''' (), in 1924 to '''Leningrad''' (), and in 1991 back to Saint Petersburg.
In 1725, Peter died at the age of fifty-two.
There is also a second professional football club in Saint Petersburg which is called FC Petrotrest Saint Petersburg.
300 other trees and bushes were planted.
Saint Petersburg is home to more than two hundred museums, many of them hosted in historic buildings.
Saint Petersburg is the most Westernized city of Russia, as well as its cultural capital.
The city absorbed about 3&nbsp;million people in the 1950s and grew to over 5&nbsp;million in the 1980s.
Since December 12, 2010 Karelian Trains, a joint venture between Russian Railways and VR (Finnish Railways), has been running Alstom Pendolino operated high-speed services between Saint Petersburg's Finlyandsky and Helsinki's Central railway stations.
Lakhta center project causes much less controversy and, unlike the previous unbuilt project, is not seen by UNESCO as potential threat to cultural heritage because it is located far away from historical center.
While economic and social activity is concentrated in the historic city centre, the richest part of Saint Petersburg, most people live in commuter areas.
On May 1, 1945 Joseph Stalin, in his Supreme Commander Order No.
File:Peter & Paul fortress in SPB 03.jpg|Peter and Paul Fortress
In any case, eventually the usage of prefix "''Sankt-''" ceased except for the formal official documents, where a 3-letter abbreviation "'''СПб'''" (''SPb'') was very widely used as well.
Among the youngest is Russian Standard Vodka introduced in Moscow in 1998, which opened in 2006 a new $60&nbsp;million distillery in Petersburg (an area of , production rate of 22,500 bottles per hour).
It is assumed that the building will be the tallest in Russia and Europe.
Chess tradition was highlighted by the 1914 international tournament, partially funded by the Tsar, in which the title "Grandmaster" was first formally conferred by Russian Tsar Nicholas II to five players: Lasker, Capablanca, Alekhine, Tarrasch and Marshall.
Solemn descriptive names like "the city of three revolutions" and "the cradle of the October revolution" used in Soviet era are reminders of the pivotal events in national history which occurred here.
Part of the city's territory west of Liteyny Prospekt is no higher than  above sea level, and has suffered from numerous floods.
Saint Petersburg is inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage list as an area with 36 historical architectural complexes and around 4000 outstanding individual monuments of architecture, history and culture.
A Russian travel advisory on the Foreign Affairs website notes that while homosexuality is legal in Russia (it was decriminalized in 1993), LGBT Canadian travellers should avoid "displaying affection in public, as homosexuals can be targets of violence… Public actions (including dissemination of information, statements, displays or conspicuous behaviour) contradicting or appearing to contradict this law may lead to arrest, prosecution and the imposition of a fine."
The authorities have recently been compelled to transfer the ownership of state-owned private residences in the city centre to private lessors.
Leningrad and many of its suburbs were rebuilt over the post-war decades, partially according to pre-war plans.
The shipping company St Peter Line operates two ferries which sail from Helsinki to St&nbsp;Petersburg and from Stockholm to St Petersburg.
* Andreyan Zakharov (Admiralty building)
It also contains the Tikhvin Cemetery with graves of many notable Petersburgers.
The city also has a new basketball team, BC Zenit Saint Petersburg.
People in urban Saint Petersburg live mostly in apartments.
Well over a thousand feature films about tsars, revolution, people and stories set in Saint Petersburg have been produced worldwide but not filmed in the city.
In 1984, 2007, 2010 and 2011/2012 Zenit were the champions of the Soviet and Russian leagues, respectively, and won the Russian Cup in 1999 and 2010, the UEFA Cup 2007–08 season and the 2008 UEFA Super Cup.
Well-known players include Maxim Afinogenov, Patrick Thoresen, Dmitri Kalinin, Petr Průcha and Viktor Tikhonov.
Saint Petersburg and Leningrad Oblast, being two different federal subjects, share a number of local departments of federal executive agencies and courts, such as court of arbitration, police, FSB, postal service, drug enforcement administration, penitentiary service, federal registration service, and other federal services.
This change officially took effect on September 6, 1991.
As a result, the steadily increasing passenger traffic has triggered a massive modernization of the entire airport infrastructure.
Saint Petersburg's loss of capital city status helped the city to retain many of its pre-revolutionary buildings, as modern architectural 'prestige projects' tended to be built in Moscow; this largely prevented the rise of mid-to-late-20th-century architecture and helped maintain the architectural appearance of the historic city center.
The Moscow – Saint Petersburg Railway opened in 1851, and is  long; the commute to Moscow now requires from three and a half to nine hours.
The construction of the Saint Petersburg Ring Road, which was completed in 2011, helped to partially reduce the traffic in the city.
For the first time since the 1940s, food rationing was introduced, and the city received humanitarian food aid from abroad.
* Yury Felten (Old Hermitage, Chesme Church)
Saint Petersburg is home to numerous parks and gardens, some of the most famous of which are situated in the southern suburbs, including one of the largest English gardens in Europe in Pavlovsk.
Unlike in Moscow, in Saint Petersburg the historic architecture of the city centre, mostly consisting of Baroque and neoclassical buildings of the 18th and 19th centuries, has been largely preserved; although a number of buildings were demolished after the Bolsheviks' seizure of power, during the Siege of Leningrad and in recent years.
Legends of the club include Alexander Belov and Vladimir Kondrashin.
Meanwhile, economic conditions started to deteriorate as the country tried to adapt to major changes.
In the 1970s many bands came out from 'underground' and eventually founded the Leningrad rock club, which provided a stage to such bands as DDT, Kino, headed by the legendary Viktor Tsoi, Alisa, Zemlyane, Zoopark, Piknik, Secret and many other popular groups.
The Kunstkamera, with its collection established in 1714 by Peter the Great to collect curiosities from all over the world, is sometimes considered the first museum in Russia, which has evolved into the present-day Peter the Great Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography.
In the warmer months many smaller boats and water-taxis maneuver the canals throughout the city.
The 18th and 19th-century architectural ensemble of the city and its environs is preserved in virtually unchanged form.
The elevation of Saint Petersburg ranges from the sea level to its highest point of  at the Orekhovaya Hill in the Duderhof Heights in the south.
Saint Petersburg Metro map
In 1951 a crowd of 110,000 set the single-game attendance record for Soviet football.
But four years later, in 1732, under Empress Anna of Russia, Saint Petersburg was again designated as the capital of the Russian Empire.
In order to commemorate 300 years anniversary of Saint Petersburg a new park was laid out.
Baroque architecture became dominant in the city during the first sixty years, culminating in the Elizabethan Baroque, represented most notably by Italian Bartolomeo Rastrelli with such buildings as the Winter Palace.
Weather conditions are quite variable all year round.
Among his students were Igor Stravinsky, Alexander Glazounov, Anatoly Liadov and others.
The annual International Music Festival SKIF (Sergey Kuriokhin International Festival) is named after him.
Today's Saint Petersburg boasts many notable musicians of various genres, from popular Leningrad's Sergei Shnurov, Tequilajazzz, Splean, Korol i Shut, to rock veterans Yuri Shevchuk, Vyacheslav Butusov and Mikhail Boyarsky.
The team leader was local player Andrei Arshavin.
The  tall Saint Petersburg TV Tower is the tallest completed structure in the city.
On June 12, 1991, simultaneously with the first Russian presidential elections, the city authorities arranged for the mayoral elections and a referendum upon the name of the city.
On March 12, 1918, the Soviets transferred the government to Moscow, to keep it away from the state border.
Famous Russian composer Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov who taught at the Conservatory for more than 30 years, created strong composers' school.
The city also has a slightly warmer climate than its suburbs.
Since then "Peter's rock" music style was formed.
Meanwhile, the oblast whose administrative center is also in Saint Petersburg is still named Leningrad.
In the early 2000s on a wave of popularity of metalcore, rapcore, emocore and there are such groups as Amatory, Kirpichi, Psychea, Stigmata, Grenouer and Animal Jazz.
The Summer Garden is the oldest one, dating back to the early 18th century and designed in the regular style.
It is situated on the southern bank of the Neva at the head of the Fontanka and is famous for its cast iron railing and marble sculptures.
During the NHL lockout, stars Ilya Kovalchuk, Sergei Bobrovsky and Vladimir Tarasenko also played for the team.
On the southern, left bank of the Neva, connected to the spit of Vasilyevsky Island via the Palace Bridge, lie the Admiralty building, the vast Hermitage Museum complex stretching along the Palace Embankment, which includes the baroque Winter Palace, former official residence of Russian emperors, as well as the neoclassical Marble Palace.
In the 1830s Alexander Pushkin translated the "foreign" city name of "Saint Petersburg" to the more Russian ''Petrograd'' in one of his poems.
Saint Petersburg Metro underground rapid transit system was opened in 1955; it now has 5 lines with 67 stations, connecting all five railway terminals, and carrying 2.3 million passengers daily.
The largest of the museums is the Hermitage Museum, featuring interiors of the former imperial residence and a vast collection of art.
For their part, poetic names of the city, like the "Venice of the North" and the "Northern Palmyra" emphasize town-planning and architectural features contrasting these parallels to the northern location of this megalopolis.
The average maximum temperature in July is , and the average minimum temperature in February is ; an extreme temperature of  occurred during the 2010 Northern Hemisphere summer heat wave.
Other symbols of Saint Petersburg include the weather vane in the shape of a small ship on top of the Admiralty's golden spire and the golden angel on top of the Peter and Paul Cathedral.
Saint Petersburg is an important transport corridor linking Scandinavia to Russia and Eastern Europe.
In 1736–1737 the city suffered from catastrophic fires.
Another notable 20th-century writer from Saint Petersburg is Joseph Brodsky, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature (1987).
An equivalent name for Petersburg, the "Northern Capital", has re-entered usage today since several federal institutions were recently moved from Moscow to Saint Petersburg.
The Saint Petersburg Mint (Monetny Dvor), founded in 1724, is one of the largest mints in the world, it mints Russian coins, medals and badges.
The musical life of Saint Petersburg is rich and diverse, with the city now playing host to a number of annual carnivals.
The complex shall include  office skyscraper and several low rise mixed use buildings.
The political life of Saint Petersburg is regulated by the Charter of Saint Petersburg adopted by the city legislature in 1998.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the poor outskirts were reconstructed into regularly planned boroughs.
Many older buildings have been reconstructed to allow their use as apartments and penthouses.
A combo ''Piterpol'' (''Питерпол'') also appears at this time.
They also won the Saporta Cup twice (1973 and 1975).
File:Griboyedov_Canal.jpg |Griboyedov Canal
A law acknowledging the honorary title of "Hero City" passed on May 8, 1965 (the 20th anniversary of the victory in the Great Patriotic War), during the Brezhnev era.
Her poem ''Requiem'' adumbrates the perils encountered during the Stalinist era.
The style of Petrine Baroque, developed by Trezzini and other architects and exemplified by such buildings as the Menshikov Palace, Kunstkamera, Peter and Paul Cathedral, Twelve Collegia, became prominent in the city architecture of the early 18th century.
Monuments and bronze statues of the Tsars, as well as other important historic figures and dignitaries, and other world famous monuments, such as the sculptures by Peter Clodt von Jürgensburg, Paolo Troubetzkoy, Pavel Antokolsky, and others, were made there.
Nevsky Prospekt, also situated on the left bank of the Neva, is the main avenue in the city.
(about 1.433 billion US$ at 2009 exchange rates)
For various reasons (including large-scale destruction during World War II and construction of modern buildings during the postwar period in the largest historical centers of Europe), Saint Petersburg has become a unique reserve of European architectural styles of the past three centuries.
* Auguste de Montferrand (Saint Isaac's Cathedral, Alexander Column)
Among other notable parks are the Maritime Victory Park on Krestovsky Island and the Moscow Victory Park in the south, both commemorating the victory over Nazi Germany in the Second World War, as well as the Central Park of Culture and Leisure occupying Yelagin Island and the Tauride Garden around the Tauride Palace.
However, Saint Petersburg soon started to be built out according to a plan.
Ballet performances occupy a special place in the cultural life of Saint Petersburg.
The sample which czar Peter followed does sound like the names of another European cities: Sankt Goar in Germany, Sankt Michael in Austria and some others, of which the closest to ''Sankt Petersburg'' was Sankt Michel in the rival Swedish Empire (now Mikkeli in Finland).
The Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra remained one of the best known symphony orchestras in the world under the leadership of conductors Yevgeny Mravinsky and Yuri Temirkanov.
The first film studios were founded in Saint Petersburg in the 20th century and since the 1920s Lenfilm has been the largest film studio based in Saint Petersburg.
The apartments of some famous Petersburgers, including Alexander Pushkin, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, Feodor Chaliapin, Alexander Blok, Vladimir Nabokov, Anna Akhmatova, Mikhail Zoshchenko, Joseph Brodsky, as well as some palace and park ensembles of the southern suburbs and notable architectural monuments such as St. Isaac's Cathedral, have also been turned into public museums.
These services are branded as "Allegro" trains.
From the 1960s to the 1980s many new residential boroughs were built on the outskirts; while the functionalist apartment blocks were nearly identical to each other, many families moved there from ''kommunalkas'' in the city centre in order to live in separate apartments.
The consecration of the small wooden church in their names (its construction began simultaneously with the citadel) made them the heavenly patrons of the Peter and Paul Fortress, while St.&nbsp;Peter at the same time became the eponym of the whole city.
/2007 there were 1024 kindergartens, 716 public schools and 80 vocational schools in Saint Petersburg.
The embankments and bridges are separated from rivers and canals by granite or cast iron parapets.
In 1953 Pavlovsky District in Leningrad Oblast was abolished, and parts of its territory, including Pavlovsk, merged with Leningrad.
Buses carry up to three million passengers daily, serving over 250 urban and a number of suburban bus routes.
The New Zenit Stadium, which will host 2018 FIFA World Cup matches, is currently under construction.
It isolated the city from most supplies except those provided through the Road of Life across Lake Ladoga.
This dramatic time was depicted in photographic series of Russian photographer Alexey Titarenko.
The Leningrad Metro underground rapid transit system, designed before the war, opened in 1955 with its first eight stations decorated with marble and bronze.
In 2009 Russian Railways launched a high speed service for the Moscow – Saint Petersburg route.
Intercity and suburban rail terminals of Petersburg
