Saladin's soldiers broke their discipline, plundering the city; Saladin only managed to protect the governor and his officers by sending them to Mosul.
Saladin had offered 100,000 gold pieces for Baldwin to abandon the project, which was particularly offensive to the Muslims, but to no avail.
Soon after, he defeated the Zengid army at the Battle of the Horns of Hama and was thereafter proclaimed the "Sultan of Egypt and Syria" by Abbasid caliph al-Mustadi.
In Saladin’s possession at the time of his death, there were one piece of gold and forty pieces of silver.
The controversial detainment of Majd al-Din was a part of the larger discontent associated with the aftermath of Turan-Shah's departure from Yemen.
Prior to his march to Jazira, tensions had grown between the Zengid rulers of the region, primarily concerning their unwillingness to pay deference to Mosul.
From then on, he ordered prayers in all the mosques of Syria and Egypt as the sovereign king and he issued at the Cairo mint gold coins bearing his official title—''al-Malik an-Nasir Yusuf Ayyub, ala ghaya'' "the King Strong to Aid, Joseph son of Job; exalted be the standard."
Soon after, Saladin entered Homs and captured its citadel in March 1175, after stubborn resistance from its defenders.
The Christians sent a large portion of their army to besiege the fortress of Harim north of Aleppo, so southern Palestine bore few defenders.
He died on September 13 and five days later, the Abbasid ''khutba'' was pronounced in Cairo and al-Fustat, proclaiming al-Mustadi as caliph.
The chief public work he commissioned outside of Cairo was the large bridge at Giza, which was intended to form an outwork of defense against a potential Moorish invasion.
In the following years, he led forays against the Crusaders in Palestine, commissioned the successful conquest of Yemen, and staved off pro-Fatimid rebellions in Upper Egypt.
The day after, 50,000 black African soldiers from the regiments of the Fatimid army opposed to Saladin's rule along with a number of Egyptian ''emirs'' and commoners staged a revolt.
Notwithstanding the differences in beliefs, the Muslim Saladin was respected by Christian lords, Richard especially.
Another version claims that Saladin hastily withdrew his troops from Masyaf because they were urgently needed to fend off a Crusader force in the vicinity of Mount Lebanon.
After establishing a garrison at Sinjar, he awaited a coalition assembled by Izz al-Din consisting of his forces, those from Aleppo, Mardin, and Armenia.
After Shawar was successfully reinstated as vizier, he demanded that Shirkuh withdraw his army from Egypt for a sum of 30,000 dinars, but he refused insisting it was Nur ad-Din's will that he remain.
To deter Saladin's progress, Raymond of Tripoli gathered his forces by Nahr al-Kabir where they were well placed for an attack on Muslim territory.
In June 1180, Saladin hosted a reception for Nur al-Din Muhammad, the Artuqid ''emir'' of Keyfa, at Geuk Su, in which he presented him and his brother Abu Bakr presents, valued at over 100,000 dinars according to Imad al-Din.
Several days later, while Saladin was resting in one of his captain's tents, an assassin rushed forward at him and struck at his head with a knife.
A Sunni Muslim of Kurdish origin, Saladin led the Muslim military campaign against the Crusader states in the Levant.
Once he reached Bira, near the river, he was joined by Kukbary and Nur al-Din of Hisn Kayfa and the combined forces captured the cities of Jazira, one after the other.
On 31 July 1173, Saladin's father Ayyub was wounded in a horse-riding accident, ultimately causing his death on 9 August.
In this battle alone the Crusader force was largely annihilated by Saladin's determined army.
'''An-Nasir Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub''' ( / ALA-LC: ''Ṣalāḥ ad-Dīn Yūsuf ibn Ayyūb'';  / ALC-LC: ''Selahedînê Eyûbî''), known as '''Saladin''' (1137&nbsp;– March 1193), was the first sultan of Egypt and Syria and the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty.
When the Crusader force—reckoned to be the largest the kingdom ever produced from its own resources, but still outmatched by the Muslims—advanced, the Ayyubids unexpectedly moved down the stream of Ain Jalut.
A suburban community of Erbil, Masif Salahaddin, is also named after him.
There have been only innumerable expenses, the sending out of troops ... and expectations which did not produce what was hoped for in the end."
By 23 August, Saladin had decisively quelled the uprising, and never again had to face a military challenge from Cairo.
All of the booty from the Ayyubid victory was accorded to the army, Saladin not keeping anything himself.
He then resolved to destroy the fortress, called Chastellet and manned by the Templars, moving his headquarters to Banias.
In the midst of these victories, Saladin received word that the Crusaders were raiding the villages of Damascus.
According to Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad, Saladin was born the same night his family left Tikrit.
Saladin died in Damascus in 1193, having given away much of his personal wealth to his subjects.
The Crusader force enjoyed early success against Shirkuh's troops, but the terrain was too steep and sandy for their horses, and commander Hugh of Caesarea was captured while attacking Saladin's unit.
The next day when Richard was preparing to retreat to Jaffa, Saladin attacked his army.
According to the later 13th-century ''Old French Continuation of William of Tyre'', Raynald captured Saladin's sister in a raid on a caravan; this claim is not attested in contemporary sources, Muslim or Frankish, however, instead stating that Raynald had attacked a preceding caravan, and Saladin set guards to ensure the safety of his sister and her son, who came to no harm.
However, his life was spared by Saladin, who said of Raynald, "it is not the wont of kings, to kill kings; but that man had transgressed all bounds, and therefore did I treat him thus."
The members of these caravans had, in vain, besought his mercy by reciting the truce between the Muslims and the Crusaders, but Raynald ignored this and insulted the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, before murdering and torturing a number of them.
Saladin in turn stated that there was not a more honorable Christian lord than Richard.
From there they headed west to besiege the fortress of A'zaz on 15 May.
In July, Saladin dispatched Farrukh-Shah to attack Kawkab al-Hawa.
Before they could form up, the Templar force hacked the Ayyubid army down.
After the battle of Arsuf, Richard moved his forces towards Ascalon.
On the evening before he departed, he sat with his companions and the tutor of one of his sons quoted a line of poetry: "enjoy the scent of the ox-eye plant of Najd, for after this evening it will come no more."
Saladin turned his attention from Mosul to Aleppo, sending his brother Taj al-Muluk Buri to capture Tell Khalid, 130&nbsp;km northeast of the city.
The agreement was read out through the streets of Jerusalem so that everyone might within forty days provide for himself and pay to Saladin the agreed tribute for his freedom.
Saladin preferred to take Jerusalem without bloodshed and offered generous terms, but those inside refused to leave their holy city, vowing to destroy it in a fight to the death rather than see it handed over peacefully.
He could also take it upon himself to annex Syria before it could possibly fall into the hands of a rival, but he feared that attacking a land that formerly belonged to his master—which is forbidden in the Islamic principles he believed—could portray him as hypocritical and thus making it unsuitable for leading the war against the Crusaders.
Two ''emir''s, including an old friend of Saladin, Izz al-Din Jurduk, welcomed and pledged their service to him.
Saladin, who now lived in Damascus, was reported to have a particular fondness for the city, but information on his early childhood is scarce.
He reached the Sultan's Mound, c. 25&nbsp;km from Aleppo, where his forces encountered Saif al-Din's army.
When as-Salih was removed to Aleppo in August, Gumushtigin, the ''emir'' of the city and a captain of Nur ad-Din's veterans assumed guardianship over him.
Jerusalem capitulated to his forces on Friday, 2 October 1187, after a siege.
Saladin's recapture of Palestine from the European Crusaders is considered an inspiration for modern-day Arabs' opposition to Zionism.
Not long after Nur ad-Din's death in 1174, Saladin launched his conquest of Syria, peacefully entering Damascus at the request of its governor.
On 11 May 1175 a group of thirteen Assassins easily gained admission into Saladin's camp, but were detected immediately before they carried out their attack by Nasih al-Din Khumartekin of Abu Qubays.
Saladin had captured almost every Crusader city.
In the spring of 1180, while Saladin was in the area of Safad, anxious to commence a vigorous campaign against the Kingdom of Jerusalem, King Baldwin sent messengers to him with proposals of peace.
In 1189, they sought to reclaim Tyre for their kingdom but were refused admission by Conrad, who did not recognize Guy as king.
Tyre, on the coast of modern-day Lebanon, was the last major Crusader city that was not captured by Muslim forces.
He replied "Let them... whilst they knock down villages, we are taking cities; when we come back, we shall have all the more strength to fight them."
Nur ad-Din chose a successor for Shirkuh, but al-Adid appointed Saladin to replace Shawar as vizier.
Before he crossed the Euphrates, Saladin besieged Aleppo for three days, signaling that the truce was over.
Ibn al-Athir claims that the caliph chose him after being told by his advisers that "there is no one weaker or younger" than Saladin, and "not one of the emirs obeyed him or served him."
In April 1191, a Frankish woman's three-month-old baby had been stolen from her camp and sold on the market.
He is buried in a mausoleum adjacent to the Umayyad Mosque.
Saladin was unnerved at the attempt on his life, which he accused Gumushtugin and the Assassins of plotting, and so increased his efforts in the siege.
In 1163, the vizier to the Fatimid caliph al-Adid, Shawar, had been driven out of Egypt by rival Dirgham, a member of the powerful Banu Ruzzaik tribe.
Presently, Saladin awoke to find a figure leaving the tent.
Despite the Crusaders' slaughter when they originally conquered Jerusalem in 1099, Saladin granted amnesty and free passage to all common Catholics and even to the defeated Christian army, as long as they were able to pay the aforementioned ransom (the Greek Orthodox Christians were treated even better, because they often opposed the western Crusaders).
Towards the end of 1169, Saladin, with reinforcements from Nur ad-Din defeated a massive Crusader-Byzantine force near Damietta.
Saladin attempted to gain the Caliph an-Nasir's support against Izz al-Din by sending him a letter requesting a document that would give him legal justification for taking over Mosul and its territories.
The ''emir'' of the city had requested Saladin's assistance and was given reinforcements under Turan-Shah—Saladin's brother.
Saladin arrived at the city on 10 November 1182.
They intercepted Crusader reinforcements from Karak and Shaubak along the Nablus road and took a number of prisoners.
Balian of Ibelin threatened to kill every Muslim hostage, estimated at 5,000, and to destroy Islam's holy shrines of the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque if such quarter were not provided.
Saif al-Din had died earlier in June 1181 and his brother Izz al-Din inherited leadership of Mosul.
Most of the foot soldiers were sold into slavery.
Saladin proceeded to take Nusaybin which offered no resistance.
He decided to attack Sinjar, which was held by Izz al-Din's brother Sharaf al-Din.
Consequently, the Nubians departed, but returned in 1173 and were again driven off.
Saladin gave a loud cry, exclaiming that Sinan himself was the figure that had left the tent.
Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem prompted the Third Crusade (1189–1192), financed in England by a special "Saladin tithe".
Gumushtigin requested from Rashid ad-Din Sinan, grand-master of the Assassins of Syria, who were already at odds with Saladin since he replaced the Fatimids of Egypt, to assassinate Saladin in his camp.
When Richard arrived at the city, he was stunned to see it abandoned and the towers demolished.
The combined forces of Mosul and Aleppo marched against Saladin in Hama.
Saladin's relationship with Richard was complicated despite their military rivalry.
He also destroyed his own citadel at A'zaz to prevent it from being used by the Ayyubids if they were to conquer it.
On December 4, the crown-prince of the Zengids, as-Salih, died in Aleppo.
Saladin's biographer Bahā' ad-Dīn ibn Šaddād reports that, after Saladin's conquest of Jerusalem, the Georgian Queen sent envoys to the sultan to request the return of confiscated possessions of the Georgian monasteries in Jerusalem.
Initially, Saladin attempted to organize his men into battle order, but as his bodyguards were being killed, he saw that defeat was inevitable and so with a small remnant of his troops mounted a swift camel, riding all the way to the territories of Egypt.
After a furious battle, Richard managed to save some of his troops and retreated to Ascalon.
Upon the capture of Jerusalem, Saladin summoned the Jews and permitted them to resettle in the city.
Leaving Farrukh-Shah in charge of Syria, Saladin returned to Cairo at the beginning of 1181.
Saladin then moved to besiege the fortress, which fell on 30 August 1179.
While transporting these goods to Damascus, Saladin took the opportunity to ravage the Crusader countryside.
According to Jonathan Riley-Smith, Scott's portrayal of Saladin was that of a "modern 19th-century liberal European gentlemen, beside whom medieval Westerners would always have made a poor showing."
Saladin defended his own conduct claiming that he had come to Syria to fight the Crusaders, end the heresy of the Assassins, and stop the wrong-doing of the Muslims.
Saladin promptly impressed the inhabitants of the town by publishing a decree that ordered a number of taxes to be canceled and erased all mention of them from treasury records, stating "the most miserable rulers are those whose purses are fat and their people thin."
Fortunately for Saladin, al-Adil had his warships moved from Fustat and Alexandria to the Red Sea under the command of an Armenian mercenary Lu'lu.
The defenders of Mosul, when they became aware that help was on the way, increased their efforts, and Saladin subsequently fell ill, so in March 1186 a peace treaty was signed.
On 2 March, al-Adil from Egypt wrote to Saladin that the Crusaders had struck the "heart of Islam."
In the summer of 1179, King Baldwin had set up an outpost on the road to Damascus and aimed to fortify a passage over the Jordan River, known as Jacob's Ford, that commanded the approach to the Banias plain (the plain was divided by the Muslims and the Christians).
The ''emir'' prepared to unseat all of his rivals in Syria and al-Jazira, beginning with Damascus.
In 1188, at Tortosa, Saladin released Guy of Lusignan and returned him to his wife, Queen Sibylla of Jerusalem.
The note threatened that he would be killed if he didn't withdraw from his assault.
In addition, other sums were to be paid to Saladin's brothers al-Adil and Taj al-Muluk Buri.
Another factor which may have affected his interest in religion was that, during the First Crusade, Jerusalem was taken by the Christians.
The Ayyubid dynasty held a council upon the revelation of his preparations to discuss the possible threat and Saladin collected his own troops outside Cairo.
His family was of Kurdish ancestry, and had originated from the city of Dvin in medieval Armenia.
With this victory, Saladin decided to call in more troops from Egypt; he requested al-Adil to dispatch 1,500 horsemen.
In return for a diploma granting him the city, Nur al-Din swore allegiance to Saladin, promising to follow him in every expedition in the war against the Crusaders, and repairing damage done to the city.
He also reported they intended to attack Medina and remove Muhammad's body.
He thus, handed Aleppo to his brother Imad al-Din Zangi, in exchange for Sinjar.
According to Abu Shama, he intended to spend the fast of Ramadan in Egypt and then make the ''hajj'' pilgrimage to Mecca in the summer.
He destroyed the town built outside the city's castle and killed most of its inhabitants after they were refused entry into the castle.
Bahā' ad-Dīn wrote:
It fell after a 15-day siege on December 30.
After the sacking of Bilbais, the Crusader-Egyptian force and Shirkuh's army were to engage in a battle on the desert border of the River Nile, just west of Giza.
He had given away his great wealth to his poor subjects, leaving nothing to pay for his funeral.
An unusually low ransom for the times (around $50 today) was to be paid for each Frank in the city, whether man, woman, or child, but Saladin, against the wishes of his treasurers, allowed many families who could not afford the ransom to leave.
Strategically, it would have made more sense for Saladin to capture Tyre before Jerusalem; Saladin, however, chose to pursue Jerusalem first because of the importance of the city to Islam.
In spite of his earlier hesitation to go through with the exchange, he had no doubts about his success, stating that Aleppo was "the key to the lands" and "this city is the eye of Syria and the citadel is its pupil."
Saladin consulted his council and the terms were accepted.
The battle ended in a Zengid victory, and Saladin is credited to have helped Shirkuh in one of the "most remarkable victories in recorded history", according to Ibn al-Athir, although more of Shirkuh's men were killed and the battle is considered by most sources as not a total victory.
The Crusaders withdrew beforehand and Saladin proclaimed it "a victory opening the gates of men's hearts."
Saladin found the situation ripe and marched to Ascalon, which he referred to as the "Bride of Syria."
After several minor skirmishes and a stalemate in the siege that was initiated by the caliph, Saladin intended to find a way to withdraw without damage to his reputation while still keeping up some military pressure.
It was finally agreed that Arslan's daughter would be sent away for a year and if Nur al-Din failed to comply, Saladin would move to abandon his support for him.
Undiscouraged by his defeat at Tell Jezer, Saladin was prepared to fight the Crusaders once again.
Amalric withdrew his Templar garrison from Gaza to assist him in defending Darum, but Saladin evaded their force and fell on Gaza instead.
He arrived in Damascus in June to learn that Farrukh-Shah had attacked the Galilee, sacking Daburiyya and capturing Habis Jaldek, a fortress of great importance to the Crusaders.
His assaults were again resisted, but he managed to secure not only a truce, but a mutual alliance with Aleppo, in which Gumushtigin and as-Salih were allowed to continue their hold on the city and in return, they recognized Saladin as the sovereign over all of the dominions he conquered.
It was a major disaster for the Crusaders and a turning point in the history of the Crusades.
In 1132 the defeated army of the Imad ad-Din Zengi, the Lord of Mosul, found their retreat blocked by the Tigris River opposite the Tikrit fortress where Saladin's father, Najm ad-Din Ayyub served as the warden.
In reality, Saladin sought to form an alliance with Sinan and his Assassins, consequently depriving the Crusaders of a potent ally against him.
Because of this, Nur ad-Din went on alone.
They broke the Crusader blockade, destroyed most of their ships, and pursued and captured those who anchored and fled into the desert.
His army conquered Hamah with relative ease, but avoided attacking Homs because of the strength of its citadel.
Later, Ayyubid warships were waged against Bedouin river pirates who were plundering the shores of Lake Tanis.
According to Imad ad-Din, after Tell Khalid, Saladin took a detour northwards to Ain Tab, but he gained possession of it when his army turned towards it, allowing to quickly move backward another c. 100&nbsp;km towards Aleppo.
When Saladin crossed the Orontes, leaving Hama, the sun was eclipsed.
Although Saladin faded into history after the Middle Ages, he appears in a sympathetic light in Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's play ''Nathan the Wise'' (1779) and in Sir Walter Scott's novel ''The Talisman'' (1825).
It is unclear exactly when, but during that same year, he attacked and captured the Crusader castle of Eilat, built on an island off the head of the Gulf of Aqaba.
Saladin himself had been strengthening his hold on Egypt and widening his support base there.
Because droughts and bad harvests hampered his commissariat, Saladin agreed to a truce.
He was again embroiled with the Bedouin; he removed two-thirds of their fiefs to use as compensation for the fief-holders at Fayyum.
Although he was short of money, Saladin also allowed the departing Zangi to take all the stores of the citadel that he could travel with and to sell the remainder—which Saladin purchased himself.
Heavily outnumbered, Saladin initially attempted to make terms with the Zengids by abandoning all conquests north of the Damascus province, but they refused, insisting he return to Egypt.
One was killed by a general of Saladin and the others were slain while trying to escape.
Saladin's military career began under the tutelage of his uncle Asad al-Din Shirkuh, a prominent military commander under Nur ad-Din, Emir of Damascus and Aleppo, member of the Turkic Zengid dynasty and the most influential teacher of Saladin.
It was not an attempt to extend the Crusader influence into that sea or to capture its trade routes, but merely a piratical move.
The Battle of Hama did not end the contest for power between the Ayyubids and the Zengids, with the final confrontation occurring in the spring of 1176.
Seeing the execution of Raynald, he feared he would be next.
However, according to this version, after some bargaining, he was eventually accepted by the majority of ''emirs''.
Although the Crusader force consisted of only 375 knights, Saladin hesitated to ambush them because of the presence of highly skilled generals.
On May 21, he camped outside the city, positioning himself east of the Citadel of Aleppo, while his forces encircles the suburb of Banaqusa to the northeast and Bab Janan to the west.
In November 1177, he set out upon a raid into Palestine; the Crusaders had recently forayed into the territory of Damascus, so Saladin saw the truce as no longer worth preserving.
When Saladin received its surrender, he proceeded to arrange the defense of Harim from the Crusaders.
In particular, the residents of Ashkelon, a large Jewish settlement, responded to his request.
Saladin made further conquests in northern Syria and Jazira, escaping two attempts on his life by the Assassins, before returning to Egypt in 1177 to address issues there.
By late April, after three days of "actual fighting", according to Saladin, the Ayyubids had captured Amid.
When the siege had started, Saladin was unwilling to promise terms of quarter to the Frankish inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Saladin's response is not recorded, but the queen's efforts seem to have been successful as Jacques de Vitry, the Bishop of Acre, reports the Georgians were, in contrast to the other Christian pilgrims, allowed a free passage into the city with their banners unfurled.
Prior to arriving at Montreal, Saladin however withdrew back to Cairo as he received the reports that in his absence the Crusader Leaders had increased their support to the traitors inside Egypt to attack Saladin from within and lessen his power especially the Fatimid who started plotting to restore their past glory.
(Muslims are buried in a simple shroud, so if there are any sarcophagi present, they are usually used for covering the top of the Islamic burials.)
Upon seeing the large size of Saladin's army, he made little effort to resist and surrendered on the condition that he would retain his property.
He had Majd al-Din released in return for a payment of 80,000 dinars.
He did not press an attack against the desert castles, but attempted to drive out the Muslim Bedouins who lived in Crusader territory with the aim of depriving the Franks of guides.
Having been absent roughly two years, he had much to organize and supervise in Egypt, namely fortifying and reconstructing Cairo.
In April 1179, the Crusaders led by King Baldwin expected no resistance and waited to launch a surprise attack on Muslim herders grazing their herds and flocks east of the Golan Heights.
Few structures associated with Saladin survive within modern cities.
Prior to his death, he had his chief officers swear an oath of loyalty to Izz al-Din, as he was the only Zengid ruler strong enough to oppose Saladin.
Saladin rode across the desert with 700 picked horsemen, passing through al-Kerak then reaching Bosra and according to him, was joined by "''emirs'', soldiers, and Bedouins—the emotions of their hearts to be seen on their faces."
In the spring of 1178, he was encamped under the walls of Homs, and a few skirmishes occurred between his generals and the Crusader army.
He handed the city to Nur al-Din Muhammad together with its stores, which consisted of 80,000 candles, a tower full of arrowheads, and 1,040,000 books.
Saladin died of a fever on 4 March 1193, at Damascus, not long after King Richard's departure.
The fall of Amid, in addition to territory, convinced Il-Ghazi of Mardin to enter the service of Saladin, weakening Izz al-Din's coalition.
On the way, his army took Buza'a, then captured Manbij.
All military attempts and battles made by Richard the Lionheart to retake Jerusalem were defeated and failed.
A hand-to-hand fight ensued and the Zengids managed to plow Saladin's left wing, driving it before him, when Saladin himself charged at the head of the Zengid guard.
Guy of Lusignan was also captured.
Under Saladin's command, the Ayyubid army defeated the Crusaders at the decisive Battle of Hattin in 1187, and thereafter wrested control of Palestine from the Crusaders, who had conquered the area 88 years earlier.
Although the Ayyubid dynasty that he founded would only outlive him by 57 years, the legacy of Saladin within the Arab World continues to this day.
Saladin moved north towards Aleppo, besieging it on December 30 after Gumushtigin refused to abdicate his throne.
Knowing that Crusader forces were massed upon the frontier to intercept him, he took the desert route across the Sinai Peninsula to Ailah at the head of the Gulf of Aqaba.
Saladin played a major role, commanding the right wing of the Zengid army (Muslim Dynasty of Oghuz Turk origin), while a force of Kurds commanded the left, and Shirkuh stationed in the center.
This was intended to cement an alliance with the Artuqids and to impress other ''emirs'' in Mesopotamia and Anatolia.
After establishing himself in Egypt, Saladin launched a campaign against the Crusaders, besieging Darum in 1170.
Mujahed al-Din Bihruz, a former Greek slave who had been appointed the military governor of northern Mesopotamia for his service to the Seljuks had reprimanded Ayyub for giving Zengi refuge and in 1137, banished Ayyub from Tikrit after his brother Asad al-Din Shirkuh killed a friend of Bihruz in an honour killing.
Modern Arab states have sought to commemorate Saladin through various measures, often based on the image created of him in the 19th-century west.
A'zaz capitulated on 21 June, and Saladin then hurried his forces to Aleppo to punish Gumushtigin.
Saladin offered no opposition to these transactions in order to respect the treaty he previously made with the Zengids.
Saladin had by now agreed truces with his Zengid rivals and the Kingdom of Jerusalem (latter occurred in the summer of 1175), but faced a threat from the Ismaili sect known then as the "Assassins" led by Rashid ad-Din Sinan.
Shirkuh was in a power struggle over Egypt with Shawar and Amalric I of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, in which Shawar requested Amalric's assistance.
He spent the rest of the year in Syria without a confrontation with his enemies.
Saladin, at age 26, went along with them.
Raynald de Châtillon had sent ships to the Gulf of Aqaba to raid towns and villages off the coast of the Red Sea.
The Zengid prisoners of war, however, were given gifts and freed.
