The 1917 catch was one quarter of the 1913 catch.
However,  populations of several species are restricted to fresh water through their lives.
The Columbia River salmon population is now less than 3% of what it was when Lewis and Clark arrived at the river.
An example of this was seen in the years following 1818 in the Columbia River Basin.
Salmon is also a source of cholesterol, with a range of 23–214&nbsp;mg/100&nbsp;g depending on the species.
This has affected employment for many fisherman, who rely on salmon as a source of income.
According to Canadian biologist Dorothy Kieser, the myxozoan parasite ''Henneguya salminicola'' is commonly found in the flesh of salmonids.
Salmon aquaculture is a major contributor to the world production of farmed finfish, representing about US$10&nbsp;billion annually.
Salmon and salmon roe have only recently come into use in making sashimi (raw fish) and sushi.
Due to logging and development, much of the salmon's habitat (i.e.
Many jurisdictions are now beginning to discourage supplemental fish planting in favour of harvest controls, and habitat improvement and protection.
Beaver ponds can provide critical habitat for juvenile salmon.
The Fraser River salmon population was affected by the 1914 slide caused by the Canadian Pacific Railway at Hells Gate.
Folklore has it that the fish return to the exact spot where they were born to spawn; tracking studies have shown this to be mostly true.
According to Dr. Kieser, a lot of work on ''Henneguya salminicola'' was done by scientists at the Pacific Biological Station in Nanaimo in the mid-1980s, in particular, an overview report which states, "the fish that have the longest fresh water residence time as juveniles have the most noticeable infections.
The fish responds by walling off the parasitic infection into a number of cysts that contain milky fluid.
'''Salmon'''  is the common name for several species of ray-finned fish in the family Salmonidae.
Salmon require large nutritional intakes of protein, and farmed salmon consume more fish than they generate as a final product.
The Ainu, of northern Japan, trained dogs to catch salmon as they returned to their breeding grounds ''en masse''.
Chinook and sockeye salmon from central Idaho, for example, travel over  and climb nearly  from the Pacific Ocean as they return to spawn.
Both Atlantic and Pacific salmon are popular sportfish.
In response to the elimination of beavers from large parts of the river system, salmon runs plummeted, even in the absence of many of the factors usually associated with the demise of salmon runs.
To produce one pound of farmed salmon, products from several pounds of wild fish are fed to them.
This is "a powerful economic argument for allocating stock resources preferentially to sport fishing."
Salmon recruitment can be affected by beavers' dams because dams can:
*Slow the rate at which nutrients are flushed from the system; nutrients provided by adult salmon dying throughout the fall and winter remain available in the spring to newly hatched juveniles
Intensive salmon farming uses open-net cages, which have low production costs.
It offers the advantage of providing natural amounts of dietary fiber and having a lower glycemic load than grain-based fish meal.
Another form of salmon production, which is safer but less controllable, is to raise salmon in hatcheries until they are old enough to become independent.
The redd may sometimes contain 5,000 eggs covering .
These dams can be overtopped at high tide and hold water at low tide.
(When a fish returns after just one year's sea feeding, it is called a grilse in Canada, Britain, and Ireland.)
In contrast about half of all farmed salmon are Atlantic salmon.
When juvenile salmon migrate to the Pacific Ocean, the second host releases a stage infective to salmon.
Specifically, the indigenous peoples of Haida Gwaii, located near former Queen Charlotte Island in British Columbia, rely on salmon as one of their main sources of food, although many other bands have fished Pacific waters for centuries.
Freshwater streams and estuaries provide important habitat for many salmon species.
One or more males approach the female in her redd, depositing sperm, or milt, over the roe.
One proposed alternative to the use of wild-caught fish as feed for the salmon, is the use of soy-based products.
The natural colour of salmon results from carotenoid pigments, largely astaxanthin, but also canthaxanthin, in the flesh.
Each year, the fish experiences a period of rapid growth, often in summer, and one of slower growth, normally in winter.
Adult salmon may survive otherwise critical numbers of sea lice, but small, thin-skinned juvenile salmon migrating to sea are highly vulnerable.
Many species of salmon  have  been introduced into non-native environments such as the Great Lakes of North America and Patagonia  in South America.
The industrial-scale extraction of wild forage fish for salmon farming affects the survivability of the wild predator fish which rely on them for food.
Spawning success is often much better in channels than in adjacent streams due to the control of floods, which in some years can wash out the natural redds.
They feed on terrestrial and aquatic insects, amphipods, and other crustaceans while young, and primarily on other fish when older.
Classified as an oily fish, salmon is considered to be healthy due to the fish's high protein, high omega-3 fatty acids, and high vitamin D content.
Lox can refer to either cold-smoked salmon or salmon cured in a brine solution (also called gravlax).
Salmon is a popular food.
The female then covers the eggs by disturbing the gravel at the upstream edge of the depression before moving on to make another redd.
The commercial value of a salmon can be several times less than the value of the same fish caught by a sport fisherman.
Estuaries and their associated wetlands provide vital nursery areas for the salmon prior to their departure to the open ocean.
First Nation-owned and operated commercial vessels in the province.
Atlantic salmon spend between one and four years at sea.
At the time, the Hudson's Bay Company sent word to trappers to extirpate all furbearers from the area in an effort to make the area less attractive to U.S. fur traders.
The type of omega-3 present may not be a factor for other important health functions.
Smoked salmon is another popular preparation method, and can either be hot or cold smoked.
Beavers build small dams of generally less than  high in channels in the myrtle zone.
With its increasing availability, this would address the problems of rising costs for buying hatchery fish feed.
These are artificial streams, usually parallel to an existing stream, with concrete or rip-rap sides and gravel bottoms.
It has the drawback of allowing disease and sea lice to spread to local wild salmon stocks.
On the Pacific coast of Canada, the louse-induced mortality of pink salmon in some regions is commonly over 80%.
In the tale, the Salmon will grant powers of knowledge to whoever eats it, and is sought by poet Finn Eces for seven years.
The parr stay for six months to three years in their natal stream before becoming smolts, which are distinguished by their bright, silvery colour with scales that are easily rubbed off.
It was very common in countries such as Sweden, before the Norwegians developed salmon farming, but is seldom done by private companies.
As the salmon farming industry expands, it requires more wild forage fish for feed, at a time when 75% of the world's monitored fisheries are already near to or have exceeded their maximum sustainable yield.
Meanwhile very few salmon reach the spawning grounds, and probably four years hence the fisheries will amount to nothing; and this comes from a struggle between the associated, or gill-net, fishermen on the one hand, and the owners of the fishing wheels up the river.''
Traditional canned salmon includes some skin (which is harmless) and bone (which adds calcium).
Other fish in the same family include trout, char, grayling and whitefish.
Salmon are intensively farmed in many parts of the world.
A conflict exists between commercial fishermen and recreational fishermen for the right to salmon stock resources.
Condition tends to deteriorate the longer the fish remain in fresh water, and they then deteriorate further after they spawn, when they are known as kelts.
During these twenty-five years the fishermen of each State have naturally tried to take all they could get, and the two legislatures have never been able to agree on joint action of any kind adequate in degree for the protection of the fisheries.
There they deposit nutrient-rich urine and feces and partially eaten carcasses.
A portion of a returning salmon run may stray and spawn in different freshwater systems.
In Canada, returning Skeena River wild salmon support commercial, subsistence and recreational fisheries, as well as the area's diverse wildlife on the coast and around communities hundreds of miles inland in the watershed.
These populations are not self-sustaining and do not provide much in the way of a commercial fishery, but have led to the development of a thriving sport fishery.
The leftovers the bears leave behind are considered important nutrients for the forest, such as the soil, trees, and plants.
Salmon are carnivorous.
Another possible alternative is a yeast-based coproduct of bioethanol production, proteinaceous fermentation biomass.
Wetlands not only help buffer the estuary from silt and pollutants, but also provide important feeding and hiding areas.
According to Klaus Schallie, Molluscan Shellfish Program Specialist with the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, "''Henneguya salminicola'' is found in southern B.C.
It is strictly a fish parasite that cannot live in or affect warm blooded animals, including man".
Salmon are not only ancient and unique, but it is important because it is expressed in culture, art forms, and ceremonial feasts.
After speaking to a string of other ancient animals who do not know his whereabouts, King Arthur's men Cai and Bedwyr are led to the Salmon of Llyn Llyw, who lets them ride its back to the walls of Mabon's prison in Gloucester.
''Henneguya'' and other parasites in the myxosporean group have complex life cycles, where the salmon is one of two hosts.
Farmed salmon has a high omega 3 fatty acid content comparable to wild salmon.
Grizzly bears function as ecosystem engineers, capturing salmon and carrying them into adjacent wooded areas.
However, the condition of the salmon in Haida has been affected in recent decades.
Salmon farming is significant in Chile, Norway, Scotland, Canada and the Faroe Islands; it is the source for most salmon consumed in the United States and Europe.
Prior to spawning, depending on the species, salmon undergo changes.
: Ain River) has been destroyed, resulting in the fish being close to endangered.
As well, the report says, at the time the studies were conducted, stocks from the middle and upper reaches of large river systems in British Columbia such as Fraser, Skeena, Nass and from mainland coastal streams in the southern half of B.C., "are more likely to have a low prevalence of infection."
In Haida, salmon is referred to as ''"tsiin"'' There are many forms of preparing it including: smoking, baking, frying, making soup, or candied salmon
Between 2 and 4% of Atlantic salmon kelts survive to spawn again, all females.
In all species of Pacific salmon, the mature individuals die within a few days or weeks of spawning, a trait known as semelparity.
Coho stocks were planted by the state of Michigan in the late 1960s to control the growing population of non-native alewife.
*Increase structural complexity with many physical niches where salmon can avoid predators
To the Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast, salmon is considered a vital part of the diet.
The report also states, "It should be stressed that ''Henneguya'', economically deleterious though it is, is harmless from the view of public health.
Spawning channels preserve the natural selection of natural streams, as there is no benefit, as in hatcheries, to use prophylactic chemicals to control diseases.
Salmon also feature in Welsh mythology.
Skinless and boneless canned salmon is also available.
Farm-raised salmon are fed the carotenoids astaxanthin and canthaxanthin to match their flesh colour to wild salmon to improve their marketability.
Seaweed provides essential minerals and vitamins for growing organisms.
The salmon spend about one to five years (depending on the species) in the open ocean, where they gradually become sexually mature.
Because of this, the ranching method has mainly been used by various public authorities and nonprofit groups, such as the Cook Inlet Aquaculture Association, as a way to increase salmon populations in situations where they have declined due to overharvesting, construction of dams, and habitat destruction or fragmentation.
Salmon can make amazing journeys, sometimes moving hundreds of miles upstream against strong currents and rapids to reproduce.
The vast majority of Atlantic salmon available around the world are farmed (almost 99%), whereas the majority of Pacific salmon are wild-caught (greater than 80%).
Hence in order of prevalence coho are most infected followed by sockeye, chinook, chum and pink."
The myxosporean parasite that causes whirling disease in trout has a similar life cycle.
The percent of straying depends on the species of salmon.
Nonetheless, according to a 2006 study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, the benefits of eating even farmed salmon still outweigh any risks imposed by contaminants.
As anyone may catch the salmon when they return to spawn, a company is limited in benefiting financially from their investment.
Smolts spend a portion of their out-migration time in brackish water, where their body chemistry becomes accustomed to osmoregulation in the ocean.
Before the availability of refrigeration, the Japanese did not consume raw salmon.
rogercresseyi'', can cause deadly infestations of both farm-grown and wild salmon.
When it is time for them to spawn, they return to where they were released, where fishermen can catch them.
Finally Finn Eces catches the fish and gives it to his young pupil, Fionn mac Cumhaill, to prepare it for him.
They are released into rivers in an attempt to increase the salmon population.
However, even in those species of salmon that may survive to spawn more than once (iteroparity), postspawning mortality is quite high (perhaps as high as 40 to 50%.)
Elsewhere in Irish mythology, the salmon is also one of the incarnations of both Tuan mac Cairill and Fintan mac Bóchra.
In Norse mythology, after Loki tricked the blind god Höðr into killing his brother Baldr, Loki jumped into a river and transformed himself into a salmon to escape punishment from the other gods.
At the moment the fishing on the Oregon side is practically closed, while there is no limit on the Washington side of any kind, and no one can tell what the courts will decide as to the very statutes under which this action and non-action result.
*Increase productivity through photosynthesis and by enhancing the conversion efficiency of the cellulose-powered detritus cycle
This fluid is an accumulation of a large number of parasites.
The fry quickly develop into parr with camouflaging vertical stripes.
It is clear that further protection is needed for salmon, such as their habitats, where logging commonly occurs.
In his 1908 State of the Union address, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt observed that the fisheries were in significant decline:
The salmon has long been at the heart of the culture and livelihood of coastal dwellers.
Homing behavior has been shown to depend on olfactory memory.
In 2003, a report on First Nation participation in commercial fisheries, including salmon, commissioned by BC’s Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries found that there were 595
Recreational salmon fishing can be a technically demanding kind of sport fishing, not necessarily congenial for beginning fishermen.
Salmon populations have been established in all the Great Lakes.
All change from the silvery blue of a fresh-run fish from the sea to a darker colour.
Sea lice, particularly ''Lepeophtheirus salmonis'' and various ''Caligus'' species, including ''C.
also and in all species of salmon.
Bears are estimated to leave up to half the salmon they harvest on the forest floor, in densities that can reach 4,000 kilograms per hectare, providing as much as 24% of the total nitrogen available to the riparian woodlands.
This system is referred to as ranching.
*Create low-energy environments where juvenile salmon put the food they ingest into growth rather than into fighting currents
Some of the salmon systems in danger include: the Davidon, Naden, Mamim, and Mathers.
The adult salmon then return primarily to their natal streams to spawn.
Freshwater growth shows as densely crowded rings, sea growth as widely spaced rings; spawning is marked by significant erosion as body mass is converted into eggs and milt.
Now Chinook (king), Atlantic, and coho (silver) salmon are annually stocked in all Great Lakes by most bordering states and provinces.
The status of wild salmon in Washington is mixed.
''The salmon fisheries of the Columbia River are now but a fraction of what they were twenty-five years ago, and what they would be now if the United States Government had taken complete charge of them by intervening between Oregon and Washington.
Various species of salmon display anadromous life strategies while others display freshwater resident life strategies.
For residents, this has resulted in limits on catches, in turn, has affected families diets, and cultural events such as feasts.
Commercial fishing in estuaries and coastal areas is often restricted so enough salmon can return to their natal rivers where they can spawn and be available for sport fishing.
Work continues on substituting vegetable   proteins for animal proteins in the salmon diet.
To lay her roe, the female salmon uses her tail (caudal fin), to create a low-pressure zone, lifting gravel to be swept downstream, excavating a shallow depression, called a redd.
In 1818, the British government made an agreement with the U.S. government to allow U.S. citizens access to the Columbia catchment (see Treaty of 1818).
The commercial salmon fisheries in California have been either severely curtailed or closed completely in recent years, due to critically low returns on the Klamath and or Sacramento rivers, causing millions of dollars in losses to commercial fishermen.
Mortality of salmon in the early life stages is usually high due to natural predation and human-induced changes in habitat, such as siltation, high water temperatures, low oxygen concentration, loss of stream cover, and reductions in river flow.
clemensi'' and ''C.
I have previously examined smoked chum salmon sides that were riddled with cysts and some sockeye runs in Barkley Sound (southern B.C., west coast of Vancouver Island) are noted for their high incidence of infestation."
PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) levels may be up to eight times higher in farmed salmon than in wild salmon, but still well below levels considered dangerous.
A variant method of fish stocking, called ocean ranching, is under development in Alaska.
This provides refuges for juvenile salmon so they do not have to swim into large channels where they are subject to predation.
On parts of the North American west coast sport salmon fishing completely replaces inshore commercial fishing.
According to reports in the journal ''Science'', farmed salmon may contain high levels of dioxins.
Water from the adjacent stream is piped into the top of the channel, sometimes via a header pond, to settle out sediment.
The eggs usually range from orange to red.
In 2011 only 2,500 tonnes were reported.
In this sense, the salmon feed the forest and in return receive clean water and gravel in which to hatch and grow, sheltered from extremes of temperature and water flow in times of high and low rainfall.
Many people of the northern Pacific shore had a ceremony to honor the first return of the year.
Because of the lack of floods, spawning channels must sometimes be cleaned out to remove accumulated sediment.
Salmon not killed by other means show greatly accelerated deterioration (phenoptosis, or "programmed aging") at the end of their lives.
Wild salmon get these carotenoids from eating krill and other tiny shellfish.
Other commonly cultured fish species include: tilapia, catfish, sea bass, carp and bream.
However, as opposed to whirling disease, the ''Henneguya'' infestation does not appear to cause disease in the host salmon&nbsp;— even heavily infected fish tend to return to spawn successfully.
They are fed a meal produced from catching other wild fish and other marine organisms.
Yet another attractive alternative is the increased use of seaweed.
Salmon farming leads to a high demand for wild forage fish.
Salmon are central spiritually and culturally to Native American mythology on the Pacific coast, from the Haida and Coast Salish peoples, to the Nuu-chah-nulth peoples in British Columbia.
In so doing, he inadvertently gains the Salmon's wisdom.
Typically, salmon are anadromous: they are born in fresh water, migrate to the ocean, then return to fresh water to reproduce.
In Irish mythology, a creature called the Salmon of Knowledge plays key role in the tale ''The Boyhood Deeds of Fionn''.
The parasite is then carried in the salmon until the next spawning cycle.
Canned salmon in the US is usually wild Pacific catch, though some farmed salmon is available in canned form.
On the Columbia River the Chief Joseph Dam completed in 1955 completely blocks salmon migration to the upper Columbia River system.
This substitution results in lower levels of the highly valued omega-3 fatty acid content in the farmed product.
Substituting such products for engineered feed can result in equal (sometimes enhanced) growth in fish.
Only 10% of all salmon eggs are estimated to survive to this stage.
Beavers also function as ecosystem engineers; in the process of clear-cutting and damming, beavers alter their ecosystems extensively.
Raw salmon flesh may contain ''Anisakis'' nematodes, marine parasites that cause anisakiasis.
When they held out a net to trap him he attempted to leap over it but was caught by Thor who grabbed him by the tail with his hand, and this is why the salmon's tail is tapered.
Salmon are native to tributaries of the North Atlantic (genus ''Salmo'') and Pacific Ocean  (genus ''Oncorhynchus'').
Salmon flesh is generally orange to red, although white-fleshed wild salmon with white-black skin colour occurs.
Black bears also rely on salmon as food.
The foliage of spruce trees up to  from a stream where grizzlies fish salmon have been found to contain nitrogen originating from fished salmon.
Eggs are laid in deeper water with larger gravel, and need cool water and good water flow (to supply oxygen) to the developing embryos.
Alaska fishery stocks are still abundant, and catches have been on the rise in recent decades, after the state initiated limitations in 1972.
The capture of wild Atlantic salmon has always been relatively small, and has declined steadily since 1990.
Nearly all captured wild salmon are Pacific salmon.
A famous spearfishing site on the Columbia River at Celilo Falls was inundated after great dams were built on the river.
Historically, there has always been enough salmon, as people would not overfish, and only took what they needed.
They may grow a hump, develop canine-like teeth, or develop a kype (a pronounced curvature of the jaws in male salmon).
The salmon is an important creature in several strands of Celtic mythology and poetry, which often associated them with wisdom and venerability.
It has been recorded in the field samples of salmon returning to the Haida Gwaii Islands.
This results in ring formation around an earbone called the otolith, (annuli) analogous to the growth rings visible in a tree trunk.
