Salt is used in many cuisines around the world, and is often found in salt shakers on diners' eating tables for their personal use on food.
Salt is also an ingredient in many manufactured foodstuffs.
In adults and children with no acute illness, a decrease in the intake of sodium from the typical high levels reduces blood pressure.
US iodized salt contains 46–77 ppm (parts per million), whereas in the UK the iodine content of iodized salt is recommended to be 10–22 ppm.
Iodized salt, containing potassium iodide, is widely available.
Another additive, especially important for pregnant women, is folic acid (vitamin B9), which gives the table salt a yellow color.
Various governments have at different times imposed salt taxes on their peoples.
Sodium ferrocyanide, also known as yellow prussiate of soda, is sometimes added to salt as an anticaking agent.
Traditionally, this was done in shallow open pans which were heated to increase the rate of evaporation.
Salt may have been used for barter in connection with the obsidian trade in Anatolia in the Neolithic Era.
There are many other processes in which salt is involved.
Algal products contribute a mildly "fishy" or "sea-air" odour, the latter from organobromine compounds.
Cities on overland trade routes grew rich by levying duties, and towns like Liverpool flourished on the export of salt extracted from the salt mines of Cheshire.
Salt may be added to the water "where it is customary" in the Roman Catholic rite of Holy water.
The identities and amounts of additives vary widely from country to country.
Sometimes these ponds have vivid colours, as some species of algae and other micro-organisms thrive in conditions of high salinity.
The Ayoreo, an indigenous group from the Paraguayan Chaco, obtain their salt from the ash produced by burning the timber of the Indian salt tree (''Maytenus vitis-idaea'') and other trees.
The habitual salt intake in many Western countries is about 10 g per day, and it is higher than that in many countries in Eastern Europe and Asia.
Another review indicated that reducing sodium intake to lower than 2,300&nbsp;mg per day may not be beneficial.
Salt is mostly sodium chloride, the ionic compound with the formula NaCl, representing equal proportions of sodium and chlorine.
A dish of salt and a dish of water are almost always present on an altar, and salt is used in a wide variety of rituals and ceremonies.
From cold solutions, salt crystallises as the dihydrate NaCl·2H2O.
Its density is 2.17 grams per cubic centimetre and it is readily soluble in water.
During this same refining process it is often also iodized.
A lack of fluorine in the diet is the cause of a greatly increased incidence of dental caries.
Unrefined sea salt contains small amounts of magnesium and calcium halides and sulfates, traces of algal products, salt-resistant bacteria and sediment particles.
There is more salt in animal tissues such as meat, blood and milk, than there is in plant tissues.
The Tuareg have traditionally maintained routes across the Sahara especially for the transportation of salt by Azalai (salt caravans).
When the judge Abimelech destroyed the city of Shechem, he is said to have "sown salt on it," probably as a curse on anyone who would re-inhabit it (Judges 9:45).
Solutions of sodium chloride have very different properties from those of pure water; the freezing point is −21.12&nbsp;°C (−6.02&nbsp;°F) for 23.31&nbsp;wt% of salt, and the boiling point of saturated salt solution is around 108.7&nbsp;°C (227.7&nbsp;°F).
This can give it different properties when used in cooking, and can be useful for preparing kosher meat.
This means that there are about  of dissolved salts, predominantly sodium () and chloride () ions, per kilogram (2.2&nbsp;lbs) of water.
The tissues of animals contain larger quantities of salt than do plant tissues.
Sea salt and freshly mined salt (much of which is sea salt from prehistoric seas) also contain small amounts of trace elements (which in these small amounts are generally good for plant and animal health).
The Bible tells the story of King Abimelech who was ordered by God to do this at Shechem, and various texts claim that the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus ploughed over and sowed the city of Carthage with salt after it was defeated in the Third Punic War (146 BC).
Salt crystals are translucent and cubic in shape; they normally appear white but impurities may give them a blue or purple tinge.
Salt is believed to ward off evil spirits in Mahayana Buddhist tradition, and when returning home from a funeral, a pinch of salt is thrown over the left shoulder as this prevents evil spirits from entering the house.
Sodium serves a vital purpose in the human body: via its role as an electrolyte, it helps nerves and muscles to function correctly, and it is one factor involved in the osmotic regulation of water content in body organs (fluid balance).
Table salt is made up of just under 40% sodium by weight, so a 6g serving (1teaspoon) contains about 2,300mg of sodium.
The voyages of Christopher Columbus are said to have been financed from salt production in southern Spain, and the oppressive salt tax in France was one of the causes of the French Revolution.
In Aztec mythology, Huixtocihuatl was a fertility goddess who presided over salt and salt water.
These are either mined directly, producing rock salt, or are extracted in solution by pumping water into the deposit.
This civil disobedience inspired millions of common people, and elevated the Indian independence movement from an elitist movement to a national struggle.
In the Middle East, salt was used to ceremonially seal an agreement, and the ancient Hebrews made a "covenant of salt" with God and sprinkled salt on their offerings to show their trust in him.
Fluoride salts can be added to table salt with the goal of reducing tooth decay, especially in countries that have not benefited from fluoridated toothpastes and fluoridated water.
The Book of Job contains the first mention of salt as a condiment.
Fleur de sel, a natural sea salt from the surface of evaporating brine in salt pans, has a unique flavour varying with the region from which it is produced.
Some people put a desiccant, such as a few grains of uncooked rice or a saltine cracker, in their salt shakers to absorb extra moisture and help break up salt clumps that may otherwise form.
Of the remainder, 12% is used in water conditioning processes, 8% goes for de-icing highways and 6% is used in agriculture.
They are most often used for cooking rather than as table condiments.
Guidelines by the United States  recommend that people with hypertension, African Americans, and middle-aged and older adults should limit consumption to no more than 1,500&nbsp;mg of sodium per day and meet the potassium recommendation of 4,700&nbsp;mg/day with a healthy diet of fruits and vegetables.
In Britain, the suffix "-wich" in a placename means it was once a source of salt, as in Sandwich and Norwich.
A typical iron source is ferrous fumarate.
Multiple stages of evaporation are then used to collect pure sodium chloride crystals, which are kiln-dried.
The manufacture of salt is one of the oldest chemical industries.
Salt became an important article of trade and was transported by boat across the Mediterranean Sea, along specially built salt roads, and across the Sahara in camel caravans.
The safety of sodium ferrocyanide as a food additive was found to be provisionally acceptable by the Committee on Toxicity in 1988.
Table salt is a refined salt containing about 97 to 99&nbsp;percent sodium chloride.
The world's oceans are a virtually inexhaustible source of salt, and this abundance of supply means that reserves have not been calculated.
With the spread of civilization, salt became one of the world's main trading commodities.
A reduction in sodium intake by 1,000&nbsp;mg per day may reduce cardiovascular disease by about 30 percent.
A major source of salt is seawater, which has a salinity of approximately 3.5%.
One of these mentions Lot's wife, who was turned into a pillar of salt when she looked back at the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 19:26) as they were destroyed.
or is there any taste in the white of an egg?"
This product absorbs minerals from the bamboo and the mud, and has been claimed to increase the anticlastogenic and antimutagenic properties of doenjang (a fermented bean paste).
Salt is processed from salt mines, or by the evaporation of seawater (sea salt) or mineral-rich spring water in shallow pools.
The scarcity and universal need for salt has led nations to go to war over salt and use it to raise tax revenues.
Before the advent of electrically powered refrigeration, salting was one of the main methods of food preservation.
Other anticaking agents sometimes used include tricalcium phosphate, calcium or magnesium carbonates, fatty acid salts (acid salts), magnesium oxide, silicon dioxide, calcium silicate, sodium aluminosilicate and calcium aluminosilicate.
Thus, herring contains 67&nbsp;mg sodium per 100&nbsp;g, while kipper, its preserved form, contains 990&nbsp;mg.
The World Health Organization recommends that adults should consume less than 2,000&nbsp;mg of sodium (which is contained in 5g of salt) per day.
In Shinto, salt is used for ritual purification of locations and people (harae, specifically shubatsu), and small piles of salt are placed in dishes by the entrance of establishments for the two-fold purposes of warding off evil and attracting patrons.
The apostle Paul also encouraged Christians to "let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt" (Colossians 4:6).
Gallican Rite) that is employed in the consecration of a church.
Salt is also used in religious ceremonies and has other cultural significance.
"Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt?
Moorish merchants in the 6th century traded salt for gold, weight for weight.
The word ''salary'' originates from  which referred to the money paid to the Roman Army's soldiers for the purchase of salt.
At the time of Brahmanic sacrifices, in Hittite rituals and during festivals held by Semites and Greeks at the time of the new moon, salt was thrown into a fire where it produced crackling noises.
Iodized table salt has significantly reduced disorders of iodine deficiency in countries where it is used.
Salt is one of the oldest and most ubiquitous food seasonings, and salting is an important method of food preservation.
In 1930, Mahatma Gandhi led at least 100,000 people on the "Dandi March" or "Salt Satyagraha", in which protesters made their own salt from the sea thus defying British rule and avoiding paying the salt tax.
Venice fought and won a war with Genoa over the product, and it played an important part in the American Revolution.
In the United States, 75% of the sodium eaten comes from processed and restaurant foods, 11% from cooking and table use and the rest from what is found naturally in foodstuffs.
Even before this, what is now thought to have been the first city in Europe is Solnitsata, in Bulgaria, which was a salt mine, providing the area now known as the Balkans with salt since 5400 BC.
Iodized salt has been used to correct these conditions since 1924 and consists of table salt mixed with a minute amount of potassium iodide, sodium iodide or sodium iodate.
Salt is considered to be a very auspicious substance in Hinduism and is used in particular religious ceremonies like house-warmings and weddings.
The caravans still cross the desert from southern Niger to Bilma, although much of the trade now takes place by truck.
From about 2800 BC, the Egyptians began exporting salt fish to the Phoenicians in return for Lebanon cedar, glass and the dye Tyrian purple; the Phoenicians traded Egyptian salt fish and salt from North Africa throughout their Mediterranean trade empire.
In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus referred to his followers as the "salt of the earth".
Most of the sodium in the Western diet comes from salt.
Elsewhere, salt is extracted from the vast sedimentary deposits which have been laid down over the millennia from the evaporation of seas and lakes.
Herodotus described salt trading routes across Libya back in the 5th century BC.
In Jainism, devotees lay an offering of raw rice with a pinch of salt before a deity to signify their devotion and salt is sprinkled on a person's cremated remains before the ashes are buried.
In the Hebrew Bible, there are thirty-five verses which mention salt.
This usually involves recrystallization during which a brine solution is treated with chemicals that precipitate most impurities (largely magnesium and calcium salts).
The latter alleviates iron deficiency anaemia, which interferes with the mental development of an estimated 40% of infants in the developing world.
Salt has long held an important place in religion and culture.
The Natron Valley was a key region that supported the Egyptian Empire to its north, because it supplied it with a kind of salt that came to be called by its name, natron.
The open ocean has about  of solids per litre, a salinity of 3.5%.
Salt is present in most foods, but in naturally occurring foodstuffs such as meats, vegetables and fruit, it is present in very small quantities.
The word "salary" comes from the Latin word for salt because the Roman Legions were sometimes paid in salt, which was quite literally worth its weight in gold.
Salt is essential for human life, and saltiness is one of the basic human tastes.
The salt is dug out by the room and pillar method, where about half the material is left in place to support the upper levels.
Since taste and aroma compounds are often detectable by humans in minute concentrations, sea salt may have a more complex flavor than pure sodium chloride when sprinkled on top of food.
Nomads who subsist on their flocks and herds do not eat salt with their food, but agriculturalists, feeding mainly on cereals and vegetable matter, need to supplement their diet with salt.
Because consuming too much salt increases risk of cardiovascular diseases, health organizations generally recommend that people reduce their dietary intake of salt.
The additive is considered safe for human consumption.
While reduction of salt intake to less than 2,300&nbsp;mg per day is recommended by developed countries, one review recommended that salt intake be no less than 1,200&nbsp;mg (contained in 3g) per day, as it is an essential nutrient required from the diet.
Evidence indicates that Neolithic people of the Precucuteni Culture were boiling the salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage to extract the salt as far back as 6050 BC.
The World Health Organization recommends that adults should consume less than 2,000&nbsp;mg of sodium, equivalent to 5&nbsp;grams of salt per day.
Similarly, pork typically contains 63&nbsp;mg while bacon contains 1,480&nbsp;mg, and potatoes contain 7&nbsp;mg but potato crisps 800&nbsp;mg per 100 g. The main sources of salt in the diet, apart from direct use of sodium chloride, are bread and cereal products, meat products and milk and dairy products.
Some kosher salt has been certified to meet kosher requirements by a hechsher, but this is not true for all products labelled as kosher salt.
Iodine deficiency affects about two billion people around the world and is the leading preventable cause of mental retardation.
The molar mass of salt is 58.443 g/mol, its melting point is 801&nbsp;°C (1,474&nbsp;°F) and its boiling point 1,465&nbsp;°C (2,669&nbsp;°F).
The amount of iodine and the specific iodine compound added to salt varies from country to country.
Such anti-caking agents have been added since at least 1911 when magnesium carbonate was first added to salt to make it flow more freely.
These include its use as a mordant in textile dying, to regenerate resins in water softening, for the tanning of hides, the preservation of meat and fish and the canning of meat and vegetables.
The harvest of salt from the surface of Xiechi Lake near Yuncheng in Shanxi, China, dates back to at least 6000 BC, making it one of the oldest verifiable saltworks.
'''Common salt''' is a mineral composed primarily of sodium chloride (NaCl), a chemical compound belonging to the larger class of salts; salt in its natural form as a crystalline mineral is known as rock salt or halite.
Excessive salt consumption can increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension, in children and adults.
In many East Asian cultures, salt is not traditionally used as a condiment.
Of the annual global production of around two hundred million tonnes of salt, only about 6% is used for human consumption.
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends 21 CFR 101.9 (c)(8)(iv) 150 micrograms of iodine per day for both men and women.
The evaporation of seawater is the production method of choice in marine countries with high evaporation and low precipitation rates.
It is also used in the manufacture of soaps and glycerine, where it is added to the vat to precipitate out the saponified products.
In the New Testament, six verses mention salt.
Only about 6% of the salt manufactured in the world is used in food.
In either case, the salt may be purified by mechanical evaporation of brine.
In its place, condiments such as soy sauce, fish sauce and oyster sauce tend to have a high sodium content and fill a similar role to table salt in western cultures.
To preserve the covenant between their people and God, Jews dip the Sabbath bread in salt.
Gourmet salts may be used for specific tastes.
The ancient Egyptians, Greeks and Romans invoked their gods with offerings of salt and water and some people think this to be the origin of Holy Water in the Christian faith.
Usually, anticaking agents such as sodium aluminosilicate or magnesium carbonate are added to make it free-flowing.
Its major chemical products are caustic soda and chlorine, which are separated by the electrolysis of a pure brine solution.
The town gave its name to the Hallstatt culture that began mining for salt in the area in about 800 BC.
Salt is present in vast quantities in seawater, where it is the main mineral constituent.
A low salt diet results in a greater improvement in blood pressure in people with hypertension.
The raw salt is refined to purify it and improve its storage and handling characteristics.
Kosher salt, though refined, contains no iodine and has a much larger grain size than most refined salts.
Salt was prized by the ancient Hebrews, the Greeks, the Romans, the Byzantines, the Hittites and the Egyptians.
These are used in the manufacture of PVC, plastics, paper pulp and many other inorganic and organic compounds.
Salzach literally means "salt river" and Salzburg "salt castle", both taking their names from the German word  meaning salt and Hallstatt was the site of the world's first salt mine.
Around 400 BC, the townsfolk, who had previously used pickaxes and shovels, began open pan salt making.
It was of high value to the ancient Hebrews, the Greeks, the Romans, the Byzantines, the Hittites and other peoples of antiquity.
Some of the earliest evidence of salt processing dates to around 8,000 years ago, when people living in an area in what is now known as the country of Romania were boiling spring water to extract the salts; a salt-works in China dates to approximately the same period.
Salt was included among funeral offerings found in ancient Egyptian tombs from the third millennium BC, as were salted birds, and salt fish.
Salt is used in the third item (which includes an Exorcism) of the Celtic Consecration (''cf.''
Sodium is an essential nutrient for human health via its role as an electrolyte and osmotic solute.
One of the two most prominent dietary risks for disability in the world is eating too much salt.
Salzburg, Hallstatt, and Hallein lie within  of each other on the river Salzach in central Austria in an area with extensive salt deposits.
Its major industrial products are caustic soda and chlorine, and is used in many industrial processes including the manufacture of polyvinyl chloride, plastics, paper pulp and many other products.
Dairy salt is used in the preparation of butter and cheese products.
The calcium and magnesium salts confer a faintly bitter overtone, and they make unrefined sea salt hygroscopic (i.e., it gradually absorbs moisture from air if stored uncovered).
Bulgarians find oldest European town, a salt production center Even the name Solnisata means "salt works".
Folic acid helps prevent neural tube defects and anaemia, which affect young mothers, especially in developing countries.
Sediments, the proportion of which varies with the source, give the salt a dull grey appearance.
For this purpose, a layer of melted salt floats on top of the molten metal and removes iron and other metal contaminants.
While people have used canning and artificial refrigeration to preserve food for the last hundred years or so, salt has been the best-known food preservative, especially for meat, for many thousands of years.
An ancient practice in time of war was salting the earth: scattering salt around in a defeated city in order to prevent plant growth.
The word ''salad'' literally means "salted", and comes from the ancient Roman practice of salting leaf vegetables.
As an emulsifier, salt is used in the manufacture of synthetic rubber, and another use is in the firing of pottery, when salt added to the furnace vaporises before condensing onto the surface of the ceramic material, forming a strong glaze.
Both the European Union and the United States Food and Drug Administration permitted the use of aluminium in the latter two compounds.
During the first millennium BC, Celtic communities grew rich trading salt and salted meat to Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome in exchange for wine and other luxuries.
When drilling through loose materials such as sand or gravel, salt may be added to the drilling fluid to provide a stable "wall" to prevent the hole collapsing.
Mined salt is often refined in the production of table salt; it is dissolved in water, purified via precipitation of other minerals out of solution, and re-evaporated.
In France, 35% of the table salt sold contains added sodium fluoride.
Salt evaporation ponds are filled from the ocean and salt crystals can be harvested as the water dries up.
The mine has nineteen storeys, eleven of which are underground, and  of passages.
When salt is added during cooking however, these flavors would likely be overwhelmed by those of the food ingredients.
The practice is more common in some European countries where water fluoridation is not carried out.
One of the largest salt mining operations in the world is at the Khewra Salt Mine in Pakistan.
It is customary to spread some salt over the bread or to dip the bread in a little salt when passing the bread around the table after the Kiddush.
Some salt is produced using the Alberger process, which involves vacuum pan evaporation combined with the seeding of the solution with cubic crystals, and produces a grainy-type flake.
In "doubly fortified salt", both iodide and iron salts are added.
Wars have been fought over salt.
High salt intake is associated with a greater risk of stroke, total cardiovascular disease and kidney disease.
Each camel takes two bales of fodder and two of trade goods northwards and returns laden with salt pillars and dates.
A small amount of dextrose may also be added to stabilize the iodine.
Accordingly, numerous world health associations and experts in developed countries recommend reducing consumption of popular salty foods.
Extraction of Himalayan salt is expected to last 350 years at the present rate of extraction of around 385,000 tons per annum.
In Africa, salt was used as currency south of the Sahara, and slabs of rock salt were used as coins in Abyssinia.
The refined salt industry cites scientific studies saying that raw sea and rock salts do not contain enough iodine salts to prevent iodine deficiency diseases.
More recently, the process is performed in pans under vacuum.
In traditional Korean cuisine, so-called "bamboo salt" is prepared by roasting salt in a bamboo container plugged with mud at both ends.
All through history the availability of salt has been pivotal to civilization.
The salt extracted from this operation may have had a direct correlation to the rapid growth of this society's population soon after its initial production began.
In the early years of the Roman Empire, roads such as the Via Salaria were built for the transportation of salt from the salt pans of Ostia to the capital.
Some table salt sold for consumption contain additives which address a variety of health concerns, especially in the developing world.
Iodine is an important micronutrient for humans, and a deficiency of the element can cause lowered production of thyroxine (hypothyroidism) and enlargement of the thyroid gland (endemic goitre) in adults or cretinism in children.
The rest (68%) is used for manufacturing and other industrial processes, and sodium chloride is one of the largest inorganic raw materials used by volume.
Salt is mandatory in the rite of the Tridentine Mass.
It is often added to processed foods (such as canned foods and especially salted foods, pickled foods, and snack foods or other convenience foods), where it functions as both a preservative and a flavoring.
The high level of sodium in many processed foods has a major impact on the total amount consumed.
It is also believed to cleanse an area of harmful or negative energies.
Other uses include water conditioning processes, deicing highways, and agricultural use.
In Judaism, it is recommended to have either a salty bread or to add salt to the bread if this bread is unsalted when doing Kiddush for Shabbat.
Such health effects of salt have long been studied.
A very ancient salt-works operation has been discovered at the Poiana Slatinei archaeological site next to a salt spring in Lunca, Neamț County, Romania.
After being repealed, this tax was reimposed by Napoleon when he became emperor to pay for his foreign wars, and was not finally abolished until 1945.
