The Dark Arts Festival is an annual 3-day festival dedicated to the goth and industrial subcultures.
The population of the Salt Lake City metropolitan area is projected to double by 2040, putting further pressure on the region's air quality.
KTVX is the oldest TV station in the Mountain Time Zone and the third oldest west of the Mississippi.
In 2012, the Salt Lake Transportation Division launched ''BikeSLC.com'', which consolidates the city's information about bicycle routes, safety, and promotions.
The Utah Division of Air Quality closely monitors air quality and issues alerts for voluntary and mandatory actions when pollution exceeds federal safety standards.
Road names are numbered with a north, south, east, or west designation, with the grid originating at the southeast corner of Temple Square downtown.
The festival also hosts the Voice of the City film festival which allows local filmmakers to show their version of Salt Lake.
UTA's bus system extends throughout the Wasatch Front from Brigham City in the north to Santaquin in the south and as far west as Grantsville, as well as east to Park City.
The BTC is anticipated to serve multi-modal commuters from TRAX and ''FrontRunner'', as well as providing a secure bicycle parking space for bicycle tourists who want to tour the city on foot or transit.
Spring snowmelt from the surrounding mountains can cause localized stream flooding during late spring and early summer, the worst examples being in 1952 and especially 1983, when City Creek burst its banks, forcing city engineers to convert several downtown streets into waterways.
These can then be traded for culinary water rights to water imported into the valley.
This division set up Camp Floyd approximately  southwest of the city.
27.0% spoke a language other than English at home.
The second-highest mountain range is the Oquirrhs, reaching a maximum height of 10,620 feet (3,237 m) at Flat Top.
KSTU is the area's Fox affiliate.
As of the census of 2010, there are 186,440 people (up from 181,743 in 2000), 75,177 households, and 57,543 families residing in the city.
The other four councilors are staggered two years from the mayoral.
Immigration of international LDS members, mining booms, and the construction of the first transcontinental railroad initially brought economic growth, and the city was nicknamed the Crossroads of the West.
Its current music director is Thierry Fischer.
KSL is operated by Deseret Media Companies, a company owned by the LDS Church.
Subsequent development of water resources was from successively more southern streams flowing from the mountains to the east of the city.
The local Pagan community has enjoyed the annual Salt Lake City Pagan Pride Day since 2001.
Members of the steampunk subculture have an annual 2-day festival called "Steamfest" in Salt Lake City.
Explorer, ethnologist, and author Richard Francis Burton traveled by coach in the summer of 1860 to document life in Great Salt Lake City.
The large Pacific Islander population, mainly  Samoan and Tongan, is also centered in the Rose Park, Glendale, and Poplar Grove sectors.
The streets are relatively wide, at the direction of Brigham Young, who wanted them wide enough a wagon team could turn around without "resorting to profanity".
By state statute, members of the city council also serve as the governing board of the Redevelopment Agency of Salt Lake City.
Other more specialized publications include ''Now Salt Lake'', ''Salt Lake City Weekly'', ''Nuestro Mundo'' of the Spanish-speaking community,'' QSaltLake'' and ''The Pillar'' for the LBGT community.
Notable firms based in nearby cities within the metropolitan area include Arctic Circle Restaurants, FranklinCovey, and Overstock.com.
The Avenues, along with Federal Heights, just to the east and north of the University of Utah, and the Foothill area, south of the university, contain gated communities, large, multimillion-dollar houses, and fantastic views of the valley.
After the original AFL folded in 2009, the future of the Blaze was unclear.
Protests have been held at the Utah State Capitol and Democratic lawmakers have introduced legislation in the Utah State Legislature to make public transportation free during January and July, when air quality is usually at its worst.
The most popular is Temple Square, which includes the Salt Lake Temple (not open to the general public) and visitors' centers open to the public, free of charge.
The Utah Pride Festival is sponsored by the Utah Pride Center.
The Olympic Legacy Plaza, located at the Gateway District, features a dancing fountain set to music and the names of 30,000 Olympic volunteers carved in stone.
Both festivals are intended to inspire yogis in the community by teaching about yoga, healthy living, raw food, and traditional yoga music.
The area from South Temple North to 6th Avenue is a Historical District that is nearly entirely residential, and contains many historical Victorian era homes.
The many small reservoirs and rivers in the Wasatch Mountains are popular for boating, fishing, and other water-related activities.
The festival celebrated its 30th anniversary in 2015.
Salt Lake City provides many venues for both professional and amateur theatre.
'''Salt Lake City''', often shortened to '''Salt Lake''' or '''SLC''', is the capital and the most populous municipality of the U.S. state of Utah.
*33.4% from 25 to 44
Salt Lake City is home to a sizeable Bosnian American community of more than 8,000 residents.
The metabolic activities of bacteria in the lake result in a phenomenon known as "lake stink", a scent reminiscent of foul poultry eggs, two to three times per year for a few hours.
Other political leaders such as Howard Dean and Harry Reid gave speeches in the city in 2005.
The park is home to a large number of birds, both wild and in the aviary.
Salt Lake City has become a case of market saturation on the FM dial; one cannot go through more than about two frequencies on an FM radio tuner before encountering another broadcasting station.
The entire Salt Lake Valley is laid out on the same numbered grid system, although it becomes increasingly irregular further into the suburbs.
On 5 December 2007, the Salt Lake Chamber and Downtown Alliance announced a two-block section of downtown south of the planned City Creek Center is planned to become a new arts hub.
Just outside Salt Lake City limits, newer immigrant communities include Nepalis, and refugees of Karen origin from Myanmar (formerly Burma).
Sugar House, in southeastern Salt Lake City, has a reputation as an older neighborhood with lots of small shops in the center.
Salt Lake City was the first city in the United States to use the "Green Shared Lane", also known as a "super sharrow", a  wide green band down the middle of a travel lane where adding a dedicated bike lane is unfeasible.
People of many faiths, races, and backgrounds live in the neighborhoods of Rose Park, Westpointe, Poplar Grove, and Glendale.
Salt Lake City was host to the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Salt Lake City features large variations in temperatures between seasons.
Delta Air Lines operates a hub at the airport, serving over 100 non-stop destinations in the United States, Mexico, and Canada, as well as Paris and Amsterdam.
Attendance ranges from 35,000 to 50,000.
The Living Traditions Festival is a 3-day multicultural arts festival hosted by the Salt Lake City Arts Council.
From the last Monday in May to the last weekend in September, City Creek Canyon Road itself is closed to motor vehicles on odd-numbered days, while bicycles are prohibited on even-numbered days and holidays.
Its encircling mountains contain several narrow glacial and stream carved canyons.
Hogle Zoo is located across the street from the park.
The Centro Civico Mexicano acts as a community gathering point for the Wasatch Front's estimated 300,000 Latinos, Mexican President Vicente Fox began his U.S. tour in the city in 2006.
Sugar House is a friendly area which has been the focus of redevelopment efforts such as the UTA S-Line Streetcar.
KUCW is the CW affiliate and part of a duopoly with KTVX.
Stan Penfold was re-elected to a second term on the city council, while James Rogers, Erin Mendenhall and Lisa Ramsey Adams were elected to fill vacancies.
The Legacy Parkway (SR-67), a controversial and oft-delayed freeway, opened September 2008, heading north from I-215 into Davis County along the east shore of the Great Salt Lake.
Other notable firms headquartered in the city include AlphaGraphics, Sinclair Oil Corporation, Smith's Food and Drug (owned by national grocer Kroger), MonaVie, Myriad Genetics, and Vehix.com.
It has always been considered a classic and diverse area, although recently its affordability has attracted many professionals and the more youthful generation.
A division of the United States Army, commanded by Albert Sidney Johnston, later a general in the army of the Confederate States of America, marched through the city and found it had been evacuated.
Leaders of the Episcopal Church's Diocese of Utah, as well as leaders of Utah's largest Jewish congregation, the Salt Lake Kol Ami, along with three elected representatives of the city identify themselves as gay.
Salt Lake City lies at the convergence of two cross-country freeways; I-15, which runs north-to-south just west of downtown, and I-80, which connects downtown with Salt Lake City International Airport just to the west and exits to the east through Parley's Canyon.
A 2006 study by UCLA estimates approximately 7.6% of the city's population, or almost 14,000 people, are openly gay or bisexual, compared to just 3.7%, or just over 60,000 people, for the metropolitan area as a whole.
Local freeways were expanded and repaired, and a light rail system was constructed.
Candidates take office in January of the following year.
The festival focuses on independent, documentary, and foreign feature-length films surrounding LGBTQ issues, ideas, and art.
The University of Utah was a part of the controversy surrounding the fairness of the Bowl Championship Series (BCS) of college football.
Westfest is a festival that celebrates the establishment of West Valley and the suburb's various diverse cultures and community.
Local, state, and federal governments have a large presence in the city, and trade, transportation, and utilities also take up a significant portion of employment, with the major employer being the Delta hub at Salt Lake City International Airport.
In 2006, Real Madrid and many of the nation's best cyclist had engagements.
The performance of the protected bicycle lane (specifically, its role in encouraging more bicycle ridership) will influence future plans for making the city more bicycle-friendly.
The construction preceded in stages, with the last stage completed in late October 2014.
The festival promotes education, sustainability, and accessibility to green and organic products and services.
The Salt Lake Valley floor is the ancient lakebed of Lake Bonneville which existed at the end of the last Ice Age.
Salt Lake also has an underground metal scene, which includes bands such as Gaza and Bird Eater.
Other attractions in or within close proximity to Salt Lake City include Timpanogos Cave National Monument, the Golden Spike National Historic Site (where the world's first transcontinental railroad was joined), the Lagoon (amusement park), the Great Salt Lake, the Bonneville Salt Flats, Gardner Historic Village, one of the largest dinosaur museums in the U.S. at Thanksgiving Point in Lehi, and the world's largest man-made excavation at Bingham Canyon Mine.
The convention broke inaugural records in 2013, hosting the largest crowd of any inaugural comic convention.
India Fest is hosted by the Krishna Temples of Salt Lake City and Spanish Fork, Utah.
It combined several new office and residential buildings (one of which is the third-tallest building in the city) around an outdoor shopping center featuring a stream, fountain, and other outdoor amenities; it opened on 22 March 2012.
Several Lake Bonneville shorelines can be distinctly seen on the foothills or benches of nearby mountains.
Besides its central offices, the LDS Church owns and operates a for-profit division, Deseret Management Corporation and its subsidiaries, which are headquartered in the city.
It is one of only two major urban areas in the Great Basin (the other is Reno, Nevada), and the largest in the Intermountain West.
Salt Lake City's mass transit service is operated by the Utah Transit Authority (UTA) and includes a bus system, light rail, and a commuter rail line.
The proceeds go to local charities.
The Off-Broadway Theatre, located in Salt Lake's historic Clift Building, features comedy plays and Utah's longest-running improv comedy troupe, Laughing Stock.
Salt Lake City is home to one Fortune 500 company, Huntsman Corporation, and two Fortune 1000 companies, Zions Bancorporation and Questar Corporation.
European ethnic groups and East Coast missionary groups constructed St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral in 1874, the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine in 1909 and the Greek Orthodox Holy Trinity Cathedral in 1923.
Postsecondary educational options in Salt Lake City include the University of Utah, Westminster College, Salt Lake Community College, Stevens-Henager College, Eagle Gate College, The Art Institute of Salt Lake City, Violin Making School of America, and LDS Business College.
Charlie Luke, Chair (D)
Other notable historical buildings include the Thomas Kearns Mansion (now the Governor's Mansion), City and County Building, built in 1894, the Kearns Building on Main Street, St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral, built in 1874, and the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine, built in 1909.
This is a much lower proportion than in Utah's more rural municipalities; altogether, LDS members make up about 62% of Utah's population.
Vendors, food, music, and performances representing the cultures of China, Cambodia, Japan, Korea, Laos, Thailand, Indonesian, Filipino, Vietnamese, Hawaiian, and Tibetan are all present at the event.
The record high temperature is , which occurred first on 26 July 1960 and again on 13 July 2002, while the record low is , which occurred on 9 February 1933.
Salt Lake City is home to several museums.
The live music is different genres and bands from rock, hip hop, R&B, funk, and jazz.
Construction started in 1853, and the temple was dedicated on 6 April 1893.
The University of Utah campus is home to the Utah Museum of Fine Arts as well as the Natural History Museum of Utah.
It is estimated about 10% of the annual precipitation in the city can be attributed to the lake effect.
These services are all interconnected at the Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub (Salt Lake Central Station) located a short distance west of the city center.
The mayor and the seven councillors are elected to four-year terms.
These honorary names appear only on street signs and cannot be used in postal addresses.
In fact, the southeast corner of Temple Square is the initial point of reference for the Salt Lake Meridian, and for all addresses in the Salt Lake Valley.
Real Salt Lake of Major League Soccer was founded in 2004, initially playing at Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah before the soccer-specific Rio Tinto Stadium was completed in 2008 in neighboring Sandy.
Many Catholic schools are located in the city, including Judge Memorial Catholic High School.
Sugar House Park is the second largest park in the city, and is host to frequent outdoor events and the primary Fourth of July fireworks in the city.
The festival features local artists, performances, music, food, and vendors.
Some streets have names, such as State Street, which would otherwise be known as 100 East.
The U.S. Volleyball Association convention in 2005 drew 39,500 attendees.
Light rail transit returned to the city when UTA's TRAX opened in 1999.
'''Assumed office'''
The LDS Church began their eventual abandonment of polygamy in 1890, releasing "The Manifesto", which officially suggested members obey the law of the land (which was equivalent to forbidding new polygamous marriages inside the U.S. and its territories, but not in Mormon settlements in Canada and Mexico).
The free festival hosts speakers, vendors, food, performing art, a Goddess pageant, and children's garden.
A major concern of recent government officials has been combating inner-city commercial decay.
The zine trimmed the submissions to 59 selections featuring diverse music types such as hip-hop, jazz, jazz-rock, punk and a variety of rock and roll.
The remnants of Hurricane Olivia helped bring the record monthly precipitation of  in September 1982.
The Salt Lake City International Tattoo Convention brings in various artists from around the United States and world.
The Jordan River flows through the city and is a drainage of Utah Lake that empties into the Great Salt Lake.
Utah became the first state outside Minnesota where bandy exists when Olympic Bandy Club was formed in Salt Lake City.
Jackie Biskupski (D)
Sandy, another suburb of Salt Lake City, holds a Hot Air Balloon Festival at the end of summer.
However, a new league branded as the Arena Football League began play in 2010.
The airport ranks as the 21st busiest airport in the United States in total passengers, is consistently rated first in the country in on-time arrivals and departures, and has the second-lowest number of cancellations.
The Jewish Arts Festival, hosted by the IJ and Jeanné Wagner JCC of Salt Lake City, showcases Jewish culture through workshops, theater, food, film, art, and contemporary music from the local and global Jewish communities.
Professional dance companies in Salt Lake City include Ballet West, Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company (which celebrated its 45th anniversary season in 2008/2009) and Repertory Dance Theatre.
The Red Line, which originally opened in 2001 and was expanded in 2011, runs from the University of Utah, south-west through Salt Lake to the community of Daybreak in South Jordan.
Presently, the city has gained an estimated 5 percent of its population since the year 2000.
In his plan the city was to be developed into 135  lots.
It was traversed by the Lincoln Highway, the first transcontinental highway, in 1913, and presently two major cross-country freeways, I-15 and I-80, intersect in the city.
The theater plans have come under criticism, however, especially from nearby smaller theaters which host Off-Broadway tours and claim such a theater cannot be supported and will hurt their business.
There are a number of local magazines, such as ''Wasatch Journal'' (a quarterly magazine covering Utah's arts, culture, and outdoors), ''Utah Homes & Garden'', ''Salt Lake Magazine'' (a bimonthly lifestyle magazine), ''CATALYST Magazine'' (a monthly environmental, health, arts and politics magazine), ''SLUG Magazine'', an alternative underground music magazine.
Eight ski resorts lie within  of the city.
Adjacent to Temple Square is also the Eagle Gate Monument.
Their name was changed to the Stingers in 2002 and to the Bees, a historical Salt Lake City baseball team name, in 2006.
Vivint Smart Home Arena
Males have a median income of $31,511 versus $26,403 for females.
The free festival draws over 20,000 attendees and features artists displaying and selling paintings, sculpture, photography, and jewelry.
The Mormon pioneers organized a new state called Deseret and petitioned for its recognition in 1849.
Print media include two major daily newspapers, ''The Salt Lake Tribune'' and the ''Deseret News'' (previously the ''Deseret Morning News'').
In 2002, Utah Symphony merged with Utah Opera, which was founded in 1978 by Glade Peterson and under current Artistic Director Christopher McBeth presents four opera productions at Capitol Theatre in downtown Salt Lake City.
It celebrated its 10th anniversary in 2013.
The Great Salt Lake is separated from Salt Lake City by extensive marshlands and mudflats.
Today, however, less than half the population of Salt Lake City proper are members of the LDS Church.
As a result, the population of the surrounding metropolitan area greatly outnumbers Salt Lake City.
Near the mouth of Emigration Canyon lies This Is The Place Heritage Park, which re-creates typical 19th century LDS pioneer life.
The mountains near Salt Lake City are easily visible from the city and have sharp vertical relief caused by massive ancient earthquakes, with a maximum difference of 7,099 feet (2164 m) being achieved with the rise of Twin Peaks from the Salt Lake Valley floor.
Erin Mendenhall (D)
Many consider this some of the most desirable real estate in the valley.
As of the launch of the program, there were 10 stations located in the downtown core.
A 2008 study by the magazines ''Men's Health'' and ''Women's Health'' found Salt Lake City to be the healthiest city for women by looking at 38 different factors, including cancer rates, air quality, and the number of gym memberships.
Of the 75,177 households, 3,904 were reported to be unmarried partner households: 3,047 heterosexual, 458 same-sex male, and 399 same-sex female.
Salt Lake City also hosts portions of the Sundance Film Festival.
The Utah Warriors were a rugby union team that competed in the Rugby Super League in 2011, playing their home games at Rio Tinto Stadium.
As a result of this increasing support, Salt Lake City's on-road bikeway network has grown to encompass 200 lane miles.
The University of Utah was the first school from a non-BCS conference to win two BCS bowl games (and was the first from outside the BCS affiliated conferences to be invited to one) since the system was introduced in 1998.
Jordan Park is home to the International Peace Gardens.
The headquarters of the event is in nearby Park City.
Due to its proximity to the Great Salt Lake, the city was originally named "Great Salt Lake City"—the word "great" was dropped from the official name in 1868 by the 17th Utah Territorial Legislature.
The Utah Grizzlies hockey team of the ECHL were established in 2005, replacing the previous Grizzlies team that existed from when they relocated from Denver in 1995 to 2005 in the International Hockey League (IHL) and, later, the American Hockey League (AHL).
Most of them came to Salt Lake City during the Bosnian War in the 1990s.
Salt Lake City has begun to host its own events in the last few years, most notably the Friday Night Flicks, free movies in the city's parks, as well as the Mayor's health and fitness awareness program, Salt Lake City Gets Fit.
Festa Italian is a 2-day festival that highlights various regions of Italy with live music, food, wine, beer and entertainment.
A third line, known as the Green Line, opened in 2011 and runs from the Salt Lake City International Airport to West Valley City (via Downtown Salt Lake City), with the extension to the airport having opened in April 2013.
The festival includes hundreds of vendors, food, music stars, a 5k run, a dyke and trans march, as well as an interfaith service by the Utah Pride Interfaith Coalition.
The Chinese businesses and residences were demolished in 1952 although a historical marker has been erected near the parking ramp which has replaced Plum Alley.
Fireworks can be legally sold and set off around 24 July.
The orchestra's original home was the Salt Lake Tabernacle, but since 1979 has performed at Abravanel Hall in the western downtown area.
It is Salt Lake City's current ABC affiliate.
Since the 2000 Census, the Census Bureau has added Summit and Tooele counties to the Salt Lake City metropolitan area, but removed Davis and Weber counties and designated them as the separate Ogden-Clearfield metropolitan area.
The burgeoning population of Salt Lake City and the surrounding metropolitan area, combined with its geographical situation, has led to air quality becoming a top concern for the populace.
The remnants of tropical cyclones from the East Pacific can rarely reach the city during Fall.
The opening of the new facilities were anticipated to coincide with the opening of the City Creek Center in 2011, but have yet to be completed.
They found the broad valley empty of any human settlement.
Most major streets run very nearly north-south and east-west.
Lisa Ramsey Adams (R)
Other economic activities include tourism, conventions, and major suburban call centers.
Fantasy Con hosted its first convention, the first of its kind, in Salt Lake City in 2014.
These extensions were made possible by a sales tax hike for road improvements, light rail, and commuter rail approved by voters on 7 November 2006.
Salt Lake City is home to the Utah Jazz of the National Basketball Association (NBA), who moved from New Orleans in 1979 and play their home games in Vivint Smart Home Arena (formerly known as the Delta Center and later known as EnergySolutions Arena).
Because of this, Salt Lake Comic Con started having a second event, FanX (Fan Experience) to give those who were not able to come to the fall Comic Con an opportunity in the spring.
However, downtown was hit by an F2 tornado on 11 August 1999, killing 1 person, injuring 60, and causing $170 million in damage.
The festival celebrates traditional dance, music, crafts and food from the various contemporary ethnic communities of Salt Lake City.
The west side of the city has historically been more culturally diverse.
Pacific Coast League
This region is a corridor of contiguous urban and suburban development stretched along an approximately  segment of the Wasatch Front, comprising a total population of 2,423,912 .
The website includes a form for business owners to request bicycle racks to be installed on public property free of charge close to their businesses, a service that has a months-long waiting list.
With an estimated population of 190,884 in 2014, the city lies at the core of the Salt Lake City metropolitan area, which has a total population of 1,153,340 (2014 estimate).
The Sugar House neighborhood holds an annual arts festival on 4 July.
The convention was sued by San Diego Comic Con, but won the right to use the trademark of comic con in its name.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, an extensive streetcar system was constructed throughout the city with the first streetcar running in 1872 and electrification of the system in 1889.
In 2004 over 200 bands submitted tracks for a compilation by a local music zine, ''SLUG Magazine''.
The Live Green SLC!
