Van den Berg'' (Mr. From the Mountain) is named ''Jan'' (John) so his name is written with first name as ''Jan van den Berg'' and with initials as ''J.
** for other members of the army: ''Monsieur / Madame''.
;Formal salutations.
In case the author and the recipients are close friends or intimates, one may use the given name of the recipient immediately after ''Cher/Chère''.
In very formal situations there can be slight variations in the choice of wording.
: '''Dear Sir''' (If the reader is male or the gender unknown.
: if the writer knows well the priest/monk/nun recipient, it is possible to use ''(Très) Cher Père,'' ''(Très) Cher Frère,'' ''(Très) Chère Mère,'' ''(Très) Chère Sœur,'': "(Most) Dear Father/Brother/Mother/Sister".
Each military or ecclesiastic rank has one abbreviation, and, historically, nobility ranks also had one - for example, one of the ways of addressing the Portuguese Monarch would be ''Sua Majestade'' (Your Majesty) abbreviated as ''S.M.''
In correspondence and during conversations, Ukrainian speakers use the words "Шановний/Шановна" (Shanovnyy/Shanovna) or "Вельмишановний/Вельмишановна" (according to male/female gender) as a salutation, followed by the given name (sometimes also uses patronymic).
It is commonly followed either by an honorific and a surname, such as "Dear Mr. Smith", or by a given name, such as "Dear Mark".
However, there is a tendency, especially among the younger generations, to also use this salutation in formal situations."
: ''Car@'' for when the gender of the addressee is unknown or must not be mentioned;
Like most other languages, gender doesn't play a role in the salutation.
: ''Onorate Domnule Ungureanu'' (understood as something like: "Honoured Mr. ...", is used in formal letters, usually has the same power as "Mult stimate ...")
** for a king/queen: ''Sire,'' / ''Madame,''
: ''Cara'' for a woman;
: '''Beste meneer''' , (If the reader is Male).
In addition, a suffix "garu" ( గారు ) is added as a respect or to address an elderly person irrespective of gender.
This was reflected in written communication from that period.
When addressing somebody in formal writing, one can use "Sayın ''Surname''" without having to refer to the gender.
For some specific professions (lawyers, physicians, for instance), two persons exercising the same such profession will always use ''Cher Confrère'' (feminine: ''Chère Consœur'').
** for a female general officer (except navy): ''Général'',
Most expressions must be modified to account for addressee gender and number.
Salutations can be formal or informal.
: ''Mult stimată Doamnă Președinte'' (for a president, woman)
Further details in the German Wikipedia article :de:Anrede
For other doctors, it is not common, even if the use is increasing, following the Anglo-Saxon custom.
The most common form of salutation in an English letter is Dear followed by the recipient's given name or title.
: ''Mult stimate Domnule Director'' (for a director, man)
Not as simple as "hola" but can be used in every situation.
You can also use "Ilustrísimo" (male) or "Ilustrísima" (female) instead of "Excelentísimo".
: '''Geachte mevrouw''' , (If the reader is Female).
"Sr." is the abbreviation).
"Ms." is the marital-status-neutral salutation for an adult woman and may be applied in cases in which the marital status is irrelevant or unknown to the author.
A salutation can be interpreted as a form of a signal in which the receiver of the salutation is being acknowledged, respected or thanked.
It is commonly followed by either an honorific and a surname, such as "Srohdeho/Jonab", or by a given name, such as "Srohdeho/Jonab John".
In case they are family, they may use their familial link preceded by ''Cher/Chère''.
** for a catholic or orthodox parish priest / archpriest / priest: ''Mon Père'' or ''Monsieur le Curé / l'Archiprêtre / l'Abbé''
For each style of salutation there is an accompanying style of complimentary close, known as valediction.
If the name and the gender of the intended recipient is known though, acceptable salutations are;
Informal salutations in German tend to begin with ''Hallo'', meaning "hello", which is used universally, written and spoken, and which is gender neutral.
: ''Madame l'Ambassadrice,'' (for the wife of an ambassador)
శ్రీమతి సుబ్బలక్ష్మి గారికి, (Mrs. Subbalakshmi)
'''Bey''' (if the intended recipient is male).
: ''Stimate Domn, Stimată Doamnă'' (used when the reader is unknown)
Example for a woman called Ana Sánchez: "Estimada Ana" or "Estimada Sra.
* for catholic or orthodox clerics:
"Miss" is the proper form of address for female children and unmarried women, although some consider the latter use to be dated.
: ''Stimate Tovarășe Ungureanu''; ''Stimată Cetățeancă Ungureanu''; ''Stimate Cetățean Ungureanu''
A salutation using ''Chère/Cher'' and a title (''Madame/Monsieur/Docteur'') followed by a person's name (e.g.
: ''Onorați Reprezentanți'' (addressed to a group of representatives)
** for the Pope: ''Très Saint Père,'' ''humblement prosterné aux pieds de Votre Sainteté et implorant la faveur de la bénédiction apostolique,''  ("Most Holy Father, humbly bowing down before the feet of Your Holiness and begging for the favour of the apostolic benediction,")
: ''Stimate Domnule Dr. Ungureanu''; ''Stimate Domnule Doctor'' (the former shows more respect)
: '''Beste''' , (For either Male and Female readers).
In the vast majority of names, the (first) prefix is always capitalized.
The salutation "Dear" in combination with a name or a title is by far the most commonly used salutation in both British and US English, in both formal and informal correspondence.
: '''Geachte heer''' , (If the reader is Male).
"Miss" can apply to specifically unmarried women, however the term is being replaced more and more by ''Ms''.
An exception is ''Dr.''
Depending on the region, informal salutations also tend to begin with ''Moin'' (north of Hannover), ''Servus'' (typically in the south and south west), or other words, although only used by locals.
For bishops/archbishops/patriarchs it is possible to be more formal and write ''Monseigneur l'Évèque / l'Archevêque / le Patriarche,''
The most widespread salutation for informal letters is, by a large margin, ''dragă'' (equivalent to English ''dear'').
This can be used independently of the recipient's gender and is normally followed by the first name.
Examples of non-written salutations are bowing (common in Japan) or even addressing somebody by their name.
: '''Jahar Proti Iha projojjo''' (if the writer wishes to exclude the gender of the reader from the salutation and/or to convey that the reader should forward the copy to one more suited to receive or respond appropriately).
(Engineer), ''Padre'' - ''Pe.''
For unmarried and young boys Kumar is used, whereas Kumari is the salutation used for unmarried and young girls.
The feminine ''profesoară universitară'' is not in common use.
: '''Geachte heer/mevrouw''' , (If the gender of the reader is unknown).
Another simple but very common example of a salutation is a military salute.
Messrs is the abbreviation (pronounced "messers") for messieurs and is used in English.
Note that some titles may lose their intended meaning when used in their feminine form.
* for monarchs and members of their families or high nobility:
However, it is not common in English to use ''both'' a title of address ''and'' a person's given name: "Dear Mr. John Smith" would not be common form.
** for a female superior officer (except navy): ''Colonel / Commandant'' according to the rank of the officer,
Specific salutations appear in German very similar to the way they do in English, with the exception that in the address block of a letter German must include all or multiple salutations that can be abbreviated ''Herr Dr. Schmidt'', or ''Herr Prof. Dr.-Ing.
to address people, preferring ''tovarăș'' (comrade) or ''cetățean'' (citizen) instead.
: '''Beste mevrouw''' , (If the reader is Female).
(Mr.) and almost always abbreviated (e.g.
In the informal way "Kizim" and "Oglum" are enough without having to use "Hanim/Bey".
*In the Netherlands the (first) prefix of the name is always capitalized
To be used from Noon or 1pm up to the sunset.
: ''Madame la Colonelle,'' (for the wife of a colonel)
If the name of the intended recipient is unknown, acceptable salutations are:
"Mrs." denotes an adult female who is married.
* A quien corresponda
The oldest surviving document written in Romanian, a 16th-century letter from a Wallachian boyar to the mayor of Brașov, contained a salutation in Slavonic, a ''lingua franca'' of the region at that time.
"Master" is used in formal situations for addressing boys typically aged under 16, after which it is "Mr".
: ''Maestro/Maestra'' for orchestra directors, choir directors and soloists
''Madame '''la Présidente''', Madame '''la Professeure''', Madame '''la Directrice'''.'')
When the surname is intended to be used, it is combined with "Sayin" instead.
Note also that in Québécois usage, many titles will be rendered in the feminine, contrary to practice in France (i.e.
: ''Stimate Domnule Profesor Ungureanu''; ''Stimate Domnule Profesor''; ''Stimate Domnule Prof. Ungureanu'' (first two versions are better)
Equivalent to good afternoon.
** for a catholic prelate or a catholic or orthodox bishop, archbishop or patriarch: ''Monseigneur,'' ("Mylord").
: '''Sroddheo''' (if the gender of the reader is unknown).
: ''Caros'' for a group of men or a mixed group of men and women;
(To the most wise and noble and honoured and by God gifted master Hanăș Bengner that is, Johannes Benkner from Brașov, much health from Neacșu from Câmpulung.)
: ''Gentile Signora'' for a married woman or a single woman (once it was used also for a single woman of high rank or age)
Dr. h.c. Krämer'', and can leave out the ''Herr'' or ''Frau''.
Since the advent of e-mail, the '''@''' symbol has been used, informally, to stand for '''a''' and '''o''' simultaneously, hence:
in short for married women
'''Hanim''' (if the intended recipient is female),
''Sehr geehrter Herr Schmidt'' or ''Sehr geehrte Frau Dr. Schmidt'').
This is often done for doctors of medicine.
The second may be used in some instances, for example if writing to a teacher.
It should be used with care because it can be otherwise perceived as patronizing or inappropriate, depending on the difference in age or social status.
Salutation to unknown persons often use "Пан/Пані" (Pan/Pani) (according to gender) or "Панове", "Панство" (Panove/Panstvo) (to unknown parties).
The salutation "Dear" in combination with a name or a title is by far the most commonly used salutation in Bengali, in both formal and informal correspondence.
In Dutch if the first name or initial is included, the prefix is never capitalized.
In a formal salutation, if the recipient's name is unknown, one uses "Sayın Yetkili", which is similar to "Dear Sir/Madam" in English.
When addressing groups, the latter is preferred.
Shri is most commonly used salutation in Hindi for a married male, while for a married woman, Shrimati is used.
''Arquitecto'' - ''Arq.''
However, it is not common in Bengali to use ''both'' a title of address ''and'' a person's given name: "Srodeho/Jonab John Smith" would not be correct form.
;Intermediate salutations.
For example, if one is writing a business letter to a woman, "Ms." is acceptable.
In the latter case this can be politically controversial with some seeing it as sexist but it is acceptable traditional English).
: '''Geachte mejuffrouw''' , (If the reader is Female, unmarried and younger than 25, this is very uncommon, archaic and nowadays considered patronizing).
* "Estimados amigos" (plural) When your letter is addressed to a group of people.
While in the opening of a letter the direct salutation is reduced to only the most important title ''Sehr geehrter Herr Dr. Schmidt'', or ''Sehr geehrter Herr Professor Krämer''.
** for a nun: ''Ma Mère'' ("My Mother") or ''Ma Sœur'' ("My Sister"), depending on the order
However, maybe following English usage, such a construction is now rather common and deemed relatively formal.
శ్రీ నరసింహ రాజు గారు, (Mr. Narasimharaju,)
When addressing a formal letter whose recipient is not known by name, the salutation of preference is ''Stimate Domn, Stimată Doamnă'' (equivalent to ''Dear Sir or Madam'' in English).
When addressing a person  who is younger, "Chiranjeevi" ( చిరంజీవి ) is commonly used irrespective of all genders.
Written salutation includes "Thiru/Thiruvalar" "திரு/திருவாளர்" for men, "Thirumathi"/"திருமதி" for women, "Selvi/Thiruniraiselvi" "செல்வி/திருநிறைச்செல்வி" for unmarried women and "Selvan/Thiruniraiselvan" "செல்வன்/திருநிறைச்செல்வன்" for unmarried men.
(Architect), ''Engenheiro'' - ''Eng.''
For instance, one will use:
* "Estimado" (+ name or title "Señor".
Formal ways of salutation include "Sri", "Sriman", "Srimati", "Chiranjeev", "Chiranjeevi Saubhagyavathi" and "Kumari".
An alternative which is less familiar is ''salut'' (equivalent to English ''hi'', ''hello''), followed by the first name.
* "Estimado amigo" or "Querido amigo" (male or unknown gender).
instead used to address anyone holding a baccalaureate degree.
: ''Onorată Comisie'' (addressed to a group of people, for example a commission)
చిరంజీవి శ్రీజన్య, (Little Miss Sreejanya,)
: ''Salut Ruxanda''; ''Salut Mihai''
** for a sovereign prince/princess, a sovereign duke/duchess, a prince/princess of royal blood, a pretendent to a throne, etc.
Most often, more emphasis is added to the adjective ''stimat'' (esteemed), becoming ''mult stimat'' (much esteemed) or ''onorat'' (honoured).
When an older person salutes a younger one in a formal way, he/she can refer to the younger person as "Hanim kizim" for females and "Bey oglum" for males where "kizim" is intended as "daughter" and "oglum" is intended as "son".
A '''salutation''' is a greeting used in a letter or other written or non-written communication.
You may or not know the name of the person.
"Miss" can apply to an unmarried woman or more generally to a younger woman.
From the sunset to the moment that you go to bed.
Due to insufficient functionality of computer software used for mass communication, some companies tend to use more clumsy gender neutral formal salutations (e. g. ''Sehr geehrte(r) Herr/ Frau Schmidt'').
It is  common to conclude the salutation with a Doa such as ''May god bless him/her'' or ''May god protect him/her''.
The formal salutation, "Geachte", is most commonly used in present formal communication, while the informal salutation "Beste" appears in informal communication.
When the recipient is known by name, ''Stimate Domnule'' or ''Stimată Doamnă'', followed by the person's last name, is used for a man or a woman respectively.
The standard informal Dutch salutation is followed by a name and a comma:
Mesdames addresses many women; pronounced "Meydammes".
: '''To Whom It May Concern''' (If the writer wishes to exclude the gender of the reader from the salutation and/or to convey that the reader should forward the copy to one more suited to receive or respond appropriately).
To be used from when you wake up to Noon or 1pm.
The formal form distinguishes between the male or female gender of the recipient as a matter of courtesy.
"Shrimati" (Abbr: "Smt.")
Dignitaries and holders of certain public office like "Mr. President" or "Dear Madam Secretary".
If the informal Dutch salutation is used in a formal context, the salutation is followed by a title, a name and a comma:
Dutch has two standard forms of salutation: one formal and the other informal.
Basically one has to be consistent with the address: a letter sent to "Dr N. N." will use a salutation formula including ''Docteur'', whereas a letter sent to "M./Mme N. N." will not.
: ''Stimată Doamnă Ungureanu,''(the reader is a woman and the last name is known, the most commonly used version)
Examples for use of titles:
For unmarried women, ''Stimată Domnișoară'' is acceptable for close relations, though this title is falling out of use in written communication and can be considered inappropriate or offensive.
or ''Messieurs'' is an historically used term to address many men rather than "Mr Pink, Mr White, et al."
* "Estimada amiga" or "Querida amiga" (female).
This convention is also used when writing in Dutch to people of foreign nationality.
The formal expression ''Excelentíssimo Senhor'' is often abbreviated as:
A more personal informal salutation begins with ''Lieber'' (male) or ''Liebe'' (female), meaning "dear", (e.g.
In this case, one should always use ''Madame'', and never ''Mademoiselle''.
"Kumari" ( కుమారి ) is sometimes used for unmarried women and "Chiranjeevi Lakshmi Sowbhagyavathi ( చిరంజీవి లక్ష్మీ సౌభాగ్యవతి ) , Chi.
This is almost compulsory if the author is a younger member of the family (child to parent, nephew to aunt/uncle, grandchild to grandparent, godchild to godparent) and is left to the author's discretion in other cases.
Use of professional titles, especially unabbreviated, is uncommon in Dutch correspondence.
: ''Madame la Générale,'' (for the wife of a  officer)
If the name of the intended recipient is unknown, acceptable salutations are:
: '''Dear Madam''' (If the reader is female).
This version is typical of the workplace, where using ''dragă'' would be too familiar.
In Turkish, there are two forms of salutations, formal and informal.
Some greetings are considered vulgar, others "rude" and others "polite".
The exception to this rule is when writing to a Flemish person.
: '''Dear Sir or Madam''' or "Sir/Madam" (If the gender of the reader is unknown).
These salutations are used with the first names.
** for the superior of a catholic or orthodox religious order: ''Mon Très Révérend Père'' or ''Révérendissime Père'' / ''Ma Très Révérende Mère'' or ''Révérendissime Mère'' ("Most Reverend Father/Mother").
This Concluding Doa comes right after the full name of the correspondent.
A comma follows the salutation and name, while a colon is used in place of a comma only in US business correspondence.
Addressee titles can be professional and are often preceded by ''Sr.''
: '''Sneher''' (if address someone younger).
If the recipient has multiple titles, generally only the most important one is used.
By saluting another rank, that person is signalling or showing his or her acknowledgment of the importance or significance of that person and his or her rank.
Various forms of salutation in Telugu are as follows: "Sri / Shri" ( శ్రీ ) is used to address men, "Srimathi / Shrimathi" ( శ్రీమతి ) is reserved for married woman.
It is possible but uncommon to include the full name (e.g.
Equivalent to good evening and good night.
** for a navy superior officer: ''Commandant''
** ''Monsieur le Cardinal,'' or less formally ''Éminence,'' (formerly ''(Illustrissime et) Éminentissime Seigneur'', "(Most Illustrious and) Most Eminent Lord", now disused) for a Cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church
In older British usage and current US usage, the abbreviations "Mr.", "Mrs.", "Dr.", and "Ms." are typically followed by a period (full stop), but it is common in recent British usage to drop the period after all such titles.
గంగా భాఘీరతి సమానులైన శ్రీమతి సూర్య కుమారి గారికి, (Mrs. Suryakumari, )
These can be used in oral or written Spanish.
The same salutation is used for famous writers, painters, and for members of the Académie française.
చందన కు, (Mrs. Chandana,)
* "Excelentísimo Señor" (+name or without it) or "Excelentísima Señora" (female).
Today, salutations using the distinctly communist-sounding ''tovarăș'' or ''cetățean'' are only used in closed communist circles or humorously.
: ''Девушка'' (addressing a young woman)
On occasion, one may use "Sir" and/or "Madam" by itself as the salutation, with nothing preceding.
