Increased sweating: 28.2%
Effects include temporary speech and coordination loss.
It is also used remedially at lower dosages as a diuretic, and to treat ailments including diarrhea, anemia, headaches, rheumatism, and a semi-magical disease known as ''panzón de borrego'', or a swollen belly (literally, "lamb belly").
Extracts reduce the overall amount of inhalations needed to ingest a given amount of active principle, thus facilitating more powerful experiences.
diarrhea), through a combination of κ-opioid and cannabinoid (mainly CB1 receptor) receptors in ''inflamed'' but not normal gut ''in vivo''.
Senator McDonald of Nebraska proposed Schedule I listing ''Salvia divinorum'' as part of their Controlled Substances Act, under which possession of salvia would have been considered a Class IV felony with a penalty of up to five years and trafficking would have fallen under a Class III felony with up to a 20 year penalty.
Wasson's speculation has been the subject of further debate amongst ethnobotanists, with some scepticism coming from Leander J. Valdés, and counterpoints more supportive of Wasson's theory from Jonathan Ott.
Other commonly reported effects include:
The origin of ''Salvia divinorum'' is still a mystery, one of only three plants in the extensive ''Salvia'' genus (approximately 900 species) with unknown origins—the other two are ''Salvia tingitana'' and ''Salvia buchananii''.
Modern methods have been developed to more effectively absorb the active principle, salvinorin A.
Doses for chewing vastly exceed doses used for smoking.
Thomas Prisinzano, assistant professor of medicinal and natural products chemistry at the University of Iowa, has suggested that salvia may help treat cocaine addiction:
The issue has been raised of whether the salvia videos are in breach of YouTube's own community guidelines, which ask users not to "cross the line" and post videos showing "bad stuff" like "drug abuse".
Concerns about driving while under the influence of salvia have also been expressed.
Aside from individual reported experiences there has been a limited amount of published work summarising salvia divinorum effects.
A survey of salvia users found that 38% described the effects as unique in comparison to other methods of altering consciousness.
* Visions of membranes, films, various two-dimensional surfaces, and fractal patterns
Chewing and swallowing a large number of fresh leaves is the other Mazatec method.
* Feelings of calmness: 42.2%
divinorum'' is also known as ''la hembra'' ("the female"), when it is included by the Mazatec as part of a family of similar religious hallucinogens.
When taken as a tincture the effects and duration are similar to other methods of oral ingestion, though they may be significantly more intense, depending on extract potency.
''Salvia divinorum'' is considered a Schedule 9 prohibited plant in Australia under the Poisons Standard (October 2015).
Its most common habitat is black soil along stream banks where small trees and bushes provide an environment of low light and high humidity.
There are many common names for ''S.
Decreased insight: 1.8%
Psychedelic experiences, like Altered States of Consciosness as such, are necessarily somewhat subjective and variations in reported subjective experiences are to be expected.
Chewing consumes more of the plant than smoking, and produces a longer-lasting experience.
Some of Brett's earlier writings about his salvia experiences have been used to suggest that it made him think "existence in general is pointless."
Brett said that he had ceased his experimentation, but his parents did not believe that he was telling the truth.
In a local news report aired on ABC affiliate WJLA in Washington, DC on July 11, 2007, the anchors are seen to exchange expressions of incredulity when referring to a salvia story with the following introduction "Now, an exclusive I-Team investigation of a hallucinogenic drug that has begun to sweep the nation.
The '' Salvia Divinorum User's Guide'' recommends having a trip sitter present to those who are new to salvia, are experimenting with a stronger form, or are using a more effective method of ingestion.
Reportedly, some months before this, Brett's mother Kathleen Chidester had learned about his salvia use and questioned him about it.
The bill did not pass.
There are two commonly cultivated strains which are known to be distinct.
Kathleen Chidester has continued campaigning for "Schedule I"-like legislation beyond their home state of Delaware.
It's my son's legacy and I will not end my fight until this happens."
About half of users report a pleasing 'afterglow', or pleasant state of mind following the main effects.
''5x'', ''10x''), the multiplicative factors being generally indicative of the relative amounts of leaf concentrate, though there is no accepted standard for these claims.
''Salvia divinorum'' was first documented in 1939, but it was many years before botanists could identify the plant due to Mazatec secrecy about the growing sites.
Decreased sweating: 1.6%
Body felt warm or hot: 25.2%
One firsthand journalistic account has been published in the UK science magazine ''New Scientist'' (note: the dose for this experience was not reported):
Some arguments against salvia have been of a preventative nature, "We need to stop this before it gets to be a huge problem not after it gets to be a huge problem," or of an imitative nature, "The Australians have clearly found a problem with it.
The experience, from the onset of effects, lasts from about 30 minutes up to one and a half hours.
This is administered sublingually, usually with the aid of a glass dropper.
Mazatec shamans have a long and continuous tradition of religious use of ''Salvia divinorum'', using it to facilitate visionary states of consciousness during spiritual healing sessions.
divinorum'' was referred to as "hoja de adivinacion" (leaf of prophecy) by the Cuicatec and Mazatec.
* Mind racing: 23.2%
The flowers, which bloom only rarely, grow in whorls on a  inflorescence, with about six flowers to each whorl.
There has been one report of salvia precipitating psychosis.
0.6% percent of respondents reported feeling addicted to or dependent on salvia at some point, and 1.2% reported strong cravings.
Turner's book ''Salvinorin—The Psychedelic Essence of Salvia Divinorum'' quotes Daniel Siebert's summarisation, mentioning that the effects may include:
Increased self-confidence: 21.6%
Salvinorin A has no actions at the 5-HT2A serotonin receptor, the principal molecular target responsible for the actions of 'classic' hallucinogens, such as mescaline and LSD, nor is it known to have affinity for any other sites to date.
The likeliest explanations are inbreeding depression or hybridity.
divinorum'') speaks with a quiet voice."
A second motion raised in October 2008 attracted 18 signatures, and it was reported that Mann had also written to Jacqui Smith, then Home Secretary.
If salvia is smoked, then the main effects are experienced quickly.
Small cuttings, between two and eight inches long, cut off of the mother plant just below a node, will usually root in plain tap water within two or three weeks.
At 5–10 minutes, less intense yet still noticeable effects typically persist, giving way to a returning sense of the everyday and familiar until back to baseline after about 15 to 20 minutes.
Decreased connection with Universe or Nature: 5.4%
''Salvia divinorum'' is native to the Sierra Mazateca in Oaxaca, Mexico, where it is still used by the Mazatec, primarily to facilitate shamanic visions in the context of curing or divination.
After the peak effects, normal awareness-of-self and the immediate surroundings return but lingering effects may be felt.
Those opposed to bill HR 5607 include Daniel Siebert, who sent a letter to Congress arguing against the proposed legislation, and the Center for Cognitive Liberty and Ethics (CCLE), who sent key members of the US Congress a report on ''Salvia divinorum'' and its active principle, along with letters from an array of scientists who expressed concern that scheduling ''Salvia divinorum'' would negatively impact important research on the plant.
Media stories generally raise alarms over ''Salvia divinorum'''s legal status and are sometimes headlined with comparisons to LSD or other psychoactive substances.
Botanists have not determined whether ''Salvia divinorum'' is a cultigen or a hybrid; native plants reproduce vegetatively, rarely producing viable seed.
Other Spanish names include "hojas de Maria", "hojas de la Pastora", "hierba (yerba) Maria", and "la Maria".
23% said the effects were like yoga, meditation or trance.
Its native habitat is in cloud forest in the isolated Sierra Mazateca of Oaxaca, Mexico, where it grows in shady and moist locations.
Research has shown that salvinorin A is a potent and selective κ-Opioid (kappa-Opioid) receptor agonist.
Opinions range from veneration of the plant as a spiritual sacrament or "a gift from the gods", to 'threat to society', to be banned as quickly as possible in order to "spare countless families the horror of losing a loved one to the relentless tentacles of drug abuse".
Early authors erred in describing the flowers as having blue corollas, based on Epling and Játiva's description.
Botanists have also not been able to determine whether it is a hybrid or a cultigen.
Some proposed state bills have failed to progress and have not been made into law (with motions having been voted down or otherwise dying in committee stages).
The temperature required to release salvinorin from the plant material is quite high (about 240&nbsp;°C).
Speculation includes ''Salvia divinorum'' being a wild plant native to the area; a cultigen of the Mazatecs; or a cultigen introduced by another indigenous group.
The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, the independent body that advises UK government on drugs, was asked to investigate further.
However, while LSD and salvinorin A may have comparative potencies, in the sense that both can produce their effects at low dosages, they are otherwise quite different.
Here too there are other candidate plants, notably Cacahuaxochitl (''Quararibea funebris''), again suggesting that there is no consensus.
While not objecting to some form of legal control, in particular with regard to the sale to minors or sale of enhanced high-strength extracts, most salvia proponents otherwise argue against stricter legislation.
''Salvia divinorum'' produces few viable seeds even when it does flower—no seeds have ever been observed on plants in the wild.
Opponents of more prohibitive measures against salvia argue that such reactions are largely due to an inherent prejudice and a particular cultural bias rather than any actual balance of evidence, pointing out inconsistencies in attitudes toward other more toxic and addictive drugs such as alcohol and nicotine.
The most intense 'peak' is reached within a minute or so and lasts for 1–5 minutes, followed by a gradual tapering off.
There are other strains that are not as well documented, such as the ''Luna'' strain (possibly ''Bunnell'') isolated from a Hawaiian patch of ''Salvia divinorum'' clones, featuring unusually serrated and rounded rather than ovate leaves.
The guide says that while the effects of salvia are generally quite different from those of alcohol, like alcohol, it impairs coordination.
Until 2010, there were differing opinions on whether ''Salvia divinorum'' is an interspecific hybrid.
The Mazatec believe the plant to be an incarnation of the Virgin Mary, so they take great care in handling the plant.
''Salvia divinorum'' was first recorded in print by Jean Basset Johnson in 1939 while he was studying Mazatec shamanism.
The name "Ska Maria Pastora", often shortened to "Ska Maria" or "Ska Pastora", refers to "the leaf or herb of Mary, the Shepherdess."
* Past memories, such as revisiting places from childhood memory
The first plant material they received was dried, so they based the flower color on an erroneous description by Hofmann and Wasson, who didn't realize that their "blue flowers, crowned with a white dome" were in fact violet calyces with unopened white corollas.
It also showed that ''Salvia divinorum'' does not belong to the ''Salvia'' section ''Dusenostachys'', as believed earlier.
Michigan Representative Michael Sak (D) submitted a bill which proposed Schedule I classification of ''Salvia divinorum'' and salvinorin A.
This enhanced (or "fortified") leaf is described by a number followed by an x (e.g.
Australia has imposed its strictest 'schedule 9' (US Schedule I equivalent), and Italy has also placed salvia in its 'Table I' of controlled substances (also US Schedule I equivalent).
* Overlapping realities, such as the perception of being in several locations at once
The genetic study also indicated that ''Salvia venulosa'' was likely misplaced into ''Salvia'' section ''Tubiflorae'', and that it may not be related to other Colombia ''Salvia'' species, though further tests are needed.
Their findings corroborate reports that the most profound effects of smoking salvia appear almost immediately and last about eight minutes.
By calculating the concentrations per leaf ("an average concentration of 2.45 mg per gram" of leaf), the average weight per leaf ("about 50 g" per 20 leaves, or 2.5g/leaf), and the standard dose for chewing (about 8-28 leaves), the doses can range from about 50&nbsp;mg to 172&nbsp;mg.
There have not been many publicized prosecutions of individuals violating anti-salvia laws in the few jurisdictions in which it is prohibited.
In Spain, there are controls focusing only on the commercial trade of ''Salvia divinorum'', personal cultivation (i.e.
Increased insight: 47%
A cooler flame will work, but the direct application of a more intense flame, such as that of a torch lighter, is often preferred.
The question is considered as particularly problematical as the videos may be something of an enforcement grey area.
Other terpenoids have been isolated from ''Salvia divinorum'', including other salvinorins and related compounds named divinatorins and salvinicins.
They are ingested in different ways and produce different effects, which manifest themselves over different timescales.
''Salvia divinorum'' remains legal in some countries and, within the United States, it is legal in some states.
"Anytime anything's on YouTube it's an issue," and "Legislators, parents, grandparents, we need to be on top of these things," ... "We need to protect our children..."
There is no active pollen tube inhibition within the style, but some event or process after the pollen tube reaches the ovary is aberrant.
for non-commercial use) is not targeted.
Some media stories have referred to these earlier written experience reports as if they were part of Brett's suicide note.
''Salvia divinorum'' has been banned by various branches of the U.S. military and some military bases.
In their rituals, the shamans use only fresh ''S.
In Massachusetts, YouTube videos were shown by a retired police officer to public health and judiciary committees as evidence in favor of outlawing it there.
''Salvia divinorum'' is generally understood to be of low toxicity (high ) and low addictive potential since it is a κ-opioid agonist and it has been indicated that κ-opioid agonist activation of the kappa opioid receptor as shown by salvia may, in fact, serve as a potent addiction treatment therapy.
divinorum'' is one of several species with hallucinogenic properties that are ritually used by Mazatec shamans.
* Merging with or becoming objects
It was not until the 1990s that the psychoactive mechanism was identified by a team led by Daniel Siebert.
Other sources may use a system of color codes to form their own standards of potency; for example, "green", "yellow", and "red."
There's obviously a risk in people taking it."
A pharmacologically important aspect of the contraction-reducing (antispasmodic) properties of ingested Salvinorin A on gut tissue is that it is only pharmacologically active on ''inflamed'' and ''not'' normal tissue, thus reducing possible side-effects.
''Salvia divinorum'' is usually propagated through vegetative reproduction.
Other users have written extensive prose and/or poetry about their experiences; some describe their visions pictorially, and there exist examples of visionary art which are 'salvia-inspired'.
Oral consumption of the leaf makes the effects come on more slowly, over a period of 10 to 20 minutes.
However, it is an even more potent D2 receptor partial agonist, and it is likely this action plays a significant role in its effects as well.
It is active at doses as low as 200 µg.
By 1985, up to fifteen populations of the plant had been found.
Those advocating consideration of ''Salvia divinorum''s potential for beneficial use in a modern context argue that more could be learned from Mazatec culture, where salvia is not really associated with notions of drug taking at all and it is rather considered as a spiritual sacrament.
There have been few books published on the subject.
Only 4.4% reported persisting (24 hours or more) negative effects (most often anxiety) on at least one occasion.
All of the Mazatec populations appear to be clonal.
Some researchers see the lack of an indigenous Mazatec name as demonstrating a non-Mazatec origin for the plant.
'''''Salvia divinorum'''''  (also known as '''sage of the diviners''', '''ska maría pastora''', '''seer's sage''', '''yerba de la pastora''' and just '''salvia''') is a psychoactive plant which can induce visions and other altered and spiritual experiences.
Worsened mood: 4.0%
Eventually, the Mazatec provided them some flowering specimens.
It has been suggested that the long-term effects of salvia use may include feelings of déjà vu.
In its natural form salvia is more balanced and benevolent, and quite strong enough, he argues.
''Salvia divinorum'' has large green ovate (often also dentate) leaves, with a yellow undertone that reach 10 to 30&nbsp;cm (4 to 12 in) long.
The other was collected from Huautla de Jiménez in 1991 by anthropologist Bret Blosser (the ''Blosser'' or ''Palatable'' strain).
Synthetic chemicals, such as LSD (active at 20–30&nbsp;µg doses), can be more potent.
The two substances are not chemically similar or related, as salvinorin A is found naturally in a single plant while LSD is chemically semisynthesized from lysergamides like ergotamine.
* Uncontrollable laughter
What might amaze you is that right now the federal government is doing nothing to stop it".
This legislation was nicknamed Brett's law (formally referred to as Senate bill 259).
Most users report no hangover or negative after-effects (e.g.
Mainstream news coverage and journalistic opinion has widely been negative on the subject.
For an unknown reason, pollen fertility is also comparatively reduced.
The 2010 study demonstrated ''Salvia divinorum'''s closest relative to be ''Salvia venulosa''—a rare and endemic ''Salvia'' that is native to Colombia, growing in shaded, wooded gullies at  elevation.
''Salvia divinorum'' is endemic to the Sierra Mazateca in the state of Oaxaca in Mexico, growing in the primary or secondary cloud forest and tropical evergreen forest at elevations from .
Less commonly, some may ingest salvia in the form of a tincture.
A schedule 9 drug is outlined in the Poisons Act 1964 as "Substances which may be abused or misused, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except when required for medical or scientific research, or for analytical, teaching or training purposes with approval of the CEO."
One notable example is Dale Pendell's work ''"Pharmako/Poeia—Plant Powers, Poisons, and Herbcraft"'' and has a chapter dedicated to ''Salvia divinorum''.
Others claim musical inspiration from the plant: including "Salvia divinorum" by 1200 Micrograms, "Salvia" by Deepwater Sunshine, and "Flight 77" by Paul Dereas.
The history of the plant is not well known, and there has been no definitive answer to the question of its origin.
The others it is connected with are ''Coleus pumila'', called ''el macho'' ("the male"), and two forms of ''Coleus blumei'' which are called ''el nene'' ("the child") and ''el ahijado'' ("the godson").
A proposed Schedule I classification would mean (among other things) that there's no ''"currently accepted medical use"'' as far as the United States government is concerned.
Blooms occur when the day length becomes shorter than 12 hours (beginning in mid-October in some places), necessitating a shade cloth in urban environments with exposure to light pollution (HPS).
For example, the effects of salvia when smoked typically last for only a few minutes as compared to LSD, whose effects can persist for 8–12 hours.
Salvinorin A is capable of inhibiting excess intestinal motility (e.g.
Per their drugs and drug paraphernelia policy, eBay does not permit sale of ''Salvia divinorum'' or derived products (despite legality in most areas).
it is often loosely translated as "diviner's sage" or "seer's sage".
One is the strain that was collected in 1962 by ecologist and psychologist Sterling Bunnell (the ''Bunnell'' strain), colloquially mis-attributed as the ''Wasson-Hofmann strain''.
None of these compounds has shown significant (sub-micromolar) affinity at the κ-Opioid receptor, and there is no evidence that they contribute to the plant's psychoactivity.
One other possibility for the plant's partial sterility is that long-term cultivation and selection have produced an inbred cultigen.
In light of this it is argued that ''Salvia divinorum'' could be better understood more positively as an entheogen rather than pejoratively as a hallucinogen.
In the United Kingdom, following a local newspaper story in October 2005, a parliamentary Early Day Motion was raised calling for ''Salvia divinorum'' to be banned there.
They usually mix these juices with water to create an infusion or 'tea' which they drink to induce visions in ritual healing ceremonies.
While not currently regulated by US federal drug laws, several states have passed laws criminalizing the substance.
There also may be synesthetic experiences.
It is well-established that some k-opioid agonists can cause dysphoria in humans.
About this the researchers said "there were too few of these individuals to interpret their reports with any confidence".
The leaves have no hairs on either surface, and little or no petiole.
The plant grows to well over  in height, on hollow square stems which tend to break or trail on the ground, with the plant rooting quite readily at the nodes and internodes.
Daniel Siebert cautions that inhaling hot air can be irritating and potentially damaging to the lungs.
Glossolalia (speaking in tongues) has been reported by ''Reason''.
Others include certain morning glory seeds (''Turbina corymbosa''), psilocybin mushrooms, and various coleus species.
Increased connection with Universe or Nature: 39.8% &nbsp;&nbsp;
Vapor produced by a heat gun needs to be cooled by running it through a water pipe or cooling chamber before inhalation.
Researchers from the University of California and California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute conducted a survey of 500 salvia users which identified that they 'sometimes or often' experience certain effects, including:
He later documented its usage and reported its effects through personal testimonials.
It also emphasizes that salvia is not a 'party drug.'
withdrawal, comedown or rebound effect) the next day.
Difficulty concentrating: 12.0%
However, a report has been published detailing an individual case of ''Salvia divinorum'' use as self-medicated treatment for depression, and Baggott's survey of 500 people with firsthand experience of salvia found that 25.8% of respondents reported improved mood and "antidepressant-like effects" lasting 24 hours or longer.
It may be taken diluted with water just before use, which may slightly reduce the intensity of its effects, but can also serve to lessen or avoid a stinging sensation in the mouth caused by the presence of alcohol.
In traditional Mazatec ritual, shamans use only fresh ''Salvia divinorum'' leaves.
The plant's partial sterility was suggestive of a hybrid origin, though no two parent species have been found with an obvious affinity to ''Salvia divinorum''.
Its chief active psychoactive constituent is a structurally unique diterpenoid called ''salvinorin A'', a potent κ-opioid and D2 receptor agonist.
He said that if people had questions about the deleterious effects of salvia, they should go on YouTube to watch the videos.
The specific epithet, ''divinorum'', was given because of the plant's traditional use in divination and healing.
* Floating feelings: 32%
Differing studies suggest no consensus so far with regard to the long-term effects of ''Salvia divinorum'' on mood.
In March 2008 a Texas news report aired with the story "A legal drug that teenagers are now using to get high could soon be banned here in San Antonio - all because of a Fox News 4 investigation", going on to say, "The drug is legal in Texas, at least for now.
Some find that untreated dry leaf produces unnoticeable or only light effects.
One earlier proposed parent was ''Salvia cyanea'' (a synonym for ''Salvia concolor''), which Epling and Játiva believed to be closely allied to ''Salvia divinorum''.
Others point out that the Virgin Mary is not normally viewed as a shepherdess in Christianity, and that image may hint at a pre-Hispanic Mazatec cultural reference to the plant.
The genus name, ''Salvia'', was first used by Pliny for a plant that was likely ''Salvia officinalis'' (common sage) and is derived from the Latin ''salvere''.
Results from a study at the University of Iowa indicate that it may have potential as an analgesic and as a therapeutic tool for treating drug addictions.
But a News 4 investigation could lead to a new ordinance to protect your kids."
divinorum'', most of them relating to the plant's association with the Virgin Mary.
