He died in 1807, before he could complete the move, which Elizabeth, his five sons, and his three daughters subsequently undertook without him.
Thanks to highly placed friends (among them James K. Polk), he was only lightly reprimanded.
At Goliad, Santa Anna ordered the execution of more than 400 volunteer Texas militia led by James Fannin, who had surrendered his forces on March 20.
Upon election, he became the only person elected to serve as governor of two U.S. states, Texas and Tennessee, by popular vote.
He began crossing the Brazos on April 12.
Although Houston stayed on briefly for negotiations, he returned to the United States for treatment of his ankle wound.
Mexican soldiers killed all those at the Alamo Mission at the end of a 13-day siege on March 6.
Houston's name has been honored in numerous ways.
Houston still believed that the U.S annexation of Texas was not a realistic goal and the U.S. Senate would never pass it because of the delicate situation between the recently independent Texas and Mexico.
Houston decided to migrate south with other Scots-Irish, who settled in the backcountry of lands in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia.
He ran for, and won, the office of Governor of Tennessee in 1827, defeating Congressman Newton Cannon and former governor Willie Blount.
He blamed the extremists of both the North and South, saying:
His son, Robert, inherited his father's land.
Houston was active in the Masonic Lodge, transferring his membership to Forrest Lodge #19.
Houston seems to have cared for his wife's reputation and wrote to her father.
Spectators from neighboring communities came to Independence, Texas to witness the event.
In 1862, Houston returned to Huntsville, Texas, and rented the Steamboat House; the hills in Huntsville reminded him of his boyhood home in Tennessee.
His second son, John Houston, emigrated to Ulster, Ireland, during the Ulster plantation period.
The baptismal site is near a roadside historical marker by the Texas Historical Commission located on Farm to Market Road&nbsp;50 at Sam Houston Road.
Houston was twice elected President of the Republic of Texas.
Houston married again after his divorce from Eliza Allen in 1837 and Tiana's death.
To help save his political reputation, Houston sent James Pinckney Henderson to Washington to help Isaac Van Zandt advocate the annexation of Texas.
He also struggled to avoid war with Mexico, whose forces invaded twice during 1842.
Houston married Tiana Rogers (d. 1838), daughter of Chief John "Hellfire" Rogers (1740–1833), a Scots-Irish trader, and Jennie Due (1764–1806), a sister of Chief John Jolly, in a ceremony according to Cherokee customs.
Judge William Cranch found Houston liable and assessed him $500 in damages.
After declining to accompany Houston to Texas in 1832, Tiana later married John McGrady.
Elizabeth took them to the eastern part of the new state, which had been admitted to the Union in 1796.
Later mass meetings were held in northern cities, such as New York City on May 30, 1860, but they too failed to nominate a Vice Presidential candidate.
The Constitution of the Republic of Texas stated that no president could succeed himself, but did not prohibit any non-consecutive multiple terms.
In 1827, Houston was elected Governor of Tennessee as a Jacksonian.
Houston withdrew from the race on August 16, convinced that his candidacy would only make it easier for Abraham Lincoln to win.
Margaret acted as a tempering influence on her much older husband and convinced him to stop drinking.
Though preceded by others in the region, the school was the first built in Tennessee since entering the Union.
He died on July 26, 1863 at Steamboat House, with his wife Margaret by his side.
On May 9, 1840, Houston, aged 47, married for a third time.
Heavy rain fell nearly every day, causing severe morale problems among the exposed troops struggling through the mud.
After the war, Houston became a key figure in Texas and was elected as the first and third President of the Republic of Texas.
In defense, Stanbery drew one of his pistols and pulled the trigger - the gun misfired.
In his passionate speech in support of the Compromise of 1850, echoing Matthew 12:25, Houston said "A nation divided against itself cannot stand."
1790; first clerk of Izard County, Arkansas, 1819–1838), Samuel (b.
In his second term, he strove for fiscal prudence and worked to make peace with the various tribes of Native Americans in the Republic.
He also attended the Consultation of 1835.
After leaving the Governor's mansion, Houston traveled to Galveston.
On April 20, 1860, the party held, on the San Jacinto Battlefield,  what it termed a national convention to nominate Houston for President.
Houston chose not to resist, stating, "I love Texas too well to bring civil strife and bloodshed upon her.
He asked his second wife, Tiana Rogers, a Cherokee, to go with him to Mexican Texas.
''Ahuludegi'' had become hereditary chief after his brother moved west; English-Americans in the area called him John Jolly.
During his trial at the District of Columbia City Hall, he pleaded self-defense and hired Francis Scott Key as his lawyer.
His health deteriorated in 1863 due to a persistent cough.
"Whatever is calculated to weaken or impair the strength of the Union,—whether originating at the North or the South,—whether arising from the incendiary violence of abolitionists, or from the coalition of nullifiers, will never meet with my unqualified approval."
Under civil law, he was still legally married to Eliza Allen Houston.
He was one of only two Southern senators (the other was John Bell of Tennessee) to vote against the act.
Houston ran twice for governor of Texas as a Unionist, unsuccessfully in 1857, and successfully against Hardin R. Runnels in 1859.
He resigned from office after his wife, Eliza Allen, left him shortly after their wedding and made public statements embarrassing to him.
He returned to Maryville in 1812, and at age 19 was hired for a term as schoolmaster of a one-room schoolhouse in Blount County between his town and Knoxville.
The party did not nominate a Vice Presidential candidate at that time since they expected later gatherings to carry out that function.
Congressman Philip Doddridge provided an eloquent argument that intimidating members of Congress with physical force amounted to anarchy in refutation of federalism.
He negotiated a peace settlement with the Cherokee of East Texas in February 1836 to allay their fears about independence.
Samuel Houston became a member of Morgan's Rifle Brigade and was commissioned a major during the American Revolutionary War.
At the time, he was considered a potential candidate for President of the United States.
Tiana was in her mid-30s, of mixed-race, and the widow of David Gentry, Jr. She had two children from her previous marriage: Gabriel, born 1819, and Joanna, born 1822.
As governor, he refused to swear loyalty to the Confederacy when Texas seceded from the Union in 1861 with the outbreak of the American Civil War, and was removed from office.
However, Houston was a politician and as such he sought to preserve his career by endorsing the support of annexation into the U.S.
Near present-day Columbus on March 26, Houston's forces were joined by 130 more men, and the next day learned of the Fannin disaster.
Houston left the United States for Mexico without paying the judgement.
The sacrament was held in the living room of the Adolphus Sterne House in Nacogdoches.
On March 29, camped along the Brazos River, two companies refused to retreat further.
His victory at the Battle of San Jacinto secured the independence of Texas from Mexico in one of the shortest decisive battles in modern history.
He became an adoptive father to Houston, giving him the Cherokee name of ''Colonneh'', meaning "the Raven".
Houston served from October 22, 1836, to December 10, 1838.
The only American to be elected governor of two states (as opposed to territories or indirect selection), Houston was also the only governor within a future Confederate state to oppose secession (which led to the outbreak of the American Civil War) and to refuse an oath of allegiance to the Confederacy, a decision that led to his removal from office by the Texas secession convention.
She had four children with him and died in 1861.)
Attacking Jackson through his protégé, Stanbery accused Houston of being in league with John Van Fossen and Congressman Robert S. Rose.
Houston had differences with John C. Calhoun, then Secretary of War, who chided him for appearing dressed as a Cherokee at a meeting.
In 1838 she died of pneumonia and is buried at Fort Gibson National Cemetery with a grave maker reading "Talahina R. wife of Gen. Sam Houston".
In 1832, Houston was involved in an altercation with a U.S.
In the 1836 election, he defeated Stephen F. Austin and Henry Smith with a landslide of over 79% of the vote.
An elected convention voted to secede from the United States on February 1, 1861, and Texas joined the Confederate States of America on March 2, 1861.
Under the system of primogeniture, he did not inherit the estate.
Houston was found guilty.
Houston officially divorced Eliza Allen Houston in 1837.
The European-American settlement of Houston was founded in August 1836 by brothers J.K. Allen and A.C. Allen.
After the annexation of Texas by the United States in 1845, Houston was elected to the U.S. Senate by the Texas state legislature, along with Thomas Jefferson Rusk.
Word of the defeat at the Alamo reached Houston and, while he waited for confirmation, he organized the recruits as the 1st Regiment Volunteer Army of Texas.
Between his presidential terms (the constitution did not allow a president to serve consecutive terms), Houston was elected as a representative from San Augustine in the Texas House of Representatives.
He returned to Maryville as a disabled veteran, but later took the army's offer of free surgery and convalesced in a New Orleans hospital.
He said, "Allow me to most respectfully decline any such assistance of the United States Government."
In 1830 and 1833, Houston visited Washington, D.C., to expose the frauds which government agents committed against the Cherokee.
Neither Houston nor Eliza ever discussed the reasons for their separation; speculation and gossip credited their split to Eliza's being in love with another man.
After Stanbery refused to answer Houston's letters about the accusation, Houston confronted him on Pennsylvania Avenue and beat him with a hickory cane, causing serious bodily injury.
She chose to stay at their cabin and trading post in present-day Kansas.
A Devoted Husband and Father.
Houston's paternal ancestry is often traced to his great-great grandfather Sir John Houston, who built a family estate in Scotland in the late seventeenth century.
The Texans won a decisive victory in under 18 minutes, suffering few casualties.
The People's Party was a loose association of the supporters of Houston.
1788), John Paxton (b.
In 1813, Houston reported for training at Camp Blount near present-day Fayetteville, Tennessee and enlisted to fight the British in the War of 1812.
A Great Orator—A Pure Patriot.
Along the way, many people demanded an explanation for his refusal to support the Confederacy.
Shortly afterwards, he moved west to Coahuila y Tejas, then a Mexican state, and became a leader of the Texas Revolution.
His wound was bandaged and he rejoined the fight.
After several years in Ireland, John Houston immigrated in 1735 with his family to the North American colonies, where they first settled in Pennsylvania.
On November 19, 1854, Houston was baptized by Rev.
On March 11, Houston joined what constituted his army at Gonzales: 374 poorly equipped, trained, and supplied recruits.
At the convention to declare Texan independence in March 1836, Houston was selected as Commander-in-Chief.
The political forces that brought about Texas's secession were powerful enough to replace the state's Unionist governor.
Houston was born at Timber Ridge Plantation in Rockbridge County, Virginia.
Later that year he was nominated for President by the People's Party.
In response to the Regulator–Moderator War of 1844, he sent in Republic militia to put down the feud.
1796), Mary Blair (b.
Sam Houston was buried in Huntsville, where he had lived in retirement.
Houston left for Texas in December 1832 and was immediately swept up in the politics of what was at the time still a part of the Mexican state of Coahuila.
In 1822, Houston was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives for Tennessee, where he was a staunch supporter of fellow Tennessean and Democrat Andrew Jackson.
The inscription on his tomb reads:
He was a friend of politician Andrew Jackson, soon to take office as President of the United States.
In April 1829, in part due to the scandal of his well-known separation, Houston resigned as governor of Tennessee.
When Andrew Jackson called on volunteers to dislodge a group of Red Sticks from their breastwork, Houston volunteered, but during the assault was struck by bullets in the shoulder and arm.
By 1854, Margaret had spent 14 years trying to convert Houston to the Baptist church.
Houston was a Congressman from 1823 to 1827, re-elected in 1824.
On April 17, Congress ordered Houston's arrest.
Houston opposed the Kansas–Nebraska Act in 1854, and correctly predicted that it would cause a sectional rift in the country that would eventually lead to war, saying: " ... what fields of blood, what scenes of horror, what mighty cities in smoke and ruins—it is brother murdering brother ...
Houston served from February 21, 1846, until March 4, 1859, with a nine-month gap in 1847 when the state legislature failed to reelect him.
Sam Houston was the fifth son of Major Samuel Houston and Elizabeth Paxton.
To avert this calamity, I shall make no endeavor to maintain my authority as Chief Executive of this State, except by the peaceful exercise of my functions ... "  He was evicted from his office on March 16, 1861, for refusing to take an oath of loyalty to the Confederacy, writing in an undelivered speech,
It is located in Ballyboley Forest Park near the site of the original John Houston estate.
The city of Houston served as the capital of the republic until President Mirabeau Lamar signed a measure that moved the capital to Austin on January 14, 1839.
After her death, Margaret was buried in Independence at her family's cemetery.
Offended, he resigned in 1818.
Throughout his term in the Senate, Houston spoke out against the growing sectionalism of the country.
In 1809, at age 16, Houston ran away from home because he was dissatisfied working as a shop clerk in his older brothers' store.
She and Houston lived together for several years.
Today, Timber Ridge Plantation maintains a log building which tradition claims was constructed from logs salvaged from the Sam Houston birthplace cabin.
While he was in Washington in April 1832, anti-Jacksonian Congressman William Stanbery of Ohio made accusations about Houston in a speech on the floor of Congress.
The senior Samuel and Elizabeth's children were Paxton (b.
This was the more radical position of the American settlers and Tejanos in Texas.
But, his strong Unionism and opposition to the extension of slavery alienated the Texas legislature and other southern states.
At the time, militia officers were expected to pay their own expenses.
I see my beloved South go down in the unequal contest, in a sea of blood and smoking ruin."
That year he was adopted by Chief John Jolly and thus made a member of the Cherokee.
Badly beaten, Santa Anna was forced to sign the Treaty of Velasco, granting Texas its independence.
(She remarried in 1840 to Dr. Elmore Douglass, becoming a stepmother to his ten children.
(Whereas Thomas McKean and John Dickinson had each served as chief executives of Delaware and then of Pennsylvania in the late 18th century, and other state governors had also served as governors of American territories, each of them achieved at least one of his positions by indirect election or appointment.)
Houston's political reputation suffered further due to the publicity related to the trial for his assault of Stanbery.
Rufus C. Burleson by immersion in Little Rocky Creek, two miles southeast of Independence.
Houston continued his retreat eastward toward the Gulf coast, drawing criticism for his perceived lack of willingness to fight.
Houston refused to recognize its legality, but the Texas legislature upheld the legitimacy of secession.
Houston supported the Oregon Bill of 1848, which was opposed by many Southerners.
Congressman, followed by a high-profile trial.
They had eight children born between Houston's 51st and 68th years.
The Texas Army commissioned him as Major General in November 1835.
He was a major critic of President Mirabeau Lamar, who advocated continuing independence of Texas, annihilation of American Indians, and the extension of Texas's boundaries to the Pacific Ocean.
By December of that year, he had been transferred to the 39th Infantry Regiment and had risen from private to third lieutenant At the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in March 1814, he was wounded in the groin by a Creek arrow.
Although the Houstons had numerous houses, they kept only one continuously: Cedar Point (1840–1863) on Trinity Bay.
In 1829, he resigned as governor and relocated to the Arkansas Territory.
When his first term ended, he was elected to serve as a representative from San Augustine County in the Republic of Texas House of Representatives.
He supported annexation by the United States and upon achieving it in 1845, he became a U.S.
On March 13, short on rations, Houston retreated before the superior forces of Mexican General Antonio López de Santa Anna.
In 1833, Houston was baptized into the Catholic faith in order to qualify under the existing Mexican law for property ownership in Coahuila y Tejas.
1797), and Elizabeth Ann (b.
It was named in Houston's honor and served as capital.
It was founded in Brazoria and was relocated in 1837 to what is now Houston.
Eight years later, Abraham Lincoln would express the same sentiment.
Stanbery filed charges against Houston in civil court.
On January 22, 1829, at the age of 35, Houston married 19-year-old Eliza Allen, the daughter of the well-connected planter Colonel John Allen (1776–1833) of Gallatin, Tennessee.
'''Samuel "Sam" Houston''' (March 2, 1793July 26, 1863) was an American politician and soldier, best known for his role in bringing Texas into the United States as a constituent state.
A Fearless Statesman.
On March 2, 1836, his 43rd birthday, Houston signed the Texas Declaration of Independence.
The Texas secession convention replaced Houston with Lieutenant Governor Edward Clark.
On April 2 he organized the 2nd Regiment, received a battalion of regulars, and on April 11 ordered all troops along the Brazos to join the main army, approximately 1,500 men in all.
Their children were born on his family's plantation near Timber Ridge Church, including Sam Houston on March 2, 1793, the fifth of nine children and the fifth son.
More significantly, an inquiry was begun into charges related to Houston's administration of supplies for the Native Americans.
Planning to move on and leave debts behind, the elder Samuel Houston patented land near relatives in Maryville, the county seat of Blount County, Tennessee.
A historic plaque near Larne in County Antrim, Northern Ireland tells the story of the Houston family.
To avoid bloodshed, he refused an offer of a Union army to put down the Confederate rebellion.
He planned to run for re-election in 1829, but was soon beset by rumors of alcoholism and infidelity.
Without his endorsement, the Texas congress would have put the question to public election and upon its likely passing would have effectively destroyed Houston's career as a Texas politician.
The three men had bid on supplying rations to the various tribes of Native Americans who were being forcibly relocated west of the Mississippi as a result of Jackson's Indian Removal Act of 1830.
He was a Senator during the Mexican–American War, when the U.S. defeated Mexico and acquired vast expanses of new territory in the Southwest as part of the concluding treaty.
On December 20, 1837, Houston presided over the convention of Freemasons that formed the Grand Lodge of the Republic of Texas, now the Grand Lodge of Texas.
At the Battle of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, Houston surprised Santa Anna and the Mexican forces during their afternoon "siesta."
After moving to Tennessee, he spent time with the Cherokee Nation (into which he later was adopted as a citizen and into which he married), performed military service during the War of 1812, and successfully participated in Tennessee politics.
The Houston family settled nearby.
With the assistance of George Washington Baines, she convinced Houston to convert; he agreed to adult baptism.
Subsequent to their separation and her statement, Houston resigned the governorship.
In mid-July, Houston developed pneumonia.
The aforementioned public statement and Houston's resignation suggest other reasons.
After four days' march, near present-day La Grange, Houston received additional troops and continued east two days later with 600 men.
Gradually, John Houston developed his land and purchased slaves.
He visited his family in Maryville every several months.
continues to Little Rocky Creek between Independence and the nearby settlement of Sandy Hill.
He went west with the Cherokee in Indian removal to exile in Arkansas Territory.
Scots-Irish newcomers included the Lyle family of the Raloo area, who helped found Timber Ridge Presbyterian Church.
While he initially sought annexation by the U.S., Houston dropped that goal during his first term.
He was of Scots-Irish descent.
He had married Elizabeth Paxton and inherited his father's land, but he was not a good manager and got into debt, in part because of his militia service.
The youngest of Robert's five sons was Samuel Houston.
A Faithful Friend, A Loyal Citizen.
He was widely considered Jackson's political protégé, although their ideas about appropriate treatment of Native Americans differed greatly.
In 1817, Jackson appointed him sub-agent in managing the business relating to Jackson's removal of the Cherokees from East Tennessee to a reservation in what is now Arkansas.
On April 19, 1861 from a hotel window he told a crowd:
