The current high priest is Aabed-El ben Asher ben Matzliach who assumed the office in 2013.
Both Jewish and Samaritan religious leaders taught that it was wrong to have any contact with the opposite group, and neither was to enter each other's territories or even to speak to one another.
The Gospel of Mark contains no mention of Samaritans or Samaria.
As a small community physically divided between neighbors in a hostile region, Samaritans have been hesitant overtly to take sides in the Arab–Israeli conflict, fearing that doing so could lead to negative repercussions.
* When instructing his disciples as to how they should spread the word, Jesus tells them not to visit any Gentile or Samaritan city, but instead go to the "lost sheep of Israel".
This distinction is controversial in part because different interpretations can be used to justify or deny claims of ancestry over this region, which has been deeply contested in modern times.
The story that developed includes the following dialogue:
The head of the community is the Samaritan High Priest, who is selected by age from the priestly family, and resides on Mount Gerizim.
Other differences are minor and seem more or less accidental.
:Rabbi Meir: From Issachar.
Further, the ''Samaritan Chronicle Adler'', or New Chronicle, believed to have been composed in the 18th century using earlier chronicles as sources states:
Samaritans appear to have texts of the Torah as old as the Masoretic Text; scholars have various theories concerning the actual relationships between these three texts.
The Samaritans believe that Mount Gerizim was the original Holy Place of Israel from the time that Joshua conquered Israel.
The Samaritan community in Israel also faces demographic challenges as young people leave the community and convert to Judaism.
But the Samaritan helped the naked man regardless of his nakedness (itself  religiously offensive to the priest and Levite), his self-evident poverty, or to which Hebrew sect he belonged (which was unclear to any, due to his nakedness).
** ''Samaritan Pentateuch'': There are some 6,000 differences between the Samaritan Pentateuch and the Masoretic Torah text, and, according to one estimate, 1,900 points of agreement between it and the Greek Septuagint version.
After Joshua's death, Eli the priest left the tabernacle which Moses erected in the desert and established on Mount Gerizim, and built another one under his own rule in the hills of Shiloh.
The reference to Mount Gerizim derives from the biblical story of Moses ordering Joshua to take the Twelve Tribes of Israel, to the mountains by Nablus and place half of the tribes, six in number, on the top of Mount Gerizim, the Mount of the Blessing, and the other half in Mount Ebal, the Mount of the Curse.
Relations of Samaritans with Jewish Israelis and Muslim and Christian Palestinians in neighboring areas have been mixed.
Ancestrally, Samaritans claim descent from the tribe of Ephraim and tribe of Manasseh (two sons of Joseph) as well as from the Levites, who have links to ancient Samaria from the period of their entry into the land of Canaan, while some suggest that it was from the beginning of the Babylonian captivity up to the Samaritan polity of Baba Rabba.
He mentioned the name of several Palestinian Muslim families as having Samaritan origins, including the Buwarda and Kasem families, who protected Samaritans from Muslim persecution in the 1850s.
The prophet Isaiah identified Cyrus as "the Lord's Messiah" (see ).
Hebrew and later Aramaic were languages in use by the Jewish and Samaritan inhabitants of Judea prior to the Roman exile.
** ''Samaritan Chronicle, Adler'' (Israel from the time of divine disfavor until the exile)
According to 2 Kings and Josephus the people of Israel were removed by the king of the Assyrians (Sargon II) to Halah, to Gozan on the Khabur River and to the towns of the Medes.
The Samaritans claimed that they were the true Israel who were descendants of the "Ten Lost Tribes" taken into Assyrian captivity.
Historically, Samaria was the key geographical concentration of the Samaritan community.
Samaritans who are Israeli citizens are drafted into the military, along with the Jewish citizens of Israel.
According to Procopius, Terebinthus went to Zeno to ask for revenge; the Emperor personally went to Samaria to quell the rebellion.
His policy was to Hellenize his entire kingdom and standardize religious observance.
The term "Cuthim" applied by Jews to the Samaritans had clear pejorative connotations, implying that they were interlopers brought in from Kutha in Mesopotamia and rejecting their claim of descent from the ancient Tribes of Israel.
** ''Samaritan Chronicle, The Tolidah'' (Creation to the time of Abishah)
Samaria or Samaritans are mentioned in the New Testament books of Matthew, Luke, John and Acts.
The Israeli army maintains a presence in the area.
According to Ezra, this rejection precipitated a further interference not only with the rebuilding of the temple but also with the reconstruction of Jerusalem.
The Samaritan religion is based on some of the same books used as the basis of rabbinic Judaism, but differs from the latter.
Conversions to Islam are also thought to have taken place, and the early Middle Ages Benjamin of Tudela estimated only around 1,900 Samaritans remained in Palestine and Syria.
There is conflict over the etymology of the name for the Samaritans in Hebrew, stemming from the fact that they are referred to differently in different dialects of Hebrew.
As a result, they have decreased from more than a million in late Roman (Byzantine) times to 150 people by the end of the Ottoman Era.
This account is contradicted by the version in Chronicles, where, following Samaria's destruction, King Hezekiah is depicted as endeavouring to draw the Ephraimites and Manassites closer to Judah.
Modern genetics partially supports both the claims of the Samaritans and the account in the Talmud, suggesting that the genealogy of the Samaritans lies in some combination of these two accounts.
He further claimed that these families had written records testifying to their Samaritan ancestry, which were maintained by their priests and elders.
The universal peril led the Samaritans, eager for safety, to repudiate all connection and kinship with the Jews.
* '''Historical writings'''
Samaritans in the Palestinian Authority-ruled territories are a minority in the midst of a Muslim majority.
Zertal dates the Assyrian onslaught at 721 BCE to 647 BCE and discusses three waves of imported settlers.
In meetings arranged by "international marriage agencies", a small number of Ukrainian women have recently been allowed to marry into the community in an effort to expand the gene pool.
* '''Hagiographical texts'''
This often poses a problem for the women, who are typically less than eager to adopt the strict interpretation of biblical (Levitical) laws regarding menstruation, by which they must live in a separate dwelling during their periods and after childbirth.
Non-Jewish Iraqis were not sampled in this study; however, mitochondrial lineages of Jewish communities tend to correlate with their non-Jewish host populations, unlike paternal lineages which almost always correspond to Israelite lineages.
In 1940, the future Israeli president and historian Yitzhak Ben-Zvi wrote an article in which he stated that two thirds of the residents of Nablus and the surrounding neighboring villages are of Samaritan origin.
They then return to Jerusalem, preaching the Gospel "in many villages of the Samaritans".
Moreover, they claimed that their version of the Pentateuch was the original and that the Jews had a falsified text produced by Ezra during the Babylonian exile.
The variations, some corroborated by readings in the Old Latin, Syriac and Ethiopian translations, attest to the antiquity of the Samaritan text.
Abu l-Fath, who in the 14th century wrote a major work of Samaritan history, comments on Samaritan origins as follows:
They had their own temple on Mount Gerizim and claimed that it was the original sanctuary.
Justa celebrated the victory with games in the circus.
A notable example is Israeli television presenter Sofi Tsedaka, who has made a documentary about her leaving the community at age 18.
The Temple of Gerizim was rebuilt after the Bar Kokhba revolt against the Romans, around 135 CE.
The rest of the New Testament makes no specific mention of Samaria or Samaritans.
With such a small population, divided into only four families (Cohen, Tsedakah, Danfi and Marhib, a fifth family died out in the twentieth century) and a general refusal to accept converts, there has been a history of genetic disorders within the group due to the small gene pool.
Antiochus IV Epiphanes was on the throne of the Seleucid Empire from 175 to 163 BCE.
The Talmudic attitude expressed in tractate Kutim is that they are to be treated as Jews in matters where their practice coincides with rabbinic Judaism but as non-Jews where their practice differs.
The priest and Levite walked past.
Much of Samaritan liturgy was set by the high priest Baba Rabba in the 4th century.
The 2004 article on the genetic ancestry of the Samaritans by Shen ''et al.''
The inhabitants worshiped the Pagan gods, but when the then-sparsely populated areas became infested with dangerous wild beasts, they appealed to the king of Assyria for Israelite priests to instruct them on how to worship the "God of that country."
*** ''Haggadic Midrash'', Abu'l Hasan al-Suri
:Rabbi Meir: What tribe are you from?
The Samaritans retained the Ancient Hebrew script, the High Priesthood, animal sacrifices, the eating of lambs at Passover, and the celebration of Aviv in spring as the New Year.
It goes on to say that the Samaritans mocked Jerusalem and built a temple on a high place to provoke Israel.
''The Samaritan News'', a monthly magazine started in 1969, is written in Samaritan, Hebrew, Arabic, and English and deals with current and historical issues with which the Samaritan community is concerned.
In addition, all marriages within the Samaritan community are first approved by a geneticist at Tel HaShomer Hospital, in order to prevent the spread of genetic disorders.
The Emperor went to Neapolis (Shechem), gathered the elders and asked them to convert; when they refused, Zeno had many Samaritans killed, and re-built the synagogue to a church.
** ''Al-Asatir''—legendary Aramaic texts from the 11th and 12th centuries, containing:
According to the historian Fayyad Altif, large numbers of Samaritans converted due to persecution under various Muslim rulers, and because the monotheistic nature of Islam made it easy for them to accept it.
Samaritan law is not the same as halakha (Rabbinical Jewish law).
However they are not referred to as foreigners.
During the Hellenistic period, Samaria was largely divided between a Hellenizing faction based in Samaria (Sebastaea) and a pious faction, led by the High Priest and based largely around Shechem and the rural areas.
* Jesus is accused of being a Samaritan and being demon-possessed.
Returning exiles considered the Samaritans to be non-Israelites and, thus, not fit for this religious work.
In Samaritan Hebrew the Samaritans call themselves "Samerim", which according to the Anchor Bible Dictionary, is derived from the Ancient Hebrew term ''Šamerim/Samerim'' שַמֶרִים, meaning "Guardians/Keepers/Watchers of the Law/Torah".
This article predated the change of the classification of haplogroup E3b1-M78 to E3b1a-M78 and the further subdivision of E3b1a-M78 into 6 subclades based on the research of Cruciani, et al.
* ''Defter'', prayer book of psalms and hymns.
There are several theories regarding the similarities.
The Dead Sea scroll 4Q372 hopes that the northern tribes will return to the land of Joseph.
* The Apostles are being persecuted.
There were some Samaritans in the Sasanian Empire, where they served in the army.
* The Parable of the Good Samaritan.
The current dwellers in the north are referred to as fools, an enemy people.
This is a politically sensitive distinction.
The situation of the Samaritan community improved significantly during the British Mandate of Palestine.
Archaeologists Aharoni, et al., estimated that this "exile of peoples to and from Israel under the Assyrians" took place during ca.
Recently several genetic studies on the Samaritan population were made using haplogroup comparisons as well as wide-genome genetic studies.
* Jesus healed ten lepers, of whom only one returned to praise God, and he was a Samaritan.
11:29; 27:12; Josh.
According to Samaritan sources, Eastern Roman emperor Zeno (who ruled 474-491 and whom the sources call "Zait the King of Edom") persecuted the Samaritans.
Zeno rebuilt the church of St. Procopius in Neapolis (Sichem) and the Samaritans were banned from Mount Gerizim, on whose top a signalling tower was built to alert in case of civil unrest.
*** ''Haggadic Midrash'', Molad Maseh (On the birth of Moses)
Samaritans living in the West Bank have been granted passports by both Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
The request was granted.
Zeno then took for himself Mount Gerizim, where the Samaritans worshipped God, and built several edifices, among whom a tomb for his recently deceased son, on which he put a cross, so that the Samaritans, worshipping God, would prostrate in front of the tomb.
This Samaritan Temple at Mount Gerizim was destroyed by John Hyrcanus in about 128 BC, having existed about 200 years.
:The Samaritan: From Joseph.
In Jewish tradition, however, it is sometimes claimed that Mount Samaria, meaning "Watch Mountain", is actually named so because watchers used to watch from those mountains for approaching armies from Egypt in ancient times..
Consequently, all that is left of the Samaritan community in Nablus/Shechem itself is an abandoned synagogue.
Most Samaritans in Israel and the West Bank today speak Hebrew and Palestinian Arabic.
In Modern Hebrew, the Samaritans are called ''Shomronim'', which would appear to simply mean "inhabitants of Samaria".
According to the Jewish version of events, when the Judean exile ended in 538 BCE and the exiles began returning home from Babylon, they found their former homeland populated by other people who claimed the land as their own and Jerusalem, their former glorious capital, in ruins.
They elected a Justa (or Justasa/Justasus) as their king and moved to Caesarea, where a noteworthy Samaritan community lived.
Only a few stone remnants of it exist today.
Since the 19th century, rabbinic Judaism has regarded the Samaritans as a Jewish sect and the term "Samaritan Jews" has been used for them.
Yitzakh Magen argues that the version of Chronicles is perhaps closer to the historical truth, and that the Assyrian settlement was unsuccessful, a notable Israelite population remained in Samaria, part of which, following the conquest of Judah, fled south and settled there as refugees.
The project was first led by Sheshbazzar (ca.
While the Samaritan communities in both the West Bank's Nablus and Israeli Holon have assimilated to the surrounding culture, Hebrew has become the primary domestic language for Samaritans.
Chronicles makes no mention of an Assyrian resettlement.
Conversion to Christianity under the Byzantines also restricted their numbers.
The split between them and the Judeans began during the time of Eli when, according to Samaritan tradition, Judeans split off from the central Israelite tradition.
So they send the Apostles Peter and John to pray for and lay hands on the baptized believers, who then receive the Holy Spirit (vs. 17).
This woman considered herself and her people to be Israelites, descendants of Jacob.
According to , the Persian emperor, Cyrus the Great (reigned 559–530 BCE), permitted the return of the exiles to their homeland and ordered the rebuilding of the Temple (Zion).
The Samaritans themselves describe the Ottoman period as the worst period in their modern history, as many Samaritan families were forced to convert to Islam during that time.
This period is considered as something of a golden age for the Samaritan community, the population thought to number up to a million.
We do know that Samaritan and Jewish alienation increased, and that the Samaritans eventually built their own temple on Mount Gerizim, near Shechem.
Biblical Hebrew ''Šomerim'' ()) "Guardians" (singular ''Šomer'') comes from the Hebrew Semitic root שמר, which means "to watch, guard".
The authors speculated that when the Assyrians conquered the northern kingdom of Israel, resulting in the exile of many of the Israelites, a subgroup of the Israelites that remained in the Land of Israel "married Assyrian and female exiles relocated from other conquered lands, which was a typical Assyrian policy to obliterate national identities."
This was put forth as the final breach between the two groups, being alleged at a much later date in the Christian Bible (John 4:9), "For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans"—or not "alleged" if the Greek sunchrasthai merely refers to not sharing utensils (NABRE).
* Jesus asks a Samaritan woman of Sychar for water from Jacob's Well.
Furthermore, to this day the Samaritans claim descent from the tribe of Joseph:
As of January 1, 2015, the population was 777, divided between Kiryat Luza on Mount Gerizim and the city of Holon, just outside Tel Aviv.
*** ''Haggadic Midrash'', Memar Markah—3rd or 4th century theological treatises attributed to ''Hakkam'' Markha
Once a large community, the Samaritan population appears to have shrunk significantly in the wake of the bloody suppression of the Third Samaritan Revolt (529 CE) against the Byzantine Empire.
Anderson notes that during the reign of Antiochus IV (175–164 BCE):
On the other hand, Matassa argues that, although there is evidence of Samaritans on Delos, there is no evidence the building was a synagogue.
Samaritan historiography places the basic schism from the remaining part of Israel after the tribes of Israel conquered and returned to the land of Canaan, led by Joshua.
For the Samaritans in particular, the passing of the al-Hakim Edict by the Fatimid Caliphate in 1021, under which all Jews and Christians in the Fatimid ruled southern Levant were ordered to either convert to Islam or leave, along with another notable forced conversion to Islam imposed at the hands of the rebel ibn Firāsa, would contribute to their rapid unprecedented decrease, and ultimately almost complete extinction as a separate religious community.
Even today, certain Nabulsi family names such as Maslamani, Yaish, and Shaksheer among others, are associated with Samaritan ancestry.
With the help of the Ghassanids, Emperor Justinian I crushed the revolt; tens of thousands of Samaritans died or were enslaved.
Much of the local Palestinian population of Nablus is believed to be descended from Samaritans who converted to Islam.
At that time, they began to work in the public sector, like many other groups.
He denies having a demon, but makes no comment on the Samaritan accusation.
*  says that at that time the churches had "rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria".
:The Samaritan: How do you figure?
The two mountains were used to symbolize the significance of the commandments and serve as a warning to whoever disobeyed them (Deut.
** ''Samaritan Chronicle'', The Chronicle of Joshua (Israel during the time of divine favor) (4th century, in Arabic and Aramaic)
concluded from a sample comparing Samaritans to several Jewish populations, all currently living in Israel—representing the Beta Israel, Ashkenazi Jews, Iraqi Jews, Libyan Jews, Moroccan Jews, and Yemenite Jews, as well as Israeli Druze and Palestinians—that "the principal components analysis suggested a common ancestry of Samaritan and Jewish patrilineages.
*  says that Paul and Barnabas were "being brought on their way by the church" and that they passed through "Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles".
During the New Testament period, although the tensions went unrecognized by Roman authorities, Josephus reports numerous violent confrontations between Jews and Samaritans throughout the first half of the first century.
538 BCE), later by Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and later still by Haggai and Zechariah (520–515 BCE).
There have been a few instances of intermarriage.
Most of the former may be traced back to a common ancestor in what is today identified as the paternally inherited Israelite high priesthood (Cohanim) with a common ancestor projected to the time of the Assyrian conquest of the kingdom of Israel."
For liturgical purposes, Samaritan Hebrew, Samaritan Aramaic, and Arabic are used, all written with the Samaritan alphabet, a variant of the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet, which is distinct from the Hebrew alphabet.
The following references are found:
The best known reference to the Samaritans is the Parable of the Good Samaritan, found in the Gospel of Luke.
In the Talmud, a central post-exilic religious text of Judaism, the Samaritans are called ''Cutheans'' (, ''Kutim''), referring to the ancient city of Kutha, geographically located in what is today Iraq.
The only Samaritan family not found in haplogroup J was the Cohen family (Tradition: Tribe of Levi) which was found haplogroup E-M78 (formerly "E3b1a M78").
The Samaritans have several groups of religious texts, which correspond to Jewish halakhah.
The Joshua-Marhiv family belongs to Haplogroup J-M267 (formerly "J1"), while the Danfi and Tsedakah families belong to haplogroup J-M172 (formerly "J2"), and can be further distinguished by M67, the derived allele of which has been found in the Danfi family.
Josephus Book 12, Chapter 5 quotes the Samaritans as saying:
*** ''Haggadic Midrash'', Pinkhas on the Taheb
Temple repairs at the time of Josiah were financed by money from all "the remnant of Israel" in Samaria, including from Manasseh, Ephraim and Benjamin.
A Midrash (Genesis Rabbah Sect.
One example is Israeli TV personality Sofi Tsedaka, who formally converted to rabbinical Judaism at the age of 18.
The Samaritan Pentateuch differs from the Masoretic Text as well.
The Talmud accounts for a people called "Cuthim" on a number of occasions, mentioning their arrival by the hands of the Assyrians.
These are the Samaritans (shamray).
Later, in 484, the Samaritans revolted.
They relocated to the mountain itself near the Israeli settlement neighborhood of Har Brakha as a result of violence during the First Intifada (1987–1990).
Samaritans claim they are Israelite descendants of the Northern Israelite tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, who survived the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel (Samaria) by the Assyrians in 722 BCE.
The king of the Assyrians then brought people from Babylon, Cuthah, Avah, Emath, and Sepharvaim to place in Samaria.
Jewish tradition affirms the Assyrian deportations and replacement of the previous inhabitants by forced resettlement by other peoples, but claims a different ethnic origin for the Samaritans.
Samaritans living in both Israel and in the West Bank enjoy Israeli citizenship.
The rebels attacked Sichem, burnt five churches built on Samaritan holy places and cut the finger of bishop Terebinthus, who was officiating the ceremony of Pentecost.
:Rabbi Meir: For it is written (Gen 46:13): The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Iob, and Shimron.
He shows that Mesopotamian pottery in Samaritan territory cluster around the lands of Menasheh and that the type of pottery found was produced around 689 BCE.
To counter this, the Samaritan community has recently agreed that men from the community may marry non-Samaritan (primarily, Israeli Jewish) women, provided that the women agree to follow Samaritan religious practices.
Jeremiah likewise speaks of people from Shechem, Shiloh and Samaria who brought offerings of frankincense and grain to the house of the Lord.
Thereafter many of the Samaritans from her town become followers of Jesus.
In the Christian Bible, the Gospel of John relates an encounter between a Samaritan woman and Jesus in which she says that the mountain was the center of their worship .
The study goes on to say that "Such a scenario could explain why Samaritan Y chromosome lineages cluster tightly with Jewish Y lineages, while their mitochondrial lineages are closest to Iraqi Jewish and Israeli Arab mtDNA sequences."
There is a six-month trial period prior to officially joining the Samaritan community to see whether this is a commitment that the woman would like to take.
According to John Malalas, the ''dux Palaestinae'' Asclepiades, whose troops were reinforced by the Caesarea-based Arcadiani of Rheges, defeated Justa, killed him and sent his head to Zeno.
The text is not clear on this matter, but one possibility is that these "people of the land" were thought of as Samaritans.
The major issue between Rabbinical Jews (Jews who follow post-exile rabbinical interpretations of Judaism, who are the vast majority of Jews today) and Samaritans has always been the location of the chosen place to worship God; Jerusalem according to the Jewish faith or Mount Gerizim according to the Samaritan faith.
** ''Samaritan Halakhic Text'', the Kitab al-Kafi (Book of Halakhah, written by Yosef Al Ascar 14th century CE)
In the biblical account, however, Cuthah was one of several cities from which people were brought to Samaria, and they worshiped Nergal.
Yom Teruah (the biblical name for Rosh Hashanah), at the beginning of Tishrei, is not considered a New Year as it is in Judaism.
Several passages in the New Testament would also appear to echo a Torah textual tradition not dissimilar to that conserved in the Samaritan text.
Some date their split with the Jews to the time of Nehemiah, Ezra, and the building of the Second Temple in Jerusalem after the Babylonian exile.
Samaritans appear briefly in the Christian gospels, most notably in the account of the Samaritan woman at the well and the parable of the Good Samaritan.
The majority of them lived in Nablus.
The work was completed in 515 BCE.
One of the biggest problems facing the community today is the issue of continuity.
According to 1 Maccabees 1:41-50 he proclaimed himself the incarnation of the Greek god Zeus and mandated death to anyone who refused to worship him.
Some differences are doctrinal: for example, the Samaritan Torah explicitly states that Mount Gerizim is "the place that God ''has chosen''" for the Temple, as opposed to the Jewish Torah that refers to "the place that God ''will'' choose".
They had a reserved seat in the Palestinian Legislative Council in the election of 1996, but they no longer have one.
Thus, it may suggest the region of Samaria is named after the Samaritans, rather than the Samaritans being named after the region.
The rebuilding of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem took several decades.
Until the 1980s, most of the Samaritans resided in the Samarian town of Nablus below Mount Gerizim.
* A Samaritan village rejected a request from messengers travelling ahead of Jesus for hospitality, because the villagers did not want to facilitate a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, a practice which they saw as a violation of the Law of Moses .
