On 10 May 2016, the Congress of Campeche passed a same-sex marriage bill.
Uruguay's Chamber of Deputies passed a bill on 12 December 2012, to extend marriage rights to same-sex couples.
Some Protestant groups, like the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (USA), and the United Church of Christ, and some Catholic ones, such as the Old Catholic Church (US Province), support allowing those of the same sex to marry or conduct same-sex marriage ceremonies.
Opponents of same-sex marriage such as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, and the Southern Baptist Convention use the term ''traditional marriage'' to mean marriages between one man and one woman.
Additionally, thirteen countries which have legalized same-sex marriage still have an alternative form of legal recognition for same-sex couples: Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Colombia, Finland, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.
Various faith communities around the world support allowing those of the same sex to marry, while many major religions oppose same-sex marriage.
Li Yinhe, a sociologist and sexologist well known in the Chinese gay community, has tried to legalize same-sex marriage several times, including during the National People's Congress in 2000 and 2004 (''Legalization for Same-Sex Marriage'' 《中国同性婚姻合法化》 in 2000 and the ''Same-Sex Marriage Bill'' 《中国同性婚姻提案》 in 2004).
Polls in June 2013 also supported the conclusion that the division of opinion between acceptance and rejection of same-sex marriage is in about equal halves.
Michelle Bachelet, the President of Chile, who was elected to a second term in March 2014, has promised to work for the implementation of same-sex marriage and has a majority in both houses of Congress.
This was the first same-sex couple married in Colombia.
In order to preserve the freedom of both religious groups and individual clergy, the Scottish Government believed it necessary for changes to be made to the Equality Act 2010 and communicated with the UK Government on this matter; thus, the first same-sex marriages in Scotland did not occur until this had taken place.
The law still requires ratification in the Danish Parliament.
Finally the constitutional court ruled against the banning of the referendum (5–4) and the referendum was to be held on 20 December 2015.
On 7 June 2012, the Folketing (Danish parliament) approved new laws regarding same-sex civil and religious marriage.
It was sent to the Judiciary Committee on 17 December 2013.
Tsai Ing-wen, the President of Taiwan since May 2016, announced her support of same-sex marriage in November 2015.
After the National Council's Committee of Law Affairs' decision to approve same-sex marriage, two opinion polls released on 22 February 2015 showed a support of 54% (Léger Marketing for Blick) and 71% (GfS Zürich for SonntagsZeitung) allowing same-sex couples to marry and adopt children.
The data of current psychological and other social science studies on same-sex marriage in comparison to mixed-sex marriage indicate that same-sex and mixed-sex relationships do not differ in their essential psychosocial dimensions; that a parent's sexual orientation is unrelated to their ability to provide a healthy and nurturing family environment; and that marriage bestows substantial psychological, social, and health benefits.
Prime minister Xavier Bettel married Gauthier Destenay, with whom he had been in a civil partnership since 2010.
The largest opposition party in the Turkish Parliament, CHP, supported the idea.
In 2013, Pew Research Center declared Spain the most tolerant country  of the world with homosexuality.
Polling shows majority support for same-sex marriage among Chileans.
It was supported by the Government of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and opposed by the Catholic Church.
This could result in long-term marriages, as well as recent same-sex marriages, being overturned.
In both Paris and Lyon, violence erupted as protesters clashed with police; the issue has mobilised right-wing forces in the country, including neo-Nazis.
Still, the lack of legal validity notwithstanding, there is a consensus among modern historians that same-sex relationships existed in ancient Rome, though the frequency and nature of "same-sex unions" during that period are obscure.
The 100,000–500,000 VND  ($24USD) fine will be abolished.
Courts nationwide must now authorize marriages between people of the same-sex through injunctions, a process slower and more expensive than opposite-sex marriage.
On 16 July 2013 the Commons accepted all of the Lords' amendments.
President Hollande signed it into law on 18 May 2013.
Subsequently, Eric Cantor, Republican majority leader in the U.S. House of Representatives, announced that the House would defend DOMA.
In the United States of America, before the case of Obergefell v. Hodges couples in same-sex marriages could only obtain a divorce in jurisdictions that recognized same-sex marriages, with some exceptions.
In 2010, a Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health study examining the effects of institutional discrimination on the psychiatric health of lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) individuals found an increase in psychiatric disorders, including a more than doubling of anxiety disorders, among the LGB population living in states that instituted bans on same-sex marriage.
In April 2014, Medha Patkar of the Aam Aadmi Party stated that her party supports the legalisation of same-sex marriage.
The Northern Ireland Executive has stated that it does not intend to introduce legislation allowing for same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland.
The American Anthropological Association asserts that social science research does not support the view that either civilization or viable social orders depend upon not recognizing same-sex marriage.
The law will take effect on 1 March 2017.
, same-sex marriage is legally allowed (nationwide or in some parts) in the following countries: Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, France, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom the United States, and Uruguay.
On 22 October 2013, a bill was passed by the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) legalising same-sex marriage in the ACT.
On 28 November 2011, the first two same-sex marriages occurred in Quintana Roo after it was discovered that Quintana Roo's Civil Code did not explicitly prohibit same-sex marriage, but these marriages were later annulled by the Governor of Quintana Roo in April 2012.
In 2011, the Obama Administration concluded that DOMA was unconstitutional and directed the U.S. Justice Department (DOJ) to stop defending the law in court.
A poll carried out during September 2015 by the pollster Cadem Plaza Pública found that 60% of Chileans support same-sex marriage, whilst 36% are against it.
On 10 December 2015, the organization Front for Equal Rights (''Frente Por los Derechos Igualitarios'') and a group of deputies presented another bill.
In October 2012, Senator Armando Benedetti introduced a bill legalizing same-sex marriage.
In addition, Andorra, Austria, Israel and Malta as well as several subnational jurisdictions which do not recognize same-sex marriage nonetheless permit joint adoption by unmarried same-sex couples: Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia in Australia as well as Bermuda, Gibraltar, the Isle of Man and Jersey in the United Kingdom.
Previously, she said, "Marriage equality, I believe we have to make it happen."
A May 2013 Ipsos poll found that 42% of Italians supported allowing same-sex couples to marry and adopt children.
In the United Kingdom, the Gender Recognition Act 2004 allows a person who has lived in their chosen gender for at least two years to receive a gender recognition certificate officially recognizing their new gender.
In the referendum, 63.4% of the voters voted against the law, rendering the parliament's same-sex marriage act invalid.
It has also averred that same-sex couples who may only enter into a civil union, as opposed to a marriage, "are denied equal access to all the benefits, rights, and privileges provided by federal law to those of married couples," which has adverse effects on the well-being of same-sex partners.
He also married an athlete named Zoticus in a lavish public ceremony in Rome amidst the rejoicings of the citizens.
Finally in December 2015, the Portuguese Parliament approved a bill to recognise adoptions rights for same-sex couples.
Ireland held a referendum on 22 May 2015.
Numerous polls and studies on the issue have been conducted, including those that were completed throughout the first decade of the 21st century.
In November 2008, Nepal's highest court issued final judgment on matters related to LGBT rights, which included permitting same-sex couples to marry.
Obama also supported the full repeal of DOMA, and called the state constitutional bans on same-sex marriage in California (2008) and North Carolina (2012) unnecessary.
The Christian Democratic People's Party of Switzerland (CVP/PDC) started in 2011 with gathering signatures for a popular initiative entitled "For the couple and the family - No to the penalty of marriage".
A same-sex-marriage bill before the Thai Parliament has bipartisan support, but as of April 2014 has been stalled due to the political crisis in the country.
On 18 May 2016, both Michoacán and Morelos passed bills allowing for same-sex marriage to be legal.
On 6 October 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court denied review of five writ petitions from decisions of appellate courts finding constitutional right to same-sex marriage.
The Scottish Government conducted a three-month-long consultation which ended on 9 December 2011 and the analysis was published in July 2012.
The Ministry of Health officially removed homosexuality from its list of mental illnesses in 2001.
In May 2012, three religious groups (Quakers, Liberal Judaism and Unitarians) sent a letter to David Cameron, asking that they be allowed to solemnise same-sex weddings.
In June 2013, the National Assembly began formal debate on a proposal to establish legal recognition for same-sex marriage.
The proposal approved; with 62% of voters supporting same-sex marriage.
Consequently, both transgender and intersex individuals may be legally categorized into confusing gray areas, and could be prohibited from marrying partners of the "opposite" sex or permitted to marry partners of the "same" sex due to legal distinctions.
In addition, some legal jurisdictions recognize a legal and official change of gender, which would allow a transgender male or female to be legally married in accordance with an adopted gender identity.
Research findings from 1998–2014 from the University of Virginia, Michigan State University, Florida State University, the University of Amsterdam, the New York State Psychiatric Institute, Stanford University, the University of California-San Francisco, the University of California-Los Angeles, Tufts University, Boston Medical Center, the Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health and independent researchers also support the findings of this study.
Prior to this ruling, same-sex marriages were legally performed in 37 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, Guam as well as some Native American tribes.
A same-sex marriage bill is pending in Parliament after the Green Liberal Party of Switzerland, in December 2013, opposed a Christian Democratic People's Party of Switzerland's initiative banning same-sex marriage.
In the United States, transgender and intersex marriages typically run into similar complications.
Among the Igbo people and probably other peoples in the south of the country, there are circumstances where a marriage between women is considered appropriate, such as when a woman has no child and her husband dies, and she takes a wife to perpetuate her inheritance and family lineage.
Australian federal law currently bans recognition of same-sex marriages.
Taiwan would become the first country in Asia to legalize same-sex marriage if the Civil Code is amended.
On 11 February 2014, the Congress of Coahuila approved adoptions by same-sex couples and a bill legalizing same-sex marriages passed on 1 September 2014 making Coahuila the second state to reform its Civil Code to allow for legal same-sex marriages.
Denmark was the first country to recognize a legal relationship for same-sex couples, establishing "registered partnerships" in 1989.
The ruling standardized court procedures across Mexico to authorize  same-sex marriages.
The campaign collected 166,000 signatures and the initiative was presented to the Parliament in December 2013.
This happened in 2013, prompted by calls from an advocacy group call Two Words and a Comma.
The Constitutional Council had previously ruled that the issue of same-sex marriage was one for the legislature to decide  and there was only little hope for UMP to overturn the parliament's vote.
They are also available in parts of the United States (California, Hawaii, Illinois, New Jersey, Nevada, Oregon and Wisconsin).
In 2010, Minister of Justice Tuija Brax said her Ministry was preparing to amend the Marriage Act to allow same-sex marriage by 2012.
Same-sex marriage has been legal in Colombia since April 2016.
The marriage was celebrated in both Greece and Rome in extravagant public ceremonies.
Article 1 of the bill defining marriage as an agreement between two people was passed on 2 February 2013 in its first reading by a 249–97 vote.
On 27 May 2014, the National Assembly's Committee for Social Affairs removed the provision giving legal status and some rights to cohabiting same-sex couples from the government's bill to amend the Law on Marriage and Family.
On 7 April 2016, the Court ruled that marriage doesn't only apply to opposite-sex couples.
The referendum proposed to add to the Irish Constitution: "marriage may be contracted in accordance with law by two persons without distinction as to their sex".
The initiative went to introductory debate on 20 February 2014 and was sent again to the Legal Affairs Committee.
The first foreign same sex marriage was registered on 29 April 2014 and the first civil union was performed on 14 June 2014.
The decree took effect on 11 November 2013.
The first marriage was challenged by a conservative group, and it was initially annulled.
Same-sex parents and carers and their children are likely to benefit in numerous ways from legal recognition of their families, and providing such recognition through marriage will bestow greater benefit than civil unions or domestic partnerships.
In its response to the consultation, the government said that it also intended "...to enable those religious organisations that wish to conduct same-sex marriage ceremonies to do so, on a permissive basis only."
Two years later on the same day, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in ''Obergefell v. Hodges'' that state level bans on same-sex marriage to be unconstitutional as well, legalizing same-sex marriage throughout the entire U.S. proper and all incorporated territories.
On 22 December 2014, a proposed amendment to the Civil Code which would legalize same-sex marriage was due to go under review by the Judiciary Committee.
However, the studies did not include the Benelux or the Scandinavian countries.
Meanwhile, on 28 January 2015, the National Congress approved a bill recognizing civil unions for same-sex and opposite-sex couples offering some of the rights of marriage.
Although the Scottish bill concerning same-sex marriage had been published, the 'Australian' reported that LGBT rights campaigners, celebrating outside the UK parliament on 15 July 2013 for the clearance of the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill in the House of Lords, declared that they would continue the campaign to extend same-sex marriage rights to both Scotland and Northern Ireland, rather than solely Northern Ireland, where there are no plans to introduce such legislation.
The registry announced more details of their plan, advising that only select registration offices in the state would be able to participate in the collective marriage event.
The initiative gathered the required 50,000 signatures of Finnish citizens in one day and exceeded 107,000 signatures by the time the media reported the figures.
The legislation was passed unanimously by the Icelandic Althing on 11 June 2010, and took effect on 27 June 2010, replacing an earlier system of registered partnerships for same-sex couples.
On 14 May 2013, the Justice's National Council of Brazil issues a ruling requiring all civil registers of the country to perform same-sex marriages by a 14–1 vote, thus legalizing same-sex marriage in the entire country.
The bill was submitted to the members' bill ballot on 30 May 2012.
The first law providing for marriage of people of the same sex in modern times was enacted in 2001 in the Netherlands.
In December 2012, the state of São Paulo likewise had same-sex marriage allowed in demand by Court order.
As of June 2016, countries that have an alternative form of legal recognition other than marriage on a national level are: Andorra, Australia, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan (various cities), Liechtenstein, Mexico (Michoacán), San Marino, Slovenia, Switzerland, Taiwan (all special municipalities and some counties and provincial cities) and the United Kingdom (Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man, Jersey and Gibraltar).
Following the election of François Hollande as President of France in May 2012 and the subsequent legislative election in which the Socialist party took a majority of seats in the French National Assembly, the new Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault stated that a same-sex marriage bill had been drafted and would be passed.
Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg officiated at a same-sex wedding during the 2013 Labor Day weekend in what is believed to be a first for a member of the Supreme Court.
The law also allows the recognition in France of same-sex couples' marriages that occurred abroad before the bill's enactment.
In March, the Assembly passed the bill in a 51–28 vote.
On 27 February 2013, the bill was rejected by the Legal Affairs Committee of the Finnish Parliament on a vote of 9&ndash;8.
The first was with one of Nero's own freedmen, Pythagoras, with whom Nero took the role of the bride.
Same-sex marriage is not explicitly prohibited under Indian law and at least one couple has had their marriage recognised by the courts.
Opponents of same-sex marriages have argued that recognition of same-sex marriages would erode religious freedoms, undermine a right of children to be raised by their biological mother and father or erode the institution of marriage itself.
However, this is not seen as homosexual, but is instead a way for families without sons to keep their inheritance within the family.
Others, such as Faramerz Dabhoiwala writing for ''The Guardian'', say that the modern movement began in the 1990s.
Recent polling in the United States has shown a further increase in public support for same-sex marriage.
It states that while Vietnam allows gay weddings, it will not offer legal recognition or protection to unions between people of the same sex.
A friend gave the "bride" away as required by law.
Malcolm Brown and Joe Schofield from Tullibody, Central Lowlands, were scheduled to be the first to be declared husband and husband just after midnight on 31 December, following a Humanist ceremony, but they were superseded by couples marrying on 16 December.
However, the process is still lengthy and more expensive than that for an opposite-sex marriage, as the ruling did not invalidate any state laws, meaning gay couples will be denied the right to wed and will have to turn to the courts for individual injunctions.
The idea implicit in the word is that a man took a woman in marriage, ''in matrimonium ducere'', so that he might have children by her."
Some additional states allow step-child adoption by those who are in a same-sex relationship but are unmarried: Croatia, Germany, Estonia and Slovenia.
Following the referendum, two same-sex couples have promised to go to the courts if they are not allowed to wed.
The third reading took place on 21 May 2013, and was approved by 366 votes to 161.
On 17 July 2013 the bill received royal assent becoming the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013.
In Nigeria, homosexual activity between men, but not between women, is illegal.
On 24 April 2013, the bill was defeated in the full Senate on a 51–17 vote.
In December 2014, the eco-socialist United Left party introduced a bill amending expansion of the definition of marriage in 1976 Marriage and Family Relations Act to include same-sex couples.
On 26 June 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 5–4 in ''Obergefell v. Hodges'' that states cannot prohibit the issuing of marriage licenses to same-sex couples, or to deny recognition of lawfully performed out-of-state marriage licenses to same-sex couples.
On 10 April 2013, the Chamber of Deputies passed the amended bill by a two-thirds majority (71–22).
In Nepal, their recognition has been judicially mandated but not yet legislated.
The largest party in parliament, the AKP, opposes same-sex marriage, although Premier Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the leader of the AKP, supported full equal rights for LGBT citizens in 2002, the year he launched his party.
Prior to this, the Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010 allowed same sex couples to enter civil partnerships.
Then the parliament voted to block the referendum with a clarification that it would be against the Slovenian constitution to vote about matters concerning human rights.
Some publications that oppose same-sex marriage, such as ''WorldNetDaily'' and Baptist Press, have an editorial style policy of placing the word ''marriage'' in scare quotes ("marriage") when it is used in reference to same-sex couples.
In June 2012, the UK Government completed the consultation to allow civil marriage for same-sex couples in England and Wales.
In January 2015, the government expressed no opposition to the bill.
President Barack Obama announced on 9 May 2012, that "I think same-sex couples should be able to get married".
We are also disappointed that the decision to hold a referendum will serve to lengthen the timeline by which the Government can fulfill its obligations to its citizens who deserve equality under the law.
In 2013, a poll of Turkish attitudes towards sexuality, 3.6% of Turks supported same-sex marriages.
Though Buddhism is considered to be ambivalent on the subject as a whole, particular Buddhists have supported marriage equality, as do a variety of other religious traditions.
Registered partnerships have been legal in Finland since in 2002.
With the advent of same-sex marriage, this restriction was dropped.
Approximately 5–10% of women are in such marriages.
The Swiss people voted on the Christian Democrats' proposal in a referendum on 28 February 2016 and rejected it by 50.8% of the votes.
Same-sex marriages from other jurisdictions are treated as civil partnerships.
All other main parties (SPD, The Greens, The Left and FDP) support full LGBT equality.
However, the High Court found that the legal change was never valid and an official reversal of the bill was announced on 12 December 2013.
Associated Press style recommends the usages ''marriage for gays and lesbians'' or in space-limited headlines ''gay marriage'' with no hyphen and no scare quotes.
The first historical mention of the performance of same-sex marriages occurred during the early Roman Empire according to controversial historian John Boswell.
In November 2012, the Court of Bahia equalized marriage in the state of Bahia.
Same-sex marriage in Sweden has been legal since 1 May 2009, following the adoption of a new, gender-neutral law on marriage by the Swedish Parliament on 1 April 2009, making Sweden the seventh country in the world to open marriage to same-sex couples nationwide.
This group has been able to lobby the One Bermuda Alliance (OBA) into tabling changes to the Matrimonial Act to "strengthen" the notion that marriage is between one man and one woman; a change that the Bermuda Human Rights Commission (BHRC) says will "undermine the integrity of the Human Rights Act.”  Also, the OBA has called for a non-binding referendum to get national consensus on the question of marriage equality.
In the past two decades, public support for same-sex marriage has steadily increased, and polls indicate that more than half of Americans support same-sex marriage.
They were married by a priest at a small chapel.
Parliament gave final approval to the legislation on 14 April 2014 by a vote of 37 in favour and 30 abstentions.
A bill was raised in the Knesset (parliament) to rescind the High Court's ruling, but the Knesset has not advanced the bill since December 2006.
Yu Mei-nu of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), who is the convener of the current legislative session, has expressed support for the amendment as have more than 20 other DPP lawmakers as well as two from the Taiwan Solidarity Union and one each from the Kuomintang and the People First Party.
An October 2014 Demos poll found that 55% of respondents were in favour of same-sex marriage, with 42% against.
The response from the BHRC was:
On 4 June 2013 the Bill received its second reading in the House of Lords, after a blocking amendment was defeated by 390 votes to 148.
The status of same-same marriage is a complicated matter in a number of other nations.
Some religious organizations may refuse to provide employment, public accommodations, adoption services, and other benefits to same-sex couples.
On 13 January 2016, the head of the Civil Registry of Acapulco announced that all marriages that took place on 10 July 2015 by the governor and his wife were void and not legal as same-sex marriage is not legal in Guerrero, unless couples are granted amparo beforehand.
However, the ECHR stated in ''Schalk and Kopf v Austria'' that this provision was intended to limit marriage to heterosexual relationships, as it used the term "men and women" instead of "everyone".
The attitude of the Chinese Government towards homosexuality is believed to be "three nos": "No approval; no disapproval; no promotion."
The Swiss President Simonetta Sommaruga in charge of the Federal Department of Justice and Police also stated she hoped personally that gay and lesbian couples would soon be allowed to marry.
On 26 June 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in ''United States v. Windsor'' Section 3 of DOMA was unconstitutional for allowing the federal government of the United States to deny federal recognition of same-sex marriage licenses, if it is recognized or performed in a state that allows same-sex marriage.
In Mexico, same-sex marriages are performed in a number of states and recognised in all thirty-one states.
The Caribbean countries Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, forming the remainder of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, do not perform same-sex marriages, but must recognize those performed in the Netherlands proper.
In Poland, the national debate regarding recognition of same-sex marriage is conducted along the debate about civil partnerships.
The Senate passed the bill on 2 April 2013, but with minor amendments.
On 10 July 2015, 20 same-sex couples were married by Governor Rogelio Ortega in Acapulco.
Legal recognition of same-sex marriage in Canada followed a series of constitutional challenges based on the equality provisions of the ''Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms''.
Couples in registered partnerships are able to retain that status or convert their registered partnership to a marriage.
Various detailed polls and studies on same-sex marriage that were conducted in several countries show that support for same-sex marriage generally increases with higher levels of education and decreases with age.
In any legal jurisdiction where marriages are defined without distinction of a requirement of a male and female, these complications do not occur.
In the late 20th century, religious rites of marriage without legal recognition became increasingly common.
Among Christians, the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, and various Protestant denominations, such as Seventh-day Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses, take official positions opposing same-sex marriage.
The main right-wing opposition party UMP challenged the law in the Constitutional Council, which had one month to rule on whether the law conformed to the Constitution.
On 17 December 2015, the Congress of Nayarit approved a bill legalizing same-sex marriage.
That same bill was approved by the Chamber of Deputies on 11 May 2016 with 372 deputies in favour and 51 against.
It became law on 30 November 2006.
A similar provision including sterilization also existed in Sweden, but was phased out in 2013.
Support for legal same-sex marriage has increased across every age group, political ideology, religion, gender, race and region of various developed countries in the world.
More than 16,000 same-sex couples are raising an estimated 22,000 adopted children in the United States.
The study linked the passage of a same-sex marriage ban in a state to an increase in the annual HIV rate within that state of roughly 4 cases per 100,000 population.
On 26 May 2015, Greenland, one of Denmark's three constituent countries in the Realm of Denmark, unanimously passed a law legalising same-sex marriage.
A "majority rules" position holds that same-sex marriage is valid, or void and illegal, based upon whether it has been accepted by a simple majority of voters or of their elected representatives.
Religion plays a prominent role in discourse about same-sex marriage, and several religious organizations and churches have expressed a range of official positions.
On 19 March 2015, a bill to legalize same-sex marriage was introduced to the Legislative Assembly by deputy Ligia Elena Fallas Rodríguez from the Broad Front.
Many psychologist organizations have concluded that children stand to benefit from the well-being that results when their parents' relationship is recognized and supported by society's institutions, e.g.
Same-sex couples are raising 4% of all adopted children in the United States.
Writing in ''Harvard Magazine'' in 2013, legal historian Michael Klarman wrote that while there was a growth of gay rights activism in the 1970s United States, "Marriage equality was not then a priority."
When sex is defined legally, it may be defined by any one of several criteria: the XY sex-determination system, the type of gonads, the type of external sexual features, or the person's social identification.
The immediate effect was to increase to 25 the number of states allowing same-sex marriage.
The governor instructed civil agencies to approve same-sex marriage licenses.
On 17 November 2015, in the Faroe Islands, a same-sex marriage bill entered Parliament.
