About three-quarters of the population live on the main island of Upolu.
Scientific research is ongoing, although a number of different theories exist; including one proposing that the Samoans originated from Austronesian predecessors during the terminal eastward Lapita expansion period from Southeast Asia and Melanesia between 2,500 and 1,500 BCE.
Like very many other countries, hip hop music is popular.
Sia Figiel won the 1997 Commonwealth Writers' Prize for fiction in the south-east Asia/South Pacific region with her novel "Where We Once Belonged".
Savai'i is the largest of the Samoan islands and the sixth largest Polynesian island after New Zealand's North, South and Stewart Islands and the Hawaiian islands of Hawaiʻi and Maui.
Rugby union is the national football code of Samoa.
The economy of Samoa has traditionally been dependent on agriculture and fishing at the local level.
Some Samoans live a communal way of life, participating in activities collectively.
Most are Criollo-Forastero hybrids.
Director Sima Urale is an award-winning filmmaker.
Some Samoans are spiritual and religious, and have subtly adapted the dominant religion of Christianity to 'fit in' with fa'a Samoa and vice versa.
This change aimed to help the nation boost its economy in doing business with Australia and New Zealand.
Their daughter Fiame Naomi Mata'afa is a paramount chief and a long-serving senior member of cabinet.
While all of the islands have volcanic origins, only Savai'i, the western most island in Samoa, is volcanically active with the most recent eruptions in Mt Matavanu (1905–1911), Mata o le Afi (1902) and Mauga Afi (1725).
The Second Samoan Civil War reached a head in 1898 when Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States were locked in dispute over who should control the Samoa Islands.
The origins of the Samoans are closely studied in modern research about Polynesia in various scientific disciplines such as genetics, linguistics and anthropology.
Items of great cultural value include the finely woven '''ie toga''.
Despite centuries of European influence, Samoa maintains its historical customs, social and political systems, and language.
The German colonial administration governed on the principle “there was only one government in the islands”, Thus, there was no Samoan ''Tupu'' (king), nor an ''alii sili'' (similar to a governor), but two ''Fautua'' (advisors) were appointed by the colonial government.
Because of variations in altitude, a large range of tropical and subtropical crops can be cultivated, but land is not generally available to outside interests.
Other successful Samoan hip hop artists include rapper Scribe, Dei Hamo, Savage and Tha Feelstyle whose music video ''Suamalie'' was filmed in Samoa.
The '''Independent State of''' '''Samoa''' (, ), commonly known as '''Samoa''' () and, until 1997, known as '''Western Samoa''', is a Unitary Parliamentary Republic with eleven administrative divisions.
The Siege of Apia occurred in March 1899.
From the end of World War I until 1962, New Zealand controlled Samoa as a Class C Mandate under trusteeship through the League of Nations, then through the United Nations.
Between 1919 and 1962, Samoa was administered by the Department of External Affairs, a government department which had been specially created to oversee New Zealand's Island Territories and Samoa.
Mission work in Samoa had begun in late 1830 by John Williams, of the London Missionary Society arriving in Sapapali'i from The Cook Islands and Tahiti.
In 1943, this Department was renamed the Department of Island Territories after a separate Department of External Affairs was created to conduct New Zealand's foreign affairs.
A Samoan girl or ''teine'' is given a malu, which covers the area from just below her knees to her upper thighs.
By the late 1920s the resistance movement against colonial rule had gathered widespread support.
Samoan Sign Language is also used by at least some of the deaf population.
In addition, many Samoans have played for or are playing for New Zealand.
Rugby league is mostly played by Samoans living in New Zealand and Australia, with Samoa reaching the quarter finals of the 2013 Rugby League World Cup made of players playing in the NRL, Super League and domestic players.
Lemi Ponifasio is a director and choreographer who is prominent internationally with his dance Company MAU.
Samoa hosts one of seven Bahá'í Houses of Worship in the world; completed in 1984 and dedicated by the Head of State, it is located in Tiapapata, 8&nbsp;km (5&nbsp;mi) from Apia.
As with other Polynesian cultures (Hawaiian, Tahitian and Māori) with significant and unique tattoos, Samoans have two gender specific and culturally significant tattoos.
Rubber has been produced in Samoa for many years, but its export value has little impact on the economy.
The second major incident arose out of an initially peaceful protest by the Mau (which literally translates as "strongly held opinion"), a non-violent popular movement which had its beginnings in the early 1900s on Savai'i, led by Lauaki Namulauulu Mamoe, an orator chief deposed by Solf.
Cultural customs such as the Samoa 'ava ceremony are significant and solemn rituals at important occasions including the bestowal of ''matai'' chiefly titles.
Universal suffrage was adopted in 1990, but only chiefs (matai) may stand for election to the Samoan seats.
The fa'a Samoa, or traditional Samoan way, remains a strong force in Samoan life and politics.
Chief Tamasese was shot from behind and killed while trying to bring calm and order to the Mau demonstrators, screaming "Peace, Samoa".
The staple products of Samoa are copra (dried coconut meat), cocoa bean (for chocolate), and bananas.
Coffee grows well, but production has been uneven.
His actions and conduct became “… paternal, fair and absolute.” In 1908, when the non-violent Mau a Pule resistance movement arose, Solf did not hesitate to banish the Mau leader Lauaki Namulauulu Mamoe to Saipan in the German Northern Mariana Islands.
Momoe Von Reiche is an internationally recognised poet and artist.
When he resisted, a struggle developed between the police and the Mau.
The Saleaula lava fields situated on the central north coast of Savai'i are the result of the Mt Matavanu eruptions which left 50&nbsp;km² (20&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi) of solidified lava.
The orator group which confers this title – the Faleiva (House of Nine) – is based at Leulumoega.
Observers point to the flexibility of the labour market as a basic strength for future economic advances.
The western islands, by far the greater landmass, became German Samoa.
At the 2003 world cup, Manu Samoa came close to beating eventual world champions, England.
This brought Samoa into line with many other countries in the region.
They also took home the cup at Wellington and the Hong Kong Rugby Sevens in 2007—for which the Prime Minister of Samoa, also Chairman of the national rugby union, Tuila’epa Sa’ilele Malielegaoi, declared a national holiday.
In comedy, Laughing Samoans, the Naked Samoans and Kila Kokonut Krew have enjoyed sold-out tours.
Written and directed by Tusi Tamasese, it received much critical acclaim and attention at film festivals throughout the world.
After several days of fighting, the Samoan rebels were finally defeated.
The United States laid its own claim and formed alliances with local native chieftains, most conspicuously on the islands of Tutuila and Manu'a.
The highest point in Samoa is Mt Silisili, at 1858&nbsp;m (6,096&nbsp;ft).
After repeated efforts by the Samoan independence movement, the New Zealand Western Samoa Act 1961 of 24 November 1961 granted Samoa independence effective 1 January 1962, upon which the Trusteeship Agreement terminated.
The main sports played in Samoa are rugby union, Samoan cricket and netball.
In 1919, the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Epidemic concluded that there had been no epidemic of pneumonic influenza in Western Samoa before the arrival of the SS ''Talune'' from Auckland on 7 November 1918.
These are the traditional eleven districts that were established well before Europeans arrived.
Jacob Roggeveen, a Dutchman, was the first known European to sight the Samoan islands in 1722.
They were also the IRB World Sevens Series Champions in 2010 capping a year of achievement for the Samoans, following wins in the USA, Australia, Hong Kong and Scotland Sevens tournaments.
Intimate sociocultural and genetic ties were maintained between the eastern Lapita colonies and the archaeological record supports oral tradition and native genealogies that indicate inter-island voyaging and intermarriage between prehistoric Samoans, Fijians, and Tongans.
The annual production of both bananas and copra has been in the range of 13,000 to 15,000 metric tons (about 14,500 to 16,500 short tons).
Actor and director Nathaniel Lees has featured in many theatre productions and films including his role as Captain Mifune in ''The Matrix'' trilogy.
The Yandall Sisters' cover of the song ''Sweet Inspiration'' reached number one on the New Zealand charts in 1974.
Sugarcane production, originally established by Germans in the early 20th century, could be successful.
By 1918, Samoa had a population of some 38,000 Samoans and 1,500 Europeans.
Currently 98% of the population identify themselves as Christian.
Samoa has a population of 194,320.
Samoa also played in the Pacific Nations Cup and the Pacific Tri-Nations The sport is governed by the Samoa Rugby Football Union, who are members of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, and thus, also contribute to the international Pacific Islanders rugby union team.
Nelson was eventually exiled during the late 1920s and early 1930s, but he continued to assist the organisation financially and politically.
Outside of a large automotive wire harness factory (Yazaki Corporation), the manufacturing sector mainly processes agricultural products.
This is also the same for the other districts.
Old train tracks for transporting cane can be seen at some plantations east of Apia.
Samoan mythology includes many gods with creation stories and figures of legend such as Tagaloa and the goddess of war Nafanua, the daughter of Saveasi'uleo, ruler of the spirit realm Pulotu.
Samoa also signed a friendship treaty with New Zealand.
Ten others died that day and approximately 50 were injured by gunshot wounds and police batons.
The Samoan labour force is estimated at 90,000.
Examples of this are the traditional Samoan ''fale'' (houses) which are open with no walls, using blinds made of coconut palm fronds during the night or bad weather.
Hip hop has had a significant impact on Samoan culture.
A 2002 article from ''ESPN'' estimated that a Samoan male (either an American Samoan, or a Samoan living in the mainland United States) is 40 times more likely to play in the NFL than a non-Samoan American.
The two main islands are Savai'i and Upolu with four smaller islands surrounding the landmasses.
A male who possesses such a tatau is called a soga'imiti.
The unicameral legislature (the Fono) consists of 49 members serving 5-year terms.
The ''sasa'' is also a traditional dance where rows of dancers perform rapid synchronised movements in time to the rhythm of wooden drums ''(pate)'' or rolled mats.
In the first month of World War I, on 29 August 1914, troops of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force landed unopposed on 'Upolu and seized control from the German authorities, following a request by Great Britain for New Zealand to perform their "great and urgent imperial service".
On 7 September 2009, the government changed the driving orientation for motorists: Samoans now drive on the left side of the road.
However, Robert Louis Stevenson, who lived in Samoa from 1889 until his death in 1894, wrote in ''A Footnote to History: Eight Years of Trouble in Samoa'', "… the Samoans are gentle people."
Only the Māori of New Zealand outnumber Samoans among Polynesian groups.
''Tumua'' and ''Pule'' (traditional governments of Upolu and Savaii) were for a time silent; all decisions on matters affecting lands and titles were under the control of the colonial Governor.
The climate is equatorial/monsoonal, with an average annual temperature of 26.5&nbsp;°C (79.7&nbsp;°F), and a rainy season from November to April.
Tusiata Avia is a performance poet.
Urale's short film ''O Tamaiti'' won the prestigious Best Short Film at the Venice Film Festival in 1996.
Before this change, Samoa was 21 hours behind Sydney, but the change means it is now three hours ahead.
This is believed to have been derived from slapping insects on the body.
Other legends include the well known story of Sina and the Eel which explains the origins of the first coconut tree.
Including second-language speakers, there are more speakers of Samoan than English in Samoa .
The Lapita people discovered and settled the Samoan islands around 3,500 years ago.
There are more than 25,000 matais in the country, about 5% of whom are women.
However, Samoans greatly resented New Zealand's colonial rule, and blamed inflation and the catastrophic 1918 flu epidemic on its misrule.
The prime minister, chosen by a majority in the Fono, is appointed by the head of state to form a government.
File:Siva Afi - Fire spinning.jpg|A Samoan fire dancer.
Rugby union is the national sport in Samoa and the national team, nicknamed the Manu Samoa, is consistently competitive against teams from vastly more populous nations.
One of the Mau leaders was Olaf Frederick Nelson, a half Samoan and half Swedish merchant.
In 2002, New Zealand's prime minister Helen Clark formally apologised for New Zealand's role in the events of 1918 and 1929.
American and British warships shelled Apia on 15 March 1899, including the USS ''Philadelphia''.
Two other paramount chiefs at the time of independence were appointed joint  heads of state for life.
They developed a unique language and cultural identity.
The Samoan islands have been produced by vulcanism, the source of which is the Samoa hotspot which is probably the result of a mantle plume.
The industrial sector is the largest component of GDP at 58.4%, followed by the services sector at 30.2% (2004 est.).
File:Apia Samoa Temple-new.jpg|LDS Apia Samoa Temple
Francis Meli, Ta'ane Lavulavu of Workington Town, Maurie Fa'asavalu of St Helens and David Fatialofa of Whitehaven and Setima Sa who signed with London Irish rugby club.
The form and construction of traditional architecture of Samoa was a specialised skill by ''Tufuga fai fale'' that was also linked to other cultural artforms.
A massive storm on 15 March 1889 damaged or destroyed the warships, ending the military conflict.
Her first feature film ''Apron Strings'' opened the 2008 NZ International Film Festival.
Samoa comprises eleven ''itūmālō'' (political districts).
Samoan forces loyal to Prince Tanu were besieged by a larger force of Samoan rebels loyal to Mata'afa Iosefo.
Samoa thus became the first country in the 21st century to switch to driving on the left.
Dance both in its traditional form and its more modern forms has remained a central cultural currency to Samoans, especially youths.
Tourist arrivals have been increasing over the years with more than 100,000 tourists visiting the islands in 2005, up from 70,000 in 1996.
Other Samoan poets and writers include Sapa'u Ruperake Petaia, Eti Sa'aga and Savea Sano Malifa, the editor of the Samoa Observer.
Samoan cocoa beans are of very high quality and used in fine New Zealand chocolates.
Samoans have been very visible in boxing, kickboxing, wrestling, and sumo; some Samoan sumo wrestlers, most famously Musashimaru and Konishiki, have reached the highest rank of ''Ozeki'' and ''yokozuna''.
At the end of December 2011, Samoa jumped forward by one day, omitting 30 December from the local calendar, when the nation moved to the west of the International Date Line.
The eastern island-group became a territory of the United States (the Tutuila Islands in 1900 and officially Manu'a in 1904) and was known as American Samoa.
92.6% of the population are Samoans, 7% Euronesians (people of mixed European and Polynesian ancestry) and 0.4% are Europeans, per the CIA World Factbook.
The Samoan government has called for deregulation of the financial sector, encouragement of investment, and continued fiscal discipline.
In music, popular local bands include The Five Stars, Penina o Tiafau and Punialava'a.
Since human habitation began, about 80% of the lowland rain forests has been lost.
Samoan and English are the official languages.
According to Barbara A.
Neil Ieremia's company Black Grace has also received international acclaim with tours to Europe and New York.
Its chief justice is appointed by the head of state upon the recommendation of the prime minister.
For example, the District of A'ana has its capital at Leulumoega.
The NZ administration allowed the ship to berth in breach of quarantine; within seven days of this ship's arrival, influenza became epidemic in Upolu and then spread rapidly throughout the rest of the territory.
In the first incident, approximately one fifth of the Samoan population died in the influenza epidemic of 1918–1919.
Her first book of poetry ''Wild Dogs Under My Skirt'' was published by Victoria University Press in 2004.
The Germans in particular began to show great commercial interest in the Samoan Islands, especially on the island of Upolu, where German firms monopolised copra and cocoa bean processing.
This visit was followed by French explorer Louis-Antoine de Bougainville, who named them the ''Navigator Islands'' in 1768.
The population of Savai'i is 42,000 people.
Agriculture represents only 11.4% of GDP (2004 est.).
Samoa, the first small-island country in the Pacific to become independent, joined the Commonwealth of Nations on 28 August 1970.
The feature film ''Siones Wedding'', co-written by Oscar Kightley, was financially successful following premieres in Auckland and Apia.
Tupua Tamasese Mea'ole died in 1963, leaving Malietoa Tanumafili II sole head of state until his death on 11 May 2007, upon which Samoa changed from a constitutional monarchy to a parliamentary republic ''de facto''.
That day would come to be known in Samoa as Black Saturday.
Other women in politics include Samoan scholar and eminent professor Aiono Fanaafi Le Tagaloa, orator-chief Matatumua Maimoana and Safuneitu'uga Pa'aga Neri ( the Minister of Communication and Technology).
The Samoan culture is centred around the principle of vāfealoa'i, the relationships between people.
Prominent Samoan players include Pat Lam and Brian Lima.
The Samoan word for dance is ''siva'' with unique gentle movements of the body in time to music and which tell a story, although the Samoan male dances can be more snappy.
The entire island group, which includes American Samoa, was called "Navigator Islands" by European explorers before the 20th century because of the Samoans' seafaring skills.
The paramount title of A'ana is the TuiA'ana.
In modern times, development aid, private family remittances from overseas, and agricultural exports have become key factors in the nation's economy.
Ancient beliefs continue to co-exist side-by-side with Christianity, particularly in regard to the traditional customs and rituals of fa'a Samoa.
Agriculture employs two-thirds of the labour force, and furnishes 90% of exports, featuring coconut cream, coconut oil, noni (juice of the ''nonu'' fruit, as it is known in Samoan), and copra.
The judicial system incorporates English common law and local customs.
German merchants and settlers were active in introducing large scale plantation operations and developing new industries, notably cocoa bean and rubber, relying on imported labourers from China and Melanesia.
About 30 ethnic Samoans, many from American Samoa, currently play in the National Football League.
The 2011 film The Orator was the first ever fully Samoan film, shot in Samoa in the Samoan language with a Samoan cast telling a uniquely Samoan story.
When Christianity was introduced in Samoa, most Samoan people converted.
Other noteworthy players from NZ and Australia have represented the Samoan National team.
The Samoan origins are currently being reassessed due to new scientific evidence and carbon dating findings from 2003 and onwards.
The capital city is Apia.
The Samoan crisis came to a critical juncture in March 1889 when all three colonial contenders sent warships into Apia harbour, and a larger-scale war seemed imminent.
The Supreme Court of Samoa is the court of highest jurisdiction.
West, "The Samoans were also known to engage in ‘headhunting', a ritual of war in which a warrior took the head of his slain opponent to give to his leader, thus proving his bravery."
King Kapisi was the first hip hop artist to receive the prestigious New Zealand APRA Silver Scroll Award in 1999 for his song ''Reverse Resistance''.
The officers began to fire randomly into the crowd and a Lewis machine gun, mounted in preparation for this demonstration, was used to disperse the demonstrators.
The 2011 domestic Samoan rugby league competition contained 10 teams with plans to expand to 12 in 2012.
For males, it is called the Pe'a and consists of intricate and geometrical patterns tattooed that cover areas from the knees up towards the ribs.
Fiame Mata'afa Faumuina Mulinu’u II, one of the four highest-ranking paramount chiefs in the country, became Samoa's first Prime Minister.
Contact was limited before the 1830s, which is when English missionaries and traders began arriving.
In accordance with the Mau's non-violent philosophy, the newly elected leader, High Chief Tupua Tamasese Lealofi, led his fellow uniformed Mau in a peaceful demonstration in downtown Apia on 28 December 1929.
The previous time zone, agreed on 4 July 1892, operated in line with American traders based in California.
This was followed by an eight-year civil war, during which each of the three powers supplied arms, training and in some cases combat troops to the warring Samoan parties.
The Mau grew, remaining steadfastly non-violent, and expanded to include the highly influential women's branch.
Forty-seven are ''matai'' title-holders elected from territorial districts by Samoans; the other two are chosen by non-Samoans with no chiefly affiliation on separate electoral rolls.
At club level, there is the National Provincial Championship and Pacific Rugby Cup.
The sector has been helped enormously by major capital investment in hotel infrastructure, political instability in neighbouring Pacific countries, and the 2005 launch of Virgin Samoa a joint-venture between the government and Virgin Australia (then Virgin Blue).
In 1989, his novel ''Flying Fox in a Freedom Tree'' was made into a feature film in New Zealand, directed by Martyn Sanderson.
These relationships are based on respect, or fa'aaloalo.
Travel writer Paul Theroux noted marked differences between the societies in Western Samoa and American Samoa in 1992.
The United Kingdom had vacated all claims in Samoa and in return received (1) termination of German rights in Tonga, (2) all of the Solomon Islands south of Bougainville, and (3) territorial alignments in West Africa.
In the period before German colonisation, Samoa produced mostly copra.
The Head of State until 2007, His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II, was a Bahá'í convert.
The next Head of State, Tuiatua Tupua Tamasese Efi, was elected by the legislature on 17 June 2007 for a fixed five-year term, and was re-elected unopposed in July 2012.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2006 was estimated at $1.218 billion USD.
Dan Taulapapa McMullin is an artist and writer.
The country currency is the Samoan tālā, issued and regulated by the Central Bank of Samoa.
The capital village of each district administers and coordinates the affairs of the district and confers each district's paramount title, amongst other responsibilities.
There followed a series of New Zealand administrators who were responsible for two major incidents.
About 4.4% is Western Samoan Trust Estates Corporation (WSTEC).
Samoans' religious adherence includes the following: Christian Congregational Church of Samoa 31.8%, Roman Catholic 19.4%, Methodist 15.2%, Assembly of God 13.7%, Mormon 7.6%, Seventh-day Adventist 3.9%, Worship Centre 1.7%, other Christian 5.5%, other 0.7%, none 0.1%, unspecified 0.1% (2011 estimate).
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States quickly resolved to end the hostilities and divided the island chain at the Tripartite Convention of 1899, signed at Washington on 2 December 1899 with ratifications exchanged on 16 February 1900.
Supporting Prince Tanu were landing parties from four British and American warships.
In addition, the integration of hip hop elements into Samoan tradition also "testifies to the transferability of the dance forms themselves," and to the "circuits through which people and all their embodied knowledge travel."
Within the ecoregion about 28% of plants and 84% of land birds are endemic.
In the district of Tuamasaga, the paramount title of the district – the Malietoa title – is conferred by the FaleTuamasaga based in Afega.
