It should be noted that many samurai forces that were active throughout this period were not deployed to Korea; most importantly, the daimyo Tokugawa Ieyasu carefully kept forces under his command out of the Korean campaigns, and other samurai commanders who were opposed to Hideyoshi's domination of Japan either mulled Hideyoshi's call to invade Korea or contributed a small token force.
Various other components of armor protected the samurai's body.
Not only has the samurai culture been adopted into animation and video games, it can also be seen in comic books.
A Naval training school was established in Nagasaki in 1855.
He is best known for his saying "The way of the Samurai is in desperateness.
With no warfare since the early 17th century, samurai gradually lost their military function during the Tokugawa era (also called the Edo period).
For this reason, many women of the samurai class were trained in wielding a polearm called a naginata or a special knife called the ''kaiken'' in an art called ''tantojutsu'' (lit.
Ten years before the Wolverine debuted, another film helped pave the way to ensure the samurai were made known to American cinema:
In the 1500s a new type of armor started to become popular due to the advent of firearms, new fighting tactics and the need for additional protection.
Taking advantage of arquebus mastery and extensive wartime experience from the Sengoku period, Japanese samurai armies made major gains in most of Korea.
The samurai have also appeared frequently in Japanese comics (manga) and animation (anime).
This does not mean that samurai women were always powerless.
I really think that among barbarous nations there can be none that has more natural goodness than the Japanese.
Just in the last two decades, samurai have become more popular in America.
In the early Heian period, during the late 8th and early 9th centuries, Emperor Kammu sought to consolidate and expand his rule in northern Honshū, and sent military campaigns against the Emishi, who resisted the governance of the Kyoto-based imperial court.
Confucian law, which helped define personal relationships and the code of ethics of the warrior class required that a woman show subservience to her husband, filial piety to her parents, and care to the children.
There were to Lord Eirin's character many high points difficult to measure, but according to the elders the foremost of these was the way he governed the province by his civility.
The Mongol invaders used small bombs, which was likely the first appearance of bombs and gunpowder in Japan.
(Hashiba is the family name that Toyotomi Hideyoshi used while he was a follower of Nobunaga.)
A woman could also arrange a divorce, although it would generally take the form of the samurai divorcing her.
From this time, the Emperor's power gradually declined.
This new armor, which used iron plated ''dou (dō)'', was referred to as ''Tosei-gusoku'', or modern armor.
With the Meiji reforms in the late 19th century, the samurai class was abolished, and a western-style national army was established.
Most of the samurai families that survived to the 19th century originated in this era, declaring themselves to be the blood of one of the four ancient noble clans: Minamoto, Taira, Fujiwara and Tachibana.
The relative peace of the Tokugawa era was shattered with the arrival of Commodore Matthew Perry's massive U.S. Navy steamships in 1853.
They are discreet, magnanimous and lovers of virtue and letters, honouring learned men very much.
''Hagakure'' or "Hidden in Leaves" by Yamamoto Tsunetomo and '' Gorin no Sho'' or "Book of the Five Rings" by Miyamoto Musashi, both written in the Tokugawa period (1603–1868), are theories often associated with Bushido and Zen philosophy.
The ''kozane dou'' made from individual scales was replaced by ''plate armor''.
Wilson then translates the writings of several warriors who mention the Heike Monogatari as an example for their men to follow.
"Bakufu" means "tent government", taken from the encampments the soldiers would live in, in accordance with the Bakufu's status as a military government.
Social mobility was high, as the ancient regime collapsed and emerging samurai needed to maintain large military and administrative organizations in their areas of influence.
Samurai were expected to be cultured and literate, and admired the ancient saying "bunbu-ryōdō" (文武両道, lit., literary arts, military arts, both ways) or "The pen and the sword in accord".
Though women of wealthier samurai families enjoyed perks of their elevated position in society, such as avoiding the physical labor that those of lower classes often engaged in, they were still viewed as far beneath men.
The conduct of samurai served as role model behavior for the other social classes.
A samurai could divorce his wife for a variety of reasons with approval from a superior, but divorce was, while not entirely nonexistent, a rare event.
Such a neglect means a disloyalty toward humanity.
Engage in combat fully determined to die and you will be alive; wish to survive in the battle and you will surely meet death.
A series of strips of kozane were then laced together with silk or leather lace and formed into a complete chest armor (''dou or dō'').
From 1854, the samurai army and the navy were modernized.
Previously, tea had been used primarily for Buddhist monks to stay awake during meditation.
Because of their rising military and economic power, the warriors ultimately became a new force in the politics of the Imperial court.
Nene, wife of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, was known to overrule her husband's decisions at times and Yodo-dono, his concubine, became the de facto master of Osaka castle and the Toyotomi clan after Hideyoshi's death.
The Taira and the Minamoto clashed again in 1180, beginning the Genpei War, which ended in 1185.
The number of people mobilized in warfare ranged from thousands to hundreds of thousands.
This is often given a simplified translation as "divine wind".
In 1274, the Mongol-founded Yuan dynasty in China sent a force of some 40,000 men and 900 ships to invade Japan in northern Kyūshū.
In Japanese, they are usually referred to as  or .
Originally the Emperor and non-warrior nobility employed these warrior nobles.
To avoid infighting, invasions of neighboring samurai territories became common and bickering among samurai was a constant problem for the Kamakura and Ashikaga Shogunates.
As was custom, Torii vowed that he would not be taken alive.
Samurai were usually loyal to their immediate superiors, who in turn allied themselves with higher lords.
Some of these exchange students started private schools for higher educations, while many samurai took pens instead of guns and became reporters and writers, setting up newspaper companies, and others entered governmental service.
In 1281, a Yuan army of 140,000 men with 5,000 ships was mustered for another invasion of Japan.
When you leave the house determined not to see it again you will come home safely; when you have any thought of returning you will not return.
Families such as the Imagawa were influential in the development of warrior ethics and were widely quoted by other lords during their lifetime.
He finally wrote "God hath provided for me after my great misery", (Letters) by which he meant the disaster-ridden voyage that initially brought him to Japan.
Kidnapping a concubine, although common in fiction, would have been shameful, if not criminal.
Yaesu is a corruption of the Dutchman's Japanese name, Yayousu (耶楊子).
From the earliest times, the Samurai felt that the path of the warrior was one of honor, emphasizing duty to one's master, and loyalty unto death".
Recent studies have shown that literacy in kanji among other groups in society was somewhat higher than previously understood.
These clans formed alliances to protect themselves against more powerful clans, and by the mid-Heian period they had adopted characteristic Japanese armor and weapons, and laid the foundations of ''Bushidō'', their ethical code.
Bandou is a large territory, ruled by six minor princes, one of whom is more powerful than the others and is obeyed by them, being himself subject to the King of Japan, who is called the Great King of Meaco.
In 2013, the samurai villain was depicted in James Mangold’s film ''The Wolverine''.
Most of them can read, and this is a great help to them for the easy understanding of our usual prayers and the chief points of our holy religion.
Musō Soseki (1275–1351) was a Zen monk who was advisor to both Emperor Go-Daigo and General Ashikaga Takauji (1304–58).
The ''kami-no-kaze'' lent credence to the Japanese belief that their lands were indeed divine and under supernatural protection.
They were strongly emphasized by the teachings of Confucius and Mencius (ca 550 BC), which were required reading for the educated samurai class.
The two provinces were the lands of the daimyo that submitted to Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara (1600).
By his civility, "all were willing to sacrifice their lives for him and become his allies."
Along with film, literature containing samurai influences are seen as well.
Literacy was generally high among the warriors and the common classes as well.
His estate was valued at 250 koku.
On the eve of the battle of Sekigahara, he volunteered to remain behind in the doomed Fushimi Castle while his lord advanced to the east.
Starring the voice of well known American actor Samuel L. Jackson, “Afro is the second-strongest fighter in a futuristic, yet, still feudal Japan and seeks revenge upon the gunman who killed his father” (King 2008).
Kurosawa was inspired by the works of director John Ford and in turn Kurosawa's works have been remade into westerns such as ''The Seven Samurai'' into ''The Magnificent Seven'' and ''Yojimbo'' into ''A Fistful of Dollars''.
According to translator William Scott Wilson: "In Chinese, the character 侍 was originally a verb meaning "to wait upon" or "accompany persons" in the upper ranks of society, and this is also true of the original term in Japanese, saburau.
The final death blow to the Japanese campaigns in Korea came with Hideyoshi's death in late 1598 and the recall of all Japanese forces in Korea by the Council of Five Elders (established by Hideyoshi to oversee the transition from his regency to that of his son Hideyori).
After a divorce samurai had to return the betrothal money, which often prevented divorces.
), a Dutch colleague of Adams' on their ill-fated voyage to Japan in the ship De Liefde, was also given similar privileges by Tokugawa Ieyasu.
Anjiro was not an intellectual, but he impressed Xavier because he took careful notes of everything he said in church.
The authorized samurai families after the 17th century were those that chose to follow Nobunaga, Hideyoshi and Ieyasu.
Through protective agreements and political marriages, they accumulated, or gathered, political power, eventually surpassing the traditional aristocracy.
Maintaining the household was the main duty of samurai women.
Examples such as Taira Tadanori (a samurai who appears in the ''Heike Monogatari'') demonstrate that warriors idealized the arts and aspired to become skilled in them.
There were, however, also notable instances where samurai would be disloyal to their lord or daimyo, when loyalty to the Emperor was seen to have supremacy.
Zen meditation became an important teaching due to it offering a process to calm one's mind.
Musō, as well as other monks, acted as political and cultural diplomat between Japan and China.
It was called "Gundan-Sei" (:ja:軍団制) by later historians and is believed to have been short-lived.
Despite the rampant romanticism of the 20th century, samurai could be disloyal and treacherous (e.g., Akechi Mitsuhide), cowardly, brave, or overly loyal (e.g., Kusunoki Masashige).
The wife, or ''okugatasama'' (meaning: one who remains in the home), was left to manage all household affairs, care for the children, and perhaps even defend the home forcibly.
In the film, Cruise’s character finds himself deeply immersed in samurai culture.
Some clans were originally formed by farmers who had taken up arms to protect themselves from the Imperial magistrates sent to govern their lands and collect taxes.
As the Tokugawa period progressed more value became placed on education, and the education of females beginning at a young age became important to families and society as a whole.
In these marriages a dowry was brought by the woman and was used to set up the couple's new household.
As the last samurai rebellion was crushed, Japan modernized its defenses and turned to a national conscription army that used uniforms.
They still had the legal right to cut down any commoner who did not show proper respect , but to what extent this right was used is unknown.
French naval engineers were hired to build naval arsenals, such as Yokosuka and Nagasaki.
Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn (1556?–1623?
In the first place, the nation with which we have had to do here surpasses in goodness any of the nations lately discovered.
Examples are Samurai Champloo, Requiem from the Darkness, Muramasa: The Demon Blade, and Afro Samurai.
He commanded most of Japan's major clans during the invasion of Korea (1592–1598).
These practices were adapted from the Chinese arts.
His cultural advisor, the Zen monk Zeami, introduced tea ceremony to him.
Torii and Tokugawa both agreed that the castle was indefensible.
Go to the battlefield firmly confident of victory, and you will come home with no wounds whatever.
Both the kanji literacy rate and skills in math improved toward the end of Kamakura period.
The feudal lord Asakura Yoshikage (1428–1481 AD) wrote: "In the fief of the Asakura, one should not determine hereditary chief retainers.
He eventually seized control of the central government, establishing the first samurai-dominated government and relegating the Emperor to figurehead status.
He stated that it was shameful for any man to have not risked his life at least once in the line of duty, regardless of his rank.
Though many of the texts written for women during the Tokugawa period only pertained to how a woman could become a successful wife and household manager, there were those that undertook the challenge of learning to read, and also tackled philosophical and literary classics.
At this time (the 7th to 9th century), the Imperial Court officials considered them to be merely a military section under the control of the Imperial Court.
In a letter dated 29 January 1552, St Francis Xavier observed the ease of which the Japanese understood prayers due to the high level of literacy in Japan at that time:
The number of men who actually achieved the ideal and lived their lives by it was high.
The fact that Chiyo (though she is better known as "Wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo") is held in such high esteem for her economic sense is illuminating in the light of the fact that she never produced an heir and the Yamauchi clan was succeeded by Kazutoyo's younger brother.
Ideally, a samurai wife would be skilled at managing property, keeping records, dealing with financial matters, educating the children (and perhaps servants, too), and caring for elderly parents or in-laws that may be living under her roof.
The culture associated with the samurai such as the tea ceremony, monochrome ink painting, rock gardens and poetry were adopted by warrior patrons throughout the centuries 1200–1600.
“By the end of the film, he has clearly taken on many of the samurai traits, such as zen-like mastery of the sword, and a budding understanding of spirituality”.
An early term for warrior, "uruwashii", was written with a kanji that combined the characters for literary study ("bun" 文) and military arts ("bu" 武), and is mentioned in the Heike Monogatari (late 12th century).
the skill of the knife), which they could use to protect their household, family, and honor if the need arose.
There is a very famous University there, as well as five chief colleges of students, and more than two hundred monasteries of bonzes, and of others who are like coenobites, called Legioxi, as well as of women of the same kind, who are called Hamacutis.
He was provided with generous revenues: "For the services that I have done and do daily, being employed in the Emperor's service, the Emperor has given me a living" (Letters).
This led to the ultimately premature uprising, led by Saigō Takamori.
Traits valued in women of the samurai class were humility, obedience, self-control, strength, and loyalty.
To amass wealth and repay their debts, magistrates often imposed heavy taxes, resulting in many farmers becoming landless.
Japan mustered a mere 10,000 samurai to meet this threat.
"It is not the Way of the Warrior i.e., bushido to be shamed and avoid death even under circumstances that are not particularly important.
The last samurai conflict was arguably in 1877, during the Satsuma Rebellion in the Battle of Shiroyama.
In 1190 he visited Kyoto and in 1192 became Sei'i-taishōgun, establishing the Kamakura Shogunate, or ''Kamakura Bakufu''.
In an account of Japan sent to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, drawn from the statements of Anger (Han-Siro's western name), Xavier describes the importance of honor to the Japanese (Letter preserved at College of Coimbra.
They were hard workers and respectful of authority.
Most warriors aspired to or followed this ideal otherwise there would have been no cohesion in the samurai armies.
Similarly, the feudal lord Takeda Nobushige (1525–1561 AD) stated: "In matters both great and small, one should not turn his back on his master's commands...One should not ask for gifts or enfiefments from the master...No matter how unreasonably the master may treat a man, he should not feel disgruntled...An underling does not pass judgments on a superior"
By the time of the Edo period, Japan had a higher literacy comparable to that in central Europe.
The samurai were usually associated with a clan and their lord, were trained as officers in military tactics and grand strategy, and they followed a set of rules that later came to be known as the bushidō.
Perry used his superior firepower to force Japan to open its borders to trade.
Hiramatsu (Schnell) was given the right to wear swords, as well as a residence in the castle town of Wakamatsu, a Japanese wife, and retainers.
By the end of the 12th century, ''samurai'' became almost entirely synonymous with ''bushi'', and the word was closely associated with the middle and upper echelons of the warrior class.
Another Ashikaga patron of the arts was Yoshimasa.
This was one of the first attempts by the Imperial government to form an organized army modeled after the Chinese system.
It is important to note that the distinction between samurai and non-samurai was so obscure that during the 16th century, most male adults in any social class (even small farmers) belonged to at least one military organization of their own and served in wars before and during Hideyoshi's rule.
Due to its popularity, Afro Samurai was adopted into a full feature animated film and also became titles on gaming consoles such as the PlayStation 3 and Xbox.
The invading army was harassed by major thunderstorms throughout the invasion, which aided the defenders by inflicting heavy casualties.
Bushido was formalized by several influential leaders and families before the Edo Period.
The programs typically feature a samurai.
For example, Iwasaki Yatarō, who was the great-grandson of a samurai, established Mitsubishi.
With an understanding of how the population was distributed, Emperor Mommu introduced a law whereby 1 in 3–4 adult males was drafted into the national military.
These soldiers were required to supply their own weapons, and in-return were exempted from duties and taxes.
Instead of ruling from Kyoto, he set up the Shogunate in Kamakura, near his base of power.
In many cases, taking a concubine was akin to a marriage.
Ieyasu Tokugawa would successfully raise an army and win at Sekigahara.
Taking place during the Meiji Period, Tom Cruise plays the role of US Army Captain Nathan Algren, who travels to Japan to train a rookie army in fighting off samurai rebel groups.
There is also a 26 episode anime adaptation (Samurai 7) of ''The Seven Samurai''.
Samurai could choose their own ''nanori'', and frequently changed their names to reflect their allegiances.
Honour with them is placed above everything else.
One of Japan’s most renowned directors, Akira Kurosawa, greatly influenced the samurai aspect in western film-making.
Emperor Meiji abolished the samurai's right to be the only armed force in favor of a more modern, western-style, conscripted army in 1873.
Skilled in mounted combat and archery (kyūdō), these clan warriors became the Emperor's preferred tool for putting down rebellions; the most well known of which was Sakanoue no Tamuramaro.
Most samurai married women from a samurai family, but for lower-ranked samurai, marriages with commoners were permitted.
Nabeshima Naoshige (1538–1618 AD) was another Sengoku Daimyo who fought alongside Kato Kiyomasa in Korea.
Most samurai were bound by a code of honor and were expected to set an example for those below them.
In a letter to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, Xavier further noted the education of the upper classes:
A man should be assigned according to his ability and loyalty."
In time, they amassed enough manpower, resources and political backing in the form of alliances with one another, to establish the first samurai-dominated government.
When the central government forced daimyos to cut the size of their armies, unemployed rōnin became a social problem.
The casualties and damage inflicted by the typhoon, followed by the Japanese defense of the Hakata Bay barrier, resulted in the Mongols again recalling their armies.
This edict allowed the Japanese aristocracy to adopt the Tang dynasty political structure, bureaucracy, culture, religion, and philosophy.
The victor, Taira no Kiyomori, became an imperial advisor, and was the first warrior to attain such a position.
The source of power for women may have been that samurai left their finances to their wives.
The rival of Takeda Shingen (1521–1573) was Uesugi Kenshin (1530–1578), a legendary Sengoku warlord well-versed in the Chinese military classics and who advocated the "way of the warrior as death".
A samurai could divorce for personal reasons, even if he simply did not like his wife, but this was generally avoided as it would embarrass the person who had arranged the marriage.
Bushido was formalized by samurai such as Imagawa Ryoshun as early as the 13th century.
Shimazu Yoshihiro led some 7,000 samurai and, despite being heavily outnumbered, defeated a host of allied Ming and Korean forces at the Battle of Sacheon in 1598, near the conclusion of the campaigns.
These early samurai armors were made from small individual scales known as ''kozane''.
He was granted the Japanese name Hiramatsu Buhei (平松武兵衛), which inverted the characters of the daimyo's name Matsudaira.
The Nobles send their sons to monasteries to be educated as soon as they are 8 years old, and they remain there until they are 19 or 20, learning reading, writing and religion; as soon as they come out, they marry and apply themselves to politics.
Attacking from the "sanctuary" of Buddhist temples, they were constant headaches to any warlord and even the Emperor who tried to control their actions.
A film released in 2003 titled ''The Last Samurai'', starring Tom Cruise, is inspired by the samurai way of life.
These loyalties to the higher lords often shifted; for example, the high lords allied under Toyotomi Hideyoshi () were served by loyal samurai, but the feudal lords under them could shift their support to Tokugawa, taking their samurai with them.
The Taihō Code classified most of the Imperial bureaucrats into 12 ranks, each divided into two sub-ranks, 1st rank being the highest adviser to the Emperor.
You may not be in the wrong to think that the world is always subject to change, but the warrior must not entertain this way of thinking, for his fate is always determined."
The Heike Monogatari makes reference to the educated poet-swordsman ideal in its mention of Taira no Tadanori's death:
These winds became known as ''kami-no-kaze'', which literally translates as "wind of the gods".
Also in common with Adam's, Joostens was given a Red Seal Ship (朱印船) allowing him to trade between Japan and Indo-China.
The design of this character preserves the samurai appearance; the villain is “Clad in traditional gleaming samurai armor and wielding an energy charged katana” (Buxton, 2013).
These writings were a required study among traditional Japanese until World War II.
However, the rule of the state by the military class was not yet over.
Plenty of warrior writings document this ideal from the 13th century onward.
The translator of ''Hagakure'', William Scott Wilson observed examples of warrior emphasis on death in clans other than Yamamoto's: "he (Takeda Shingen) was a strict disciplinarian as a warrior, and there is an exemplary story in the ''Hagakure'' relating his execution of two brawlers, not because they had fought, but because they had not fought to the death".
In spite of the superiority of Japanese land forces, ultimately the two expeditions failed (though they did devastate the Korean landmass) from factors such as Korean naval superiority (which, led by Admiral Yi Sun-shin, harassed Japanese supply lines continuously throughout the wars, resulting in supply shortages on land), the commitment of sizeable Ming forces to Korea, Korean guerrilla actions, the underestimation of resistance by Japanese commanders (in the first campaign of 1592, Korean defenses on land were caught unprepared, under-trained, and under-armed; they were rapidly overrun, with only a limited number of successfully resistant engagements against the more-experienced and battle-hardened Japanese forces - in the second campaign of 1597, Korean and Ming forces proved to be a far more difficult challenge and, with the support of continued Korean naval superiority, limited Japanese gains to parts southeastern Korea), and wavering Japanese commitment to the campaigns as the wars dragged on.
In both countries the terms were nominalized to mean "those who serve in close attendance to the nobility", the pronunciation in Japanese changing to saburai.
A few of the more famous samurai generals of this war were Katō Kiyomasa, Konishi Yukinaga, and Shimazu Yoshihiro.
The thunderstorms of 1274 and the typhoon of 1281 helped the samurai defenders of Japan repel the Mongol invaders despite being vastly outnumbered.
Completed in 1277, this wall stretched for 20 kilometers around the border of the bay.
The last showing of the original samurai was in 1867 when samurai from Chōshū and Satsuma provinces defeated the Shogunate forces in favor of the rule of the Emperor in the Boshin War (1868–1869).
He was granted a fief in Hemi () within the boundaries of present-day Yokosuka City, "with eighty or ninety husbandmen, that be my slaves or servants" (Letters).
Hideyoshi began as a peasant and became one of Nobunaga's top generals, and Ieyasu had shared his childhood with Nobunaga.
Kato Kiyomasa advanced to Orangkai territory (present-day Manchuria) bordering Korea to the northeast and crossed the border into Manchuria, but withdrew after retaliatory attacks from the Jurchens there, as it was clear he had outpaced the rest of the Japanese invasion force.
Thus it is essential to engrave this business of the warrior into one's mind well."
The nobles, however poor they may be, receive the same honour from the rest as if they were rich.
With time on their hands, samurai spent more time in pursuit of other interests such as becoming scholars.
