On the evening of 7 April 1775, he made the famous statement, "Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel."
According to Bate, "Johnson loved biography," and he "changed the whole course of biography for the modern world.
He was buried on 20 December 1784 at Westminster Abbey with an inscription that reads:
The plays themselves were in a version that Johnson felt was closest to the original, based on his analysis of the manuscript editions.
On 8 June 1756, Johnson published his ''Proposals for Printing, by Subscription, the Dramatick Works of William Shakespeare'', which argued that previous editions of Shakespeare were edited incorrectly and needed to be corrected.
On 16 March 1756, Johnson was arrested for an outstanding debt of £5 18s.
Two doctors were brought in to aid Johnson; he regained his ability to speak two days later.
In particular, Johnson emphasises "the helpless vulnerability of the individual before the social context" and the "inevitable self-deception by which human beings are led astray".
Afterwards, Johnson stayed with the Thrales for 17 years until Henry's death in 1781, sometimes staying in rooms at Thrale's Anchor Brewery in Southwark.
In the autumn of 1735, Johnson opened Edial Hall School as a private academy at Edial, near Lichfield.
Boswell's ''Life'', along with other biographies, documented Johnson's behaviour and mannerisms in such detail that they have informed the posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome, a condition not defined or diagnosed in the 18th century.
190, and the two became friends.
These accounts of his life include Thomas Tyers's ''A Biographical Sketch of Dr Samuel Johnson'' (1784); Boswell's ''The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides'' (1785); Hester Thrale's ''Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson'', which drew on entries from her diary and other notes; John Hawkins's ''Life of Samuel Johnson (1787)'', the first full-length biography of Johnson; and, in 1792, Arthur Murphy's ''An Essay on the Life and Genius of Samuel Johnson'', which replaced Hawkins's biography as the introduction to a collection of Johnson's ''Works''.
In 1770 he produced ''The False Alarm'', a political pamphlet attacking John Wilkes.
At the age of 16, Johnson was given the opportunity to stay with his cousins, the Fords, at Pedmore, Worcestershire.
Gower petitioned Oxford for an honorary degree to be awarded to Johnson, but was told that it was "too much to be asked".
Some criticised the dictionary, including Thomas Babington Macaulay, who described Johnson as "a wretched etymologist," but according to Bate, the ''Dictionary'' "easily ranks as one of the greatest single achievements of scholarship, and probably the greatest ever performed by one individual who laboured under anything like the disadvantages in a comparable length of time."
However, his second imitation, ''The Vanity of Human Wishes'', is completely different; the language remains simple, but the poem is more complicated and difficult to read because Johnson is trying to describe complex Christian ethics.
However, there was open dissatisfaction with the dictionaries of the period.
Johnson's Christian morality permeated his works, and he would write on moral topics with such authority and in such a trusting manner that, Walter Jackson Bate claims, "no other moralist in history excels or even begins to rival him".
Hester Thrale's documentation of Johnson's life during this time, in her correspondence and her diary (''Thraliana''), became an important source of biographical information on Johnson after his death.
At about this time, Johnson's father became ill and developed an "inflammatory fever" which led to his death in December 1731.
He is also the subject of "the most famous single biographical work in the whole of literature," James Boswell's ''Life of Samuel Johnson.''
Johnson was born in the family home above his father's bookshop in Lichfield, Staffordshire and, because his mother Sarah was 40 when she gave birth, a "man-midwife" and surgeon of "great reputation" named George Hector was brought in to assist.
This only exacerbated Johnson's feelings of loss and despair after the death of his wife.
Johnson read Abbé Joachim Le Grand's French translations, and thought that a shorter version might be "useful and profitable".
Unable to contact anyone else, he wrote to the writer and publisher Samuel Richardson.
His works on Shakespeare were devoted not merely to Shakespeare, but to understanding literature as a whole; in his ''Preface'' to Shakespeare, Johnson rejects the previous dogma of the classical unities and argues that drama should be faithful to life.
In addition to his views on language, Johnson believed that a good poem incorporated new and unique imagery.
Johnson continued to look for a position at a Lichfield school.
After a short meeting, Johnson was impressed both with the King himself and with their conversation.
His odd gestures and tics were disconcerting to some on first meeting him.
Towards the end of his life, he produced the massive and influential ''Lives of the Most Eminent English Poets'', a collection of biographies and evaluations of 17th- and 18th-century poets.
Beyond appearance, Adam Smith claimed that "Johnson knew more books than any man alive", while Edmund Burke thought that if Johnson were to join Parliament, he "certainly would have been the greatest speaker that ever was there".
:''Ætatis suœ'' LXXV.
Hogarth was quite surprised when "this figure stalked forwards to where he and Mr. Richardson were sitting and all at once took up the argument&nbsp;... with such a power of eloquence, that Hogarth looked at him with astonishment, and actually imagined that this ideot had been at the moment inspired".
As well as direct literary criticism, Johnson emphasised the need to establish a text that accurately reflects what an author wrote.
Chesterfield, impressed by the language, kept the letter displayed on a table for anyone to read.
The poem was critically celebrated but it failed to become popular, and sold fewer copies than ''London''.
Little is known about Johnson's life between the end of 1729 and 1731.
He was penniless and pessimistic about their travel, but fortunately for them, Garrick had connections in London, and the two were able to stay with his distant relative, Richard Norris.
Boswell claimed that Johnson "felt himself overwhelmed with an horrible melancholia, with perpetual irritation, fretfulness, and impatience; and with a dejection, gloom, and despair, which made existence misery".
After returning home and then travelling for a short period, Johnson received word that his friend and tenant Robert Levet, had died on 17 January 1782.
After nine years of work, Johnson's ''A Dictionary of the English Language'' was published in 1755.
Although Boswell, a Scotsman, was a close companion and friend to Johnson during many important times of his life, like many of his fellow Englishmen Johnson had a reputation for despising Scotland and its people.
John Bowle and William Seward, both man of letters, were members of this club.
Johnson's ''A Voyage to Abyssinia'' was published a year later.
The work was intended to discuss the social problems and struggles that affected the Scottish people, but it also praised many of the unique facets of Scottish society, such as a school in Edinburgh for the deaf and mute.
Before that could happen, he was arrested again, for a debt of £40, in February 1758.
Other dictionaries, such as Nathan Bailey's ''Dictionarium Britannicum'', included more words, and in the 150 years preceding Johnson's dictionary about twenty other general-purpose monolingual "English" dictionaries had been produced.
The King, upon hearing that Johnson would visit the library, commanded that Barnard introduce him to Johnson.
Since it was feared that the baby might die, the vicar of St Mary's was summoned to perform a baptism.
Johnson eventually found employment as undermaster at a school in Market Bosworth, run by Sir Wolstan Dixie, 4th Baronet who allowed Johnson to teach without a degree.
Seven years after first meeting Johnson to go over the work, Chesterfield wrote two anonymous essays in ''The World'' recommending the ''Dictionary''.
They decided to meet every Monday at 7:00&nbsp;pm at the Turk's Head in Gerrard Street, Soho, and these meetings continued until long after the deaths of the original members.
At the time, Warren was starting his ''Birmingham Journal'', and he enlisted Johnson's help.
They quickly became friends, although Boswell would return to his home in Scotland or travel abroad for months at a time.
To occupy himself, Johnson began to work on ''The Literary Magazine, or Universal Review'', the first issue of which was printed on 19 March 1756.
We have no Dictionary of our Language, and scarce a tolerable Grammar."
On 13 December 1784, Johnson met with two others: a young woman, Miss Morris, whom Johnson blessed, and Francesco Sastres, an Italian teacher, who was given some of Johnson's final words: "''Iam Moriturus''" ("I who am about to die").
Another important source was Fanny Burney, who described Johnson as "the acknowledged Head of Literature in this kingdom" and kept a diary containing details missing from other biographies.
They were poor and would stay in taverns or sleep in "night-cellars".
This was especially true of his ''Dictionary'' of which he wrote: "I lately published a Dictionary like those compiled by the academies of Italy and France, ''for the use of such as aspire to exactness of criticism, or elegance of style''".
In the 1770s, Johnson, who had tended to be an opponent of the government early in life, published a series of pamphlets in favour of various government policies.
Years later, many of its quotations would be repeated by various editions of the ''Webster's Dictionary'' and the ''New English Dictionary''.
Johnson's edition of ''Shakespeare'' was finally published on 10 October 1765 as ''The Plays of William Shakespeare, in Eight Volumes&nbsp;... To which are added Notes by Sam.
Johnson was also known as a staunch Tory; he admitted to sympathies for the Jacobite cause during his younger years but, by the reign of George III, he came to accept the Hanoverian Succession.
In 1750, he decided to produce a series of essays under the title ''The Rambler'' that were to be published every Tuesday and Saturday and sell for twopence each.
In 1774 he printed ''The Patriot'', a critique of what he viewed as false patriotism.
Unable to return to Lichfield Grammar School, Johnson was enrolled into the King Edward VI grammar school at Stourbridge.
Langton waited until 11:00&nbsp;pm to tell the others, which led to John Hawkins' becoming pale and overcome with "an agony of mind", along with Seward and Hoole describing Johnson's death as "the most awful sight".
However, some of their contemporaries disagreed: Stendhal's ''Racine et Shakespeare'' is based in part on Johnson's views of Shakespeare, and Johnson influenced Jane Austen's writing style and philosophy.
He returned to Lichfield in February 1734, and began an annotated edition of Poliziano's Latin poems, along with a history of Latin poetry from Petrarch to Poliziano; a ''Proposal'' was soon printed, but a lack of funds halted the project.
In a parody of the Declaration of Rights, Johnson suggested that the Americans had no more right to govern themselves than the Cornish people, and asked "How is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes?"
As Johnson justified in the advertisement for the work, "my purpose was only to have allotted to every Poet an Advertisement, like those which we find in the French Miscellanies, containing a few dates and a general character."
He had to employ a number of assistants for the copying and mechanical work, which filled the house with incessant noise and clutter.
The London ''Times'' and ''Punch'' produced parodies of Johnson's style for the occasion.
In 1776, he returned to Pembroke with Boswell and toured the college with his former tutor Adams, who was now a Master.
Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield, was the patron of the ''Plan'', to Johnson's displeasure.
His works were dominated with his intent to use them for literary criticism.
Ford was a successful, well-connected academic, but he was also a notorious alcoholic whose excesses contributed to his death six years later.
In May 1738 his first major work, the poem ''London'', was published anonymously.
In 1749, Garrick made good on his promise that he would produce ''Irene'', but its title was altered to ''Mahomet and Irene'' to make it "fit for the stage."
These Christian values are not unique to the poem, but contain views expressed in most of Johnson's works.
However, Johnson's moral writings do not contain, as Donald Greene points out, "a predetermined and authorized pattern of 'good behavior, even though Johnson does emphasise certain kinds of conduct.
In August, Johnson's lack of an MA degree from Oxford or Cambridge led to his being denied a position as master of the Appleby Grammar School.
Although critics like Donald Greene argue about its status as a true biography, the work became successful as Boswell and his friends promoted it at the expense of the many other works on Johnson's life.
She was his primary motivation, and her death hindered his ability to complete his work.
Boswell's account of their journey, ''The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides'' (1786), was a preliminary step toward his later biography, ''Life of Johnson''.
The authors most frequently cited include William Shakespeare, John Milton and John Dryden.
A year later, Johnson wrote ''Life of Mr Richard Savage'' (1744), a "moving" work which, in the words of the biographer and critic Walter Jackson Bate, "remains one of the innovative works in the history of biography".
While there, he wrote a prayer for the Thrale family:
Born in Lichfield, Staffordshire, Johnson attended Pembroke College, Oxford for just over a year, before his lack of funds forced him to leave.
After a series of illnesses, he died on the evening of 13 December 1784, and was buried in Westminster Abbey.
It was years before ''Johnson's Dictionary'', as it came to be known, turned a profit.
The ''Dictionary'' was finally published in April 1755, with the title page acknowledging that Oxford had awarded Johnson a Master of Arts degree in anticipation of the work.
Between 1737 and 1739, Johnson befriended Richard Savage.
He was committed to debtors' prison and died in 1743.
This work brought Johnson popularity and success.
During this time, Johnson's future was uncertain because his father was deeply in debt.
Although Johnson respected John Milton's poetry, he could not tolerate Milton's Puritan and Republican beliefs, feeling that they were contrary to England and Christianity.
However, her daughter Lucy accepted Johnson from the start, and her other son, Joseph, later came to accept the marriage.
Authors' royalties were unknown at the time, and Johnson, once his contract to deliver the book was fulfilled, received no further money from its sale.
This may have led Johnson to "the invisible occupation of authorship".
Years before, Johnson had stated that the English and the French were just "two robbers" who were stealing land from the natives, and that neither deserved to live there.
He eventually did receive a degree.
He was always busy, and kept hundreds of books around.
Around the spring of 1763, Johnson formed "The Club", a social group that included his friends Reynolds, Burke, Garrick, Goldsmith and others (the membership later expanded to include Adam Smith and Edward Gibbon).
Writer and printer Samuel Richardson, enjoying the essays greatly, questioned the publisher as to who wrote the works; only he and a few of Johnson's friends were told of Johnson's authorship.
Shortly afterwards Johnson caught a cold that developed into bronchitis and lasted for several months.
Besides working on the ''Dictionary'', Johnson also wrote numerous essays, sermons, and poems during these nine years.
In an effort to end such rejections, Pope asked Lord Gower to use his influence to have a degree awarded to Johnson.
The notice which you have been pleased to take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind: but it has been delayed till I am indifferent and cannot enjoy it; till I am solitary and cannot impart it; till I am known and do not want it."
After an argument with Dixie he quit the school, and by June 1732 he had returned home.
:''Obiit XIII die Decembris,''
He enjoyed Adams as a tutor, but by December, Johnson was already a quarter behind in his student fees, and he was forced to return home.
The ''Lives'', which were critical as well as biographical studies, appeared as prefaces to selections of each poet's work, and they were longer and more detailed than originally expected.
''The Rambler'' seemed the best that occurred, and I took it."
Johnson was a tall and robust man.
Dr. Johnson "established an evening club at the Essex Head in 1783" according to an English Heritage blue plaque in Essex Street, Westminster.
The comments soon motivated Johnson to finish his ''Shakespeare'', and, after receiving the first payment from a government pension on 20 July 1762, he was able to dedicate most of his time towards this goal.
Johnson's ''Dictionary'' offers insights into the 18th century and "a faithful record of the language people used".
The family remained in poverty until Sarah Johnson's cousin, Elizabeth Harriotts, died in February 1728 and left enough money to send Johnson to university.
''Rasselas'' was written in one week to pay for his mother's funeral and settle her debts; it became so popular that there was a new English edition of the work almost every year.
With no one to visit, Johnson expressed a desire to die in London and arrived there on 16 November 1784.
To accommodate both his wife and his work, he moved to 17 Gough Square near his printer, William Strahan.
There he became a close friend of Cornelius Ford, who employed his knowledge of the classics to tutor Johnson while he was not attending school.
His health began to improve by May 1784, and he travelled to Oxford with Boswell on 5 May 1784.
His greatest complaint was that obscure allusions found in works like Milton's ''Lycidas'' were overused; he preferred poetry that could be easily read and understood.
Also, Johnson used the work to enter into the dispute over the authenticity of James Macpherson's Ossian poems, claiming they could not have been translations of ancient Scottish literature on the grounds that "in those times nothing had been written in the Earse i.e.
When asked by a little girl why he made such noises and acted in that way, Johnson responded: "From bad habit."
John Hawkins described the scene: "The books he used for this purpose were what he had in his own collection, a copious but a miserably ragged one, and all such as he could borrow; which latter, if ever they came back to those that lent them, were so defaced as to be scarce worth owning."
When not working on the ''Magazine'', Johnson wrote a series of prefaces for other writers, such as Giuseppe Baretti, William Payne and Charlotte Lennox.
After thirteen months, a shortage of funds forced Johnson to leave Oxford without a degree, and he returned to Lichfield.
Johnson considered the genre of autobiography and diaries, including his own, as one having the most significance; in ''Idler'' 84 he explains how a writer of an autobiography would be the least likely to distort his own life.
The inheritance did not cover all of his expenses at Pembroke, but Andrew Corbet, a friend and fellow student at Pembroke, offered to make up the deficit.
In particular, the character Mr. Glanville says, "you may sit in Judgment upon the Productions of a ''Young'', a ''Richardson'', or a ''Johnson''.
Johnson's revolutionary innovation was to create a set of corresponding notes that allowed readers to clarify the meaning behind many of Shakespeare's more complicated passages, and to examine those which had been transcribed incorrectly in previous editions.
Many visitors came to see Johnson as he lay sick in bed, but he preferred only Langton's company.
During this time, Johnson started to exhibit the tics that would influence how people viewed him in his later years, and which formed the basis for the posthumous diagnosis of Tourette syndrome.
He did not cry and, with doubts surrounding the newborn's health, his aunt exclaimed "that she would not have picked such a poor creature up in the street."
They married on 9 July 1735, at St Werburgh's Church in Derby.
On 6 August 1773, eleven years after first meeting Boswell, Johnson set out to visit his friend in Scotland, and to begin "a journey to the western islands of Scotland", as Johnson's 1775 account of their travels would put it.
After working as a teacher, he moved to London, where he began to write for ''The Gentleman's Magazine''.
Johnson did not attempt to create schools of theories to analyse the aesthetics of literature.
One friend, the novelist Charlotte Lennox, includes a defence of ''The Rambler'' in her novel ''The Female Quixote'' (1752).
He drafted a "plan of study" called "Adversaria", which was left unfinished, and used his time to learn French while working on his Greek.
Edmund Wilson claimed that "The ''Lives of the Poets'' and the prefaces and commentary on Shakespeare are among the most brilliant and the most acute documents in the whole range of English criticism".
This connection with Warren grew, and Johnson proposed a translation of Jerónimo Lobo's account of the Abyssinians.
On 9 January 1765, Murphy introduced Johnson to Henry Thrale, a wealthy brewer and MP, and his wife Hester.
In preparation, Johnson wrote a ''Plan'' for the ''Dictionary''.
Johnson demonstrated signs of great intelligence as a child, and his parents, to his later disgust, would show off his "newly acquired accomplishments".
His most highly regarded poem, ''The Vanity of Human Wishes'', was written with such "extraordinary speed" that Boswell claimed Johnson "might have been perpetually a poet".
An important innovation in English lexicography was to illustrate the meanings of his words by literary quotation, of which there were approximately 114,000.
Later, Johnson's works came into favour, and Matthew Arnold, in his ''Six Chief Lives from Johnson's "Lives of the Poets"'', considered the ''Lives'' of Milton, Dryden, Pope, Addison, Swift, and Gray as "points which stand as so many natural centres, and by returning to which we can always find our way again".
He was an opponent of slavery on moral grounds, and once proposed a toast to the "next rebellion of the negroes in the West Indies".
My imagination was not convinced."
It was Boswell who gave people the impression that Johnson was an "arch-conservative", and it was Boswell, more than anyone else, who determined how Johnson would be seen by people years later.
He later attempted to produce a new edition of her works, but even with his support they were unable to find enough interest to follow through with its publication.
From early childhood, Johnson suffered from poor eyesight, especially in his left eye, which interfered with his education.
Explaining the title years later, he told his friend, the painter Joshua Reynolds: "I was at a loss how to name it.
Instead, he used his criticism for the practical purpose of helping others to better read and understand literature.
Instead, Johnson believed in portraying the biographical subjects accurately and including any negative aspects of their lives.
It is more than a reference book; it is a work of literature.
When Johnson questioned if the pension would force him to promote a political agenda or support various officials, he was told by Bute that the pension "is not given you for anything you are to do, but for what you have done".
However, he spent only six months at Stourbridge before returning once again to his parents' home in Lichfield.
Gower then asked a friend of Jonathan Swift to plead with Swift to use his influence at the University of Dublin to have a master's degree awarded to Johnson, in the hope that this could then be used to justify an MA from Oxford, but Swift refused to act on Johnson's behalf.
Instead of trying to keep the failing school going, Johnson began to write his first major work, the historical tragedy ''Irene''.
He was a celebrity for the activities and the state of his health in his later years were constantly reported in various journals and newspapers, and when there was nothing to report, something was invented.
Johnson's works, especially his ''Lives of the Poets'' series, describe various features of excellent writing.
Around this time, Anna Williams began boarding with Johnson.
Johnson claimed that he could finish the project in three years.
As three to sixteen hundred, so is the proportion of an Englishman to a Frenchman."
Johnson denounced English supporters of American separatists as "traitors to this country", and hoped that the matter would be settled without bloodshed, but he felt confident that it would end with "English superiority and American obedience".
Tom Davies, William Strahan and Thomas Cadell had asked Johnson to create this final major work, the ''Lives of the English Poets'', for which he asked 200 guineas, an amount significantly less than the price he could have demanded.
To earn money, Johnson began to stitch books for his father, and it is likely that Johnson spent much time in his father's bookshop reading and building his literary knowledge.
Johnson was, in the words of Steven Lynn, "more than a well-known writer and scholar"; for it is said of his poetry, 'small in amount, its quality excellent', and regrets were expressed that he had not written much more'.
Johnson was a devout Anglican and committed Tory, and has been described as "arguably the most distinguished man of letters in English history".
Johnson's dictionary was not the first, nor was it unique.
On 17 June 1783, Johnson's poor circulation resulted in a stroke and he wrote to his neighbour, Edmund Allen, that he had lost the ability to speak.
Johnson argued that in emigrating to America, colonists had "voluntarily resigned the power of voting", but they still had "virtual representation" in Parliament.
He was suspicious of the poetic language used by Milton, whose blank verse he believed would inspire many bad imitations.
Instead of writing the work himself, he dictated to Hector, who then took the copy to the printer and made any corrections.
Johnson felt guilty about the poverty in which he believed he had forced Tetty to live, and blamed himself for neglecting her.
Because his insistence on accuracy in biography was little short of revolutionary, Johnson had to struggle against a society that was unwilling to accept biographical details that could be viewed as tarnishing a reputation; this became the subject of ''Rambler'' 60.
It was, however, the most commonly used and imitated for the 150 years between its first publication and the completion of the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' in 1928.
In 1746, a group of publishers approached Johnson with an idea about creating an authoritative dictionary of the English language.
To achieve this purpose, Johnson included quotations from Bacon, Hooker, Milton, Shakespeare, Spenser, and many others from what he considered to be the most important literary fields: natural science, philosophy, poetry, and theology.
Hester Thrale Piozzi claimed, in a discussion on Smart's mental state, that Johnson was her "friend who feared an apple should intoxicate him".
His assignments for the magazine and other publishers during this time were "almost unparalleled in range and variety," and "so numerous, so varied and scattered" that "Johnson himself could not make a complete list".
He was confined to his room from 14 December 1783 to 21 April 1784.
This series was shorter and lacked many features of ''The Rambler''.
It is likely that he lived with his parents.
In particular, Johnson emphasises God's infinite love and shows that happiness can be attained through virtuous action.
Let me see; forty times forty is sixteen hundred.
Johnson feared that he was dying, and wrote:
Johnson completed half of the translation in one afternoon and the rest the following morning.
Burney waited for word of Johnson's condition, along with Windham, Strahan, Hoole, Cruikshank, Des Moulins and Barber.
Johnson'' in a printing of one thousand copies.
When it came to biography, Johnson disagreed with Plutarch's use of biography to praise and to teach morality.
