While Adams tried to reassert control of the meeting, people poured out of the Old South Meeting House and headed to Boston Harbor.
Adams soon became closely associated with James Otis, Jr., a member of the Massachusetts House famous for his defense of colonial rights.
In April 1770, Parliament repealed the Townshend duties, except for the tax on tea.
Officials such as Governor Francis Bernard, believing that common people acted only under the direction of agitators, blamed the violence on Adams.
Because the Continental Congress worked under a secrecy rule, Adams's precise role in congressional deliberations is not fully documented.
When John Adams traveled to France during the Revolution, he had to explain that he was not Samuel, "the famous Adams".
Drawing heavily upon English political theorist John Locke's ''Second Treatise of Government'', Adams's essays emphasized many of the themes that would characterize his subsequent career.
Subsequent biographers became increasingly hostile towards Adams and the common people he represented.
On September 16, messenger Paul Revere brought Congress the Suffolk Resolves, one of many resolutions passed in Massachusetts that promised strident resistance to the Coercive Acts.
Adams was elected to the Massachusetts ratifying convention, which met in January 1788.
Adams expressed these views in May 1764, when the Boston Town Meeting elected its representatives to the Massachusetts House.
Great Britain responded to the Boston Tea Party in 1774 with the Coercive Acts.
A graduate of Harvard College, he was an unsuccessful businessman and tax collector before concentrating on politics.
He supported calls for a boycott of British goods to put pressure on Parliament to repeal the tax.
He was also selected to attend the Second Continental Congress, scheduled to meet in Philadelphia in May 1775.
The first full biography of Adams appeared in 1865, a three-volume work written by William Wells, Adams's great-grandson.
Although the Wells biography is still valuable for its wealth of information, Whig portrayals of Adams were uncritically pro-American and had elements of hagiography, a view that influenced some later biographies written for general audiences.
The Boston Committee of Correspondence published its statement of colonial rights, along with Hutchinson's exchange with the Massachusetts House, in the widely distributed "Boston Pamphlet".
The Massachusetts popular party gained ground in the May 1766 elections.
Adams continued to work on getting the troops withdrawn, and keeping the boycott going until the Townshend duties were repealed.
Boston's Republican newspaper, the ''Independent Chronicle'', eulogized him as the "Father of the American Revolution".
In September 1765, Adams was once again appointed by the Boston Town Meeting to write the instructions for Boston's delegation to the Massachusetts House of Representatives.
Adams's friends paid off some of the deficit, and the town meeting wrote off the remainder.
The younger Adams left his father the certificates he had earned as a soldier, giving Adams and his wife unexpected financial security in their final years.
The "power of the purse" conflict was still at issue: The tea tax revenues were to be used to pay the salaries of certain royal officials, making them independent of the people.
Adams would always remain, in the words of historian Pauline Maier, "a man utterly uninterested in either making or possessing money".
Adams would remarry in 1764, to Elizabeth Wells, but would have no other children.
Singling out Hancock and Adams in this manner only added to their renown among Patriots, and, according to Patriot historian Mercy Otis Warren, perhaps exaggerated the importance of the two men.
When Deacon Adams died in 1748, Adams was given the responsibility of managing the family's affairs.
A few merchants in New York, Philadelphia, Boston, and Charlestown were selected to receive the company's tea for resale.
The new constitution established a republican form of government, with annual elections and a separation of powers.
In 1770 first New York City then Philadelphia abandoned the non-importation boycott of British goods.
On the night of April 18, Gage sent out a detachment of soldiers on the fateful mission that would spark the American Revolutionary War.
As it turned out, he wrote his own instructions: on September 27, the town meeting selected him to replace the recently deceased Oxenbridge Thacher as one of Boston's four representatives in the assembly.
After much debate, the Articles were sent to the states for ratification in November 1777.
Like his fellow Republicans, he spoke out against the Jay Treaty in 1796, a position that drew criticism in a state that was increasingly Federalist.
Adams was reelected to the Massachusetts House in April 1772, but he received far fewer votes than ever before.
After the fact, Adams did approve of the August 14 action because he saw no other legal options to resist what he viewed as an unconstitutional act by Parliament, but he condemned attacks on officials' homes as "mobbish".
In July 1757, Elizabeth died soon after giving birth to a stillborn son.
Colonial smugglers played a significant role in the protests, since the Tea Act made legally imported tea cheaper, which threatened to put smugglers of Dutch tea out of business.
According to Maier, Adams was at this time a reformer rather than a revolutionary; he sought to have the British ministry change its policies, and warned Britain that independence would be the inevitable result of a failure to do so.
In Boston, however, Governor Hutchinson was determined to hold his ground.
Adams therefore used the Boston Town Meeting to organize an economic boycott, and called for other towns to do the same.
Eventually, British merchants were able to convince Parliament to repeal the tax.
Investments in land would make them relatively wealthy by the mid-1790s, but this did not alter their frugal lifestyle.
In late 1773, seven ships carrying East India Company tea were sent to the colonies, including four bound for Boston.
Revenues from these duties were to be used to pay for governors and judges who would be independent of colonial control.
A new royal governor was appointed to enforce the acts: General Thomas Gage, who was also commander of British military forces in North America.
Adams served on military committees, including an appointment to the Board of War in 1777.
Protesters were instead concerned with a variety of other issues.
In every colony except Massachusetts, protesters were able to force the tea consignees to resign or to return the tea to England.
Even with the support of Hancock and Adams, the Massachusetts convention narrowly ratified the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168.
He returned to Boston in 1781, and was never to leave Massachusetts again.
In that year's U. S. presidential election, Republicans in Virginia cast 15 electoral votes for Adams in an effort to make him Jefferson's vice-president, but Federalist John Adams won the election, with Jefferson becoming vice-president.
These duties were relatively low, because the British ministry wanted to establish the precedent that Parliament had the right to impose tariffs on the colonies before raising them.
Adams worried that the  Society was "a stride towards an hereditary military nobility", and thus a threat to republicanism.
After the Boston Massacre, Adams and other town leaders met with Bernard's successor, Governor Thomas Hutchinson, and Colonel William Dalrymple, the army commander, to demand the withdrawal of the troops.
Small farmers, angered by high taxes and debts, armed themselves and shut down debtor courts in two counties.
When the commissioners of the Customs Board found that they were unable to enforce trade regulations in Boston, they requested military assistance.
According to Pauline Maier, however, "There is no evidence that he prompted the Boston Massacre riot".
Resistance to the Townshend Acts grew slowly.
After graduating in 1740, Adams continued his studies, earning a master's degree in 1743.
Not only did Adams argue that the Stamp Act was unconstitutional; he also believed that it would hurt the economy of the British Empire.
In the late 19th century, many American historians, uncomfortable with contemporary revolutions, found it problematic to write approvingly about Adams.
Governor Hutchinson, concerned that the committees of correspondence were growing into an independence movement, convened the General Court in January 1773.
The Massachusetts Government Act rewrote the Massachusetts Charter, making many officials royally appointed rather than elected, and severely restricting the activities of town meetings.
His thesis, in which he argued that it was "lawful to resist the Supreme Magistrate, if the Commonwealth cannot otherwise be preserved", indicated that his political views, like his father's, were oriented towards colonial rights.
Hancock was a wealthy merchant—perhaps the richest man in Massachusetts—but a relative newcomer to politics.
Soon after the battle, Gage issued a proclamation granting a general pardon to all who would "lay down their arms, and return to the duties of peaceable subjects"—with the exceptions of Hancock and Samuel Adams.
The younger Adams had served as surgeon in the Revolutionary War, but had fallen ill and never fully recovered.
Governor James Bowdoin sent four thousand militiamen to put down the uprising, an action supported by Adams.
After a delay to rally support, Congress approved the language of the United States Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, which Adams signed.
However, this claim did not appear in print until nearly a century after the event, in a biography of Adams written by his great-grandson, who apparently misinterpreted the evidence.
I meet with a National Government, instead of a Federal Union of States."
He was a second cousin to President John Adams.
Despite his reservations, Adams rarely spoke at the convention, and listened carefully to the arguments rather than raising objections.
Adams thought that Hancock, by acting like an aristocrat and courting popularity, was not acting the part of a virtuous republican leader.
According to a popular story, Adams's statement was a prearranged signal for the "tea party" to begin.
Decades after Adams's death, orator Edward Everett would call him "the last of the Puritans".
When sailors and marines from the ''Romney'' came ashore to tow away the ''Liberty'', a riot broke out.
Concerned about the new Constitution, Adams made an attempt to reenter national politics.
His parents hoped that his schooling would prepare him for the ministry, but Adams gradually shifted his interest to politics.
However, Adams wrote essays condemning the outcome of the trials; he thought the soldiers should have been convicted of murder.
He argued that the Tea Party was not the act of a lawless mob, but was instead a principled protest and the only remaining option the people had to defend their constitutional rights.
According to the "propagandist interpretation" of Adams popularized by historian John Miller, Adams deliberately provoked the incident to promote his secret agenda of American independence.
He called for harsh state legislation to punish Loyalists—Americans who continued to support the British crown—who Adams believed were as dangerous to American liberty as British soldiers.
For if our Trade may be taxed, why not our Lands?
These groups take their names from Adams in homage of his ability to organize citizens at the local level in order to achieve a national goal.
In 1772, Massachusetts learned that the those officials would henceforth be paid by the British government rather than by the province.
Adams was one of the charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780.
The first of these acts, the Boston Port Act, closed Boston's commerce until the East India Company had been repaid for the destroyed tea.
While Adams was attending the ratifying convention, his only son, Samuel Adams, Jr., died at just thirty-seven years of age.
Although Hutchinson denied that this is what he meant, his career in Massachusetts was effectively over.
Like others at the time, Adams considered himself a citizen of the United States while continuing to refer to Massachusetts as his "country".
Legitimate tea importers who had not been named as consignees by the East India Company were also threatened with financial ruin by the Tea Act, and other merchants worried about the precedent of a government-created monopoly.
Deacon Adams rose through the political ranks, becoming a justice of the peace, a selectman, and a member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives.
Adams saw the act as an infringement of longstanding colonial rights.
A New England town meeting is a form of local government with elected officials, and not just a gathering of citizens; it was, according to historian William Fowler, "the most democratic institution in the British empire".
The act also reduced the taxes on tea paid by the company in Britain, but kept the controversial Townshend duty on tea imported in the colonies.
This measure was a threat to the American colonial economy because it granted the Tea Company a significant cost advantage over local tea merchants and even local tea smugglers, driving them out of business.
'''Samuel Adams''' ( – October 2, 1803) was an American statesman, political philosopher, and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States.
Adams wrote numerous letters and essays in opposition to the occupation, which he considered a violation of the 1689 Bill of Rights.
To help coordinate resistance to what he saw as the British government's attempts to violate the British Constitution at the expense of the colonies, in 1772 Adams and his colleagues devised a committee of correspondence system, which linked like-minded Patriots throughout the Thirteen Colonies.
In 1974, Akers called on historians to critically reexamine the sources rather than simply repeating the myth.
The family lived on Purchase Street in Boston.
From the Whig perspective, this arrangement, by keeping royally appointed officials accountable to democratically elected representatives, was an important check on executive power.
Adams was reelected to the House and selected as its clerk.
In Boston, a group called the Loyal Nine, a precursor to the Sons of Liberty, organized protests of the Stamp Act.
By modern standards, the new constitution was not "democratic"; Adams, like most of his peers, believed that only free males who owned property should be allowed to vote, and that the senate and the governor served to balance any excesses that might result from majority rule.
Deciding that it was not safe to return to Boston before leaving for Philadelphia, the two men stayed at Hancock's childhood home in Lexington.
"I confess," he wrote to Richard Henry Lee in 1787, "as I enter the Building I stumble at the Threshold.
Peter Oliver, the exiled chief justice of Massachusetts, characterized Adams as devious Machiavellian with a "cloven Foot".
He allowed his name to be put forth as a candidate for the United States House of Representatives in the December 1788 election, but lost to Fisher Ames, apparently because Ames was a stronger supporter of the Constitution, a more popular position.
In 1781, Adams retired from the Continental Congress.
The directives also contained the first official recommendation that the colonies present a unified defense of their rights."
The ''Journal'' ceased publication on August 1, 1769, which was a day of celebration in Boston: Governor Bernard had left Massachusetts, never to return.
Deacon Adams became a leading figure in Boston politics through an organization that became known as the Boston Caucus, which promoted candidates who supported popular causes.
After the Boston Massacre, politics in Massachusetts entered what is sometimes known as the "quiet period".
Adams was appointed to a three-man drafting committee with his cousin John Adams and James Bowdoin.
In 1768, Adams's political opponents would use the situation to their advantage, obtaining a court judgment of £1,463 against him.
Adams urged colonists to keep up the boycott of British goods, arguing that paying even one small tax allowed Parliament to establish the precedent of taxing the colonies, but the boycott faltered.
The House sent a petition to the king asking for his recall.
Using language more moderate than what Adams desired, the convention issued a letter that insisted that Boston was not a lawless town, and that the impending military occupation violated Bostonians' natural, constitutional, and charter rights.
Dickinson's argument that the new taxes were unconstitutional had been made before by Adams, but never to such a wide audience.
Adams and the House responded that the Massachusetts Charter did not establish Parliament's supremacy over the province, and so Parliament could not claim that authority now.
Directors of the land bank, including Deacon Adams, became personally liable for the currency still in circulation, payable in silver and gold.
But in the early 19th century, Adams was often viewed as an old-fashioned Puritan, and was consequently neglected by historians.
He served on numerous committees, often dealing with military matters.
It strikes at our British privileges, which as we have never forfeited them, we hold in common with our Fellow Subjects who are Natives of Britain.
Adams was friendly with the Loyal Nine, but was not a member.
Thomas Jefferson, for example, characterized Adams as "truly the ''Man of the Revolution''."
Adams often failed to collect taxes from his fellow citizens, which increased his popularity among those who did not pay, but left him liable for the shortage.
He thought the leaders of Shays's Rebellion should be hanged, reportedly saying that "the man who dares to rebel against the laws of a republic ought to suffer death".
The younger Samuel Adams attended Boston Latin School and then entered Harvard College in 1736.
A struggle over the power of the purse brought Adams back into the political limelight.
On August 26, lieutenant governor Thomas Hutchinson's home was destroyed by an angry crowd.
By May 16, 1766, news of the repeal had reached Boston.
He worked at Thomas Cushing's counting house, but the job only lasted a few months because Cushing felt that Adams was too preoccupied with politics to become a good merchant.
Finding itself deep in debt and looking for new sources of revenue, the British Parliament sought, for the first time, to directly tax the colonies of British America.
Tensions escalated after the captain of the ''Romney'' began to impress local sailors.
"When the Boston Town Meeting approved the Adams instructions on May 24, 1764," wrote historian John K. Alexander, "it became the first political body in America to go on record stating Parliament could not constitutionally tax the colonists.
Because of the heavy taxes imposed on tea imported into Great Britain, Britons could buy smuggled Dutch tea more cheaply than the East India Company's tea, and so the company amassed a huge surplus of tea that it could not sell.
Taking a cue from President Washington, who declined to run for reelection in 1796, Adams retired from politics at the end of his term as governor in 1797.
Thousands of people arrived, so many that the meeting was moved to the larger Old South Meeting House.
Adams wanted the soldiers to have a fair trial, because this would show that Boston was not controlled by a lawless mob, but was instead the victim of an unjust occupation.
From Philadelphia, Adams urged Massachusetts to ratify, which it did.
News of the passage of the Stamp Act produced an uproar in the colonies.
This view gave way to negative assessments of Adams in the first half of the 20th century, in which he was portrayed as a master of propaganda who provoked mob violence to achieve his goals.
The familiar "no taxation without representation" argument, along with the question of the extent of Parliament's authority in the colonies, remained prominent.
Adams was a cautious advocate for a declaration of independence, urging eager correspondents back in Massachusetts to wait for more moderate colonists to come around to supporting separation from Great Britain.
According to some accounts, the occupation of Boston was a turning point for Adams, after which he gave up hope of reconciliation and secretly began to work towards American independence.
Adams's lack of business instincts were confirmed: he loaned half of this money to a friend, which was never repaid, and frittered away the other half.
To protest this development, in November 1772 Adams and his colleagues devised a system of committees of correspondence; the towns of Massachusetts would consult with each other concerning political matters via messages sent through a network of committees that recorded British activities and protested imperial policies.
Adams signed the Articles of Confederation with the other Massachusetts delegates in 1778, but they were not ratified by all the states until 1781.
According to the modern scholarly interpretation of Adams, he supported legal methods of resisting parliamentary taxation—petitions, boycotts, and nonviolent demonstrations—but he opposed mob violence, which he saw as illegal, dangerous, and counterproductive.
Although his old political ally James Warren thought that Adams had forsaken his principles, Adams saw no contradiction.
Opposition to the land bank came from the more aristocratic "court party", who were supporters of the royal governor and controlled the Governor's Council, the upper chamber of the General Court.
Why not the Produce of our Lands & everything we possess or make use of?
This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and the extent of Parliament's authority in the colonies.
Adams disapproved of what he viewed as Hancock's vanity and extravagance, which Adams believed were inappropriate in a republican leader.
The struggle continued in Massachusetts.
On December 16—the last day of the ''Dartmouth's'' deadline—about 7,000 people had gathered around the Old South Meeting House.
Drawing upon the traditional Anglo-American distrust of standing armies garrisoned among civilians, the ''Journal'' depicted a Boston besieged by unruly British soldiers, who assaulted men and raped women with regularity and impunity.
When Hancock left Congress in 1777, Adams and the other Massachusetts delegates voted against thanking Hancock for his service as president of Congress.
Although the Stamp Act was scheduled to go into effect on November 1, 1765, it was not enforced because protestors throughout the colonies had compelled stamp distributors to resign.
In early 1776, writing as "Candidus", he praised Thomas Paine's popular pamphlet ''Common Sense'' and supported the call for American independence.
Traditionally, the Massachusetts House of Representatives paid the salaries of the governor, lieutenant governor, and superior court judges.
Adams favored James Bowdoin for governor, and was distressed when Hancock won annual landslide victories.
Historian George Bancroft portrayed Adams favorably in his monumental ''History of the United States from the Discovery of the American Continent'' (1852).
William Gordon and Mercy Otis Warren, two historians who knew Adams, wrote of him as a man selflessly dedicated to the American Revolution.
For example, in what became the standard biography of Adams, historian John C. Miller wrote in 1936 that Adams "controlled" Boston with his "trained mob".
The first step in the new program was the Sugar Act of 1764.
Samuel Adams emerged as an important public figure in Boston soon after the British Empire's victory in the Seven Years' War (1756–1763).
He cited the decline of the Roman Empire as an example of what could happen to New England if it were to abandon its Puritan values.
After receiving a report that Governor Hutchinson had again refused to let the ships leave, Adams announced that "This meeting can do nothing further to save the country."
Adams focused his political agenda on promoting virtue, which he considered essential in a republican government.
Harlow argued that because the masses were easily misled, Adams "manufactured public opinion" to produce the Revolution, a view that became the thesis of John C. Miller's 1936 biography, ''Sam Adams: Pioneer in Propaganda''.
Interest in Adams was revived in the mid-19th century.
Adams's parents were devout Puritans and members of the Old South Congregational Church.
Like his father, Adams embarked on a political career with the support of the Boston Caucus.
His health was one reason: he was approaching his sixtieth birthday, and suffered from tremors that made writing difficult.
He approved of rebellion against an unrepresentative government, as had happened during the American Revolution, but he opposed taking up arms against a republican government, where problems should be remedied through elections.
On June 30, the House refused to rescind the letter by a vote of 92 to 17, with Adams citing their right to petition as justification.
In the coming years, Adams would use his position as clerk, in which he was responsible for official House papers, to promote his political message with great effect.
As was customary, the town meeting provided the representatives with a set of written instructions, which Adams was selected to write.
Two regiments were removed from Boston in 1769, but the other two remained.
Committees of correspondence soon formed in other colonies as well.
The British government's solution to the problem was to sell the surplus in the colonies.
Whether or not he helped plan the event is unknown, but Adams immediately worked to publicize and defend it.
Drawing upon the tradition that Adams had been a brewer, the Boston Beer Company created Samuel Adams Boston Lager in 1985, which became a popular award-winning brand.
By then, Adams had emerged as a leader of the popular party, and the embarrassing situation did not lessen his influence.
Elizabeth gave birth to six children over the next seven years, but only two—Samuel (born 1751) and Hannah (born 1756)—would live to adulthood.
The next year Adams was elected as governor in his own right, the first of four annual terms.
Leaders in other colonies were compared to him: Cornelius Harnett was called the "Samuel Adams of North Carolina", Charles Thomson the "Samuel Adams of Philadelphia", and Christopher Gadsden the "Sam Adams of the South".
He argued that the people must resist any encroachment on their constitutional rights.
In Massachusetts, more than 300 Loyalists were banished and their property confiscated.
Shays's Rebellion contributed to the belief that the Articles of Confederation needed to be revised.
Although Gage had evidently decided against seizing Adams and Hancock, Patriots initially believed otherwise, perhaps influenced by London newspapers that reached Boston with the news that the patriot leader would be hanged if he were caught.
Adams and the correspondence committees promoted opposition to the Tea Act.
The Virginia House of Burgesses passed a widely reprinted set of resolves against the Stamp Act that resembled Adams's arguments against the Sugar Act.
