Through Sandwich, he was involved in the administration of the short-lived English colony at Tangier.
As such, readers genuinely see a complete view of a complex human soul, the good and the bad.
On 1 January 1660 ("1 January 1659/1660" in contemporary terms), Pepys began to keep a diary.
Indeed, Claire Tomalin writes that "the most notable fact about Pepys's plague year is that to him it was one of the happiest of his life."
Among his papers are two detailed memoranda on the administration of the school.
Various single-volume abridgements of this text are also available.
Hearing news that the fire was advancing, he started to pack up his possessions by moonlight.
His opening paragraphs, written in January 1660, begin:
At the beginning of 1679 Pepys was elected MP for Harwich in Charles II's third parliament which formed part of the Cavalier Parliament.
In the 1990s it was performed as a ''Classic Serial'' starring Bill Nighy, and in the 2010s it was serialised as part of the ''Woman's Hour'' radio magazine programme.
By May of that year, they were under attack from their political enemies.
Returning home, Pepys met his clerk Tom Hayter who had lost everything.
His nephew and heir John Jackson died in 1723, when it was transferred intact to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where it can be seen in the Pepys Building.
In 1670, he was forced to defend his own role.
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1665 and served as its President from 1 December 1684 to 30 November 1686.
His colleagues were either engaged elsewhere or incompetent, and Pepys had to conduct a great deal of business himself.
Hugh Bonneville plays Pepys.
When James fled the country at the end of 1688, Pepys's career also came to an end.
In about 1644, Pepys attended Huntingdon Grammar School before being educated at St Paul's School, London, c. 1646–1650.
However, these demands were actually quite desirable for him, as tactical and strategic mistakes were not the responsibility of the Navy Board.
In 1673 he was involved with the establishment of the Royal Mathematical School at Christ's Hospital, which was to train 40 boys annually in navigation, for the benefit of the Royal Navy and the English Merchant Navy.
The Board was, however, criticised for its use of tickets to pay seamen.
After his release, he retired from public life at age 57.
The most recent general study is by Claire Tomalin, which won the 2002 Whitbread Book of the Year award, the judges calling it a "rich, thoughtful and deeply satisfying" account that unearths "a wealth of material about the uncharted life of Samuel Pepys".
Pepys was one of the most important civil servants of his age, and was also a widely cultivated man, taking an interest in books, music, the theatre, and science.
Nonetheless, Pepys was certainly concerned about the plague.
The 2004 film Stage Beauty concerns London theatre in the 17th century and is based on Jeffrey Hatcher's play Compleat Female Stage Beauty, which in turn was inspired by a reference in Pepys's diary to the actor Edward Kynaston, who played female roles in the days when women were forbidden to appear on stage.
Pepys was accused, among other things, of being a papist.
In the end, Pepys’s fears were unjustified and he lived another 34 years without going blind, but he never took to writing his diary again.
His eyesight began to trouble him and he feared that writing in dim light was damaging his eyes.
::Blessed be God, at the end of the last year I was in very good health, without any sense of my old pain but upon taking of cold.
It may be thought by some that these omissions are due to an unnecessary squeamishness, but it is not really so, and readers are therefore asked to have faith in the judgement of the editor."
In 1650, he went to Cambridge University, having received two exhibitions from St Paul's School (perhaps owing to the influence of Sir George Downing, who was chairman of the judges and for whom he later worked at the Exchequer) and a grant from the Mercers' Company.
* Sir Francis Drake's personal almanac
Historians have been using his diary to gain greater insight and understanding of life in London in the 17th century.
Pepys and his wife took a holiday to France and the Low Countries in June–October 1669; on their return, Elisabeth fell ill and died on 10 November 1669.
The complete, unexpurgated, and definitive edition, edited and transcribed by Robert Latham and William Matthews, was published by Bell & Hyman, London, and the University of California Press, Berkeley, in nine volumes, along with separate Companion and Index volumes, over the years 1970–1983.
In 1669, Pepys had to prepare detailed answers to the committee's eight "Observations" on the Navy Board's conduct.
Arthur Bryant published his three-volume study in 1933–1938, long before the definitive edition of the diary, but, thanks to Bryant's lively style, it is still of interest.
Isaac Newton's ''Principia Mathematica'' was published during this period, and its title page bears Pepys' name.
Pepys diary is one of the only known sources which provides such length in details of everyday life of an upper middle class man during the seventeenth century.
After six months' service, he travelled back through Spain accompanied by the naval engineer Edmund Dummer, returning to England after a particularly rough passage on 30 March 1684.
Furthermore, it was Pepys who suggested that the Navy Office should evacuate to Greenwich, although he did offer to remain in town himself.
In the following days, Pepys witnessed looting, disorder, and disruption.
From 1685 to 1688, he was active not only as Secretary for the Admiralty, but also as MP for Harwich.
The committee accepted this tactic when they reported in February 1668.
* Over 1,800 printed ballads, one of the finest collections in existence.
In his will, he left her an annuity of £200 and many of his possessions.
The charges are believed to have been fabricated under the direction of Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury.
He was also a keen singer, performing at home, in coffee houses, and even in Westminster Abbey.
The next day, Pepys continued to arrange the removal of his possessions.
At noon, he returned home and "had an extraordinary good dinner, and as merry, as at this time we could be", before returning to watch the fire in the city once more.
In relation to the Plague and Fire, C. S. Knighton has written: "From its reporting of these two disasters to the metropolis in which he thrived, Pepys's diary has become a national monument."
He was baptised at St Bride's Church on 3 March.
His influence and reforms at the Admiralty were important in the early professionalisation of the Royal Navy.
He moved out of London ten years later (1701) to a house in Clapham owned by his friend William Hewer, who had begun his career working for Pepys in the admiralty.
He described the chaos in the city and his curious attempt at saving his own goods:
the Rump, after being disturbed by my Lord Lambert, was lately returned to sit again.
Pepys learned arithmetic from a private tutor and used models of ships to make up for his lack of first-hand nautical experience, and ultimately came to play a significant role in the board's activities.
Others had apparently succeeded in reading the diary earlier, perhaps knowing about the key, because a work of 1812 quotes from a passage of it.
John Smith (later the Rector of St Mary the Virgin in Baldock) was then engaged to transcribe the diaries into plain English.
Pepys's health suffered from the long hours that he worked throughout the period of the diary.
Periodically, he would resolve to devote more time to hard work instead of leisure.
In 1663, he independently negotiated a £3,000 contract for Norwegian masts, demonstrating the freedom of action that his superior abilities allowed.
The diary was written in one of the many standard forms of shorthand used in Pepys's time, in this case called Tachygraphy and devised by Thomas Shelton.
From a young age, Pepys suffered from bladder stones in his urinary tract – a condition from which his mother and brother John also later suffered.
By then, he believed that Seething Lane was in grave danger, so he suggested calling men from Deptford to help pull down houses and defend the king's property.
Pepys erected a monument to her in the church of St Olave's, Hart Street, London.
Among his colleagues were Admiral Sir William Penn, Sir George Carteret, Sir John Mennes, and Sir William Batten.
The commission was followed by an investigation led by a more powerful authority, the commissioners of accounts.
He worked as a teller in the Exchequer under George Downing.
At his death, there were more than 3,000 volumes, including the diary, all carefully catalogued and indexed; they form one of the most important surviving 17th century private libraries.
Without returning home, he took a boat and observed the fire for over an hour.
He found the Lord Mayor, who said, "Lord!
In particular, it is an invaluable source for the study of the Second Anglo-Dutch War of 1665–7, the Great Plague of 1665, and the Great Fire of London in 1666.
Many of his valuables, including his diary, were sent to a friend from the Navy Office at Bethnal Green.
In mid-1658 Pepys moved to Axe Yard, near the modern Downing Street.
He also taught his wife to sing and paid for dancing lessons for her (although these stopped when he became jealous of the dancing master).
It was, in the words of C. S. Knighton, a "virtuoso performance".
According to his entry of 2 September 1666, Pepys recommended to the king that homes be pulled down in the path of the fire in order to stem its progress.
Though he had resigned from the Tangier committee in 1679, in 1683 he was sent to Tangier to assist Lord Dartmouth with the evacuation and abandonment of the English colony.
The war ended in August and, on 17 October, the House of Commons created a committee of "miscarriages".
The diary mostly covers work-related matters.
I am spent: people will not obey me.
He was almost never without pain, as well as other symptoms, including "blood in the urine" (hematuria).
He did imply in his last entries that he might have others write his diary for him, but doing so would result in a loss of privacy and it seems that he never went through with those plans.
He liked wine, plays, and the company of other people.
He decided to send her and his gold – about £2,350 – to Woolwich.
Shortly after waking, his servant returned and reported that 300 houses had been destroyed and that London Bridge was threatened.
He was elected along with Sir Anthony Deane, a Harwich alderman and leading naval architect, to whom Pepys had been patron since 1662.
He had no children and bequeathed his estate to his unmarried nephew John Jackson.
He decided that the fire was not particularly serious and returned to bed.
This added about a third to the previously published text, but still left only about 80% of the diary in print.
The Dutch raid was a major concern in itself, but Pepys was personally placed under a different kind of pressure: the Navy Board and his role as Clerk of the Acts came under scrutiny from the public and from Parliament.
Pepys had been a strong supporter of Cromwell, but he converted to the Royalist cause upon the Protector’s death.
In 1974 Richard Ollard produced a new biography that drew on Latham's and Matthew's work on the text, benefitting from the author's deep knowledge of Restoration politics.
Pepys was the fifth of eleven children, but child mortality was high and he was soon the oldest survivor.
Clapham was in the country at the time; it is now part of inner London.
At the outset, he proposed a centralised approach to supplying the fleet.
Later, he returned to Whitehall, then met his wife in St. James's Park.
Aside from day to day activities, Pepys also commented on the significant and turbulent events of his nation.
His idea was accepted, and he was made surveyor-general of victualling in October 1665.
Propriety did not prevent him from engaging in a number of extramarital liaisons with various women that were chronicled in his diary, often in some detail, and generally using a cocktail of languages (English, French, Spanish, and Latin) when relating the intimate details.
Pepys stopped writing his diary in 1669.
His diary reveals his jealousies, insecurities, trivial concerns, and his fractious relationship with his wife.
It was not until June 1665 that the unusual seriousness of the plague became apparent, so Pepys's activities in the first five months of 1665 were not significantly affected by it.
When they wrote notes to each other, Pepys signed himself "Dapper Dickey," while Knep was "Barbry Allen" (that popular song was an item in her musical repertory).
He was imprisoned on suspicion of Jacobitism from May to July 1689 and again in June 1690, but no charges were ever successfully brought against him.
Pepys took a coach back as far as St Paul's Cathedral before setting off on foot through the burning city.
On 1 January 2003 Phil Gyford started a weblog, pepysdiary.com, that serialised the diary one day each evening together with annotations from public and experts alike.
This often annoyed Pepys and provoked much harsh criticism in his diary.
Motivated by the publication of Evelyn's Diary, Lord Granville deciphered a few pages.
Pepys did not spend all of his infancy in London; for a while, he was sent to live with nurse Goody Lawrence at Kingsland, just north of the city.
Pepys had no maritime experience, but he rose to be the Chief Secretary to the Admiralty under both King Charles II and King James II through patronage, hard work, and his talent for administration.
'''Samuel Pepys'''  ( ; 23 February 1633 – 26 May 1703) was an English naval administrator and Member of Parliament who is most famous for the diary that he kept for a decade while still a relatively young man.
Pepys lived there until his death on 26 May 1703.
He excelled under the pressure, which was extreme due to the complexity and under-funding of the Royal Navy.
Pepys made detailed provisions in his will for the preservation of his book collection.
They were imprisoned in the Tower of London on suspicion of treasonable correspondence with France, specifically leaking naval intelligence.
Only my Lord Lambert is not yet come in to the Parliament; nor is it expected that he will, without being forced to it.
All of these editions omitted passages (chiefly about Pepys's sexual adventures) which the editors thought too obscene ever to be printed.
A second transcription, done with the benefit of the key, but often less accurately, was completed in 1875 by Mynors Bright and published in 1875–1879.
In 1667, with the war lost, Pepys helped to discharge the navy.
::The condition of the State was thus.
Pepys resigned as Secretary to the Admiralty.
Smith's transcription, which is also kept in the Pepys Library, was the basis for the first published edition of the diary, edited by Lord Braybrooke, released in two volumes in 1825.
Outbreaks of plague were not particularly unusual events in London; major epidemics had occurred in 1592, 1603, 1625, and 1636.
She did not return to Seething Lane until January 1666, and was shocked by the sight of St Olave's churchyard, where 300 people had been buried.
Pepys writes that "it made me weep to see it".
He also kept a diary for a few months in 1683 when he was sent to Tangier, Morocco as the most senior civil servant in the navy, during the English evacuation.
The detailed private diary that Pepys kept from 1660 until 1669 was first published in the 19th&nbsp;century and is one of the most important primary sources for the English Restoration period.
He later took great pride in his stoicism.
The incision on his bladder broke open again late in his life.
In 1657 Pepys decided to undergo surgery, not an easy option, as the operation was known to be especially painful and hazardous.
Meanwhile, Elisabeth Pepys was sent to Woolwich.
As always with Pepys it is people, not literary effects, that matter."
In 1665, he worked very hard, and the outcome was that he quadrupled his fortune.
I have been pulling down houses; but the fire overtakes us faster than we can do it."
Several detailed studies of Pepys' life are available.
On 7 September, he went to Paul's Wharf and saw the ruins of St Paul's Cathedral, of his old school, of his father's house, and of the house in which he had had his stone removed.
It has been an important account of London in the 1660s.
Pepys' stone was successfully removed and he resolved to hold a celebration on every anniversary of the operation, which he did for several years.
In October, he was admitted as a sizar to Magdalene College; he moved there in March 1651 and took his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1654.
He was appointed to a commission of the royal fishery on 8 April 1664.
It has only recently been noted that the gambling advice which Newton gave Pepys was correct, while the logical argument with which Newton accompanied it was unsound.
As secretary to the board, Pepys was entitled to a £350 annual salary plus the various gratuities and benefits that came with the job–including bribes.
"Mrs Knep was the wife of a Smithfield horsedealer, and the mistress of Pepys" — or at least "she granted him a share of her favours".
He reluctantly concluded in his last entry, dated 31 May 1669, that he should completely stop writing for the sake of his eyes, and only dictate to his clerks from then on, which meant that he could no longer keep his diary.
By the time of his marriage, the condition was very severe.
The diary gives a detailed account of Pepys's personal life.
Pepys was born in Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, London on 23 February 1633, the son of John Pepys (1601–1680), a tailor, and Margaret Pepys (''née'' Kite; died 1667), daughter of a Whitechapel butcher.
And King Charles II said: "Don't fight the Dutch, imitate them".
Robert Latham, editor of the definitive edition of the diary, remarks concerning the Plague and Fire: "His descriptions of both – agonisingly vivid – achieve their effect by being something more than superlative reporting; they are written with compassion.
Nevertheless, Pepys consulted surgeon Thomas Hollier and, on 26 March 1658, the operation took place in a bedroom in the house of Pepys' cousin Jane Turner.
The Companion provides a long series of detailed essays about Pepys and his world.
Pepys made a long speech at the bar of the Commons on 5 March 1668 defending this practice.
He called her husband "an ill, melancholy, jealous-looking fellow" and suspected him of abusing his wife.
The women whom he pursued, his friends, and his dealings are all laid out.
In his diary, Pepys recorded his observations as follows:
Pepys wrote about the Second Anglo-Dutch War: "In all things, in wisdom, courage, force and success, the Dutch have the best of us and do end the war with victory on their side".
Pepys is a character in the film and is portrayed as an ardent devotee of the theatre.
I lived in Axe yard, having my wife and servant Jane, and no more in family than us three.
England was in disarray when he began writing his diary.
These tickets could only be exchanged for cash at the Navy's treasury in London.
On 20 October, a list was demanded from Pepys of ships and commanders at the time of the division of the fleet in 1666.
As such, he was on the ship that brought Charles II home to England.
* The ''Pepys Manuscript'', a late 15th century English choirbook
It is clear from its content that it was written as a purely personal record of his life and not for publication, yet there are indications that Pepys took steps to preserve the bound manuscripts of his diary.
He did not live in cramped housing, he did not routinely mix with the poor, and he was not required to keep his family in London in the event of a crisis.
His great uncle Talbot Pepys was Recorder and briefly Member of Parliament (MP) for Cambridge in 1625.
In December 2003 the blog won the best specialist blog award in ''The Guardian''s Best of British Blogs.
He laboured at this task for three years, from 1819 to 1822, unaware until nearly finished that a key to the shorthand system was stored in Pepys' library a few shelves above the diary volumes.
In 1675 he was appointed a Governor of Christ's Hospital and for many years he took a close interest in its affairs.
The procedure may have left him sterile, though there is no direct evidence for this, as he was childless before the operation.
Pepys did not plan on other eyes ever seeing his diary, which is evident from the fact that he wrote in shorthand, and many times employed more cryptic codes (utilizing words based on Spanish, French, and Italian) when writing about his illicit affairs.
Pepys has been called the greatest diarist of all time due to his frankness in writing concerning his own weaknesses and the accuracy with which he records events of daily British life and major events in the 17th century.
The entries from the first few months were filled with news of General George Monck's march on London.
He also spent time evaluating his fortune and his place in the world.
In January 1689, he was defeated in the parliamentary election at Harwich; in February, one week after the accession of William and Mary, he resigned his secretaryship.
The most important items in the Library are the six original bound manuscripts of Pepys's diary, but there are other remarkable holdings, including:
Pepys went to the Tower to get a better view.
Pepys wrote about the contemporary court and theatre (including his amorous affairs with the actresses), his household, and major political and social occurrences.
Furthermore, Pepys was not among the group of people who were most at risk.
Later in 1654 or early in 1655, he entered the household of another of his father's cousins, Sir Edward Montagu, who was later created 1st Earl of Sandwich.
His job required him to meet many people to dispense money and make contracts.
In June 1667, they conducted their Raid on the Medway, broke the defensive chain at Gillingham, and towed away the , one of the Royal Navy's most important ships.
He attended the execution of Charles I in 1649.
He was passionately interested in music; he composed, sang, and played for pleasure, and even arranged music lessons for his servants.
In 1699, after the successful conclusion of a seven-year campaign to get the master of the Mathematical School replaced by a man who knew more about the sea, he was rewarded for his service as a Governor by being made a Freeman of the City of London.
As he had done during the Fire and the Plague, Pepys again removed his wife and his gold from London.
He joined the Tangier committee in August 1662 when the colony was first founded and became its treasurer in 1665.
The first unabridged recording of the diary as an audiobook was published in 2015 by ''Naxos AudioBooks''.
Pepys first met Knep on 6 December 1665.
Pepys was a lifelong bibliophile and carefully nurtured his large collection of books, manuscripts, and prints.
A cart arrived at 4 a.m. on 3 September and Pepys spent much of the day arranging the removal of his possessions.
He talked at length about his new watch (which had an alarm, a new thing at the time) which he was very proud of, a country visitor who did not enjoy his time in London because he felt that it was too crowded, and his cat waking him up at one in the morning.
He often laments how he "lost his labour" having gone to some appointment at a coffee house or tavern, only to discover that the person was not there whom he was seeking.
The position brought a further £300 a year.
He and his wife took flageolet lessons from master Thomas Greeting.
In the early hours of 2 September 1666, Pepys was awakened by his servant who had spotted a fire in the Billingsgate area.
