Beckett was awarded the Croix de guerre and the Médaille de la Résistance by the French government for his efforts in fighting the German occupation; to the end of his life, however, Beckett would refer to his work with the French Resistance as "boy scout stuff".
In October 1969 while on holiday in Tunis with Suzanne, Beckett heard that he had won the Nobel Prize for Literature.
In May, he wrote to MacGreevy that he had been reading about film and wished to go to Moscow to study with Sergei Eisenstein at the Gerasimov Institute of Cinematography in Moscow.
As for example when he hears, You are on your back in the dark.
Rousimoff’s son was André the Giant and when Beckett found out that Rousimoff was having trouble getting his son to school due to his size, Beckett offered to drive André to school in his truck—a vehicle that could fit André.
Only a small part of what is said can be verified.
Beckett seems to have been immediately attracted by her and she to him.
The passage makes reference to Dante's ''Commedia'', which can serve to confuse readers not familiar with that work.
In future, his work would focus on poverty, failure, exile and loss – as he put it, on man as a 'non-knower' and as a 'non-can-er.'"
While Beckett did not devote much time to interviews, he sometimes met the artists, scholars, and admirers who sought him out in the anonymous lobby of the Hotel PLM St. Jacques in Paris near his Montparnasse home.
Finally, in ''The Unnamable'', almost all sense of place and time are abolished, and the essential theme seems to be the conflict between the voice's drive to continue speaking so as to continue existing, and its almost equally strong urge towards silence and oblivion.
Some early philosophical critics, such as Sartre and Theodor Adorno, praised him, one for his revelation of absurdity, the other for his works' critical refusal of simplicities; others such as Georg Lukács condemned him for 'decadent' lack of realism.
An Ulster History Circle blue plaque in his memory is located at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, County Fermanagh.
Reminiscent of a harp on its side, it was designed by the celebrated Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava, who had also designed the James Joyce Bridge further upstream opened on Bloomsday (16 June) 2003.
Billie Whitelaw worked with Beckett for 25 years on such plays as ''Not I'', ''Eh Joe'', ''Krapp's Last Tape'', and ''Footfalls'' and ''Rockaby.''
Some consider one of these to be among the top three photographs of the 20th century.
He has divided critical opinion.
They had married in 1901.
And we laugh, we laugh, with a will, in the beginning.
Beckett published essays and reviews, including "Recent Irish Poetry" (in ''The Bookman'', August 1934) and "Humanistic Quietism", a review of his friend Thomas MacGreevy's ''Poems'' (in ''The Dublin Magazine'', July–September 1934).
"Sam knew that I would turn myself inside out to give him what he wanted", she explained.
Following from ''Krapp's Last Tape'', many of these later plays explore memory, often in the form of a forced recollection of haunting past events in a moment of stillness in the present.
Beckett had felt that he would remain forever in the shadow of Joyce, certain to never best him at his own game.
Happy Days Enniskillen International Beckett Festival is an annual multi-arts festival celebrating the work and influence of Beckett.
Although Beckett was an intensely private man, a review of the second volume of his letters by Roy Foster in the 15 December 2011 issue of ''The New Republic'' reveals Beckett to be not only unexpectedly amiable but frequently prepared to talk about his work and the process behind it.
His revelation prompted him to change direction and to acknowledge both his own stupidity and his interest in ignorance and impotence:
But it's always the same thing.
He was always adding to it; you only have to look at his proofs to see that.
It opened in London in 1955 to mainly negative reviews, but the tide turned with positive reactions from Harold Hobson in ''The Sunday Times'' and, later, Kenneth Tynan.
In 1935—the year that Beckett successfully published a book of his poetry, ''Echo's Bones and Other Precipitates''—Beckett worked on his novel ''Murphy''.
''Watt'', written while Beckett was in hiding in Roussillon during World War II, is similar in terms of themes but less exuberant in its style.
Sometimes as a director Beckett comes out with absolute gems and I use them a lot in other areas.
Blissful Beatrice was there, Dante also, and she explained the spots on the moon to him.
He was elected a Scholar in Modern Languages in 1926.
It was morning and Belacqua was stuck in the first of the canti in the moon.
The ironically titled ''Play'' (1962), for instance, consists of three characters immersed up to their necks in large funeral urns.
At the age of five, Beckett attended a local playschool, where he started to learn music, and then moved to Earlsfort House School in the city centre near Harcourt Street.
In true ascetic fashion, he gave away all of the prize money.
They also deal with the theme of the self confined and observed, with a voice that either comes from outside into the protagonist's head (as in ''Eh Joe'') or else another character comments on the protagonist silently, by means of gesture (as in ''Not I'').
Beckett's earliest works are generally considered to have been strongly influenced by the work of his friend James Joyce.
It explores human movement as if it were a mathematical permutation, presaging Beckett's later preoccupation—in both his novels and dramatic works—with precise movement.
The Becketts were members of the Anglican Church of Ireland.
These defied Beckett's usual scrupulous concern to translate his work from its original into the other of his two languages; several writers, including Derek Mahon, have attempted translations, but no complete version of the sequence has been published in English.
What's more, since the second act is a subtly different reprise of the first, he has written a play in which nothing happens, twice."
Barbara Bray died in Edinburgh on 25 February 2010.
Knowlson wrote of them: "She was small and attractive, but, above all, keenly intelligent and well-read.
Beckett travelled in Europe.
She stopped performing his plays in 1989 when he died.
It was written as a sequence of unpunctuated paragraphs in a style approaching telegraphese: "You are there somewhere alive somewhere vast stretch of time then it's over you are there no more alive no more than again you are there again alive again it wasn't over an error you begin again all over more or less in the same place or in another as when another image above in the light you come to in hospital in the dark" Following this work, it was almost another decade before Beckett produced a work of non-dramatic prose.
While there, he was introduced to renowned Irish author James Joyce by Thomas MacGreevy, a poet and close confidant of Beckett who also worked there.
Music for three Samuel Beckett plays (''Words and Music'', ''Cascando'', and ''...but the clouds...''), was composed by Martin Pearlman which was commissioned by the 92nd Street Y in New York for the Beckett centennial and produced there and at Harvard University.
She said of her role in ''Footfalls'': "I felt like a moving, musical Edvard Munch painting and, in fact, when Beckett was directing ''Footfalls'' he was not only using me to play the notes but I almost felt that he did have the paintbrush out and was painting."
The term "Theatre of the Absurd" was coined by Martin Esslin in a book of the same name; Beckett and ''Godot'' were centerpieces of the book.
More importantly, the novel was Beckett’s first long work that he wrote in French, the language of most of his subsequent works which were strongly supported by Jérôme Lindon director of his parisian publishing house Les Éditions de Minuit, including the poioumenon "trilogy" of novels: ''Molloy'' (1951); ''Malone meurt'' (1951), ''Malone Dies'' (1958); ''L'innommable'' (1953), ''The Unnamable'', (1960).
Suzanne died on 17 July 1989.
As a result, he became the only Nobel literature laureate to have played first class cricket.
When Beckett resigned from Trinity at the end of 1931, his brief academic career was at an end.
Later, he was to play for Dublin University and played two first-class games against Northamptonshire.
Beckett experienced something of a renaissance with the novella ''Company'' (1980), which continued with ''Ill Seen Ill Said'' (1982) and ''Worstward Ho'' (1984), later collected in ''Nohow On''.
The novel presaged his most famous work, the play ''Waiting for Godot'', which was written not long afterwards.
In an Irish context, he has exerted great influence on poets such as Derek Mahon and Thomas Kinsella, as well as writers like Trevor Joyce and Catherine Walsh who proclaim their adherence to the modernist tradition as an alternative to the dominant realist mainstream.
Beckett's most politically charged play, ''Catastrophe'' (1982), which was dedicated to Václav Havel, deals relatively explicitly with the idea of dictatorship.
He was elected Saoi of Aosdána in 1984.
Jack MacGowran was the first actor to do a one-man show based on the works of Beckett.
"I realized that Joyce had gone as far as one could in the direction of knowing more, being in control of one’s material.
I realized that my own way was in impoverishment, in lack of knowledge and in taking away, in subtracting rather than in adding."
In 1936, a friend had suggested him  to look up the works of Arnold Geulincx, which Beckett did and he took many notes.
During the two years that Beckett stayed in Roussillon he indirectly helped the Maquis sabotage the German army in the Vaucluse mountains, though he rarely spoke about his wartime work in later life.
He continued writing sporadically for radio and extended his scope to include cinema and television.
"To one on his back in the dark.
Returning to Ireland briefly in 1937, he oversaw the publication of ''Murphy'' (1938), which he translated into French the following year.
Beckett had one older brother, Frank Edward Beckett (born 1902).
Beckett also began to write his fourth novel, ''Mercier et Camier'', which was not published until 1970.
The show went through further revisions before Beckett directed it in Paris in 1970; MacGowran won the 1970-71 Obie for Best Performance By an Actor when he performed the show off-Broadway as ''Jack MacGowran in the Works of Samuel Beckett.''
Like most of his works after 1947, the play was first written in French with the title ''En attendant Godot''.
Sometime around December 1937, Beckett had a brief affair with Peggy Guggenheim, who nicknamed him "Oblomov" (after the character in Ivan Goncharov's novel).
Beckett studied French, Italian, and English at Trinity College, Dublin from 1923 to 1927 (one of his tutors was the eminent Berkeley scholar A.
The estate has a controversial reputation for maintaining firm control over how Beckett's plays are performed and does not grant licenses to productions that do not adhere to the writer's stage directions.
An early variant version of ''Comment c'est'', ''L'Image'', was published in the British arts review, ''X: A Quarterly Review'' (1959), and is the first appearance of the novel in any form.).
''How It Is'' is generally considered to mark the end of his middle period as a writer.
It also anticipates aspects of Beckett's later work: the physical inactivity of the character Belacqua; the character's immersion in his own head and thoughts; the somewhat irreverent comedy of the final sentence.
On several occasions over the next two years he was nearly caught by the Gestapo.
Their encounter was highly significant for them both, for it represented the beginning of a relationship that was to last, in parallel with that with Suzanne, for the rest of his life."
Broadly speaking, the plays deal with the subject of despair and the will to survive in spite of that despair, in the face of an uncomprehending and incomprehensible world.
His work has also influenced numerous international writers, artists and filmmakers including Edward Albee, Avigdor Arikha, Paul Auster, J. M. Coetzee, Richard Kalich, Douglas Gordon, Bruce Nauman, Anthony Minghella, and Damian Pettigrew.
The Central Bank of Ireland launched two Samuel Beckett Centenary commemorative coins on 26 April 2006: €10 Silver Coin and €20 Gold Coin.
After this, the play became extremely popular, with highly successful performances in the US and Germany.
Many major 20th-century composers including Luciano Berio, György Kurtág, Morton Feldman, Pascal Dusapin, Philip Glass, Roman Haubenstock-Ramati and Heinz Holliger have created musical works based on Beckett's texts.
Esslin claimed these plays were the fulfilment of Albert Camus's concept of "the absurd"; this is one reason Beckett is often falsely labeled as an existentialist (this is based on the assumption that Camus was an existentialist, though he in fact broke off from the existentialist movement and founded his own philosophy).
It is frequently performed today.
Asmus has directed all of Beckett's plays internationally.
Beckett eventually dropped the charges against his attacker—partially to avoid further formalities, partly because he found Prudent likeable and well-mannered.
Beckett went on to write many of his experimental theatre works for her.
She came to be regarded as his muse, the "supreme interpreter of his work", perhaps most famous for her role as the mouth in ''Not I''.
After a long period of inactivity, Beckett's poetry experienced a revival during this period in the ultra-terse French poems of ''mirlitonnades'', with some as short as six words long.
Despite his inability to get it published, however, the novel served as a source for many of Beckett's early poems, as well as for his first full-length book, the 1933 short-story collection ''More Pricks Than Kicks''.
Generally speaking, there is a tendency on the part of designers to overstate, and this has never been the case with Jocelyn."
Attendees at the official opening ceremony included Beckett’s niece Caroline Murphy, his nephew Edward Beckett, poet Seamus Heaney and Barry McGovern.
In his theatre of the late period, Beckett's characters—already few in number in the earlier plays—are whittled down to essential elements.
In 1919, Beckett went to Portora Royal School in Enniskillen, County Fermanagh (which Oscar Wilde had also attended).
In the hospital and nursing home where he spent his final days, Beckett wrote his last work, the 1988 poem "What is the Word" ("Comment dire").
In 1956, he had his first commission from the BBC Third Programme for a radio play, ''All That Fall.''
On 10 December 2009, the new bridge across the River Liffey in Dublin was opened and named the Samuel Beckett Bridge in his honour.
This meeting had a profound effect on the young man.
The extreme example of this, among his dramatic works, is the 1969 piece ''Breath'', which lasts for only 35 seconds and has no characters (though it was likely intended to offer ironic comment on ''Oh!
Anticipating that her intensely private husband would be saddled with fame from that moment on, Suzanne called the award a "catastrophe".
Aspects of it became evident in Beckett's later works, such as ''Watt'' and ''Waiting for Godot''.
One of the locals that helped him build the cottage was a Bulgarian-born farmer named Boris Rousimoff, who Beckett befriended.
Beckett is most famous for his play ''En attendant Godot'' (1953) (''Waiting for Godot'').
During his stay, he had a revelation in his mother’s room: his entire future direction in literature appeared to him.
Beckett's 1930 essay ''Proust'' was strongly influenced by Schopenhauer's pessimism and laudatory descriptions of saintly asceticism.
The 1960s was a period of change for Beckett, both on a personal level and as a writer.
From the late 1950s until his death, Beckett had a relationship with Barbara Bray, a widow who worked as a script editor for the BBC.
This time, however, the two would begin a lifelong companionship.
Prudent replied: "Je ne sais pas, Monsieur.
Beckett went on to write successful full-length plays, including ''Fin de partie'' (''Endgame'') (1957), ''Krapp's Last Tape'' (1958, written in English), ''Happy Days'' (1961, also written in English), and ''Play'' (1963).
In November 1930, he presented a paper in French to the Modern Languages Society of Trinity on the Toulouse poet Jean du Chas, founder of a movement called ''le Concentrisme''.
In the late 1950s, however, he created one of his most radical prose works, ''Comment c'est'' (1961; ''How It Is''.
The actor also appeared in various productions of ''Waiting for Godot'' and ''Endgame,'' and did several readings of Beckett's plays and poems on BBC Radio; he also recorded the LP, ''MacGowran Speaking Beckett'' for Claddagh Records in 1966.
The television drama ''Eh Joe'' (1963), which was written for the actor Jack MacGowran, is animated by a camera that steadily closes in to a tight focus upon the face of the title character.
The publicity surrounding the stabbing attracted the attention of Suzanne Dechevaux-Dumesnil, who previously knew Beckett slightly from his first stay in Paris.
He debuted ''End of Day'' in Dublin in 1962, revising it as ''Beginning To End'' (1965).
Beckett said that Herbert became his closest friend in England: "She has a great feeling for the work and is very sensitive and doesn't want to bang the nail on the head.
The words of Nell—one of the two characters in ''Endgame'' who are trapped in ashbins, from which they occasionally peek their heads to speak—can best summarize the themes of the plays of Beckett's middle period: "Nothing is funnier than unhappiness, I grant you that.
During the 15 years following the war, Beckett produced four major full-length stage plays: ''En attendant Godot'' (written 1948–1949; ''Waiting for Godot''), ''Fin de partie'' (1955–1957; ''Endgame''), ''Krapp's Last Tape'' (1958), and ''Happy Days'' (1961).
The novel's opening sentence hints at the somewhat pessimistic undertones and black humour that animate many of Beckett's works: "The sun shone, having no alternative, on the nothing new".
He fell out with his mother, which contributed to his decision to settle permanently in Paris.
We were doing ''Happy Days'' and I just did not know where in the theatre to look during this particular section.
They are erudite and seem to display the author's learning merely for its own sake, resulting in several obscure passages.
It was a literary parody, for Beckett had in fact invented the poet and his movement that claimed to be "at odds with all that is clear and distinct in Descartes."
In 1945, Beckett returned to Dublin for a brief visit.
Beckett translated all of his works into English himself, with the exception of ''Molloy'', for which he collaborated with Patrick Bowles.
Beckett worked on the play between October 1948 and January 1949.
Václav Havel, John Banville, Aidan Higgins, Tom Stoppard, Harold Pinter and Jon Fosse have publicly stated their indebtedness to Beckett's example.
In mid-1936 he wrote to Sergei Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin to offer himself as their apprentices.
This has led to his work sometimes being described as minimalist.
The house and garden, together with the surrounding countryside where he often went walking with his father, the nearby Leopardstown Racecourse, the Foxrock railway station and Harcourt Street station at the city terminus of the line, all feature in his prose and plays.
Joyce arranged a private room for Beckett at the hospital.
In ''Malone Dies'', movement and plot are largely dispensed with, though there is still some indication of place and the passage of time; the "action" of the book takes the form of an interior monologue.
She said of the play ''Rockaby'': "I put the tape in my head.
The success of his plays led to invitations to attend rehearsals and productions around the world, leading eventually to a new career as a theatre director.
Beckett bought some land in 1953 near a hamlet around forty miles northeast of Paris and built a cottage for himself with the help of some locals.
Beckett wrote the radio play ''Embers'' and the teleplay ''Eh Joe'' specifically for MacGowran.
Knowlson argues that "Beckett was rejecting the Joycean principle that knowing more was a way of creatively understanding the world and controlling it ...
After the Nazi German occupation of France in 1940, Beckett joined the French Resistance, in which he worked as a courier.
Beckett is one of the most widely discussed and highly prized of 20th-century authors, inspiring a critical industry to rival that which has sprung up around James Joyce.
She shewed him in the first place where he was at fault, then she put up her own explanation.
Despite the widely held view that Beckett's work, as exemplified by the novels of this period, is essentially pessimistic, the will to live seems to win out in the end; witness, for instance, the famous final phrase of ''The Unnamable'': 'I can't go on, I'll go on'.
The revelation "has rightly been regarded as a pivotal moment in his entire career."
In August 1942, his unit was betrayed and he and Suzanne fled south on foot to the safety of the small village of Roussillon, in the Vaucluse ''département'' in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.
In a much-quoted article, the critic Vivian Mercier wrote that Beckett "has achieved a theoretical impossibility—a play in which nothing happens, that yet keeps audiences glued to their seats.
Beckett was awarded the 1969 Nobel Prize in Literature "for his writing, which—in new forms for the novel and drama—in the destitution of modern man acquires its elevation."
Beckett fictionalised the experience in his play ''Krapp's Last Tape'' (1958).
In her autobiography she describes their first meeting in 1963 was "trust at first sight".
The essay defends Joyce's work and method, chiefly from allegations of wanton obscurity and dimness, and was Beckett's contribution to ''Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress'' (a book of essays on Joyce which also included contributions by Eugene Jolas, Robert McAlmon, and William Carlos Williams).
This work relates the adventures of an unnamed narrator crawling through the mud while dragging a sack of canned food.
The distinguished German director Walter D. Asmus began his working relationship with Beckett in the Schiller Theatre in Berlin in 1974 and continued until 1989, the year of the playwright's death.
He began to write in English again, although he also wrote in French until the end of his life.
Confined to a nursing home and suffering from emphysema and possibly Parkinson's disease, Beckett died on 22 December.
In describing these poets as forming "the nucleus of a living poetic in Ireland", Beckett was tracing the outlines of an Irish poetic modernist canon.
Beckett's outstanding achievements in prose during the period were the three novels ''Molloy'' (1951), ''Malone meurt'' (1951; ''Malone Dies'') and ''L'innommable'' (1953: ''The Unnamable'').
Despite being a native English speaker, Beckett wrote in French because—as he himself claimed—it was easier for him thus to write "without style."
He was so bogged that he could move neither backward nor forward.
In these novels—sometimes referred to as a "trilogy", though this is against the author's own explicit wishes—the prose becomes increasingly bare and stripped down.
This he can tell by the pressure on his hind parts and by how the dark changes when he shuts his eyes and again when he opens them again.
In these three "'closed space' stories," Beckett continued his preoccupation with memory and its effect on the confined and observed self, as well as with the positioning of bodies in space, as the opening phrases of ''Company'' make clear: "A voice comes to one in the dark.
Beckett graduated with a BA and, after teaching briefly at Campbell College in Belfast, took up the post of ''lecteur d'anglais'' at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris from November 1928 to 1930.
The poem grapples with an inability to find words to express oneself, a theme echoing Beckett's earlier work, though possibly amplified by the sickness he experienced late in life.
Throughout the 1960s and into the 1970s, Beckett's works exhibited an increasing tendency—already evident in much of his work of the 1950s—towards compactness.
'', the theatrical revue for which it served as an introductory piece).
He spent some time in London, where in 1931 he published ''Proust'', his critical study of French author Marcel Proust.
Beckett later insisted that he had not intended to fool his audience.
Historians interested in tracing Beckett's blood line were, in 2004, granted access to confirmed trace samples of his DNA to conduct molecular genealogical studies to facilitate precise lineage determination.
Samuel Beckett was born on Good Friday, 13 April 1906 to William Frank Beckett, a quantity surveyor and descendant of the Huguenots, and Maria Jones Roe, a nurse, when both were 35.
Yes, yes, it's the most comical thing in the world.
While listening to a tape he made earlier in his life, Krapp hears his younger self say "clear to me at last that the dark I have always struggled to keep under is in reality my most...", at which point Krapp fast-forwards the tape (before the audience can hear the complete revelation).
He commemorated it with the poem "Gnome", which was inspired by his reading of Johann Wolfgang Goethe's ''Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship'' and eventually published in ''The Dublin Magazine'' in 1934:
In 1961, he married Suzanne in a secret civil ceremony in England (its secrecy due to reasons relating to French inheritance law).
The English stage designer Jocelyn Herbert was a close friend and influence on Beckett until his death.
The two were interred together in the Cimetière du Montparnasse in Paris and share a simple granite gravestone that follows Beckett's directive that it should be "any colour, so long as it's grey."
Beckett's prose pieces during the late period were not so prolific as his theatre, as suggested by the title of the 1976 collection of short prose texts ''Fizzles'' (which the American artist Jasper Johns illustrated).
Since Beckett's death, all rights for performance of his plays are handled by the Beckett estate, currently managed by Edward Beckett (the author's nephew).
Similar elements are present in Beckett's first published novel, ''Murphy'' (1938), which also explores the themes of insanity and chess (both of which would be recurrent elements in Beckett's later works).
In 1929, Beckett published his first work, a critical essay entitled "Dante... Bruno.
She had it from God, therefore he could rely on its being accurate in every particular.
At this time Beckett began to write creatively in the French language.
The next year he won a small literary prize for his hastily composed poem "Whoroscope", which draws on a biography of René Descartes that Beckett happened to be reading when he was encouraged to submit.
Though many of the themes are similar, Beckett had little affinity for existentialism as a whole.
The newest ship of the Irish Naval Service, the LÉ ''Samuel Beckett'' (P61), is named for Beckett.
These plays—which are often considered, rightly or wrongly, to have been instrumental in the so-called "Theatre of the Absurd"—deal in a very blackly humorous way with themes similar to those of the roughly contemporary existentialist thinkers.
Directed by Roger Blin, the play was a critical, popular, and controversial success in Paris.
He has had a wider influence on experimental writing since the 1950s, from the Beat generation to the happenings of the 1960s and after.
There he continued to assist the Resistance by storing armaments in the back yard of his home.
Yes, it's like the funny story we have heard too often, we still find it funny, but we don't laugh any more."
When André recounted the drives with Beckett, he revealed they rarely talked about anything other than cricket.
Some of the best-known pictures of Beckett were taken by photographer John Minihan, who photographed him between 1980 and 1985 and developed such a good relationship with the writer that he became, in effect, his official photographer.
Beckett assisted Joyce in various ways, one of which was research towards the book that became ''Finnegans Wake''.
In 1961, Beckett received the International Publishers' Formentor Prize in recognition of his work, which he shared that year with Jorge Luis Borges.
Je m'excuse" "I do not know, sir.
In the United States, it flopped in Miami and had a qualified success in New York City.
