This has been a boon to the Salvadoran economy as it encourages foreign investors to launch new companies in El Salvador, saving them the inconvenience of conversion to other currencies.
The municipality is further subdivided into districts governed by the municipal mayor (Norman Quijano ) and by a District board.
San Salvador's economy is mostly based on the service and retail sector, rather than on industry or manufacturing.
(Population: 126,290)
Some of the bus transportation system is operated by the city government, but most of it is operated by the private sector.
The government opened public schools to be used as temporary shelters for three months.
An important historical street is Calle Arce, which was closed in order to create a pedestrian-only mall in the historic downtown of San Salvador.
By the time the buses have reached the San Salvador historic downtown they will have already transported 20,000 passengers.
In 2002 crime rates skyrocketed and the municipal government was unable to combat the rise.
The economy of San Salvador, Antiguo Cuscatlán, and Santa Tecla is a mixed one composed mainly of services, private education, banking, business headquartering, and industrial manufacturing.
Concerns about public safety in San Salvador increased in the late 1980s due to the civil war.
It has been used for ceremonial purposes since the administration of General Maximiliano Hernández Martínez.
San Salvador had managed to reduce its crime rate, and reduce its murder rate to a level lower than that of Haiti, Venezuela, Mexico, Guatemala, or Honduras, although at over 90 murders per 100,000 residents, the per capita rate was more than 10 times higher than major cities such as New York or London.
Mayor Norman Quijano inaugurated the first phase of its redevelopment near the Plaza de la Salud, which focuses on improvements to the sidewalks between 21st and 19th Avenida Norte.
(Population: 68,465)
The symbols of the city are the shield, flag, anthem, and staff of office.
The 1986 San Salvador earthquake destroyed many government buildings and other important structures, injuring and killing hundreds.
The 18th Street gang, originating in Los Angeles, California, has proliferated in San Salvador.
Twelve antique lights, originally from Spain and dating from 1900, will be installed, along with six benches and forty trees.
In April and May temperatures may reach .
Since 2009, Mayor Norman Quijano has worked for the redevelopment of parks and historic buildings in the ''Rescate del Centro Histórico'', which involves the removal of street vendors.
Most national companies have their headquarters in San Salvador, which is also home to regional offices for various transnational entities.
The Palace's facilities were occupied by government offices until 1974.
The San Salvador metropolitan area, which comprises San Salvador and thirteen of its surrounding municipalities, is one of the largest urban centers in Central America, with a projected population of 1,767,102 in 2015.
The city government operates a free bus system for use by handicapped, elderly, and pregnant persons; this is the only such system in Central America.
These events are becoming less prominent with a sharp decline in the Roman Catholic population during the past decade.
Approximately 200,000 people use the city's public bus system daily.
Many Jews had migrated to El Salvador during World War II due to the work of José Castellanos Contreras, the Salvadoran diplomatic Consul General in Geneva, Switzerland, who helped a Jewish-Hungarian businessman named Gyorgy Mandl (he later adopted the name George Mantello) save up to 40,000 Jews in Central Europe from the Nazi persecution by giving them Salvadoran nationality papers.
MARTE's mission is to contribute to development of the country's education and culture through the conservation and dissemination of its artistic heritage, and by improving historical knowledge, reaffirming cultural values that shape the Salvadoran identity, and promoting new artistic idioms.
* District One - Historic Downtown, Colonia Layco, Colonia La Rabida, Colonia Manzano.
San Salvador's colonial structures, especially its colonial cathedrals, have been destroyed over time by historic earthquakes, consequently Modernist and Gothic style cathedrals have taken their place.
Along ''Alameda Manuel Enrique Araujo'' there are many businesses, banks, and financial centers, government institutions and museums.
San Salvador, as well as the rest of the country, has used the U.S. dollar as its currency of exchange since 2001.
It is the largest and most luxurious theater in Central America, and was declared a National Monument in 1979.
The Cerrón Grande Hydroelectric Dam provides a substantial portion of the region's electricity.
The original buildings of the Spanish colony have been mostly destroyed by natural disasters over the years.
The new city coat of arms is silver as a symbol of purity; it has the National Flag in the center, and a ribbon on the bottom with the date 1834, the year San Salvador was declared capital of Central America.
The 1960s to the 1980s were the golden age of San Salvador in all aspects of security, quality of life, and modernization.
The museum aims to foster cultural awareness for Salvadorans through exhibitions, research, publications and educational programs.
There are small streams running down from Lake Ilopango, and a few old aqueduct systems, but the municipality itself has no major bodies of water.
The square in front of the Cathedral was the site of celebrations after the signing of the Chapultepec Peace Accords that ended the Salvadoran Civil War in 1992.
The Yellow Room (''Salon Amarillo'') is used as an office for the President of the Republic, while the Pink Room (''Salon Rosado'') housed the Supreme Court and later the Ministry of Defense.
The religious procession called ''El Descenso'' ("The Descent"), dedicated to the ''Divine Savior of the World'' and representing the resurrection of Jesus and his descent from the tomb, terminates there.
The departure interval will be approximately eight to ten minutes.
Not much is known about Cuzcatlan, as it was abandoned by its inhabitants in an effort to avoid Spanish rule.
The municipality is surrounded by these natural features of the landscape: southward by the ''Cordillera del Balsamo'' (Balsam Mountain Range); westward by the Boquerón Volcano and ''Cerro El Picacho'', the highest point in the municipality at .
The Blue Room (''Salon Azul'') was the meeting place of the Legislature of El Salvador from 1906, and its classical architecture with Ionian, Corinthian and Roman elements is notable.
The sculpture was created by the artist Francisco Durini Vasalli originally of Tremona, Italy.
San Salvador has small industrial zones scattered throughout the municipality, although most of them are concentrated in the eastern section near the border with Soyapango.
Hurricanes, tsunamis, and landslides also pose a threat.
The lake is also the largest natural body of water in the country, with an area of .
El Boquerón Volcano was dormant since its last eruption in 1917, but has been active recently.
* Plan and organize conventions for exhibitors from the realms of commerce, industry and tourism
* '''Alameda Manuel Enrique Araujo and Zona Rosa'''
A different sort of museum, but equally popular, is the  Tin Marín Museo de los Niños (Tin Marin Children's Museum), located between Gimnasio Nacional José Adolfo Pineda and Parque Cuscatlán.
The ''Acelhuate'' served as a water source for San Salvador during the late 1800s and early 1900s, but due to urbanization is now polluted.
The Martínez regime lasted from December 4, 1931 to May 6, 1944.
The building features an ellipsoidal dome containing a mural by painter Carlos Cañas and a crystal chandelier; other impressive spaces include the Chamber Hall and the Grand Foyer.
San Salvador has excellent transportation connectivity, due to its extensive road network and its street maintenance system.
San Salvador is located in the Salvadoran highlands, surrounded by volcanoes and prone to earthquakes.
Another major roadway is the RN-4 (Carretera Este Oeste) which runs from San Salvador through Apopa, and subsequently merges with the CA-1 Panamericana.
San Salvador has many museums.
San Salvador is governed by a council consisting of a mayor (elected by direct vote every three years, with an option to be re-elected), a trustee and two or more aldermen whose number varies in proportion to the population of the municipality.
San Salvador is currently the home of three major soccer teams in the Primera División (El Salvador): Alianza F.C., C.D.
The municipal staff shows a series of figures and symbols relating to local history.
The San Salvador Metropolitan Area Integrated System of Transportation (SITRAMSS) is a proposed high-volume bus transportation system.
The Metropolitan Cathedral of the Holy Savior ''(Catedral Metropolitana de San Salvador)'' is the principal church of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador and the seat of the Archbishop of San Salvador.
The Ministry of Labor transferred the property to the authorities of the Ministry of Education, with a directive to explore the possibility of its restoration and rehabilitation.
The largest are Tigo, Claro-Telecom, Movistar-Telefónica, and Digicel.
About 86% of the population is considered to be mestizo, and 12% fall under the category of white, or creole, having mostly Spanish ancestry, and a few of French or German descent.
The 2001 El Salvador earthquakes struck El Salvador on January 13 and February 13, 2001, resulting in considerable damage to the city, especially in Las Colinas suburb, where a landslide destroyed homes and killed many people.
Recent efforts by mayor Norman Quijano to restore public safety have been somewhat successful.
The ''Monumento a los Próceres de 1811'' (Monument to the Heroes of 1811), located in the Plaza Libertad, and the ''Teatro Nacional'' were built in 1911 during Dr. Manuel Enrique Araujo's presidency.
The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE) also has its headquarters in San Salvador.
The first route of the SITRAMSS will make a round trip from San Martin, through Ilopango, Soyapango, San Salvador, and Antiguo Cuscatlan to Santa Tecla.
The town changed location twice, in 1528 and 1545.
The population of San Salvador is predominantly Roman Catholic, with a significant minority of Protestants.
As the expansion of San Salvador continues, the need for infrastructure improvements becomes more acute.
The housing developments of Colonia Miravalle, Montebello, Satellite, Maquilishuat, San Mateo Lomas de San Francisco, Alta Mira, Loma Linda, La Floresta, and Jardines de la Libertad were built during this period.
Universidad de El Salvador.
It was built in the French Renaissance style with details done in the Rococo, Romantic, and Art Nouveau styles, and can seat 650 spectators in the Grand Hall.
San Salvador has a tropical wet and dry climate under the Köppen climate classification, and enjoys warm weather all year round, with daily mean temperatures of  (80&nbsp;°F).
On November 2009, Hurricane Ida hit the departments of San Salvador, San Vicente and Cuscatlán.
The company became part of the second largest brewer in the world, SABMiller, in 2005.
The historic downtown of San Salvador includes the area where the capital city of El Salvador has been located since the 16th century.
Universidad de El Salvador plays theirs at Estadio Universitario UES.
The plaza is also the focal point for celebrations accompanying the feast of San Salvador on August 5 and 6.
The monument, designed by Francisco Durini Cáseres, and installed in 1911, is crowned by an "angel of freedom" at its pinnacle holding a laurel wreath in both hands.
Road numbering starts at the downtown intersection of Avenida Espana/Avenida Cuscatlán and Delgado Arce street.
In 1969, celebrations in the Cuscatlán stadium were held in honor of the returning troops from the Football War with Honduras.
* District Five - Colonia Monserrat, Colonia Modelo, Centro Urbano Candelaria.
The Coca Cola company uses the La Constancia installations to manufacture its beverage brands sold in El Salvador and the rest of Central America.
On May 5, 2015, Mayor Nayib Bukele presented the redesigned city shield and flag.
The city government is restoring the downtown area, with the goal of celebrating the city's past and promoting cultural diversity.
The theater is open to tourists, and after the Historic Downtown Restoration has been used for plays, shows, operas, song recitals, and modern dance performances.
Since then the museum has become an essential element of the cultural life of Central America, with its representative view of art from the mid-19th century to contemporary times.
As a consequence of increased commercial activity, the area around the plaza was enhanced with the construction of two ornate buildings, the ''Portal la Dalia'' in 1915–1916 and the ''Portal de Occidente'' in 1917.
(Population: 110,475)
The highest dew point was  and the lowest .
(Population: 118,325)
The tallest tower is occupied by the Telefónica phone company, the next tallest tower is used by RED Business Communication Systems.
Plaza Gerardo Barrios is the site of many demonstrations and political rallies.
In 2011, the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities or ''Unión de Ciudades Capitales Iberoamericanas'' (UCCI), selected San Salvador as a "Latin American capital of culture", recognizing San Salvador's cultural diversity.
In 1917, an earthquake during an eruption of the nearby San Salvador volcano (also known as ''Quetzaltepec'') damaged the city, but it escaped additional damage because the lava flowed down the back side of the volcano.
The Cathedral was finished off with a festive tiled ceramic mural façade by the Salvadoran master Fernando Llort and inaugurated on March 19, 1999.
Originally established in what is now the archaeological site of Ciudad Vieja, north of the present-day city, it was moved to the ''Valle de Las Hamacas'', so named for the intense seismic activity that characterizes it.
The current National Palace building replaced the old National Palace built in 1866–1870, which was destroyed by fire on December 19, 1889.
The shield (designed by the painter José Mejía Vides) is divided into four quadrants: the two quadrants at the top right and bottom left have blue and white fields symbolizing the national flag; the top left quadrant displays a symbolic emerald necklace; and the lower right contains the bell of the Church of La Merced, representing the birth of El Salvador's independence movement in 1811, when José Matías Delgado rang the bells.
San Salvador is a major regional transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network.
The museum has held temporary exhibitions of works by internationally renowned artists like Picasso, Rembrandt, Salvador Dalí and Joan Miró.
Also according to a UN Development report, San Salvador has a relatively low robbery rate of 90 per 100,000, compared to San José, the capital of Costa Rica, which has 524 robberies per 100,000.
San Salvador's government is composed of various departments, including the departments of festivals, parks, cemeteries, and finance.
San Salvador has a relatively benign climate; the temperature range is constant through the year, and it gets more than adequate rain.
San Salvador has numerous private high schools, including Protestant and Catholic high schools, as well as secular ones; the city also has numerous private bilingual schools.
There are plans to start operation of another route, connecting the northern side of San Salvador, Cuscatancingo, to Apopa and from Apopa, to the city of Nejapa.
San Salvador is also home to about 3,500 Jews; the Jewish community is still robust, but less so since the 1980s, as a large number of them left with the start of the Salvadoran Civil War.
The new site was chosen because it had more space and more fertile land, thanks to the Acelhuate River.
Streets have odd-number names if they are to the north of the intersection, and even-number names if to the south.
Estadio Cuscatlán, with a capacity of over 45,000, is the largest soccer venue not only in Central America, but in the Caribbean as well.
It has a capacity of 15,000 persons.
Although not within the municipality, it forms a natural boundary between San Salvador and Soyapango.
There is also a historic railroad consisting of railroad cars from the 1960s which were refurbished and put into operation by the ministry of tourism.
Construction materials ranging from ceramic tiles to concrete blocks and concrete are produced in large quantities; plastics extrusion, including the production of piping, is also an important industry.
English is spoken more widely than in the past, due mainly to cultural influences from the United States, especially in entertainment, and the large number of Salvadoran emigrants returned from the United States.
As a "gamma" global city, San Salvador is also an important financial hub of Central America.
* Support the international exchange of technological, commercial and industrial ideas
200,000 people were left homeless after the earthquake and a week of minor aftershocks.
After several years the number of buildings has increased, and it has become one of the most significant business complexes in San Salvador.
Atlético Marte and C.D.
Its flagship brand is ''Pilsener'', a pilsner style lager beer, the national beer of El Salvador.
The project started in 1997 with Phase I, the construction of the two tallest towers.
The National Theater is located on the southern side of Francisco Morazán Plaza on Calle Delgado.
The figure, made of bronze, is placed on a pedestal of granite and depicts battle scenes and the shield of El Salvador.
The National palace, built in 1905, is a mix of Gothic, Neoclassical, and Renaissance Revival architecture.
The final phase was remodeling of the Telemovil building to convert it into the Banco Azteca Center.
The restoration work began in 2001 under the leadership of Dr. Alfredo Martínez Moreno, former director of the Salvadorean Language Academy and the Royal Spanish Academy.
The screen is 40&nbsp;meters in height and width and was completed in March 2008.
During the Salvadoran civil war, large building construction projects were halted and eventually cancelled due to the collapse of the economy; the remainder of early Modernist office and hotel buildings collapsed during the 1986 San Salvador earthquake and the 2001 El Salvador earthquakes, while the few remaining old buildings were left uninhabitable.
(Population: 92,908)
Other municipalities in the metropolitan area depend either on industry, like Soyapango and Ilopango, on public services, like Mejicanos, or on power generation, as in Nejapa and Apopa.
Thus, the city contains many narrow streets which create traffic problems, and sidewalks are often overcrowded.
Some streets in the city are very narrow with little room for cars to pass, although many streets are wide.
La Plaza Gerardo Barrios, also known as the Civic Plaza, is located in the heart of the city.
Unilever manufactures all its products sold in Central America in San Salvador.
On December 2, 1931, president Arturo Araujo was ousted by a military coup d'état and replaced by a military directorate.
Various business complexes and towers have sprouted in the commercial districts of ''Colonia Escalón'' and ''Colonia San Benito'', both in District Three of the Salvadoran capital.
The company produces the ''Agua Cristal'' brand of bottled water, the best selling in El Salvador and in the Central American region.
plays their home games at Jorge "Mágico" González; Atlético Marte plays home games at Cuscatlán, and C.D.
There are also smaller Latter Day Saints chapels in Districts 1 and 3.
There was an expansion of middle-class neighborhoods such as Merliot, Santa Elena and the Tier, but internal migration and the cessation of armed conflict created a high demand for urban public housing.
In San Vicente, the municipalities of Verapaz and Guadalupe were totally destroyed by rainfall accompanying the hurricane, and the resultant landslide.
The people of El Salvador raised money for the homeless and international aid came from countries such as the United States, Mexico, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and the European Union.
With the commencement of the Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s, many modernization projects were halted.
The first three were created as a result of a contest launched in 1943.
A relatively large proportion of residents have telephones, televisions, and access to the internet, and several communications companies have their headquarters in San Salvador.
San Salvador has the second largest Jewish community in Central America and a small Muslim community.
San Salvador is not only the capital of El Salvador, but also disproportionately concentrates economic activity in the country.
The San Salvador Municipality is naturally delimited by the Acelhuate River on the east, the San Jacinto Hill on the south east, the lower highlands of the Balsam Range on the South, El Picacho Mountain and the Bicentennial Park on the West, and North by the San Antonio River.
* District Six - Barrio San Esteban.
The anthem was written by Carlos Bustamante (lyrics) and Ciriaco de Jesús Alas (music).
The National Theater is the oldest theater in Central America, being built in 1917 in the French Renaissance Revival style with details in the Rococo, Romantic and Art Nouveau architectural styles.
As of October, 2012, the center consists of two towers of 8 levels each, with a total of  of office space.
The Protestant population is mostly Evangelical.
As in most of the country, Roman Catholicism still plays a prominent role in the celebration of holidays, including ''Las Fiestas Agostinas'' (The August Festivals) in honor of Jesus Christ, the patron "saint" of El Salvador, referred to as ''El Salvador del Mundo'' (The Savior of the World).
In late December 2012, the Archbishop of San Salvador, José Luis Escobar Alas, ordered the removal of the façade without consulting the national government or the artist himself.
In 1973 the Department of Vocational Training Ministry of Labor occupied the structure; in 1986 it was declared a Cultural Asset by an Executive Agreement of May 8, 1985.
San Salvador lacks a consolidated financial district; this is mainly due to the lack of urban planning that has plagued the city since the aftermath of the Salvadoran Civil War in 1992.
Districts 1 and 2 have a slightly higher crime rate than 3 or 4, while District 5, bordering San Marcos, and District 6, bordering Soyapango, have the highest crime rates.
The gunmen were never identified.
File:Boulevard mosenor romero.jpg|Boulevard Monseñor Romero ('''Boulevard Diego de Holguin''')
The RN-21 (Bulevar Monseñor Romero) is a major east–west road connecting the cities of Santa Tecla and Antiguo Cuscatlán, finally merging in San Salvador with the RN-5 East/West (also known as Bulevar los Próceres), that later turns into the North/South RN-5 heading towards the International Airport.
Industrias La Constancia, El Salvador's largest brewer and bottler of purified water, dominates the Salvadoran export market of beers and bottled water.
Mayor Bukele, a member of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front party, is accompanied by a trustee, twelve aldermen, four substitute aldermen, and a secretary.
Major routes of the national transportation network run through the city.
The city's average elevation is  above sea level, but ranges from a highest point of  above sea level to a lowest point of  above sea level.
The caldera is seismically active, but has not erupted since 1880.
This stadium hosted the Central American and Caribbean Games in 2002, in which El Salvador came in 6th place among 37 countries.
Before the Spanish conquest, the Pipil people established their capital, Cuzcatlan, near the current location of San Salvador.
To finish the project, legislation was passed that collected one colon for every ''quintal'' of coffee exported.
Tickets cost $0.10.
San Salvador has many restaurants and shopping malls, including Metrocentro, the largest shopping mall in Central America, as well as retail stores such as Wal-Mart, Office Max, and a Pricesmart warehouse club.
Unilever, a British–Dutch multinational consumer goods company, has a plant in San Salvador.
Alianza is well known throughout El Salvador for its loyal supporters and for the exuberant atmosphere created during games.
Since the early 2010s there has been a boom in the construction of call centers providing services to national and international companies alike.
This mixture of ownership has contributed to safety and traffic problems.
One such project is to reroute the public transportation routes so they no longer pass through the historic downtown.
The Inter-American Development Bank has determined that San Salvador has one of the best road systems in Latin America.
One is held every month in San Salvador at ''Las Fuentes de Beethoven'' in the plazas Argentina and Unión Europea.
The expansion of San Salvador, while occurring in all directions, was primarily in the direction of the volcano of San Salvador.
Security measures in San Salvador's most troubled Districts (5 and 6, which border Soyapango, and are home to many gangs) included safety campaigns and recreational activities to keep youth from joining gangs.
The Mara Salvatrucha is a rival gang.
* District Four - Colonia San Francisco, Colonia La Cima (I-IV), Colonia La Floresta.
Thousands of people were displaced by the disaster and many struggled to find shelter in the ruins.
The statue that dominates the site, designed by Francisco Durini Cáseres, is dedicated to President Gerardo Barrios and was unveiled in 1909.
Between 1,000 and 1,500 people are believed to have been killed, and over 10,000 people were injured.
Trains depart from near the East Bus Station and travel to the town of Apopa (servise suspended from 2013).
In 1902, the Hospital Rosales was built, named after its benefactor, Dr. Jose Rosales, a banker who gave his fortune to the hospital and to the orphanage.
Each of the six city districts also has a government department.
The few notable surviving buildings were erected in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The project was launched in the historic downtown and will expand throughout the entire city.
