KRTU 91.7 is a non-commercial radio station based out of Trinity University.
Kiddie Park, featuring old fashioned amusement rides for children, was established in 1925, and is the oldest children's amusement park in the U.S.
San Antonio International is the 6th busiest airport based on passenger boardings in Texas.
Within the past twenty years, San Antonio has become a significant location for American-based call centers and has added a significant manufacturing sector centered around automobiles.
The market is also home to six Spanish-language stations, three religious stations, three independent stations and one Internet-based station ( 210 TV).
The 1953 tornado resulted in two deaths and 15 injuries.
The University of Texas at San Antonio is San Antonio's largest university.
They named the place and river "San Antonio" in his honor.
Work was authorized to begin in 2015 on the restoration of the former Hot Wells hotel, spa, and bathhouses on the San Antonio River on the south-side of the city.
On May 1, the governor transferred ownership of the Mission San Antonio de Valero (later famous as the Alamo) to Fray Antonio de Olivares.
In addition,  63.2% of the city's population was of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race.
The average coolest month is January.
Roadrunner football began play in 2011, with a record of 4-6.
A bus and rubber tired streetcar (bus) system is provided by the city's metropolitan transit authority, VIA Metropolitan Transit.
By its end, the population of the city had been reduced by almost two-thirds, to 800 inhabitants.
The San Antonio Public Library serves all of these institutions along with the 19 independent school districts within the Bexar County/ San Antonio metropolitan area.
He was forced out of that office, due to threats on his life, by sectarian newcomers and political opponents in 1842, becoming the last Tejano mayor for nearly 150 years.
He directed Martin de Alarcón, the governor of Coahuila and Texas, to establish the mission complex.
It is the largest medical education center in the world.
The City of San Antonio runs under a Council-Manager form of government.
The Battle of the Alamo took place from February 23 to March 6, 1836.
Other places of interest include the San Antonio Botanical Garden, Brackenridge Park, the Japanese Tea Gardens, the Sunken Garden Theater, the San Antonio Zoo, and The Woodlawn Theatre and the Majik Theatre a children's educational theater.
KSTX also broadcasts "Riverwalk Jazz", featuring Jim Cullum Jazz Band at The Landing, a fixture on the River Walk since 1963.
The current city manager is Sheryl Sculley.
It was the fastest growing of the top 10 largest cities in the United States from 2000 to 2010, and the second from 1990 to 2000.
Unlike other college radio stations throughout the US, the station plays jazz 17 hours a day and college rock/indie rock at night.
His plan was approved, and notice was given the Canary Islanders (''isleños'') to furnish 200 families; the Council of the Indies suggested that 400 families should be sent from the Canaries to Texas by way of Havana and Veracruz.
These neighborhoods are not districts of the City of San Antonio like Lincoln Heights and Brackenridge Park, rather, they are independent cities throughout the San Antonio region completely surrounded, but not directly controlled, by the City of San Antonio.
Located about 10 miles northwest of Downtown is the South Texas Medical Center, which is a conglomerate of various hospitals, clinics, and research (see Southwest Research Institute) and higher educational institutions.
In 1997 Titan Holdings and USLD Communications had sold their operations to larger companies.
San Antonio has two rugby union teams, the Alamo City Rugby Football Club, and San Antonio Rugby Football Club.
In the 2000s the city annexed several long narrow corridors along major thoroughfares in outlying areas to facilitate eventual annexation of growth developing along the routes.
The city straddles South Texas and Central Texas and is on the southwestern corner of an urban megaregion known as the Texas Triangle.
San Antonio is home to six Fortune 500 companies and the South Texas Medical Center, the only medical research and care provider in the South Texas region.
Also, there is the very popular Six Flags Fiesta Texas.
San Antonio was named for Saint Anthony of Padua, whose feast day is on June 13, by a 1691 Spanish expedition in the area.
It represented Mexican expansion into the area.
San Antonio receives about a dozen subfreezing nights each year, typically seeing some sort of wintry precipitation about once every 2-3 winters (i.e.
She is the first African American female to hold the office.
Most Latin stations in the area play regional Mexican, Tejano or contemporary pop.
Each district elects one person to sit on the City Council with the mayor elected on a citywide basis.
There are 433,122 housing units at an average density of 1,062.7 per square mile (410.3&nbsp;km2).
However, Univision announced on November 10, 2006, that it flipped KLTO Tejano 97.7's format to reggaeton in an attempt to reintroduce the format to San Antonio.
Soccer Complex were sold to the City of San Antonio and Bexar County, a deal which was accompanied by an agreement for Spurs Sports and Entertainment to operate the facilities and field a team that plays in the United Soccer League.
Its flagship, WOAI AM-1200, is known for its local news operation, considered among the best in the country.
Kelly Air Force Base operated out of San Antonio until 2001, when the airfield was transferred to Lackland AFB.
VIA has, among its many routes, one of the longest local transit routes in America.
The University of Texas at San Antonio fields San Antonio's only NCAA Division I athletic teams, known as the UTSA Roadrunners.
Professional soccer returned with the birth of the San Antonio Scorpions of the modern NASL in 2012.
This includes express service from Downtown to park and ride locations in the south, west, northwest, north central and northeast sides of the city, with service to major locations such as UTSA, Six Flags Fiesta Texas and SeaWorld.
San Antonio-based TV stations are WOAI channel 4 (NBC), KSAT channel 12 (ABC), KENS channel 5 (CBS), KABB channel 29 (Fox Broadcasting Company), KCWX channel 2 (myNetworkTV), KMYS channel 35 (The CW) and KLRN channel 9 (PBS).
Widespread bankruptcy forced Leal Goraz Jr.'s army back into the current boundaries of Mexico; they fell into internal conflict and turmoil with neighboring entities.
It is expected to serve both residents and visitors.
Although largely disconnected, the progress to create a bicycle-friendly environment was recognized when San Antonio was designated a bronze-level "Bicycle Friendly Community" by the League of American Bicyclists.
Following the Civil War, San Antonio prospered as a center of the cattle industry.
The immigrants formed the nucleus of the villa of San Fernando de Béxar, the first regularly organized civil government in Texas.
The city planned to annex nearly forty additional square miles by 2009.
The San Antonio Missions became the 23rd U.S. site on the World Heritage List, which includes the Grand Canyon and the Statue of Liberty.
Under the leadership of Juan Leal Goraz, the group marched overland from Veracruz to the Presidio San Antonio de Béxar, where they arrived on March 9, 1731.
San Antonio has experienced two F4 tornadoes, one in 1953 and another in 1973.
The defense industry in San Antonio employs over 89,000 and provides a $5.25 billion impact to the city's economy.
The United States Postal Service operates San Antonio's Main Post Office.
The city operates its own electric and gas utility service, CPS Energy.
The San Antonio Missions became the 23rd U.S. site on the World Heritage List, which includes the Grand Canyon and the Statue of Liberty.
San Antonio serves as the seat of Bexar&nbsp;County.
Tourism also brings new annual revenues to the City of San Antonio and other governmental entities with the hotel & motel tax, sales taxes and other revenues from hospitality agreements and contracts.
sleet/freezing rain), but accumulation and snow itself are very rare.
The University of Texas at San Antonio fields the only collegiate men's rugby team in the city.
These buses serve the Downtown core area, and are the first revenue vehicles VIA operates which have zero emissions.
These schools include: Central Catholic Marianist High School, Incarnate Word High School,  Saint Mary's Hall, The Atonement Academy, Antonian College Preparatory High School, San Antonio Academy, Holy Cross High School, Providence High School, The Carver Academy, Keystone School, TMI – The Episcopal School of Texas, St. Anthony Catholic High School, Lutheran High School of San Antonio, and Harmony Science Academy.
On December 22, 2015, it was announced that Toyota Field and S.T.A.R.
These men were seen as "martyrs" for the cause of Texas freedom and "Remember the Alamo" became a rallying cry in the Texian Army's eventual success at defeating Santa Anna's army.
Recent annexations have extended the city's boundaries into Medina County and, though for only a very tiny area near the city of Garden Ridge, into Comal County.
San Antonio FC began play in the soccer-specific stadium, Toyota Field, in 2016.
In San Antonio, July and August tie for the average warmest months, with an average high of .
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2000 the city had a total area of — (98.9%) of land and
In San Antonio, 48% of the population are males, and 52% of the population are females.
The San Antonio ''Current'' is the free "alternative" paper published weekly with local political issues, art and music news, restaurant listings and reviews, and listings of events and nightlife around town.
** Texas District 23: Will Hurd (R)
The city is also home of the U.S. Army All-American Bowl, played annually in the Alamodome and televised live on NBC.
The October 1998 Central Texas floods were one of the costliest floods in United States history, resulting in $750 million in damage and 32 deaths.
The city is home to the five-time NBA champion San Antonio Spurs and hosts the annual San Antonio Stock Show & Rodeo, one of the largest such events in the country.
In 2015, San Antonio ranked No.
The city has also hosted the Dallas Cowboys and Houston Oilers preseason camps in the past, and the Cowboys practiced in San Antonio through 2011.
For every 100 females, there are 93.5 males.
The ETJ lands are in an area bordered by FM 1518 to the west, Lower Seguin Road to the north, Cibolo Creek to the east and I-10 to the south.
95.1 was then flipped back to the "La Kalle" format again after being flipped to feature a "95X" format.
''La Prensa'', a bilingual publication, also has a long history in San Antonio.
The 30 hybrid buses were put into service on VIA's express routes to serve daily commuters across the city.
The outnumbered Texian force was ultimately defeated, with all of the Alamo defenders killed.
Subsequent population counts, however, indicate continued rapid growth in the area.
Nearly three-fourths of its current land area had been annexed since 1960.
The primary source of drinking water for the city is the Edwards Aquifer.
The SAU&G was merged into the Missouri Pacific Railroad in 1956 and subsequently subsumed by the Union Pacific.
Hearst, using the Express-News brand, also produces ''Conexion'', a weekly magazine written by an entirely Hispanic staff with a Hispanic spin on weekly events.
It began operation in March 2011.
With his robust military forces, he led exploration and establishing Spanish colonial bases as far as San Francisco, California.
Males have a median income of $30,061 versus $24,444 for females.
The University added football in 2011, hiring former University of Miami coach Larry Coker as its initial head coach.
The 2011 US Census estimate for the eight-county  metropolitan area placed its population at 2,194,927 making it the third-most populous metro area in Texas (after Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and Houston Metropolitan Area) and the 24th-most populous metro area in the US.
In 1691, a group of Spanish Catholic explorers and missionaries came upon the river and Payaya settlement on June 13, the feast day of St. Anthony of Padua.
Involuntary annexation is a controversial issue in those parts of unincorporated Bexar County affected by it.
Upon his departure, the joint command of William Barrett Travis and James Bowie were left in charge of defending the old mission.
The city's population has nearly doubled in 35 years, from just over 650,000 in the 1970 census to an estimated 1.2 million in 2005, through both population growth and land annexation (the latter has considerably enlarged the physical area of the city).
It is about 75 miles to the southwest of its neighboring city, Austin, the state capital.
Residents attracted to the outlying areas by lower taxes and affordable real estate values, often see annexation as a mechanism to increase property tax rates (which are primarily driven by school district taxes, not city taxes) without a corresponding improvement in services such as police and fire protection, while the city regards its annexation policy as essential to its overall prosperity.
San Antonio and New Braunfels, forty miles to the northeast, are some of the most flood-prone regions in North America.
UTSA set attendance records for both highest attendance at an inaugural game (56,743) and highest average attendance for a first year program (35,521).
The city sits on the Balcones Escarpment.
The council effectively functions as the city's legislative body with the city manager acting as its chief executive, responsible for the management of day-to-day operations and execution of council legislation.
B-Cycle, the same system used in Denver, supplies the bike share system.
Off-road trails travel along the San Antonio River, linear greenways, or city parks.
Routes 550 (clockwise) and 551 (counterclockwise) travel  one way as they loop around the city.
San Antonio is home to Clear Channel Communications, the largest operator of radio stations in the US.
The predecessor route, including passenger service, from 1913 to 1956 was provided by the San Antonio, Uvalde and Gulf Railroad, or "The Sausage", as it was commonly termed.
In the 1850s Frederick Law Olmsted, the landscape architect who designed Central Park in New York City, traveled throughout the South and Southwest, and published accounts of his observations.
A North Star Mall display features 40 foot (12&nbsp;meters) tall cowboy boots.
Therefore, just like in the rest of the country, radio station conglomerates have been changing formats in San Antonio to reflect shifting demographics.
On the northern side of the Alamo complex, beside the Emily Morgan Hotel, is the San Antonio Cavalry Museum, which features cavalry artifacts and exhibits.
During the Spanish Mexican settlement of Southwestern lands, which took place over the following century, Juan Leal Goraz Jr. was a prominent figure.
At the time of European encounter, Payaya Indians lived near the San Antonio River Valley in the San Pedro Springs area, calling the vicinity ''Yanaguana'', meaning "refreshing waters".
The city stretches into several national congressional districts and is represented in Congress by the following:
San Antonio hosts the NCAA football Alamo Bowl each December, played among the Big XII and Pac-12 each December in the Alamodome.
The San Antonio Fire Department (SAFD) provides the city with fire protection and EMS service.
It is the first site in the state of Texas.
The agreement releases a total of  of San Antonio's ETJ lands north of I-10 to Schertz.
In the fall of 2010, VIA took delivery of three new buses that are powered by electricity from on-board batteries.
San Antonio has about  of bike lanes, routes or off-road paths.
San Antonio hosts over 100,000 students in its 31 higher-education institutions.
Freight service from San Antonio to Corpus Christi is provided by the Union Pacific Railroad.
Additionally, the close proximity of Austin truncates the potential market area.
The ''Express-News'' currently circulates as the largest newspaper service in South Texas.
This led to the Mexican–American War.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked San Antonio the 40th-most walkable of the fifty largest cities in the United States.
VIA began operating a Bus Rapid Transit line known as VIA Primo in December 2012, which connects Downtown San Antonio to the South Texas Medical Center, the main campus of the University of Texas at San Antonio, and the independent enclave city of Leon Valley.
In 1845, the United States finally decided to annex Texas and include it as a state in the Union.
Houston and Laredo have similar term limits to those in San Antonio.
The initial program consisted of 140 bikes at 14 locations supported by a "central hub".
Under the leadership of Ben Milam, in the Battle of Bexar, December 1835, Texian forces captured San Antonio from forces commanded by General Martin Perfecto de Cos, Santa Anna's brother-in-law.
Then, 97.7 was flipped again to feature a rock format.
Private universities include Trinity University, St. Mary's University, Our Lady of the Lake University, University of the Incarnate Word, Webster University, Baptist University of the Américas, Hallmark University, Oblate School of Theology, and the Southwest School of Art, which enrolled its first BFA class in 2014.
By comparison, the other two Texas cities with populations of over a million people, Houston and Dallas, are among the 10 largest markets.
The Roadrunners moved to the Western Athletic Conference in 2012, and to Conference USA in 2013.
Natural vegetation in the San Antonio area (where undisturbed by development) includes oak-cedar woodland, oak grassland savanna, chaparral brush and riparian (stream) woodland.
It presently ranks 33rd in the United States, according to marketing research firm ACNielsen.
Texas was the first state to have major cities develop by railroads rather than waterways.
In 1990, the United States Census Bureau reported San Antonio's population as 55.6% Hispanic, 7% black, and 36.2% non-Hispanic white.
The San Antonio Police Department (SAPD) is the city's municipal body of law enforcement.
Despite the relatively large size of both the city proper and the metropolitan area, San Antonio has always been a medium-sized market.
San Antonio grew to become the largest Spanish settlement in Texas; it was designated as the capital of the Spanish, later Mexican, province of Tejas.
San Antonio is located near 29.5°N 98.5°W.
* House of Representatives
San Antonio Bike Share, a non-profit, was formed to oversee the operation, locally operated and maintained by Bike World.
Also, since the City has annexed a large amount of land over time, San Antonio surrounds several independent enclave cities which include Alamo Heights, Terrell Hills, Olmos Park, Hollywood Park, Hill Country Village, Castle Hills, Windcrest, Kirby, Balcones Heights, and Shavano Park.
The Bowl is an East versus West showdown featuring the nation's top 90 high school senior football players.
The families who clustered around the presidio and mission formed the beginnings of Villa de Béjar, destined to become the most important town in Spanish Texas.
In addition, METC (the Military Education and Training Campus), which provides the medical training for the U.S. military at Fort Sam Houston, hosts 30 programs and over 24,000 annual graduates.
VIA also offers a special service to city events including Spurs games and city parades from its park and ride locations.
All positions are elected on non-partisan ballots as required by Texas law.
This number exceeded $300 million in 2012.
As stated above, the 2010 US Census showed the city's population at 1,327,407, making it the second-most-populous city in Texas (after only Houston), as well as the seventh-most-populous city in the United States.
It was years before any Spanish settlement took place.
Growth along the Interstate 35 and Interstate 10 corridors to the north, west and east make it likely that the metropolitan area will continue to expand.
San Antonio is home to U.S. Air Force Basic Military Training (AFBMT).
The metropolitan area is bordered to the northeast by , and the two metropolitan areas together combine to form a region of over 4.1 million people.
The viceroy gave formal approval for a combined mission and presidio in late 1716, as he wanted to forestall any French expansion into the area from their colony of ''La Louisiane'', as well as prevent illegal trading with the Payaya.
The per capita income for the city is $17,487.
Though the US ultimately won, the war was devastating to San Antonio.
Former NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue stated San Antonio was successful in hosting the New Orleans Saints, and that the city would be on the short list for any future NFL expansions.
Publicly supported schools include the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, the University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas A&M University–San Antonio, and the Alamo Community College District.
It was placed in its new location, three blocks south of the Alamo, over four days in 1985, and cost $650,000 to move.
The city is also about 190 miles west of Houston and about 250 miles south of the Dallas–Fort Worth area.
San Antonio's economy is focused primarily within military, health care, government civil service, financial services, oil and gas and tourism sectors.
The first radio station to broadcast in south Texas was KTSA AM-550 in 1922.
Mexico allowed European-American settlers from the United States into the territory; they mostly occupied land in the eastern part.
As a result, the San Antonio Scorpions franchise of the NASL was shut down.
In 2002, from June 30 to July 7,  of rain fell in the San Antonio area, resulting in widespread flooding and 12 fatalities.
Commonly referred to as Greater San Antonio, the metropolitan area has a population of nearly 2.4 million based on the 2015 US Census estimate, making it the 25th-largest metropolitan area in the United States and third-largest in the state of Texas.
Father Antonio de Olivares visited the site in 1709, and he was determined to found a mission and civilian settlement there.
He claimed nearly 100,000 sq miles (153,766 acres) as Spanish territory and held some control for nearly three decades: this area stretched across six present-day states.
In addition, the ''San Antonio Business Journal'' covers general business news.
Since the late twentieth century, San Antonio has had steady population growth.
The airport has three runways and is also home to the Texas Air Museum.
Due to marriages along the way, the party now included 15 families, a total of 56 persons.
San Antonio has a diversified economy with about a $96.8 billion metropolitan Gross Domestic Product.
The region's National Public Radio member is Texas Public Radio, a group of three stations; KSTX 89.1 FM is NPR news/talk, KPAC 88.3 is a 24-hour classical music station, and KTXI 90.1 is a mix of NPR news/talk and classical music broadcast for the West Central Texas Hill Country.
In the spring of 1836, Santa Anna marched on San Antonio.
The Hearst Corporation, which owned a second newspaper, the ''San Antonio Light'', purchased the ''Express-News'' from News Corp. in 1992 and shut down the ''Light'' after failing to find a buyer.
The council hires a City Manager to handle day-to-day operations.
Unlike most large cities in the US, San Antonio is not completely surrounded by independent suburban cities, and under Texas state law it exercises extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) over much of the surrounding unincorporated land, including planning major thoroughfares and enforcing rules for platting and subdivision.
It has two terminals and is served by 10 airlines serving 44 destinations including six in Mexico.
The new Mission Reach Ecosystem and Restoration and Recreation project was completed in 2013, and created over 15 miles of biking, hiking, and paddling trails that connect the Missions to the San Antonio riverwalk.
VIA's full fare monthly unlimited Big Pass is $35 per month.
An F2 tornado will land within  of the city on average once every five years.
Juan Seguín, who organized the company of Tejano patriots, who fought for Texas independence, fought at the Battle of Concepción, Siege of Bexar, and the Battle of San Jacinto, and served as mayor of San Antonio.
Other post offices are located throughout San Antonio.
Stinson Municipal Airport is a reliever airport located six miles (10&nbsp;km) south of Downtown San Antonio.
After a Los Angeles buyout specialist purchased Builders Square, the company's operations were moved out of San Antonio.
This is mainly because the nearby suburban and rural areas are not much larger than the city itself.
The missions of the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park along with the Alamo, became part of UNESCO's World Heritage Sites on July 5, 2015.
