Older and denser neighborhoods around the downtown tend to be utility cycling oriented.
A city charter was re-established in 1889 and today's city charter was adopted in 1931.
The downtown branch consists of two building on two opposite streets.
One of the Port of San Diego's two cargo facilities is located in Downtown San Diego at the Tenth Avenue Marine Terminal.
The population was 45.3% non-Hispanic whites, down from 78.9% in 1970, 27.7% Hispanics, 15.6% Asians/Pacific Islanders, 7.1% blacks, 0.4% American Indians, and 3.9% from other races.
Because of its diversity of habitat and its position on the Pacific Flyway, San Diego County has recorded the presence of 492 bird species, more than any other region in the country.
The city-run San Diego Public Library system is headquartered downtown and has 34 branches throughout the city.
According to Uniform Crime Report statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2010, there were 5,616&nbsp;violent crimes and 30,753&nbsp;property crimes.
San Diego home prices peaked in 2005, then declined as part of a nationwide trend.
Two years later the city was bankrupt; the California legislature revoked the city's charter and placed it under control of a board of trustees, where it remained until 1889.
In October 2003, San Diego was the site of the Cedar Fire, which has been called the largest wildfire in California over the past century.
Under the Köppen–Geiger climate classification system, the San Diego area has been variously categorized as having either a semi-arid climate (''BSh'' in the original classification and ''BSkn'' in modified Köppen classification) or a Mediterranean climate (''Csa'' and ''Csb'').
The estimated city population in 2009 was 1,306,300.
The City of San Diego is responsible for police, public safety, streets, water and sewer service, planning and zoning, and similar services within its borders.
To their south are Torrey Pines State Reserve and the business center of the Golden Triangle.
In addition to damage caused by the fire, smoke resulted in a significant increase in emergency room visits due to asthma, respiratory problems, eye irritation, and smoke inhalation; the poor air quality caused San Diego County schools to close for a week.
Variability of rainfall can be extreme: in the wettest years of 1883/1884 and 1940/1941 more than  fell in the city, whilst in the driest years as little as  has fallen for a full year.
, the city had one employee for every 137 residents, with a payroll greater than $733 million.
The city recognized the importance of its neighborhoods when it organized its 2008 General Plan around the concept of a "City of Villages".
Frequently, particularly during the "May gray/June gloom" period, a thick "marine layer" cloud cover keeps the air cool and damp within a few miles of the coast, but yields to bright cloudless sunshine approximately  inland.
The Columbia district downtown is home to historic ship exhibits belonging to the San Diego Maritime Museum, headlined by the Star of India, as well as the unrelated San Diego Aircraft Carrier Museum featuring the USS Midway aircraft carrier.
Elections are held on a non-partisan basis per California state law; nevertheless, most officeholders do identify themselves as either Democrats or Republicans.
The city's population grew rapidly during and after World War II, more than doubling between 1930 (147,995) and 1950 (333,865).
Though the E. W. Scripps Company owns KGTV and KZSD-LP, they are not considered a duopoly under the FCC's legal definition as common ownership between full-power and low-power television stations in the same market is permitted regardless to the number of stations licensed to the area.
The San Diego metropolitan area had one of the worst housing affordability of all metropolitan areas in the United States.
Also, an expansion of Interstate 15 through the North County is underway with the addition of high-occupancy-vehicle (HOV) "managed lanes".
In 1821, San Diego became part of the newly-independent Mexico, which reformed as the First Mexican Republic two years later.
Qualcomm was founded and is headquartered in San Diego, and is one of the largest private-sector  employers in San Diego.
The visitor industry provides employment for more than 160,000 people.
The change was brought about by a citywide vote in 2004.
It was the first settlement by Europeans in what is now the state of California.
Thus, the canyons give parts of the city a segmented feel, creating gaps between otherwise proximate neighborhoods and contributing to a low-density, car-centered environment.
The city of San Diego recognizes 52 individual areas as Community Planning Areas.
After World War II, the military continued to play a major role in the local economy, but post-Cold War cutbacks took a heavy toll on the local defense and aerospace industries.
The Trolley primarily serves downtown and surrounding urban communities, Mission Valley, east county, and coastal south bay.
Soccer, American football, and track and field are also played in Balboa Stadium, the city's first stadium, constructed in 1914.
San Diego was ranked as the 20th-safest city in America in 2013 by ''Business Insider''.
The San Diego Yacht Club hosted the America's Cup yacht races three times during the period 1988 to 1995.
In 1978 the city decided to replace them with more efficient sodium vapor lamps.
The city is the seat of San Diego County and is the economic center of the region as well as the San Diego–Tijuana metropolitan area.
That represents a population increase of just under 7% from the 1,223,400 people, 450,691 households, and 271,315 families reported in 2000.
Point Loma occupies the peninsula across San Diego Bay from downtown.
A significant number of people moved to adjacent Riverside County, commuting daily to jobs in San Diego, while others are leaving the region altogether and moving to more affordable regions of the country.
According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 68% of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians, with 22% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant, and 32% professing Roman Catholic beliefs.
Testament to San Diego's cycling efforts, in 2006, San Diego was rated as the best city for cycling for U.S. cities with a population over 1&nbsp;million.
Other wireless industry manufacturers headquartered here include Nokia, LG Electronics, Kyocera International., Cricket Communications and Novatel Wireless.
The largest software company in San Diego is security software company Websense Inc. San Diego also has the U.S. headquarters for the Slovakian security company ESET.
In addition to the municipal public library system, there are nearly two dozen libraries open to the public which are run by other governmental agencies and by schools, colleges, and universities.
Most of the rainfall occurs during the cooler months.
The city has a mild climate year-round, with an average of 201 days above  and low rainfall ( annually).
As time went on multiple buildings claimed the title of San Diego's tallest skyscraper, including the Union Bank of California Building and Symphony Towers.
Millennials (ages 18 through 34) constitute 27.1% of San Diego's population, the second-highest percentage in a major U.S. city.
The original town of San Diego was located at the foot of Presidio Hill, in the area which is now Old Town San Diego State Historic Park.
Also, the local craft brewing industry attracts an increasing number of visitors for "beer tours" and the annual San Diego Beer Week in November; San Diego has been called "America's Craft Beer Capital."
The presence of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), with the affiliated UCSD Medical Center, has helped make the area a center of research in biotechnology.
In 1952, however, the FCC began licensing UHF channels, making it possible for cities such as San Diego to acquire more stations.
Two of college football's annual bowl games are also held at Qualcomm Stadium: the Holiday Bowl and the Poinsettia Bowl.
Mission San Diego was the southern anchor in California of the historic mission trail El Camino Real.
It is located on San Diego Bay  from downtown.
There are more than 400 biotechnology companies in the area.
torreyana torreyana'', is found.
The southern portion of the Point Loma peninsula was set aside for military purposes as early as 1852.
The libraries have had reduced operating hours since 2003 due to the city's financial problems.
The San Diego Surf of the American Basketball Association is located in the city.
The city is "home to the majority of the U.S. Pacific Fleet's surface combatants, all of the Navy's West Coast amphibious ships and a variety of Coast Guard and Military Sealift Command vessels".
Like most of southern California, the majority of San Diego's current area was originally occupied by chaparral, a plant community made up mostly of drought-resistant shrubs.
The Cuyamaca Mountains and Laguna Mountains rise to the east of the city, and beyond the mountains are desert areas.
The other three occasions, in 1882, 1946, and 1987, involved flurries but no accumulation.
As of January 1, 2008 estimates by the San Diego Association of Governments revealed that the household median income for San Diego rose to $66,715, up from $45,733, and that the city population rose to 1,336,865, up 9.3% from 2000.
Other prominent Aztec sports include college football, as well as soccer, basketball and volleyball.
the median age was 35.6; more than a quarter of residents were under age 20 and 11% were over age 65.
This terminal has facilities for containers, bulk cargo, and refrigerated and frozen storage, so that it can handle the import and export of many commodities.
Stations include: KOGO AM 600, KFMB AM 760, KCEO AM 1000, KCBQ AM 1170, K-Praise, KLSD AM 1360 ''Air America'', KFSD 1450 AM, KPBS-FM 89.5, Channel 933, Star 94.1, FM 94/9, FM News and Talk 95.7, Q96 96.1, KyXy 96.5, Free Radio San Diego (AKA Pirate Radio San Diego) 96.9FM FRSD, KSON 97.3/92.1, KXSN 98.1, Jack-FM 100.7, 101.5 KGB-FM, KLVJ 102.1, Rock 105.3, and another ''Pirate Radio'' station at 106.9FM, as well as a number of local Spanish-language radio stations.
San Diego International Airport maintains scheduled flights to the rest of the United States including Hawaii, as well as to Mexico, Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom.
The members of the city council are each elected from single member districts within the city.
According to ''Forbes'' magazine, San Diego was the ninth-safest city in the top 10 list of safest cities in the U.S. in 2010.
The per capita income for the city was $23,609.
In 1846, the United States went to war against Mexico and sent a naval and land expedition to conquer Alta California.
Within a given planning area there may be several distinct neighborhoods.
Both subsequently resigned.
As a result of the Mexican–American War of 1846–48, the territory of Alta California, including San Diego, was ceded to the United States by Mexico, under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848.
By 2015, the Tijuana Cross-border Terminal in Otay Mesa will give direct access to Tijuana International Airport, with passengers walking across the U.S.–Mexico border on a footbridge to catch their flight on the Mexican side.
In 1822, Mexico began attempting to extend its authority over the coastal territory of Alta California.
Mexican partisans held San Diego for three weeks until October 24, 1846, when the Americans recaptured it.
The San Diego Repertory Theatre at the Lyceum Theatres in Horton Plaza produces a variety of plays and musicals.
Over the ensuing six weeks, 18 women came forward to publicly claim that Filner had sexually harassed them, and multiple individuals and groups called for him to resign.
Most were eventually rebuilt, using castings of the original façades to retain the architectural style.
The 432 residents of the town petitioned the governor to form a pueblo, and Juan María Osuna was elected the first ''alcalde'' ("municipal magistrate"), defeating Pío Pico in the vote.
Altogether the city contains more than 100 identified neighborhoods.
As a whole, the Mexico side of the San Diego-Tijuana market has two duopolies and one triopoly (Entravision Communications owns both XHAS-TV and XHDTV-TV, Azteca owns XHJK-TV and XHTIT-TV, and Grupo Televisa owns XHUAA-TV and XHWT-TV along with being the license holder for XETV-TV, which is run by California-based subsidiary Bay City Television).
In 1949 and 1967, snow stayed on the ground for a few hours in higher locations like Point Loma and La Jolla.
Crime in San Diego increased in the early 2000s.
''Times of San Diego''  is a free online newspaper covering local news in the metropolitan area.
The San Diego Opera at Civic Center Plaza, directed by Ian Campbell, was ranked by Opera America as one of the top 10 opera companies in the United States.
New Town soon eclipsed the original settlement, known to this day as Old Town, and became the economic and governmental heart of the city.
Further south are the beach and coastal communities of La Jolla, Pacific Beach, Mission Beach, and Ocean Beach.
A sign of global warming, scientists at Scripps Institution of Oceanography say the average surface temperature of the water at Scripps Pier in the California Current has increased by almost 3 degrees since 1950.
By 1797, the mission boasted the largest native population in Alta California, with over 1,400 neophytes living in and around the mission proper.
Arriving on his flagship ''San Diego'', Vizcaíno surveyed the harbor and what are now Mission Bay and Point Loma and named the area for the Catholic Saint Didacus, a Spaniard more commonly known as ''San Diego de Alcalá''.
Downtown San Diego was in decline in the 1960s and 1970s, but experienced some urban renewal since the early 1980s, including the opening of Horton Plaza, the revival of the Gaslamp Quarter, and the construction of the San Diego Convention Center; Petco Park opened in 2004.
(Sometimes in the past, a missing network affiliate in the Imperial Valley would be available on cable TV from San Diego.)
However, San Diego had been losing population throughout the 1830s and in 1838 the town lost its pueblo status because its size dropped to an estimated 100 to 150 residents.
However, since February 2016 the median home price has significantly dropped to $455,000.
In November 1602, Sebastián Vizcaíno was sent to map the California coast.
San Diego's first television station was KFMB, which began broadcasting on May 16, 1949.
The Amtrak and Coaster trains currently run along the coastline and connect San Diego with Los Angeles, Orange County, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura via Metrolink and the Pacific Surfliner.
San Diego's Spanish and Mexican heritage is reflected in the many historic sites across the city, such as Mission San Diego de Alcala and Old Town San Diego State Historic Park.
In 1850, William Heath Davis promoted a new development by the Bay shore called "New San Diego", several miles south of the original settlement; however, for several decades the new development consisted only a few houses, a pier and an Army depot.
The city shares a  border with Mexico that includes two border crossings.
, San Diego has the third-largest homeless population in the United States; the city's homeless population has the largest percentage of homeless veterans in the nation.
The development of skyscrapers over  in San Diego is attributed to the construction of the El Cortez Hotel in 1927, the tallest building in the city from 1927 to 1963.
Stretching north from Miramar are the northern suburbs of Mira Mesa, Scripps Ranch, Rancho Peñasquitos, and Rancho Bernardo.
Old Globe Theatre at Balboa Park produces about 15 plays and musicals annually.
The state of California was admitted to the United States in 1850.
The Museum of Contemporary Art San Diego (MCASD) is located in La Jolla and has a branch located at the Santa Fe Depot downtown.
At the same time, the city's hilly, canyon-like terrain and significantly long average trip distances—brought about by strict low-density zoning laws—somewhat restrict cycling for utilitarian purposes.
There are two Amtrak stations in San Diego, in Old Town and the Santa Fe Depot downtown.
Total property crimes per 100,000 people were lower than the national average in 2008.
Traditionally, San Diegans have built their homes and businesses on the mesas, while leaving the urban canyons relatively wild.
San Diego's television market is limited to only San Diego county.
, as well as a number of small parks and preserves.
Tourism is a major industry owing to the city's climate, its beaches, and numerous tourist attractions such as Balboa Park, Belmont amusement park, San Diego Zoo, San Diego Zoo Safari Park, and SeaWorld San Diego.
The dry and mild climate of San Diego makes cycling a convenient and pleasant year-round option.
For the most part, San Diego neighborhood boundaries tend to be understood by its residents based on geographical boundaries like canyons and street patterns.
This resulted in the resignation of newly re-elected Mayor Dick Murphy and the criminal indictment of six pension board members.
The endangered Torrey pine has the bulk of its population in San Diego in a stretch of protected chaparral along the coast.
This course was also the site of the 2008 U.S. Open Golf Championship.
In 2014, San Diego was designated by a ''Forbes'' columnist as the best city in the country to launch a small business or startup company.
The annual Farmers Insurance Open golf tournament (formerly the Buick Invitational) on the PGA Tour occurs at Torrey Pines Golf Course.
The communities of South San Diego, such as San Ysidro and Otay Mesa, are located next to the Mexico–United States border, and are physically separated from the rest of the city by the cities of National City and Chula Vista.
The new system is predicted to save $2.2 million per year in energy and maintenance costs.
In 2009, a judge acquitted Zucchet on seven out of the nine counts against him, and granted his petition for a new trial on the other two charges; the remaining charges were eventually dropped.
The Cleveland National Forest is a half-hour drive from downtown San Diego.
Also available are whale-watching cruises to observe the migration of gray whales, peaking in mid-January.
San Diego County hosted more than 32&nbsp;million visitors in 2012; collectively they spent an estimated $8 billion locally.
The city altered its lighting regulations to limit light pollution within  of Palomar.
Port expansions included a second cruise terminal on Broadway Pier which opened in 2010.
In 2009 the Port of San Diego handled 1,137,054 short tons of total trade; foreign trade accounted for 956,637 short tons while domestic trade amounted to 180,417 short tons.
Torrey Pines State Reserve and a coastal strip continuing to the north constitute the only location where the rare species of Torrey Pine, ''P.
At first they had an easy time of it capturing the major ports including San Diego, but the Californios in southern Alta California struck back.
From 2002 to 2006, the crime rate overall dropped 0.8%, though not evenly by category.
The months of May through September tend to be almost completely dry.
As of December 2010, home prices were down 36 percent from the peak in 2005.
The mayor, city attorney, and council members are elected to four-year terms, with a two-term limit.
Public schools within the city are managed and funded by independent school districts (see above).
In 2013, San Diego had the lowest murder rate of the ten largest cities in the United States.
San Diego will participate in the Western American National Rugby League which starts in 2011.
ParkScore ranks city park systems by a formula that analyzes acreage, access, and service and investment.
In the early part of the 20th century, San Diego hosted two World's Fairs: the Panama-California Exposition in 1915 and the California Pacific International Exposition in 1935.
Snow in the city is so rare that it has been observed only five times in the century-and-a-half that records have been kept.
The fire burned , killed 15 people, and destroyed more than 2,200 homes.
During the final months of the war, the Japanese had a plan to target multiple U.S. cities for biological attack, starting with San Diego.
Several reservoirs and Mission Trails Regional Park also lie between and separate developed areas of the city.
The city had a population of 1,307,402 according to the 2010 census, distributed over a land area of .
Gas and electric utilities are provided by San Diego Gas & Electric, a division of Sempra Energy.
The ethnic makeup of the city was 28.8% Hispanic or Latino (''of any race''); 24.9% of the total population were Mexican American, and 0.6% were Puerto Rican.
The urban area of San Diego extends beyond the administrative city limits and had a total population of 2,956,746, making it the third-largest urban area in the state, after that of the Los Angeles metropolitan area and San Francisco metropolitan area.
They, along with the Riverside–San Bernardino, form those metropolitan areas in California larger than the San Diego metropolitan area, with a total population of 3,095,313 at the 2010 census.
Skirmishes occurred daily and snipers shot into the town every night.
Freeway projects included expansion of Interstates 5 and 805 around "The Merge," a rush-hour spot where the two freeways meet.
San Diego is also home to more than 140 contract research organizations (CROs) that provide a variety of contract services for pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies.
The months of December through March supply most of the rain, with February the only month averaging  or more of rain.
In 2014, San Diego announced plans to become the first U.S. city to install cyber-controlled street lighting, using an "intelligent" lighting system to control 3,000 LED street lights.
The climate in San Diego, like most of Southern California, often varies significantly over short geographical distances resulting in microclimates.
The presence of the University of California, San Diego and other research institutions has helped to fuel biotechnology growth.
Males had a median income of $36,984 versus $31,076 for females.
On December 1 the Americans garrison learned that the dragoons of General Stephen W. Kearney were at Warner's Ranch.
The first European to visit the region was Portuguese-born explorer Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo sailing under the flag of Castile.
Carmel Valley and Del Mar Heights occupy the northwest corner of the city.
The city also has the seventh-highest percentage of gay residents in the U.S. Additionally in 2013, San Diego State University (SDSU), one of the city's prominent universities, was named one of the top LGBT-friendly campuses in the nation.
There is a tollway (The South Bay Expressway) connecting SR 54 and Otay Mesa, near the Mexican border.
The mayor is in effect the chief executive officer of the city, while the council is the legislative body.
The USA Sevens, a major international rugby event, was held there from 2007 through 2009.
In 1850, it became part of the United States following the Mexican–American War and the admission of California to the union.
A narrow strip of land at the bottom of San Diego Bay connects these southern neighborhoods with the rest of the city.
The following are published within the city: the daily newspaper, ''U-T San Diego'' and its online portal, of the same name, and the alternative newsweeklies, the ''San Diego CityBeat'' and ''San Diego Reader''.
That same year San Diego was designated the seat of the newly established San Diego County and was incorporated as a city.
In 2011, the city announced plans to upgrade 80% of its street lighting to new energy-efficient street lights which use induction technology, a modified form of fluorescent lamp that produces a broader spectrum than sodium-vapor lamps.
San Diego's main economic engines are military and defense-related activities, tourism, international trade, and manufacturing.
In 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $45,733, and the median income for a family was $53,060.
San Diego is a sanctuary city, however, San Diego County is a participant of the Secure Communities program.
Local sight-seeing cruises are offered in San Diego Bay and Mission Bay.
Currently the tallest building in San Diego is One America Plaza, standing  tall, which was completed in 1991.
Both the Presidio and the Mission are National Historic Landmarks.
A new nine-story Central Library on Park Boulevard at J Street opened on September 30, 2013.
San Diego transit information about public transportation and commuting is available on the Web and by dialing "511" from any phone in the area.
The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.30.
Congressman Randy "Duke" Cunningham resigned after being convicted on federal bribery charges.
Hundreds of movies and a dozen TV shows have been filmed in San Diego, a tradition going back as far as 1898.
It is the busiest single-runway airport in the United States.
Areas of the city immediately adjacent to San Diego Bay ("tidelands") are administered by the Port of San Diego, a quasi-governmental agency which owns all the property in the tidelands and is responsible for its land use planning, policing, and similar functions.
while 27% claim no religious affiliation.
During World War II, San Diego became a major hub of military and defense activity, due to the presence of so many military installations and defense manufacturers.
As a result, a vast majority of cycling-related activities are recreational.
Major biotechnology companies like Illumina and Neurocrine Biosciences are headquartered in San Diego, while many biotech and pharmaceutical companies have offices or research facilities in San Diego.
San Diego is part of San Diego County, and includes all or part of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th supervisorial districts of the San Diego County Board of Supervisors, Other county officers elected in part by city residents include the Sheriff, District Attorney, Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk, and Treasurer/Tax Collector.
Notable efforts are improvements to San Diego freeways, expansion of San Diego Airport, and doubling the capacity of the cruise ship terminal of the port.
Rainfall is usually greater in the higher elevations of San Diego; some of the higher elevation areas of San Diego can receive  of rain a year.
In San Diego, this is mostly because of the city's topography (the Bay, and the numerous hills, mountains, and canyons).
The city was home to important airplane developers and manufacturers like Ryan Airlines (later Ryan Aeronautical), founded in 1925, and Consolidated Aircraft (later Convair), founded in 1923.
