Grinding the acorns was a simple process where they crushed the nuts using rocks in natural granite depressions.
However, opponents assert that the upper San Joaquin River, already straitjacketed by dams (Mammoth Pool, No.
One of the first was the Robla Canal Company in the Merced River area, which went into operation in March 1876, but was soon surpassed by the Farmers Canal Company.
Fages, accompanied by Father Juan Crespí, reached Mount Diablo near Suisun Bay on March 30 and there gazed upon the merging courses of the Sacramento, San Joaquin and Mokelumne Rivers.
After years of lobbying, farmers convinced the state government to authorize a massive flood-control system of diversion channels and levees whose main component is the Eastside Bypass, so named because of its location east of and parallel to the San Joaquin.
As defined by the World Wildlife Fund, the San Joaquin River watershed is part of the Sacramento-San Joaquin freshwater ecoregion, which supports almost 40 species of freshwater fish.
These two reaches are from below the dam to Mendota Pool, and from the Sack Dam, a diversion dam approximately  downstream, to the confluence with the Merced River.
The early 20th century saw proposals to maintain a minimum depth in the lower river by dredging, but these were interrupted by the onset of World War I.
In 1827, Jedediah Smith wrote in his journal that an unknown group of Native Americans called the river the ''Peticutry'', a name which is listed as an official variant in the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Geographic Names Information System.
The vulnerability of the small local infrastructure led to the establishment of irrigation districts, which were formed to construct and maintain canals in certain areas of the valley.
Today, the navigation channel, known as the Stockton Deep Water Ship Channel, can handle fully loaded vessels of up to 60,000 tons and up to .
This includes the  San Joaquin basin proper, and the  Tulare Basin, each comparable to the size of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
The  long river starts in the high Sierra Nevada, and flows through the rich agricultural region of the northern San Joaquin Valley before reaching Suisun Bay, San Francisco Bay, and the Pacific Ocean.
Water from the Friant Dam supplies almost  of farmland in Fresno, Kern, Madera, and Tulare counties.
This may happen in 2016 or 2017.
After crossing the mountains, he came upon the shore of Buena Vista Lake at the southern end of the San Joaquin Valley, and gave the name ''Buena Vista'' ("beautiful view") to the pass and a nearby Native American village.
Livestock raising is also a major business in the valley.
By the early 20th century, Californian cities as far south as Los Angeles were looking to new sources for electricity because of their rapidly growing populations and industries.
bar:Mar from:0 till: 7220
bar:Jun from:0 till: 6280
It was in the mid-1860s that the San Joaquin River and its surrounds underwent the greatest change they had seen in human history: the introduction of irrigated agriculture.
This was a haven for criminals and fugitives, and was frequented by the infamous bandits Joaquín Murrieta and Tiburcio Vásquez.
bar:Sep from:0 till: 1760
The San Joaquin Valley aquifer lost about  from 1961 to 2003, which despite being a dramatic reduction from the 1960s, still amounts to nearly  per year.
Irrigated land covers 30% of the watershed followed by forested areas in addition to national forest and park land that encompass 26.8% of the total land area.
Just a year before, Benjamin Davis Wilson had "drove a herd of cattle from his Riverside rancho through the San Joaquin Valley to Stockton and reported seeing not a single white man".
Water from Bass Lake was diverted to a powerhouse on the San Joaquin River beginning in 1917, and two more powerhouses were added in 1919, increasing the total generating capacity to about 28 MW.
Some early estimates even range as high as 14 million acre-feet (17.3 million dam3), or more than .
bar:Jan from:0 till: 5010
Once, before agricultural development of its valley, the San Joaquin was navigable by steamboats as far upstream as Fresno, but diversions have slowed and shallowed the river.
Although relations between the Spanish and the Native Americans in the earlier expeditions to the valley were initially friendly, the indigenous began to grow accustomed to, and thus started taking advantage of, the Spanish that later came to the San Joaquin River region.
The vegetation communities created by the introduced grasses are sometimes referred to as "valley grassland", which is highly seasonal but is spread throughout the Central Valley from near Redding to south of Bakersfield.
There has also been a lawsuit regarding damage to farmland west of the San Joaquin, near the town of Los Baños, claiming that the flows are seeping through levees that have not seen use in years due to the drying out of the river channel.
As this was in violation of a law which prevented foreigners from entering California and he could have been arrested for spying, he traveled north into the San Joaquin Valley, searching for populations of beaver.
Below Friant Dam(RM267), the San Joaquin flows west-southwest out into the San Joaquin Valley – the southern part of the Great Central Valley – passing north of Fresno.
This is when spawners construct their redds, or pockets in the gravel to lay their eggs in, on top of preexisting redds, thereby killing or burying some of the eggs in the pre-existing redds.
The majority of the river flows through quiet agricultural bottomlands, and as a result its meandering course manages to avoid most of the urban areas and cities in the San Joaquin Valley.
Although fairly large with a capacity of , Millerton Lake, the reservoir of Friant Dam, is small compared to other reservoirs in the San Joaquin basin, such as Don Pedro and Pine Flat.
Miller and Lux were not any newer to the San Joaquin Valley than had been Haggin, but were the driving influence on valley agribusiness until well into the early 20th century.
Territories east of the foothills were occupied by the Chumash and Paiute, while the marshlands to the west were inhabited by various nomadic peoples, and probably had fewer permanent residents although it was a favored fishing and hunting spot.
Also, with the introduction of better technology that allowed farmers to dig deeper wells and install electrical pumps, groundwater was seen as an often cheaper and easily accessible source compared to the river.
The court battle that resulted would change water laws and rights in the San Joaquin River valley forever, and ended up promoting large-scale agribusiness over small farmers.
However, in 77% of the years studied by the San Joaquin River Restoration Program, water temperatures were elevated above 57&nbsp;°F and abnormalities and egg morbidity rates increased.
In 1826, Smith arrived in Mission San Gabriel Arcángel, California, when the region was under control by the Mexican government.
In a geologic context, the San Joaquin River can be divided into two major segments.
The project was still in its planning stages when the Great Depression hit the United States, and California was unable to raise the funds necessary for building the various facilities.
During the time Mexico was in control of California, the San Joaquin River region was only sparsely populated, and used almost exclusively for cattle ranching.
referring to the difference between a slough and a marsh.
The San Joaquin River basin is roughly synonymous with the San Joaquin Valley, and is bounded by the Sierra Nevada to the east, the Coast Ranges on the west, and the Tehachapi Mountains on the south.
bar:Fév from:0 till: 6860
The staple food for San Joaquin Valley inhabitants was the acorn, which when ground, could be made into various foods such as cakes.
Most of the Sierras are underlain by granitic igneous and metamorphic rock dating back to the Mesozoic Era (250-66 MYA); in addition many of the San Joaquin's tributaries flow across a foothills region of metamorphosed volcanic rock more famously known as the Mother Lode Gold Belt.
Period     = from:0 till:10000
, plans had been finalized for a $14.5 million hatchery near Friant Dam as part of a $20 million federal restoration project for the fish.
The aquifer underlying the San Joaquin River and Tulare Basin is estimated to hold nearly  of water, of which about half can be pumped economically or is clean enough for human use.
Historically, surface water was able to provide all the needed supply, but as agricultural lands spread across more and more of the valley, groundwater pumping became increasingly common.
The San Joaquin River and its marshes and wetlands provide a critical resting and breeding stop for migratory birds along the Pacific Flyway.
In the San Joaquin's direct drainage region (not including the Tulare Basin) agricultural cover was 19.2%, forests embraced 28.4%, and urban areas occupied 2.4% as of 1995.
In some areas, the water table has declined more than  vertically, forcing farmers to sink their wells as deep as  to hit more abundant pockets of the underground water.
This further crowds the salmon into smaller and smaller suitable spawning beds, which increases the likely hood of red superimposition.
Military violence and disease caused the extermination of much of the remaining valley population, including those in a series of 24 villages along the lower San Joaquin River described by Moraga.
Today, this vegetation community exists only in isolated pockets because of development of the valley for agriculture, and in much of the remnant open areas where it once thrived, now grows introduced flora such as annual rye and wild oat.
In fact, despite the relatively small percentage of developed areas, more than 50% of the population lives in the watershed's four largest cities: Fresno, Bakersfield, Stockton and Modesto.
The bypass system starts with the Chowchilla Canal Bypass, which can divert up to  off the San Joaquin, a few miles above Mendota.
Other major cities include Visalia, Tulare, Hanford, Porterville, Madera, Merced, Turlock, Manteca and Lodi.
The name Moraga chose was later applied to the entire river; it was in common use by 1810.
The largest cities are Bakersfield, near the south end of the valley on the Kern River; Fresno, roughly in the geographic center; Modesto, on the Tuolumne River; and Stockton, on the southeast fringe of the Delta region.
In turn, the boost in flow could assist restoration efforts and help flush out saline water in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, where water is pumped into state aqueducts which provide water supplies to two-thirds of Californians.
Starting in the late 18th century, successive waves of explorers then settlers, mainly Spanish and American, emigrated to the San Joaquin basin, first exploiting then driving out the indigenous tribes.
This range is less extreme than the temperatures below Vernalis where the range is from 2 Celsius(35.6 F)on Dec 26, 1987 to 35.5C(95.9F) on August 9, 1990.
A majority of the people along the San Joaquin River and its tributaries lived in small bands or tribes, which had no distinguishing names.
These include several types of lampreys, sturgeons, sunfish, perch and various anadromous fish species such as salmon and steelhead.
Fifty miles (80&nbsp;km) downstream, the Merced River empties into an otherwise dry San Joaquin(RM118).
Concentration of chloride and other minerals generally increases from east to west across the basin.
As early as 1863, small irrigation canals were built in the Centerville area, southeast of Fresno, but were destroyed in subsequent floods.
Phase 1 will include interim flows of up to .
The San Joaquin River region remained largely unknown except for the fact of its existence until 1806, when Spanish explorer Gabriel Moraga led the first of several subsequent expeditions into the Central Valley, in order to find potential mission sites.
Construction on the channel, which included widening and deepening the riverbed and cutting off meanders and oxbows, began in earnest in 1928.
Land cover in the watershed is predominantly agriculture and forest, and large expanses of shrubland and semiarid foothill terrain also occupy portions of the basin in addition to a growing urban percentage.
One of the most powerful early irrigation empires was the Kern County Land and Water Company, established in 1873 by land speculator James Ben Ali Haggin, which grew to supply over  through their canal system.
Additionally, from 1820, El Camino Viejo a route between Los Angeles and San Francisco Bay along the west side the San Joaquin Valley began, which brought settlements into the valley.
The increased flows will not only begin to restore large areas of desccicated riverside habitat below the dam, but will serve the primary purpose of restoring salmon runs in the upper San Joaquin watershed.
Finally, they crossed the mountains along the Stanislaus River canyon, becoming the first recorded whites to cross the Sierra Nevada on foot.
The Miwok, for example, rarely traveled more than a few miles from their home villages, and as such the inhabitants of one village would not know much of the surrounding country beyond the neighboring villages.
In addition, some of the discharge of the Kings River also enters the San Joaquin directly (but seasonally) through a distributary.
Approximately $330 million will be paid by Central Valley farmers, and the state and federal governments will provide the remaining funding.
Rough ways such as the Millerton Road which later became the Stockton - Los Angeles Road quickly extended the length of the valley, some following old cattle routes and Native American trails, and were served by mule teams and covered wagons.
The maximum drop in elevation was near Mendota, the northward bend of the San Joaquin River, at over .
bar:Déc at: 3430 fontsize:S
The river was called many different names; at times different parts of the river were known by different names.
Some of these fish are believed to have descended from fishes of the Columbia Basin in geologically ancient times, when the upper reaches of the Sacramento River watershed were connected with that of the Snake River.
The native people, mostly hunter-gatherers, lived off this land of abundance; during the 18th century, the population of the San Joaquin Valley was estimated at more than 69,000, representing one of the greatest concentrations of native people anywhere in North America.
Recent years have seen work by the California Department of Water Resources and the California Department of Fish and Game to construct and manage temporary rock barriers at the head of the Old River in order to keep fish in the main channel of the San Joaquin River.
It is widely believed that the dominant grass species throughout the San Joaquin River valley and Tulare Basin, as well as the Sacramento Valley, the Sierra foothills and Coast Ranges, was Nassella pulchra, a type of bunchgrass more commonly known as purple needlegrass.
There have been seepage concerns below this part of the river, so current flows are restricted below the Sack Dam.
Those natives that lived in the foothills and the higher mountains of the Sierra remained undisturbed for the most part, and fought back against the Spanish while sheltering their valley counterparts.
6, Redinger, Kerckhoff, Friant, and scores more on tributaries) will not provide sufficient discharge to fill the reservoir except in very wet years.
The navigation project shortened the river length by  and deepened it to .
People have inhabited the San Joaquin Valley for more than 8,000 years, and it was long one of the major population centers of pre-Columbian California.
These grasses all thrive in the Mediterranean climate that dominates much of the San Joaquin Valley.
Built-up areas use a much smaller percentage of the watershed, at just 1.9%.
All of the major tributaries of the river originate in the Sierra Nevada; most of the streams that start in the Coast Range are intermittent, and contribute little to the flow of the San Joaquin.
However, when California won independence from Mexico in 1846, becoming part of the United States the following month, a flood of American settlers descended upon the valley.
It would also give dam operators the advantage of being able to maintain the river to a lower temperature due to the reservoir's great depth.
The new reservoir would provide an estimated annual yield of .
The combined waters from the two rivers then flow west through the Carquinez Strait and San Francisco Bay into the Pacific.
Years of pesticides and fertilizers being applied to the surrounding lands as well as municipal runoff have led to elevated levels of selenium, fluoride, nitrates and other substances in the river and its tributaries; pesticide pollution is now considered "ubiquitous" to the San Joaquin River system.
Even with the presence of Friant and numerous other flood control dams, large floods still caused significant damage along the San Joaquin River all the way through the late 1950s.
Water diversions from the rivers feeding it have increased salinity, which has in turn caused declines in fish populations that once thrived in the region.
ImageSize  = width:800 height:280
Salmon will be re-introduced to the river in 2012, most habitat conservation work on the San Joaquin River will be completed by the end of 2013.
When Miller died in 1916, his company owned  in the San Joaquin Valley alone with hundreds of miles of well-developed, maintained irrigation canals.
Water imported from Northern California through the Central Valley Project managed to stave off increasing rates of withdrawal for several years, until the 1977 California drought heavily decreased water supplies from these sources for a while and caused many farmers to return to groundwater pumping.
In late summer and autumn, there is little water left over to replenish streamflow.
The USBR will begin releasing up to , or "full restoration flows", from the Friant Dam in 2014.
BackgroundColors = canvas:sfondo
The typical monthly flow of the San Joaquin River near the Sack Dam is 0.
The Temperature of the water can also affect the level of spawning.
An epidemic of smallpox and malaria brought unintentionally by the Europeans had swept down the San Joaquin River corridor during the summer of 1833, killing in a single stroke between 50 and 75 percent of the entire native population in the valley.
In the late 19th century, the city of Stockton, once an important seaport for the San Joaquin Valley, found itself increasingly landlocked because the San Joaquin River, its main connection to the sea, was rapidly silting up.
TimeAxis   = orientation:vertical
Most of the tributaries had much larger flows before irrigation diversions – for example, the Tuolumne's historic discharge was almost 48% higher than it is now.
The newcomers also included a group of Mormons led by Samuel Brannan who established a settlement at the confluence of the San Joaquin and the Stanislaus, called New Hope or San Joaquin City.
The present name of the river dates to 1805–1808, when Spanish explorer Gabriel Moraga was surveying east from Mission San José in order to find possible sites for a mission.
In a study from 1993 to 1995, it was found that the main stem of the San Joaquin River was mainly populated by fathead minnow, red shiner, threadfin shad and inland silverside, all of which were introduced.
AlignBars  = justify
, the San Joaquin River watershed had a human population of roughly 4,039,000, about 1.9 million of whom live within the section of the watershed not including the Tulare Basin.
As said by Tom Mott, the son of Miller and Lux' irrigation superintendent, "Miller realized you couldn't do anything with the land unless you had the water to go with it.
The subsidence caused by groundwater withdrawal has threatened infrastructure in the San Joaquin Valley, including the California Aqueduct, a State Water Project facility that conveys water from the delta region to coastal-central and southern California.
bar:Mai from:0 till: 7560
With most of its water diverted into aqueducts, the river frequently runs dry in a 150-mile section This lack of riverwater begins in the  between Friant Dam and Mendota, where it is only replenished by the Delta-Mendota Canal (RM 205) and the Fresno Slough, when the Kings River is flooding.
In 1925 the city put forth a $1.3 million bond for dredging the lower San Joaquin from its mouth to the Port of Stockton – a distance of  by river.
A famous leader of the natives was the Yokut Estanislao, who led revolts against the Mexicans in the late 1820s until finally defeated in 1829 on the Stanislaus River, which bears his name today.
The city of Stockton, on the lower San Joaquin, quickly grew from a sleepy backwater to a thriving trading center, the stopping-off point for miners headed to the gold fields in the foothills of the Sierra.
bar:Déc from:0 till: 3430
id:sfondo value:rgb(1,1,1)
Construction of the system's facilities, which included Mammoth Pool and Redinger Dams on the San Joaquin and four additional reservoirs on its tributaries with a total storage capacity of , started in 1911.
The real influx came in 1848, when a gold strike on the American set off the California Gold Rush.
Smith noted the fertility and natural beauty of the area, and the apparent peace of the Native Americans living in the villages he passed by.
In addition, this has caused the river to drop large amounts of silt that formerly washed out to sea in its bed, further reducing the depth.
Past the head of tide, amid the many islands of the delta, the San Joaquin is joined by two more tributaries: the Calaveras River and the larger Mokelumne.
The water is largely held behind Friant Dam.
These included major cuts at Hog, Venice and Mandeville Islands, plus five more smaller straightening projects.
Groundwater withdrawal reached its peak during the 1960s with more than  being drawn from the aquifer each year – over twice the present flow of the San Joaquin River – which accounted for 69.6% of all the groundwater pumped within the Central Valley, and nearly 14 percent of all the groundwater withdrawn in the United States.
Because of its highly permeable nature, the San Joaquin River's valley is underlain by one of the largest aquifers in the Western United States.
Most native fish stocks have suffered because of predation by introduced species and dam construction.
These primarily entail the cleanup of existing wetlands and procuring additional water supplies, rather than converting agricultural land back into the original swamp and marsh.
bar:Jan at: 5010 fontsize:S
One of the worst environmental disasters was at Kesterson Reservoir, a disposal site for agricultural drain water which doubled as a wildlife refuge.
During these pre-European times, the San Joaquin River flowed through rich grasslands and sprawling marshes, flooding every few years and transforming much of the valley into lakes.
Arguably, it is the most litigated river in America."
The first American known to see the San Joaquin River was likely Jedediah Smith, a renowned mountain man, fur trapper and explorer.
Both are irrigation and municipal supply canals serving primarily agricultural interests.
Recent years have seen efforts to bring back some of the salmon population to the San Joaquin and some of its tributaries; these include the establishment of fish hatcheries.
By reconnecting, it means the portion from Friant Dam to where the San Joaquin River joins the Merced river above Vernalis.
Human activities have replaced or altered over 95&nbsp;percent of the historic wetlands as well as the California oak woodland habitat, which originally occurred along stream and river corridors in the foothills, and the tule grass that once thrived in huge stands on the edges of marshes and lakes.
In the fall of 2009, just 2,236 salmon returned to the entire river system to spawn; this has led to a government ban on salmon fishing off the coasts of northern California and Oregon.
id:darkgrey  value:gray(0.3)
During that year, Huntington and Eastwood devised plans to utilize the water of the San Joaquin River and some of its headwaters tributaries in what would become one of the most extensive hydroelectric systems in the world, known as the Big Creek Hydroelectric Project.
Since then, most of the Delta islands have been cultivated, and consistent use of the land has resulted in subsidence, in some cases up to .
Most of the elevation change in the San Joaquin occurs within the first  above Friant Dam.
The upper  above Friant Dam in the Sierra is characterized as a steep-gradient, rocky mountain stream.
This is believed to be a result of the combination of the abrupt geometry change from the shallow river upstream of Stockton to the deep water channel, in addition to pollution from the harbor and city and poor tidal mixing.
However, Fages did not venture farther north, and thus did not further explore the main stem of the San Joaquin River.
These included San Joaquin City, near the confluence of the San Joaquin with the Stanislaus, probably the largest of these post-gold-rush boomtowns.
Much of the land that Miller and Lux acquired was swamp and marsh, which was considered virtually worthless.
The '''San Joaquin River'''  is the longest river of Central California in the United States.
From Mendota, the San Joaquin swings northwest, passing through many different channels, some natural and some man-made.
Seven major tributaries flow directly into the San Joaquin River, all of which run from the Sierra Nevada westwards into the main stem.
Most of the Miwok people in the watershed were part of the appropriately named Sierra Miwok group.
The watershed's major southeast-northwest axis runs roughly parallel with the Pacific coast of California; it measures  covering all or parts of seventeen California counties stretching from north of Lodi to well south of Bakersfield.
In the 20th century, many levees and dams were built on the San Joaquin and all of its major tributaries.
Early 1900s hydroelectric development in the upper San Joaquin River basin was not limited to Southern California Edison.
An important source of irrigation water as well as a wildlife corridor, the San Joaquin is among the most heavily dammed and diverted of California's rivers.
During Mexican rule, the mission lands in the San Joaquin Valley were subdivided to wealthy landowners (''rancheros'') and caused even more conflicts between the Mexicans and the Native Americans.
Prior to the uplift of the California Coast Ranges, more than  of sediments were deposited at the foot of the Sierras by tidal activity, and the ancestral San Joaquin and its tributaries flowed west over this alluvial plain to the sea, dumping their own sediments onto the marine deposits.
This significant loss of suitable spawning habitat is due to lack of spawning-sized gravel recruitment from lateral and upstream sources due to the installation of manmade barriers that block this gravel from passing naturally downstream.
Most of the major cities lie on the State Route 99 corridor, which runs along the entirety of the San Joaquin Valley and forms the primary thoroughfare for the valley.
Efforts have been under way to restore wetlands along the San Joaquin River as well as on the historic shores of Tulare Lake.
His expedition then turned east in an attempt to cross the Sierra Nevada.
Construction of Friant Dam, the main dam on the San Joaquin River, began in 1937 and was completed in 1942.
Although some of his men confirmed it, Smith did not make any mention of the precious metal in his journal.
The river's source is located in the Ansel Adams Wilderness, in the south-central Sierra Nevada at the confluence of three major affluents: the Middle Fork, which rises from Thousand Island Lake at almost  above sea level, the smaller North Fork, which starts  southeast of Mount Lyell., and the South Fork, which flows through Florence Lake and begins at Martha Lake in Kings Canyon National Park.
Proponents of the project cite numerous benefits: flood control, increased storage, hydroelectric potential, and capacity to provide a greater flow in the downstream river during the dry season.
Many of the surviving examples of acorn milling areas can still be found in the foothills, especially around the Kaweah River area.
The tremendous volume of sediments that underlie the lower San Joaquin River ranges from  deep, with distance to bedrock generally increasing in a northerly direction.
Moraga started out from Mission San Juan Bautista, in present-day San Benito County, on September 21 of that year and traveled east into the San Joaquin Valley.
The EPA has also stated that the remaining gravel is "probably fairly highly embedded and therefore of reduced quality and unavailable to fish for spawning".
The California Department of Fish and Game estimated in the 1930s that the historic salmon run was likely in the vicinity of 200,000 to 500,000 of spawners annually, but by the mid-20th century, reduction in river flows led to the run dropping to about 3,000-7,000.
From north to south, these are the Carson, Walker, and Owens Rivers.
Built in 1871 at the juncture of the San Joaquin River and Fresno Slough, it initially served to divert water into the Main Canal, an irrigation canal for the riverside bottomlands in the San Joaquin Valley.
bar:Nov at: 2260 fontsize:S
Once habitat for hundreds of thousands of spawning salmon and millions of migratory birds, today the river is subject to tremendous water-supply, navigation and regulation works by various federal agencies, which have dramatically reduced the flow of the river since the 20th century.
The two major ethnic groups were the Miwok people, who inhabited the northern end of the San Joaquin Valley and the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta region, and the Yokut tribes, scattered around the more arid southern portion of the basin.
The maximum peak flow occurred on December 9, 1950 at , and a low flow of  was recorded on August 10, 1961.
'''San Joaquin River monthly discharges at Vernalis'''
A bond measure that would provide $3 billion for the construction of Temperance Flat Dam, as well as the Sites Reservoir near Colusa, will be voted on in November 2014.
Wetlands preservation group Ducks Unlimited was awarded a $1 million grant in 2005 as part of the North American Wetlands Conservation Act in order to conduct restoration work on  of swamps and marshes throughout the San Joaquin Valley.
The consistent use and reuse of the waters of the San Joaquin River, its South Fork, and the namesake of the project, Big Creek, over a vertical drop of , have over the years inspired a nickname, "The Hardest Working Water in the World".
Before irrigation development, the San Joaquin River and its tributaries once supported the third largest run of Pacific salmon in California including prodigious spring, summer, fall, and late-fall runs of chinook salmon.
