Cycling is growing in San Francisco.
The California Gold Rush of 1849 brought rapid growth, making it the largest city on the West Coast at the time.
The city is mainly patrolled by the San Francisco Police Department.
Zipcar closely followed.
These two districts are each sometimes further divided into two regions: the Outer Richmond and Outer Sunset can refer to the more western portions of their respective district and the Inner Richmond and Inner Sunset can refer to the more eastern portions.
The international character that San Francisco has enjoyed since its founding is continued today by large numbers of immigrants from Asia and Latin America.
It moved to its current building in the South of Market neighborhood in 1995 and attracted more than 600,000 visitors annually.
The 1980 San Francisco Recycling Program was one of the earliest curbside recycling programs.
West of the Mission, the area historically known as Eureka Valley, now popularly called the Castro, was once a working-class Scandinavian and Irish area.
It has several nicknames, including "The City by the Bay", "Fog City", "San Fran", and "Frisco", as well as older ones like "The City that Knows How", "Baghdad by the Bay", "The Paris of the West", or simply "The City".
It was in this period that the island of Alcatraz, a former military stockade, began its service as a federal maximum security prison, housing notorious inmates such as Al Capone, and Robert Franklin Stroud, The Birdman of Alcatraz.
The San Francisco Sheriff's Department, BART Police (public transit only), Amtrak Police, California Highway Patrol and many other local, state, and federal agencies perform law enforcement tasks in the city.
Small businesses with fewer than 10 employees and self-employed firms make up 85% of city establishments, and the number of San Franciscans employed by firms of more than 1,000 employees has fallen by half since 1977.
Cable cars carry riders up steep inclines to the summit of Nob Hill, once the home of the city's business tycoons, and down to the waterfront tourist attractions of Fisherman's Wharf, and Pier 39, where many restaurants feature Dungeness crab from a still-active fishing industry.
The promise of fabulous riches was so strong that crews on arriving vessels deserted and rushed off to the gold fields, leaving behind a forest of masts in San Francisco harbor.
The port currently uses Pier 35 to handle the 60–80 cruise ship calls and 200,000 passengers that come to San Francisco.
and is one of the 100 most visited cities worldwide according to Euromonitor International.
The 49ers won five Super Bowl titles in the 1980s and 1990s.
In World War II, San Francisco was the port of embarkation for service members shipping out to the Pacific Theater.
Commodore John D. Sloat claimed California for the United States on July 7, 1846, during the Mexican–American War, and Captain John B. Montgomery arrived to claim Yerba Buena two days later.
Montgomery Street in the Financial District became known as the "Wall Street of the West", home to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Wells Fargo corporate headquarters, and the site of the now-defunct Pacific Coast Stock Exchange.
In 2013, 21 pedestrians were killed in vehicle collisions, the highest since 2001, which is 2.5 deaths per 100,000 population – 70% higher than the national average of 1.5 deaths per 100,000 population.
Rejecting calls to completely remake the street grid, San Franciscans opted for speed.
According to a 2014 quality of life survey of global cities, San Francisco has the highest quality of living of any U.S. city.
With a large hotel infrastructure and a world-class convention facility in the Moscone Center, San Francisco is a popular destination for annual conventions and conferences.
It contains research space and facilities to foster biotechnology and life sciences entrepreneurship and will double the size of UCSF's research enterprise.
In turn, the destroyed mansions of Nob Hill became grand hotels.
The city's largest manufacturing employer is Anchor Brewing Company, and the largest by revenue is Timbuk2.
Because of these characteristics, San Francisco is ranked the second "most walkable" city in the United States by Walkscore.com.
The Presidio developed into the most important American military installation on the Pacific coast.
Under Mexican rule, the mission system gradually ended, and its lands became privatized.
The San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency and Bay Area Air Quality Management District are responsible for the operation with management provided by Alta Bicycle Share.
The Contemporary Jewish Museum is a non-collecting institution that hosts a broad array of temporary exhibitions.
The school has approximately 30,000 students and awards undergraduate, master's and doctoral degrees in more than 100 disciplines.
Muni is the seventh-largest transit system in the United States, with 210,848,310 rides in 2006.
The U.S. Census Bureau estimates San Francisco's population increased to 864,816 as of July 1, 2015.
State Route 82 enters San Francisco from the south as Mission Street, and terminates shortly thereafter at its junction with 280.
Also in this quadrant are Russian Hill, a residential neighborhood with the famously crooked Lombard Street; North Beach, the city's Little Italy and the former center of the Beat Generation; and Telegraph Hill, which features Coit Tower.
The Golden Gate Ferry is the other ferry operator with service between San Francisco and Marin County.
Founded in 1871, the San Francisco Art Institute is the oldest art school west of the Mississippi.
It attracts the fifth-highest number of foreign tourists of any city in the United States
San Francisco became an epicenter of Internet start-up companies during the dot-com bubble of the 1990s and the subsequent social media boom of the late 2000s (decade).
It is the only such consolidation in California.
They also protect neighborhoods directly to their east from the foggy and sometimes very cold and windy conditions experienced in the Sunset District; for those who live on the eastern side of the city, San Francisco is sunnier, with an average of 260 clear days, and only 105 cloudy days per year.
All in all, UCSF operates more than 20 facilities across San Francisco.
In 2015,  Walk Score ranked San Francisco the second-most walkable city in the United States.
Bank of America, a pioneer in making banking services accessible to the middle class, was founded in San Francisco and in the 1960s, built the landmark modern skyscraper at 555 California Street for its corporate headquarters.
Although the Financial District, Union Square, and Fisherman's Wharf are well-known around the world, San Francisco is also characterized by its numerous culturally rich streetscapes featuring mixed-use neighborhoods anchored around central commercial corridors to which residents and visitors alike can walk.
Its private golf course has hosted the U.S. Open on five occasions.
Since 2002, improvements in cycling infrastructure in recent years, including additional bike lanes and parking racks, have made cycling in San Francisco safer and more convenient.
San Francisco's tallest hill, Mount Davidson, is  high and is capped with a  tall cross built in 1934.
KALW was the city's first FM radio station when it signed on the air in 1941.
Interstate 80 begins at the approach to the Bay Bridge and is the only direct automobile link to the East Bay.
The commodification of the Castro District has contributed to San Francisco's tourist economy.
Several picturesque islands—Alcatraz, Treasure Island and the adjacent Yerba Buena Island, and small portions of Alameda Island, Red Rock Island, and Angel Island—are part of the city.
San Francisco's shoreline has grown beyond its natural limits.
Many neighborhoods feature a mix of businesses, restaurants and venues that cater to both the daily needs of local residents while also serving many visitors and tourists.
San Francisco was also granted a perpetual leasehold over the Hetch Hetchy Valley and watershed in Yosemite National Park by the Raker Act in 1913.
The nearby San Andreas and Hayward Faults are responsible for much earthquake activity, although neither physically passes through the city itself.
By June 2, 2015, the median rent was reported to be as high as $4,225.
The construction of the Twin Peaks Tunnel in 1918 connected southwest neighborhoods to downtown via streetcar, hastening the development of West Portal, and nearby affluent Forest Hill and St. Francis Wood.
Satellite channel non-commercial Link TV was launched in 1999 from San Francisco.
The Giants won World Series titles in 2010, 2012 and in 2014.
In 1998, six teenagers were shot and wounded at the Chinese Playground; a 16-year-old boy was subsequently arrested.
32% of San Francisco residents use public transportation in daily commuting to work, ranking it first on the West Coast and third overall in the United States.
The predominantly African American Bayview-Hunters Point in the far southeast corner of the city is one of the poorest neighborhoods and suffers from a high rate of crime, though the area has been the focus of several revitalizing and controversial urban renewal projects.
It has an enrollment of about 100,000 students and offers an extensive continuing education program.
On Nob Hill, the Cable Car Museum is a working museum featuring the cable car power house, which drives the cables.
The Democrats and to a lesser extent the Green Party have dominated city politics since the late 1970s, after the last serious Republican challenger for city office lost the 1975 mayoral election by a narrow margin.
The existing primary terminal at Pier 35 has neither the sufficient capacity to allow for the increasing size of new cruise ships nor the amenities needed for an international cruise terminal.
Among major U.S. cities, San Francisco has the coolest daily mean, maximum, and minimum temperatures for June, July, and August.
The system will be expanded in the future.
Local theater companies have been noted for risk taking and innovation.
Many piers remained derelict for years until the demolition of the Embarcadero Freeway reopened the downtown waterfront, allowing for redevelopment.
There are more than 50 hills within city limits.
In 2008, the MTA estimated that about 128,000 trips were made by bicycle each day in the city, or 6% of total trips.
The dry period of May to October is mild to warm, with the normal monthly mean temperature peaking in September at .
Above average rain years are often associated with warm El Niño conditions in the Pacific while dry years often occur in cold water La Niña periods.
The explosion of jobs drew many people, especially African Americans from the South, to the area.
San Francisco–based CNET and Salon.com pioneered the use of the Internet as a media outlet.
Itineraries from San Francisco usually include round trip cruises to Alaska and Mexico.
Since 2006, San Francisco has received a Bicycle Friendly Community status of "Gold" from the League of American Bicyclists.
It has become North America's first and best known gay village, and is now the center of gay life in the city.
The San Francisco Fire Department provides both fire suppression and emergency medical services to the city.
BART, a regional Rapid Transit system, connects San Francisco with the East Bay through the underwater Transbay Tube.
There were about 134 rapes, 3,142 robberies, and about 2,139 assaults.
After the end of the war, many military personnel returning from service abroad and civilians who had originally come to work decided to stay.
The resulting liquefaction causes extensive damage to property built upon it, as was evidenced in the Marina district during the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake.
The GGNRA also administers Fort Funston, Lands End, Fort Mason, and Alcatraz.
In 1978, Dianne Feinstein assumed the office following the assassination of George Moscone and was later selected by the board to finish the term.
Hippies flocked to Haight-Ashbury in the 1960s, reaching a peak with the 1967 Summer of Love.
East of the Mission is the Potrero Hill neighborhood, a mostly residential neighborhood that features sweeping views of downtown San Francisco.
Because of its sharp topography and maritime influences, San Francisco exhibits a multitude of distinct microclimates.
The Tenderloin area has the highest crime rate in San Francisco: 70% of the city's violent crimes, and around one-fourth of the city's murders, occur in this neighborhood.
In recent years, gentrification has changed the demographics of parts of the Mission from Latino, to twenty-something professionals.
San Francisco later celebrated its regained grandeur with a World's fair, the Golden Gate International Exposition in 1939–40, creating Treasure Island in the middle of the bay to house it.
The members of the Board of Supervisors are elected as representatives of specific districts within the city.
With 39% of its residents born overseas, San Francisco has numerous neighborhoods filled with businesses and civic institutions catering to new arrivals.
San Franciscans built schools, churches, theaters, and all the hallmarks of civic life.
After three-quarters of the city was destroyed by the 1906 earthquake and fire, San Francisco was quickly rebuilt, hosting the Panama-Pacific International Exposition nine years later.
There were about 4,469 burglaries, 25,100 thefts, and 4,210 motor vehicle thefts.
Yerba Buena was renamed San Francisco on January 30 of the next year, and Mexico officially ceded the territory to the United States at the end of the war.
Politically, the city votes strongly along liberal Democratic Party lines.
The California Culinary Academy, associated with the Le Cordon Bleu program, offers programs in the culinary arts, baking and pastry arts, and hospitality and restaurant management.
The legacy of the California Gold Rush turned San Francisco into the principal banking and finance center of the West Coast in the early twentieth century.
'''San Francisco''' (), officially the '''City and County of San Francisco''', is the cultural, commercial, and financial center of Northern California and the only consolidated city-county in California.
San Francisco International Airport, though located in San Mateo County, is owned and operated by the City and County of San Francisco.
In the 1910s, a wave of Central American immigrants settled in the Mission and, in the 1950s, immigrants from Mexico began to predominate.
Snowfall in the city is very rare, with only 10 measurable accumulations recorded since 1852, most recently in 1976 when up to  fell on Twin Peaks.
It is also part of the greater 12-county San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland, CA Combined Statistical Area, whose population is over 8.7 million, making it the fifth-largest in the United States as of July 1, 2015.
Together, these areas are known as The Avenues.
Yet high technology and entrepreneurship remain mainstays of the San Francisco economy.
It was during this period San Francisco built some of its most important infrastructure.
With water mains out of service, the Presidio Artillery Corps attempted to contain the inferno by dynamiting blocks of buildings to create firebreaks.
In an effort to buoy small privately owned businesses in San Francisco and preserve the unique retail personality of the city, the Small Business Commission supports a publicity campaign to keep a larger share of retail dollars in the local economy, and the Board of Supervisors has used the planning code to limit the neighborhoods where formula retail establishments can set up shop, an effort affirmed by San Francisco voters.
Among the GGNRA's attractions within the city are Ocean Beach, which runs along the Pacific Ocean shoreline and is frequented by a vibrant surfing community, and Baker Beach, which is located in a cove west of the Golden Gate and part of the Presidio, a former military base.
The northwestern quadrant of the city contains the Richmond, also a mostly middle-class neighborhood north of Golden Gate Park, home to immigrants from other parts of Asia as well as many Russian and Ukrainian immigrants.
ESPN uses the local ABC studio for their broadcasting.
West of downtown, across Van Ness Avenue, lies the large Western Addition neighborhood, which became established with a large African American population after World War II.
Though located  south of downtown in unincorporated San Mateo County, San Francisco International Airport (SFO) is under the jurisdiction of the City and County of San Francisco.
The city's oldest radio station, KCBS (AM), began as an experimental station in San Jose in 1909, before the beginning of commercial broadcasting.
The California College of the Arts, located north of Potrero Hill, has programs in architecture, fine arts, design, and writing.
Silver discoveries, including the Comstock Lode in 1859, further drove rapid population growth.
The Giants play at AT&T Park, which opened in 2000.
Also included are the uninhabited Farallon Islands,  offshore in the Pacific Ocean.
Thruway service also runs south to San Luis Obispo, California with connection to the Pacific Surfliner.
Foreign governments maintain more than seventy consulates in San Francisco.
Golden Gate University is a private, nonsectarian, coeducational university formed in 1901 and located in the Financial District.
San Francisco residents have often ranked among the fittest in the country.
Bloomberg West was launched in 2011 from a studio on the Embarcadero and CNBC broadcasts from One Market Plaza since 2015.
San Francisco has significantly higher rates of pedestrian and bicyclist traffic deaths than the United States on average.
San Francisco serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy, including the U.S. Court of Appeals, the Federal Reserve Bank, and the U.S. Mint.
San Francisco has a large number of theaters and live performance venues.
A total of 41 consulates general and 23 honorary consulates have offices in the San Francisco Bay Area.
An abundant water supply enabled San Francisco to develop into the city it has become today.
The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake caused destruction and loss of life throughout the Bay Area.
The city employs around 27,000 workers.
San Francisco (Spanish for Saint Francis) was founded on June 29, 1776, when colonists from Spain established Presidio of San Francisco at the Golden Gate and Mission San Francisco de Asís named for St. Francis of Assisi a few miles away.
There are more than  of bicycle paths, lanes and bike routes in the city.
The regional sports network, Comcast SportsNet Bay Area and its sister station Comcast SportsNet California, are both located in San Francisco.
The line runs under Market Street to Civic Center where it turns south to the Mission District, the southern part of the city, and through northern San Mateo County, to the San Francisco International Airport, and Millbrae.
Variation in precipitation from year to year is high.
The South of Market, which was once San Francisco's industrial core, has seen significant redevelopment following the construction of AT&T Park and an infusion of startup companies.
Third—at 1.8% (8,500+ people)—is California Pacific Medical Center, the largest private-sector employer.
However, the murder rate is still much lower than in past decades.
The city and its surrounding areas are known as the San Francisco Bay Area, and are a part of the larger OMB-designated San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland combined statistical area, the fifth most populous in the nation with an estimated population of 8.7 million.
Additionally, it runs a historic streetcar line, which runs on Market Street from Castro Street to Fisherman's Wharf.
Over this period, San Francisco became a magnet for America's counterculture.
The museum reopened on May 14, 2016 with an addition, designed by Snøhetta, that has doubled the museum's size.
UCSF is a major local employer, second in size only to the city and county government.
Other local winners of the Regional Theatre Tony Award include the San Francisco Mime Troupe.
USGS has released the California earthquake forecast which models earthquake occurrence in California.
SF Greasecycle is a program to recycle used cooking oil for conversion to biodiesel.
In 1835, Englishman William Richardson erected the first independent homestead, near a boat anchorage around what is today Portsmouth Square.
City Hall rose again in splendid Beaux Arts style, and the city celebrated its rebirth at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition in 1915.
Five members of the Joe Boys gang were arrested and convicted of the crime.
Historically, trains operated by Southern Pacific Lines ran from San Francisco to Los Angeles, via Palo Alto and San Jose.
The city's property values and household income have risen to among the highest in the nation, creating a large and upscale restaurant, retail, and entertainment scene.
None of the victims in this attack were gang members.
More than 18&nbsp;million visitors arrived in San Francisco in 2014, injecting US$10.67&nbsp;billion into the economy.
Boating, sailing, windsurfing and kitesurfing are among the popular activities on San Francisco Bay, and the city maintains a yacht harbor in the Marina District.
African-American street gangs familiar in other cities, including the Crips, have struggled to establish footholds in San Francisco, while police and prosecutors have been accused of liberally labeling young African-American males as gang members.
The 11-member Board of Supervisors, the legislative branch, is headed by a president and is responsible for passing laws and budgets, though San Franciscans also make use of direct ballot initiatives to pass legislation.
It is ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States and operates the UCSF Medical Center, which ranks among the top 15 hospitals in the country.
San Francisco has long had an LGBT-friendly history.
Buried ships are occasionally exposed when foundations are dug for new buildings.
SFO is a hub for United Airlines and Virgin America.
The suburbs experienced rapid growth, and San Francisco underwent significant demographic change, as large segments of the white population left the city, supplanted by an increasing wave of immigration from Asia and Latin America.
Despite its attractive location as a port and naval base, San Francisco was still a small settlement with inhospitable geography.
By 1851 the harbor was extended out into the bay by wharves while buildings were erected on piles among the ships.
San Francisco theaters frequently host pre-Broadway engagements and tryout runs, and some original San Francisco productions have later moved to Broadway.
The fog is less pronounced in eastern neighborhoods and during the late summer and early fall, which is the warmest time of the year.
State Route 35 enters the city from the south as Skyline Boulevard and terminates at its intersection with Highway 1.
452,986 people (56%) lived in rental housing units, and 327,985 people (41%) lived in owner-occupied housing units.
Geographically, Oakland Airport is approximately the same distance from downtown San Francisco as SFO, but due to its location across San Francisco Bay, it is greater driving distance from San Francisco.
It was home to the first lesbian-rights organization in the United States, Daughters of Bilitis; the first openly gay person to run for public office in the United States, José Sarria; the first openly gay man to be elected to public office in California, Harvey Milk; the first openly lesbian judge appointed in the U.S., Mary C. Morgan; and the first transgender police commissioner, Theresa Sparks.
Nearly 40 of those schools are Catholic schools managed by the Archdiocese of San Francisco.
A heightened interest in conventioneering in San Francisco, marked by the establishment of convention centers such as Yerba Buena,  acted as a feeder into the local tourist economy and resulted in an increase in the hotel industry: "In 1959, the city had fewer than thirty-three hundred first-class hotel rooms; by 1970, the number was nine thousand; and by 1999, there were more than thirty thousand."
By 2000, the city's population reached new highs, surpassing the previous record set in 1950.
The high hills in the geographic center of the city are responsible for a 20% variance in annual rainfall between different parts of the city.
First was the dot-com boom of the late 1990s, startup companies invigorated the San Francisco economy.
The California Gold Rush brought a flood of treasure seekers (known as "forty-niners", as in "1849").
Until decommissioning in the early 1990s, the city had major military installations at the Presidio, Treasure Island, and Hunters Point—a legacy still reflected in the annual celebration of Fleet Week.
When the bubble burst in 2001, many of these companies folded and their employees were laid off.
The Western Addition survived the 1906 earthquake with its Victorians largely intact, including the famous "Painted Ladies", standing alongside Alamo Square.
More than three-quarters of the city lay in ruins, including almost all of the downtown core.
In 2007, the city expanded its Medicaid and other indigent medical programs into the "Healthy San Francisco" program, which subsidizes certain medical services for eligible residents.
Located on Pier 15 on the Embarcadero, the Exploratorium is an interactive science museum.
Amadeo Giannini's Bank of Italy, later to become Bank of America, provided loans for many of those whose livelihoods had been devastated.
Demand for new housing and office space ignited a second wave of high-rise development, this time in the South of Market district.
Rebuilding was rapid and performed on a grand scale.
It was the O'Shaughnessy Dam, Hetch Hetchy Reservoir, and Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct that would have the largest effect on San Francisco.
This was the first television.
The San Francisco 49ers of the National Football League (NFL) were the longest-tenured major professional sports franchise in the city until moving in 2013.
By 1870 Yerba Buena Cove had been filled to create new land.
The San Andreas Fault caused the earthquakes in 1906 and 1989.
San Francisco Bay Ferry operates from the Ferry Building and Pier 39 to points in Oakland, Alameda, Bay Farm Island, South San Francisco, and north to Vallejo in Solano County.
In San Francisco, the quake severely damaged structures in the Marina and South of Market districts and precipitated the demolition of the damaged Embarcadero Freeway and much of the damaged Central Freeway, allowing the city to reclaim The Embarcadero as its historic downtown waterfront and revitalizing the Hayes Valley neighborhood.
Refugees settled temporarily in makeshift tent villages in Golden Gate Park, the Presidio, on the beaches, and elsewhere.
The ''San Francisco Examiner'', once the cornerstone of William Randolph Hearst's media empire and the home of Ambrose Bierce, declined in circulation over the years and now takes the form of a free daily tabloid, under new ownership.
