A letter to Santa is often a child's first experience of correspondence.
* In 2007, Canada Post replied to letters in 26 languages and Deutsche Post in 16 languages.
In Dutch artist Jan Steen's painting, ''The Feast of Saint Nicholas'', adults and toddlers are glancing up a chimney with amazement on their faces while other children play with their toys.
In pre-Christian Norse tradition, Odin would often enter through chimneys and fire holes on the solstice.
Writing letters to Santa Claus has the educational benefits of promoting literacy, computer literacy, and e-mail literacy.
For instance, writer Austin Cline posed the question: "Is it not possible that kids would find at least as much pleasure in knowing that parents are responsible for Christmas, not a supernatural stranger?"
During the Christianization of Germanic Europe, this figure may also have absorbed elements of the god Odin, who was associated with the Germanic pagan midwinter event of Yule and led the Wild Hunt, a ghostly procession through the sky.
It contained ''Old Santeclaus'', an anonymous poem describing an old man on a reindeer sleigh, bringing presents to children.
One school in the seaside town of Brighton banned the use of a red suit erroneously believing it was only indicative of the Coca-Cola advertising campaign.
On 9 September 2007 where a total of 12,965 people dressed up as Santa or Santa's helper which previously brought down the record of 3,921, which was set during the Santa Dash event in Liverpool City Centre in 2005.
He accomplishes this feat with the aid of the elves who make the toys in the workshop and the flying reindeer who pull his sleigh.
Volunteers dressed as Santa Claus typically became part of fundraising drives to aid needy families at Christmas time.
Writing letters to Santa Claus has been a Christmas tradition for children for many years.
Norway claims he lives in Drøbak.
The area set up for this purpose is festively decorated, usually with a large throne, and is called variously "Santa's Grotto", "Santa's Workshop" or a similar term.
This tradition was confirmed in two important scientific investigations of the relics in Bari and Venice, which revealed that the relics in the two Italian cities belong to the same skeleton.
From 2002 to 2014, the program replied to approximately "one million letters or more a year, and in total answered more than 24.7 million letters"; as of 2015, it responds to more than 1.5 million letters per year, "in over 30 languages, including Braille … answering them all in the language they are written".
Reverend Paul Nedergaard, a clergyman in Copenhagen, Denmark, attracted controversy in 1958 when he declared Santa to be a "pagan goblin" (translated from Danish) after Santa's image was used on fundraising materials for a Danish welfare organization Clar, 337.
Saint Nicholas of Myra was a 4th-century Greek Christian bishop of Myra (now Demre) in Lycia, a province of the Byzantine Empire, now in Turkey.
In 1087, the Italian city of Bari mounted an expedition to locate the tomb of the Saint.
To mould aright the first impressions of innocence, aids in perpetuating purity and in unfolding the immortal model, man in His image and likeness."
a little round bellyThat shook when he laugh'd, like a bowl full of jelly''
Written and sent with the help of a parent or teacher, children learn about the structure of a letter, salutations, and the use of an address and postcode.
A basilica was constructed the same year to store the loot and the area became a pilgrimage site for the devout.
Some modern ideas of Santa Claus seemingly became canon after the anonymous publication of the poem "A Visit From St. Nicholas" (better known today as "The Night Before Christmas") in the Troy, New York, ''Sentinel'' on 23 December 1823; the poem was later attributed to Clement Clarke Moore.
In the Dutch New Netherland colony, season celebrations focused on New Year's Day.
School spokesman Sarah James said: "The red-suited Santa was created as a marketing tool by Coca-Cola, it is a symbol of commercialism."
Too much cannot be done towards guarding and guiding well the germinating and inclining thought of childhood.
The laughter of Santa Claus has long been an important attribute by which the character is identified, but it also does not appear in many non-English-speaking countries.
I'm against Santa in my country only."
In 1889, the poet Katharine Lee Bates popularized Mrs. Claus in the poem "Goody Santa Claus on a Sleigh Ride".
By the end of the 20th century, the reality of mass mechanized production became more fully accepted by the Western public.
There is also a city named North Pole in Alaska where a tourist attraction known as the "Santa Claus House" has been established.
Objections include that it is unethical for parents to lie to children without good cause, and that it discourages healthy skepticism in children.
This was popularized by the 1947 film ''Miracle on 34th Street'' with Santa Claus being called Kris Kringle.
In ''The Sopranos'' episode, "...To Save Us All from Satan's Power", Paulie Gualtieri says he "Used to think Santa and Mrs. Claus were running a sweatshop over there...
"I'm not against Santa himself.
Santa Claus is generally depicted as a portly, joyous, white-bearded man—sometimes with spectacles—wearing a red coat with white collar and cuffs, white-cuffed red trousers, and black leather belt and boots and who carries a bag full of gifts for children.
During this period, supernatural and ghostly occurrences were said to increase in frequency, such as the Wild Hunt, a ghostly procession through the sky.
The number was mistyped and children called the Continental Air Defense Command (CONAD) on Christmas Eve instead.
It is the textual rendition of a particular type of deep-throated laugh or chuckle, most associated today with Santa Claus and Father Christmas, it was connected in the 17th century with the English mythological figure of Puck.
The League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, among them being Santa Claus and the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays including Easter; the League established an antireligious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement.
However, the criticism about this deception is not that it is a simple lie, but a complicated series of very large lies.
The New Zealand Skeptics also see no harm in parents telling their children that Santa is real.
The reindeer were also named: Dasher, Dancer, Prancer, Vixen, Comet, Cupid, Dunder and Blixem (Dunder and Blixem came from the old Dutch words for thunder and lightning, which were later changed to the more German sounding Donner and Blitzen).
The 1956 popular song by George Melachrino, "Mrs. Santa Claus", and the 1963 children's book ''How Mrs. Santa Claus Saved Christmas'', by Phyllis McGinley, helped standardize and establish the character and role of Mrs. Claus in the popular imagination.
As Father Christmas has been increasingly merged into the image of Santa Claus, that has been changed to the more commonly known red suit.
In Britain it was traditional for some to burn the Christmas letters on the fire so that they would be magically transported by the wind to the North Pole.
In the past, many local television stations in the United States and Canada likewise claimed they "tracked Santa Claus" in their own metropolitan areas through the stations' meteorologists.
In Mexico and other Latin American countries, besides using the mail, sometimes children wrap their letters to a small helium balloon, releasing them into the air so Santa magically receives them.
According to Dr. Condry, "The most common response to finding out the truth was that they felt older and more mature.
In the Kyrgyz capital, Bishkek, a Santa Claus Festival was held on 30 December 2007, with government officials attending.
Much of Santa Claus's mythos was not set in stone at the time, leaving Baum to give his "Neclaus" (Necile's Little One) a wide variety of immortal support, a home in the Laughing Valley of Hohaho, and ''ten'' reindeer—who could not fly, but leapt in enormous, flight-like bounds.
'''''Ho ho ho''''' is the way that many languages write out how Santa Claus laughs.
With the Christianization of Germanic Europe, numerous traditions were absorbed from Yuletide celebrations into modern Christmas.
In North American tradition (in the United States and Canada), Santa lives on the North Pole, which according to Canada Post lies within Canadian jurisdiction in postal code H0H 0H0 (a reference to "ho ho ho", Santa's notable saying, although postal codes starting with H are usually reserved for the island of Montreal in Québec).
Tags on gifts for children are sometimes signed by their parents "From Santa Claus" before the gifts are laid beneath the tree.
The Director of Operations, Colonel Harry Shoup, received the first call for Santa and responded by telling children that there were signs on the radar that Santa was indeed heading south from the North Pole.
Santa has been described as a positive male cultural icon:
Essayist David Sedaris is known for the satirical SantaLand Diaries he kept while working as an elf in the Macy's display, which were turned into a famous radio segment and later published.
Images of Santa Claus were further popularized through Haddon Sundblom's depiction of him for The Coca-Cola Company's Christmas advertising in the 1930s.
In Belarus there is a home of Ded Moroz in Belovezhskaya Pushcha National Park.
In 2012, the Southcentre Mall in Calgary was the first mall to offer this service.
The tale had become well known by the 1870s.
Through the years, the Finnish Santa Claus (Joulupukki or "Yule Goat") has received over eight million letters.
Thomas Nast immortalized Santa Claus with an illustration for the 3 January 1863 issue of ''Harper's Weekly''.
In 2009, the Brazilian National Post Service, "Correios" answered almost two million children's letters, and spread some seasonal cheer by donating 414,000 Christmas gifts to some of Brazil's neediest citizens.
This tracking can now be done via the Internet and NORAD's website.
All that Santa stuff seems to me like cheap show business," said David König of the Creative Copywriters Club, pointing out that it is primarily an American and British tradition.
Santa Claus has partial Christian roots in Saint Nicholas, particularly in the high church denominations that practice the veneration of him, in addition to other saints.
Earlier still, Santa Claus had appeared dressed in red and white and essentially in his current form on several covers of ''Puck'' magazine in the first few years of the 20th century.
Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of the Christian Science movement, wrote: "the children should not be taught that Santa Claus has aught to do with this Christmas pastime.
This image has been maintained and reinforced through song, radio, television, children's books and films.
The American colonies established by these groups reflected this view.
He receives over 600,000 letters every year from over 198 different countries with Togo being the most recent country added to the list.
President Reagan steps in, fires all of Santa's helpers, and replaces them with out-of-work air traffic controllers (an obvious reference to the 1981 air traffic controllers' strike), resulting in a riot before Santa vindictively rehires them in humiliating new positions such as his reindeer.
… Odin, transformed into Father Christmas, then Santa Claus, prospered with St Nicholas and the Christchild became a leading player on the Christmas stage."
There are schools offering instruction on how to act as Santa Claus.
"In the 1820s he began to acquire the recognizable trappings: reindeer, sleigh, bells," said Seal in an interview.
The practice of this has been credited to James Edgar, as he started doing this in 1890 in his Brockton, Massachusetts department store.
Seabury Quinn's 1948 novel ''Roads'' draws from historical legends to tell the story of Santa and the origins of Christmas.
His physical appearance was variable, with one famous image being John Leech's illustration of the "Ghost of Christmas Present" in Charles Dickens's festive classic ''A Christmas Carol'' (1843), as a great genial man in a green coat lined with fur who takes Scrooge through the bustling streets of London on the current Christmas morning, sprinkling the essence of Christmas onto the happy populace.
Other modern additions to the "story" of Santa include Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, the 9th and lead reindeer immortalized in a Gene Autry song, written by a Montgomery Ward copywriter.
So Saint Nicholas changed to Santa Claus.
In the Italian Befana tradition, the gift-giving witch is perpetually covered with soot from her trips down the chimneys of children's homes.
The Finnish Santa Claus lives in Korvatunturi, however the Santa Claus Main Post Office is situated in Rovaniemi precisely at the Arctic circle.
The Guinness World Record for the largest gathering of Santa Clauses is held by Thrissur, Kerala, India where on 27 December 2014, 18,112 Santas came overtaking the current record of Derry City, Northern Ireland.
The custom of gifting of children at Christmas has been propagated by Martin Luther as an alternative to the previous very popular gift custom on St. Nicholas, to focus the interest of the children to Christ instead of the veneration of saints.
Claus's immortality was earned, much like his title ("Santa"), decided by a vote of those naturally immortal.
Many postal services allow children to send letters to Santa Claus.
Father Christmas dates back as far as 16th century in England during the reign of Henry VIII, when he was pictured as a large man in green or scarlet robes lined with fur.
Historically, Coca-Cola was not the first soft drink company to utilize the modern image of Santa Claus in its advertising—White Rock Beverages had already used a red and white Santa to sell mineral water in 1915 and then in advertisements for its ginger ale in 1923.
Other Christmas Eve Santa Claus rituals in the United States include reading ''A Visit from St. Nicholas'' or other tale about Santa Claus, watching a Santa or Christmas-related animated program on television (such as the aforementioned ''Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town'' and similar specials, such as ''Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer'', among many others), and the singing of Santa Claus songs such as "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town", "Here Comes Santa Claus", and "Up on the House Top".
In Canada, malls operated by Oxford Properties established a process by which autistic children could visit Santa Claus at the mall without having to contend with crowds.
The tradition of Santa Claus entering dwellings through the chimney is shared by many European seasonal gift-givers.
Martin Luther first suggested the Christkind as the bringer of gifts.
A boy from Colorado writing to the children's magazine ''The Nursery'' in late 1874 said, "If we did not live so very far from the North Pole, I should ask Santa Claus to bring me a donkey."
This date was earlier than the original day of gifts for the children, which moved in the course of the Reformation and its opposition to the veneration of saints in many countries on the 24 and 25 December.
was the title of an editorial appearing in the 21 September 1897 edition of ''The New York Sun''.
Santa's entrance into homes on Christmas Eve via the chimney was made part of American tradition through the poem ''"A Visit from St. Nicholas"'' where the author described him as an elf.
Quite often the Santa, if and when he is detected to be fake, explains that he is not the real Santa and is helping him at this time of year.
Sometimes a photograph of the child and Santa are taken.
Following the Restoration of the monarchy and with Puritans out of power in England, the ban on Christmas was satirized in works such as Josiah King's ''The Examination and Tryal of Old Father Christmas; Together with his Clearing by the Jury'' (1686).
In the United Kingdom, Father Christmas was historically depicted wearing a green cloak.
L. Frank Baum's ''The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus'', a 1902 children's book, further popularized Santa Claus.
A magazine article from 1853, describing American Christmas customs to British readers, refers to children hanging up their stockings on Christmas Eve for 'a fabulous personage' whose name varies: in Pennsylvania he is usually called 'Krishkinkle' but in New York he is 'St.
Some, such as NORAD Tracks Santa, the Airservices Australia Tracks Santa Project, the Santa Update Project, and the MSNBC and Bing Maps Platform Tracks Santa Project have endured.
The malls open early to allow entry only to families with autistic children, who have a private visit with Santa Claus.
In Sweden, the town of Mora has a theme park named Tomteland.
'''Santa Claus''', '''Saint Nicholas''', '''Saint Nick''', '''Father Christmas''', '''Kris Kringle''', '''Santy''', or simply '''Santa''' is a mythical figure with historical origins who, in many Western cultures, brings gifts to the homes of well-behaved, "good" children on Christmas Eve (24 December) and the early morning hours of Christmas Day (25 December).
Dr. John Condry of Cornell University interviewed more than 500 children for a study of the issue and found that not a single child was angry at his or her parents for telling them Santa Claus was real.
The modern Santa Claus is derived from the British figure of Father Christmas, the Dutch figure of Sinterklaas, and Saint Nicholas, the historical Greek bishop and gift-giver of Myra.
However, Santa had been portrayed in a red suit in the 19th century by Thomas Nast among others.
This work also established Claus's motives: a happy childhood among immortals.
One of the first artists to define Santa Claus's modern image was Thomas Nast, an American cartoonist of the 19th century.
Sometimes children's charities answer letters in poor communities, or from children's hospitals, and give them presents they would not otherwise receive.
The USPS Santa letter answering effort started in 1912 out of the historic James Farley Post Office in New York, and since 1940 has been called "Operation Santa" to ensure that letters to Santa are adopted by charitable organizations, major corporations, local businesses and individuals in order to make children's holiday dreams come true from coast to coast.
Most of these websites use volunteer living people as "elves" to answer email sent to Santa.
The hearth was held sacred in primitive belief as a source of beneficence, and popular belief had elves and fairies bringing gifts to the house through this portal.
His address is: Santa Claus' Main Post Office, Santa Claus Village, FIN-96930 Arctic Circle.
They now knew something that the younger kids did not".
Other interesting Santa letter processing information, according to the UPU's 2007 study and survey of national postal operations, are:
Irving's book was a lampoon of the Dutch culture of New York, and much of this portrait is his joking invention.
He is commonly portrayed as living at the North Pole and  saying "ho ho ho" often.
Condemnation of Christmas was prevalent among the 17th-century English Puritans and Dutch Calvinists who banned the holiday as either pagan or Roman Catholic.
The remains of Saint Nicholas are in Italy.
In the tale of Saint Nicholas, the saint tossed coins through a window, and, in a later version of the tale, down a chimney when he finds the window locked.
The editorial, which included the famous reply "Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus", has become an indelible part of popular Christmas lore in the United States and Canada.
Children from Great Britain, Poland and Japan are the busiest writers.
In some images from the early 20th century, Santa was depicted as personally making his toys by hand in a small workshop like a craftsman.
Some websites, such as Santa's page on Microsoft's Windows Live Spaces, however have used or still use "bots" to compose and send email replies, with occasional unfortunate results.
Many of these websites also include email addresses which allow children to send email to Santa Claus.
Others, such as the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport's Tracks Santa Project, the Santa Retro Radar – Lehigh Valley Project, and the NASA Tracks Santa Project, have fallen by the wayside.
The image of Santa Claus as a benevolent character became reinforced with its association with charity and philanthropy, particularly by organizations such as the Salvation Army.
In the Czech tradition, presents are delivered by Ježíšek, which translates as Baby Jesus.
In Denmark, Norway and Sweden, it is common for children to leave him rice porridge with cinnamon sugar instead.
The leader of the wild hunt is frequently attested as the god Odin and he bears the Old Norse names ''Jólnir'', meaning "yule figure" and the name ''Langbarðr'', meaning "long-beard" (see list of names of Odin).
2008 was officially declared the Year of Santa Claus in the country.
* In 2006, Finland's national postal operation received letters from 150 countries (representing 90% of the letters received), France's Postal Service from 126 countries, Germany from 80 countries, and Slovakia from 20 countries.
Many other websites are available year-round that are devoted to Santa Claus and purport to keep tabs on his activities in his workshop.
In December 2000, the Weather Channel built upon these local efforts to provide a national Christmas Eve "Santa tracking" effort, called "SantaWatch" in cooperation with NASA, the International Space Station, and Silicon Valley-based new multimedia firm Dreamtime Holdings.
In light of these facts, the character has sometimes been the focus of controversy over the holiday and its meanings.
On Christmas Eve "Little Jesus" comes and gives gifts for everyone.
However this has been found to be less efficient than the use of the normal postal service, and this tradition is dying out in modern times, especially with few homes having open fires.
Writing in ''Mothering'', writer Carol Jean-Swanson makes similar points, noting that the original figure of St. Nicholas gave only to those who were needy and that today Santa Claus seems to be more about conspicuous consumption:
In Kyrgyzstan, a mountain peak was named after Santa Claus, after a Swedish company had suggested the location be a more efficient starting place for present-delivering journeys all over the world, than Lapland.
That shift was reflected in the modern depiction of Santa's residence—now often humorously portrayed as a fully mechanized production and distribution facility, equipped with the latest manufacturing technology, and overseen by the elves with Santa and Mrs. Claus as executives and/or managers.
Nicholas' or 'Santa Claus'.
Children following the Dutch custom for ''sinterklaas'' will "put out their shoe" (leave hay and a carrot for his horse in a shoe before going to bed, sometimes weeks before the ''sinterklaas avond'').
In Denmark, he is said to live in Greenland (near Uummannaq).
With no greater good at the heart of the lie, some have charged that it is more about the parents than it is about the children.
In his book ''Nicholas: The Epic Journey from Saint to Santa Claus'', writer Jeremy Seal describes how the commercialization of the Santa Claus figure began in the 19th century.
These letters normally contain a wishlist of toys and assertions of good behavior.
In the United States and Canada, children traditionally leave Santa a glass of milk and a plate of cookies; in Britain and Australia, he is sometimes given sherry or beer, and mince pies instead.
The idea of a wife for Santa Claus may have been the creation of American authors, beginning in the mid-19th century.
New Zealander, British, Australian, Irish, Canadian, and American children also leave a carrot for Santa's reindeer, and were traditionally told that if they are not good all year round, that they will receive a lump of coal in their stockings, although this practice is now considered archaic.
The Macy's Santa Claus in New York City is often said to be the real Santa.
In Hungary, St. Nicolaus (Mikulás) comes on the night of 5 December and the children get their gifts the next morning.
The author quotes Moore's poem in its entirety, saying that its descriptions apply to Krishkinkle too.
In addition to providing holiday-themed entertainment, "Santa tracking" websites raise interest in space technology and exploration, serve to educate children in geography.
The god Odin's role during the Yuletide period has been theorized as having influenced concepts of St. Nicholas in a variety of facets, including his long white beard and his gray horse for nightly rides (see Odin's horse Sleipnir), which was traded for reindeer in North America.
Father Christmas is now widely seen as synonymous with the Santa Claus figure.
Santa Claus appears in the weeks before Christmas in department stores or shopping malls, or at parties.
For instance, a ''Bloom County'' story from 15 December 1981 through 24 December 1981 has Santa rejecting the demands of PETCO (Professional Elves Toy-Making and Craft Organization) for higher wages, a hot tub in the locker room, and "short broads,” with the elves then going on strike.
According to the Universal Postal Union (UPU)'s 2007 study and survey of national postal operations, the United States Postal Service (USPS) has the oldest Santa letter answering effort by a national postal system.
When Ak, Master Woodsman of the World, exposes him to the misery and poverty of children in the outside world, Santa strives to find a way to bring joy into the lives of all children, and eventually invents toys as a principal means.
An example of a public and private cooperative venture is the opportunity for expatriate and local children and parents to receive postmarked mail and greeting cards from Santa during December in the Finnish Embassy in Beijing, People's Republic of China, Santa Claus Village in Rovaniemi, Finland, and the People's Republic of China Postal System's Beijing International Post Office.
Last minute rituals for children before going to bed include aligning stockings at the mantelpiece or other place where Santa cannot fail to see them, peeking up the chimney (in homes with a fireplace), glancing out a window and scanning the heavens for Santa's sleigh, and (in homes without a fireplace) unlocking an exterior door so Santa can easily enter the house.
In 1863, a picture of Santa illustrated by Nast appeared in ''Harper's Weekly''.
His address is: Santa Claus, North Pole, Canada, H0H 0H0; no postage is required.
en" (in Dutch, "Pères Fouettard" in French), so they are not elves.
and encourage them to take an interest in science.
As the years passed, Santa Claus evolved in popular culture into a large, heavyset person.
This image became popular in the United States and Canada in the 19th century due to the significant influence of the 1823 poem "A Visit From St. Nicholas" and of caricaturist and political cartoonist Thomas Nast.
(This postal code, in which zeroes are used for the letter "O" is consistent with the alternating letter-number format of all Canadian postal codes.)
''"Is There a Santa Claus?"''
In Finland, Korvatunturi has long been known as Santa's home, and two theme parks, Santa Claus Village and Santa Park are located near Rovaniemi.
Santa Claus is believed to make lists of children throughout the world, categorizing them according to their behavior ("naughty" or "nice") and to deliver presents, including toys, and candy to all of the well-behaved children in the world, and sometimes coal to the naughty children, on the single night of Christmas Eve.
Girls generally write longer but more polite lists and express the nature of Christmas more in their letters than in letters written by boys.
Saint Nicholas was later claimed as a patron saint of many diverse groups, from archers, sailors, and children to pawnbrokers.
Margaret Baker comments that "The appearance of Santa Claus or Father Christmas, whose day is 25th of December, owes much to Odin, the old blue-hooded, cloaked, white-bearded Giftbringer of the north, who rode the midwinter sky on his eight-footed steed Sleipnir, visiting his people with gifts.
National postal operators offering the ability to use an on-line web form (with or without a return e-mail address) to Santa and obtain a reply include Canada Post (on-line web request form in English and French), France's Postal Service (on-line web request form in French), and New Zealand Post (on-line web request form in English).
A deceit or falsehood is never wise.
Canada Post has a special postal code for letters to Santa Claus, and since 1982 over 13,000 Canadian postal workers have volunteered to write responses.
The events are seen as moves to boost tourism in Kyrgyzstan.
For example, children's television producer Jonathan Meath studied at the International School of Santa Claus and earned the degree ''Master of Santa Claus'' in 2006.
Psychologist Tamar Murachver said that because it is a cultural, not parental, lie, it does not undermine parental trust.
* Countries whose national postal operators answer letters to Santa and other end-of-year holiday figures, and the number of letters received in 2006: Germany (500,000), Australia (117,000), Austria (6,000), Bulgaria (500), Canada (1,060,000), Spain (232,000), United States (no figure, as statistics are not kept centrally), Finland (750,000), France (1,220,000), Ireland (100,000), New Zealand (110,000), Portugal (255,000), Poland (3,000), Slovakia (85,000), Sweden (150,000), Switzerland (17,863), Ukraine (5,019), United Kingdom (750,000).
The popularity of the image spawned urban legends that Santa Claus was invented by The Coca-Cola Company or that Santa wears red and white because they are the colors used to promote the Coca-Cola brand.
Over the years there have been a number of websites created by various organizations that have purported to track Santa Claus.
He typified the spirit of good cheer at Christmas, bringing peace, joy, good food and wine and revelry.
A number of denominations of Christians have varying concerns about Santa Claus, which range from acceptance to denouncement.
His Christmas image in the ''Harper's'' issue dated 29 December 1866 was a collage of engravings titled ''Santa Claus and His Works'', which included the caption "Santa Claussville, N.P."
All the same, Santa still receives far more letters than e-mail through the national postal operators, proving that children still write letters.
The reliquary of St. Nicholas was conquered by Italian sailors and his relics were taken to Bari where they are kept to this day.
Prior to Christianization, the Germanic peoples (including the English) celebrated a midwinter event called Yule (Old English ''geola'' or ''guili'').
It blossomed into a second career for him, and after appearing in parades and malls, he appeared on the cover of the American monthly ''Boston Magazine'' as Santa.
He is played by an actor, usually helped by other actors (often mall employees) dressed as elves or other creatures of folklore associated with Santa.
Some social scientists have found that boys and girls write different types of letters.
He is also the patron saint of both Amsterdam and Moscow.
