File:Museo de Arte Contemporáneo Santiago2.jpg|Contemporary Art Museum of Santiago
Two new earthquakes hit the city, one on 19 November 1822, and another on 20 February 1835.
* Ex National Congress
In the following decades, Santiago continued to grow unabated.
Despite these classifications, when the term "Santiago" is used without another descriptor, it usually refers to what is also known as '''Greater Santiago''' (''Gran Santiago''), a territorial extension defined by its urban continuity that includes the Commune of Santiago in addition to 36 other communes, which together comprise the majority of the Santiago Province and some areas of neighboring provinces (see Political divisions).
In February 2011, Gran Torre Santiago, part of the Costanera Center project, located in the called Sanhattan district, reached the 300-meter mark, officially becoming the tallest structure in Latin America.
Comodoro Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport (IATA: SCL) is Santiago's national and international airport and the principal hub of LATAM Airlines, Sky Airline, One Airlines, Aerocardal and PAL Airlines.
For instance, in 1987, the fourth wettest year on record with , there was only  in the 36 days between 3 June and 8 July, followed by  in the 38 days between 9 July and 15 August.
East of that is the colonial building of the Casa Colorada (1769), which houses the Museum of Santiago.
To tackle these issues a new transport system, called Transantiago, was devised.
The Great Depression caused the collapse of the nitrate industry in the north, leaving 60,000 unemployed, which added to the decline in agricultural exports, resulting in a total number for the unemployed to be about 300,000 nationwide.
The 27 February 2010, a strong earthquake was felt in the capital, causing some damage to old buildings; however, some modern buildings are uninhabitable, generating much debate about the actual implementation of mandatory earthquake standards in the modern architecture of Santiago.
Not far from the theatre is the Subercaseaux Mansion and the National Library, one of the largest libraries of South America.
With the end of the war, Bernardo O'Higgins was accepted as Supreme Director and, like his father, began a number of important works for the city.
The resistance was led by Inés de Suárez, a mistress to Valdivia.
File:Excongreso.jpg|Former Congress Building
Santiago is located in the country's central valley, at an elevation of  above mean sea level.
The Metro was expanded considerably, extending its lines and creating three new lines between 1997 and 2006 in the southeastern sector.
The Congress was deposed under the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet (1973–1989), and after the dictatorship was newly constituted on 11 March 1990, in Valparaíso.
The temperature may even drop to , especially during the morning.
The feeling that the early 20th century was an era of economic growth due to technological advances contrasted dramatically with the standard of living of lower social classes.
Santiago's air is the most polluted air in Chile.
4,313,719 people in Chile say they were born in one of the communes of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, which according to the 2002 census, amounts to 28.54% of the national total.
During the years of the Republican era, institutions such as the University of Chile (Universidad de Chile), the Normal School of Preceptors, the School of Arts and Crafts, and the Quinta Normal, which included the Museum of Fine Arts (now Museum of Science and Technology) and the National Museum of Natural History, were founded.
Some international institutions, such as ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean), have their offices in Santiago.
The building is home to the Supreme Court of Chile.
In 1990 the total population under 20 years was 38.04% and 8.86% were over 60.
The east side neighborhoods like Vitacura, La Dehesa, and Las Condes are home to Santiago's Alonso de Cordova street, and malls like Parque Arauco, Alto Las Condes, Mall Plaza (a chain of malls present in Chile and other Latin American countries) and Costanera Center are known for their luxurious shopping.
During this time, the downtown district was consolidated into a commercial, financial and administrative center, with the establishment of various portals and locales around Ahumada Street and a Civic District in the immediate surroundings of the Palace of La Moneda.
The growth of the previous decades led to an unprecedented population explosion starting in 1929.
Thus, the old moneyed class trips to Cousino and Alameda Park, lost hegemony over popular entertainment venues such as the National Stadium emerged in 1938.
During winter months, Thermal inversion (a meteorological phenomenon whereby a stable layer of warm air holds down colder air close to the ground) causes high levels of smog and air pollution to be trapped and concentrated within the Central Valley.
Several mercados in the city sell local goods.
It received recognition by the Chilean government as an appointed Pontifical University in 1931.
The longest section is the Americo Vespuccio road, which contains a very wide dirt path with many trees through the center of a street used by motorists on both sides.
It works by combining local (feeder) bus lines, main bus lines, and the Metro network.
Construction of two new lines (3 and 6) was confirmed recently by president Sebastián Piñera, and are expected to be operating in 2016.
There are now a number of large wastewater processing and recycling plants under construction, and ongoing plans to decontaminate the river and make it navigable.
The Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile (PUC) was founded in June 1888 and was ranked as the best school in Latin America in 2014.
However, in March 2012, the Mapocho Wastewater Treatment Plant began operations, increasing the wastewater treatment capacity of the city to 100%, making Santiago the first capital city in Latin America to treat all of its municipal sewage.
The San Cristobal Hill in this period began a long process of development.
525 people died, of whom 13 were in Santiago, and the damage was estimated at 15-30 billion US dollars.
With the arrival of the new century, the city began to experience various changes related to the strong development of industry.
Growth has declined, reaching 1.35% in the early 2000s.
Its origins date back to 1813, when it was created by the nascent Republic and was moved to its current premises a century later, also home to the headquarters of the National Archives.
In face of this barbaric act, the natives dispersed in terror.
Both of these constructions consisted of mainly adobe and stone.
Universidad Católica has 11 national titles, making it the third most successful football club in the country.
Following colonial rule, Valdivia entrusted the layout of the new town to master builder Pedro de Gamboa, who would design the city grid layout.
Close by is the Municipal Theatre of Santiago, which was built in 1857 by the French architect Brunet of Edward Baines.
The Costanera Center has stores like Armani Exchange, Banana Republic, Façonnable, Hugo Boss, Swarovski, and Zara.
The city has a varying elevation, with  in the western areas and  at the Plaza Baquedano.
The Spanish army gained new victories in 1818 and headed for Santiago, but their march was definitively halted on the plains of the Maipo River, during the Battle of Maipú on 5 April 1818.
Diesel truck exhaust is another major source of winter smog.
The population surged again via migration from rural sectors between 1940 and 1960.
File:El Colorado ski.jpg|Ski Center El Colorado
This figure reflects broad growth in the population of the city during the 20th century: in 1907 it had 383,587 inhabitants; 1,010,102 in 1940; 2,009,118 in 1960; 3,899,619 in 1982; and 4,729,118 in 1992.
The first railroad reached the city on 14 September 1857, at the Santiago Estación Central railway station.
Trains operated by Chile's national railway company, Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado (EFE), connect Santiago to several cities in the south-central part of the country: Rancagua, San Fernando, Talca (connected to the coastal city of Constitución by a different train service), Linares and Chillán.
Widespread disease, including tuberculosis, claimed the lives of hundreds of the homeless.
Copper, gypsum, and limestone are mined.
The hosts of Valdivia camped by the river in the slopes of the Tupahue hill and slowly began to interact with the picunches natives who inhabited the area.
It also prevents the entry of air masses, with the exception of some coastal low clouds that penetrate to the basin through the river valleys.
* ''Parque O'Higgins'' – O'Higgins Park
Transantiago is the name for the city's public transport system.
With the 1910 Chile Centennial celebrations, many urban projects were undertaken.
There is an extensive network of bicycle trails in the city, especially in the Providencia commune.
File:Bellasartes.jpg|Fine Arts Museum
A new redevelopment of the Alameda Avenue turned it into the main road of the city.
Approximately 10.4% of the population of the Metropolitan Region stated that they were atheist or agnostic, while 5.4% declared that they followed other religions.
This basin is approximately  in a north–south direction and  from east to west.
The club was founded on 24 May 1927, under the name Club Deportivo Universitario as a union of Club Náutico and Federación Universitaria.
Santiago has 37% of Chile's vehicles, with a total of 991,838 vehicles, 979,346 of which are motorized.
For children and teenagers there are several entertainment venues, such as amusement park Fantasilandia, the National Zoo or the Buin Zoo on the outskirts of the city.
Mean rainfall is  per year, about 80% of which occurs during the winter months (May to September), varying between  of rainfall during these months.
Santiago is also served by Eulogio Sánchez Airport (ICAO: SCTB), a small, privately owned general aviation airport in the commune of La Reina.
(The name ''Santiago'' is the local Galician evolution of Vulgar Latin ''Sanctu Iacobu'', "Saint James".)
Major companies and financial corporations were established in the area, giving rise to a thriving modern business center known as ''Sanhattan''.
Qantas operate the non-stop flights to Sydney, Australia.
According to data collected in the 2002 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the Santiago metropolitan area population reached 5,428,590 inhabitants, equivalent to 35.91 per cent of the national total and 89.56 per cent of total regional inhabitants.
The city is now home to a growing theater and restaurant scene, extensive suburban development, dozens of shopping centers, and a rising skyline, including the tallest building in Latin America, the Gran Torre Santiago.
The real estate development in these municipalities and others like Quilicura and Peñalolen largely due to the construction of housing projects for middle-class families.
The city's main parks are:
The size of the city expanded constantly; The 20,000 hectares Santiago covered in 1960 doubled by 1980, reaching 64,140 hectares in 2002.
The largest airport in Chile, it is ranked sixth in passenger traffic among Latin American airports, with 14,168,282 passengers served in 2012—a 17.04% increase over 2011.
That amount contrasts with a very dry season during the summer months between December and March, when rainfall does not exceed  on average, caused by an anticyclonic dominance continued for about seven or eight months.
Created primarily for educational use, they also became examples of public planning during that period.
File:San Cristóbal altura.jpg|Cerro San Cristobal
In the 1990s the government attempted to reorganize the public transport system.
This migration was coupled with high fertility rates, and annual growth reached 4.92% between 1952 and 1960.
According to the National Census, carried out in 2002 by the National Statistics Bureau (INE), in the Santiago Metropolitan Region, 3,129,249 people 15 and older identified themselves as Catholics, equivalent to 68.7% of the total population, while 595,173 (13.1%) described themselves as Evangelical Protestants.
The South Express Line, Line 6, will be finished by 2016, adding 12 stations to the network and approximately  of track, and line 3 will be finished by 2018.
In 2011 they were champions of Copa Sudamericana, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament.
In other parts of the city there are some museums such as the Aeronautical Museum in Cerrillos, Museum of Tajamares in Providence and the Museo Interactivo Mirador in La Granja.
The center, however, lost people leaving more space for the development of trade, banking and government
The four office towers are served by highway and subway connections.
Already in 1895, 75% of the national manufacturing industry was in the capital and only 28% in the harbor, and by 1910, major banks and shops were set up in the streets of the city center, leaving Valparaíso.
The villages established in the areas belonging to picunches groups (name given by Chileans) or promaucaes (name given by Incas), were subject to the Inca Empire throughout the late fifteenth century and into the early sixteenth century.
Joaquín Larraín Gandarillas (1822–1897), Archbishop of Anazarba, was the founder and first rector of the PUC.
Having been sent by Francisco Pizarro from Peru and having made the long journey from Cuzco, Extremadura conquistador Pedro de Valdivia reached the valley of the Mapocho on 13 December 1540.
The system has five operating lines and carries around 2,400,000 passengers per day.
A final major source of Santiago air pollution, one that continues the year-around, is the smelter of the El Teniente copper mine.
, the fare evasion rate is stubbornly high.
Universidad de Chile has 17 national titles and 4 Copa Chile wins.
It is closed for maintenance on Mondays.
'''Santiago''' (; ), also known as '''Santiago de Chile''' , is the capital and largest city of Chile.
The largest university and one of the oldest in the Americas is Universidad de Chile.
Alonso de Cordova also houses some of Santiago's most famous restaurants, art galleries, wine showrooms and furniture stores.
After the coup of 1973 and the establishment of the military regime, urban planning major changes did not start until the 1980s, when the government adopted a neoliberal economic model and the role of organizer passes the state to the market.
The system was launched in earnest on 10 February 2007, combining core services across the city with the subway and with local feeder routes, under a unified system of payment through a contactless smartcard called "Tarjeta bip!".
Laws exist which require industries and local governments to treat all wastewater discharges, but these regulations are often loosely enforced.
In 1820, the city reported 46,000 inhabitants, while in 1854, the population  reached 69,018.
* Parque Padre Hurtado (a.k.a.
These two events, however, did not prevent the city's rapid, continued growth.
File:Alameda - Santiago de Chile.jpg|Entel Tower
The city lies in the center of the ''Santiago Basin'', a large bowl-shaped valley consisting of broad and fertile lands surrounded by mountains.
To this other structures adopted artistic trends from Europe, as the Equestrian Club of Santiago, the head offices of the University of Chile and the Catholic University, Central Station and the Mapocho Station, Mercado Central, join the National Library, Museum of Fine Arts and the Paris-London, among others.
Valparaíso, which had hitherto been the economic center of the country slowly begins to lose prominence at the expense of capital.
* Barrio Bellavista, cultural and bohemian neighborhood
As we enter the twenty-first century, Santiago persists in its rapid development.
The groups were mainly nomadic hunter-gatherers, who traveled from the coast to the interior in search of guanacos during the time of the Andean snowmelt.
Annual festivals featured in Santiago include Lollapalooza and the Maquinaria festival.
Other important buildings were opened during this era, such as the Teatro Municipal opera house, and the Club Hípico de Santiago.
The Bellavista, Brasil, Manuel Montt, Plaza Ñuñoa and Suecia account for most of the nightclubs, restaurants and bars in the city, the main evening entertainment centers in the capital.
A new extension to Maipú was inaugurated in 2011, leaving the metropolitan railway with a length of 105 km.
The streets of Santiago were paved and by 1875 and there were 1,107 cars in the city, while 45,000 people used tram services on a daily basis.
Many people use folding bicycles to commute to work.
* ''Parque Forestal'' – Forestal Park, park located at the city center alongside Mapocho river
The coastal mountain range serves as a screen that stops the spread of maritime influence, contributing to the increase in annual and daily thermal oscillation (the difference between the maximum and minimum daily temperatures can reach 14&nbsp;°C) and maintaining low relative humidity, close to an annual average of 70%.
Estimates in 2007 show that 32.89% of men and 30.73% of women were less than 20 years old, while 10.23% of men and 13.43% of women were over 60 years.
As of 2006, Santiago was home to 992,000 vehichles, 979,000 of which were motorized.
Furthermore, in the periphery villas were built various partners from various organizations of the time.
The wettest year since records began in 1866 was 1900 with  – part of a “pluvial” from 1898 to 1905 that saw an average of  over eight years incorporating the second wettest year in 1899 with  – and the driest 1924 with .
In order to provide more closeness to the population, incorporating new technologies and complement the services provided by public libraries and the National Library was opened in 2005 the Library of Santiago at Barrio Matucana.
Air France Operates non-stop flights Santiago – Paris.
There are a number of jazz establishments, some of them, including "El Perseguidor", "Thelonious", and "Le Fournil Jazz Club", are located in Bellavista, one of Santiago's "hippest" neighborhoods, though "Club de Jazz de Santiago", the oldest and most traditional one, is in Ñuñoa.
In Chile, there are several entities which bear the name of "Santiago" that are often confused.
The Metro de Santiago subway carries over two million passengers daily through its five lines (1, 2, 4, 4A, and 5), extending over  and 108 stations.
Noise levels on the main streets are high, mostly because of noisy diesel buses.
Other major roads include the Avenida Los Pajaritos to the west and Providencia Avenue and Apoquindo Avenue to the east.
The indigenous hosts of Michimalonco used this to their advantage, and attacked the fledgling city.
The departure of these companies to Barrio Alto and the construction of shopping centers all around the city, creating a crisis in the city center, which had reinvented: its main shopping streets turned into pedestrian walkways, as the Paseo Ahumada, and instituted tax benefits for the construction of residential buildings, mainly attracting young adults.
However, socioeconomic inequality and geosocial fragmentation remain two of the most important problems, both city and country.
On the southeast corner of the square stands the green cast-iron Commercial Edwards building, which was built in 1893.
In 1865, the census reported 115,337 inhabitants.
Of these, 93 are located within the commune of Santiago, considered the historic center of the city.
Barrio Bellavista is where some of the most exclusive night clubs and chic cafes are located.
Santiago's steady economic growth over the past few decades has transformed it into a modern metropolis.
Other mountains include Tupungatito, San José, and Maipo.
Within the metropolitan area of Santiago, there are 174 heritage sites in the custody of the National Monuments Council, among which are archaeological, architectural and historical monuments, neighborhoods and typical areas.
Other buildings surrounding the Plaza de Armas are the Central Post Office Building, which was finished in 1882, and the Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago, built between 1804 and 1807.
Santiago’s location within a watershed is one of the most important factors determining the climate of the city.
However, the shrine would not be completed until some decades later.
The city and region's demonym is ''santiaguinos'' (male) and ''santiaguinas'' (female).
These important works were opened permanently in 1798.
The area would have served as a basis for the failed Inca expeditions southward road junction as the Inca Trail.
370,000 homes were damaged, but the building codes implemented after the earlier earthquakes meant that despite the size of the earthquake, damage was far less than that caused a few weeks earlier by the 2010 Haiti earthquake, in which at least 100,000 people died.
Maipú, Ñuñoa, Renca, Lampa and Colina were to be created in 1891, Providencia and Barrancas in 1897, and Las Condes in 1901.
Unemployment and living costs increased dramatically whilst the salaries of the population of Santiago fell.
In 1940, the city accumulated 952,075 inhabitants, in 1952 this figure rose to 1,350,409 residents and the census of 1960 totaled 1,907,378 santiaguinos.
In areas such as La Dehesa, Lo Curro, and El Arrayan, urban development is present at over 1,000 metres of altitude.
Bandera street leads toward the building of the Santiago Stock Exchange (the ''Bolsa de Comercio''), completed in 1917, the Club de la Unión (opened in 1925), the Universidad de Chile (1872), and toward the oldest churchhouse in the city, the San Francisco Church (constructed between 1586 and 1628), with its Marian statue of the ''Virgen del Socorro'' ("Our Lady of Help"), which was brought to Chile by Pedro de Valdivia.
About 10 daily trains operate the full distance in each direction, with up to 30 trains between Santiago and Graneros.
This made up 37.3% of Chile's total vehicle count.
As in most of Chile, the majority of the population of Santiago is Catholic.
Although no santiaguino monument has been declared a World Heritage Site by Unesco three have already been proposed by the Chilean government: the Incan sanctuary of El Plomo, the church and convent of San Francisco and the palace of La Moneda.
The Former National Congress Building, the Justice Palace, and the Royal Customs Palace (''Palacio de la Real Aduana de Santiago'') are located close to each other.
* Parque Inés de Suarez, Providencia
Taxicabs are common in Santiago and are painted black with yellow roofs and have orange license plates.
Falabella, Paris,  Johnson, Ripley, La Polar, and several other department stores dot the mall landscape of Chile.
So-called ''radiotaxis'' may be called up by telephone and can be any make, model, or color but should always have the orange plates.
The historic low of  was in July 1976.
There are ski resorts to the east of the city (Valle Nevado, La Parva, El Colorado) and wineries in the plains west of the city.
an annual growth of 3.3%, almost three times the national figure.
In 2010, Chile was struck by the sixth largest earthquake ever recorded, reaching 8.8 on the moment magnitude scale.
The Andes mountains around Santiago are quite elevated; the tallest is the Tupungato mountain at .
The government does not usually report it as being a local pollution source, as it is just outside the reporting area of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, being  from downtown.
Meanwhile, high-income families moved into the foothills and called Barrio Alto, increasing the population of Las Condes and giving rise to new communes like Vitacura and Lo Barnechea.
Reshaping the international airport by 2012 and expansion of rail services is expected, including several projects currently under evaluation as a network of trams in Las Condes, close to trains Lampa and Padre Hurtado (Melitrén) and a high-speed train that connects the capital to Valparaíso and Viña del Mar.
further east is the Cordillera of the Andes with its mountain ranges and volcanoes, many of which exceed  and in which some glaciers are present.
At the southern border lies the ''Angostura de Paine'', an elongated spur of the Andes that almost reaches the coast.
With the start of the transition in 1990, the city of Santiago and surpassed the four million inhabitants, preferably living in the south: La Florida was followed in population by Puente Alto and Maipú.
The club's wins include 30 national titles, 10 Copa Chile successes, and champions of the Copa Libertadores tournament in 1991, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament.
The panel of 21 judges is the highest judicial power in Chile.
It includes several major universities, and has developed a modern transportation infrastructure, including a free flow toll-based, partly underground urban freeway system and the Metro de Santiago, South America's most extensive subway system.
These mountains contribute to a considerable smog problem, particularly during winter.
Following the edge of the Mapocho River, Costanera Norte was built to link the northeast of the capital to the airport and the downtown area.
Santiago is Chile's retail capital.
Santiago was left unprotected.
The main road is the Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins, better known as Alameda Avenue, which runs northeast and southwest.
On 11 September 1541, the city was destroyed by the natives, but the 55 Spanish Garrison managed to defend the fort.
Under construction at the time, the station would be opened permanently in 1884.
''Colectivos'' are shared taxicabs that carry passengers along a specific route for a fixed fee.
At the Mapocho river southern side, the Parque Forestal was created and new buildings as the Museum of Fine Arts, the National Internship and the National Library were opened.
In 1966 the Santiago Metropolitan Park was established in the Cerro San Cristóbal and MINVU began eradicating shanty towns and the construction of new homes and the San Borja, near which was built the Edificio Diego Portales.
* Teatro Municipal (Municipal Theatre of Santiago),the principal opera house of the country.
The growth of Santiago has undergone several changes over the course of its history.
Other non-free flow toll roads connecting Santiago to other cities, include: Rutas del Pacífico (Ruta 68), the continuation of the ''Alameda'' Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Avenue to the west, provides direct access to Valparaíso and Viña del Mar; Autopista del Sol (Ruta 78), connects Melipilla and the port of San Antonio with the capital; Autopista Ruta del Maipo (a.k.a.
LATAM Airlines operate the non-stop flights to Auckland, New Zealand and these flights continue to Sydney.
* Palacio de La Moneda, government palace
