The state was governed by the Brooke family in the 19th and 20th centuries.
The ports of Kuching and Sibu are built some distance from the coast on rivers.
The Rhinoceros hornbill is the state bird of Sarawak.
Sarawak Cultural Village is located at the foot of Mount Santubong, Kuching.
They consist of several sub-ethnic groups such as the Jagoi, Biatah, and Selakau, and speak mutually unintelligible dialects.
Mount Murud is the highest point in Sarawak.
There are also district hospitals, public health clinics, 1Malaysia clinics, and rural clinics.
Sarawak was recognised as an independent state by the United States in 1850 and the United Kingdom in 1864.
Some typical Malay villages are located along the riverside near Fort Margherita, behind the Kuching Mosque, and at the foot of Mount Santubong.
The Sarawak Biodiversity Centre was set up in 1997 for the conservation, protection, and sustainable development of biodiversity in the state.
The Bintulu seaport is under the jurisdiction of the Malaysian federal government.
The Orang Ulu have about 30 different language dialects.
Today, English is used in the courts, state legislative assembly, and certain government agencies in Sarawak.
Between February and April 1962, the commission met more than 4,000 people and received 2,200 memoranda from various groups.
They worked as fishermen, boat-builders, and craftsmen.
The Malaysian federation had drawn opposition from the Philippines, Indonesia, Brunei People's Party, and Clandestine Communist Organisation (CCO).
Meanwhile, the interior hinterland of Sarawak was mainly dominated by tribal wars fought by Iban, Kayan, and Kenyah people who were aggressive in their territorial expansions.
In 1970 the first Sarawak state election was held, with members of the Council Negri (now Sarawak State Legislative Assembly) being directly elected by the voters.
Ethnic groups also celebrate their own festivals.
It forms two percent of the total forested area in Sarawak, most commonly found in the estuarine areas of Kuching, Sarikei, and Limbang.
The Regional Corridor Development Authority (RECODA) is the government agency responsible for managing SCORE.
The Rural Water Supply Department manages the water supply for the remaining areas.
Birdwatching is a common activity in various national parks such as Gunung Mulu National Park, Lambir Hills National Park, and Similajau National Park.
Unemployment rate also slipped from 4.6 percent (2010) to 3.1 percent (2014).
The majority of Orang Ulu are Christians.
Sarawak is situated in northwest Borneo, bordering the state of Sabah to the northeast, Kalimantan, the Indonesian portion of Borneo, to the south, and surrounding the independent state of Brunei.
The Penan people were the last indigenous group to abandon their nomadic way of life in the jungle.
Total exports as a percentage of GDP was more than 100 percent in 2013 while total trade exceeds 130 percent.
Sarawak is the only state in Malaysia where Christians outnumber Muslims.
The annual rainfall varies between  and , spanning 220 days a year.
Sarawak was divided into three provinces, namely: Kuching-shu, Sibu-shu, and Miri-shu, each under their respective Japanese Provincial Governor.
Intelligence gathered from the operations helped Allied forces (headed by Australia) to reconquer Borneo in May 1945 through Operation Oboe Six.
Sarawak has the highest number of Ibans in Borneo, numbering 745,400 people.
However, a considerable number of Chinese moved from urban areas into the less accessible interior to lessen contact with the Japanese.
The CCO tried to realise a communist state in Sarawak through constitutional means but during the confrontation period, it resorted to armed struggle against the government.
Several plant species have been studied for their medicinal properties.
Since 1983 a Dayak-based party, the SNAP, has fragmented into several splinter parties due to recurrent leadership crises.
The average population growth rate per year from 2000 to 2010 was 1.8 percent.
Meanwhile, there are several SarawakKalimantan border issues yet to be settled with Indonesia.
Other archaeological sites in Sarawak include the Kapit, Song, Serian, and Bau districts.
Total Tourism Receipts, billions (RM)
The oldest schools that are established in Sarawak are: St. Thomas's School Kuching (1848),  St Mary's School Kuching (1848), and St Joseph's School Kuching (1882).
Mail delivery coverage in rural areas was 60 percent in 2015.
Other smaller airports such as Sibu Airport, Bintulu Airport, Mukah Airport, Marudi Airport, Mulu Airport, and Limbang Airport provide services to Kuala Lumpur and other domestic destinations in Sarawak.
Unlike other states in West Malaysia, Sarawak is divided into divisions rather than districts.
Other industries are manufacturing, energy, and tourism.
However, he was ousted in 1966 by Tawi Sli (of the PESAKA) with the help of the Malaysian federal government, causing the 1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis.
Several types of stone that can be found in central and northern Sarawak are shale, sandstone, and chert.
Following international criticism of the logging industry in Sarawak, the state government decided to downsize the Sarawak Forest Department and created the Sarawak Forestry Corporation in 1995.
The Brooke dynasty ruled Sarawak for a hundred years as "White Rajahs".
On 22 July 1963, Sarawak was granted self-government by the British.
Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation (OCBC Bank) was the first foreign bank to open its branches in Sarawak in 1955.
The main contributors in the manufacturing industry are food and beverages, wood-based and rattan products, basic metal products, and petrochemical products.
In the same year, the North Kalimantan Communist Party (NKCP) was formed, which mounted guerilla warfare against the newly elected Sarawak state government.
The Brookes subsequently built a new government house by the Sarawak River at Kuching which is presently known as the Astana.
Geological formation of the central and northern regions started during the late Cretaceous period.
The earliest Christian missionaries in Sarawak were propagated by Church of England (Anglicans) in 1848, followed by Roman Catholics a few years later, and Methodists in 1903.
Most of them come from the coastal town of Mukah.
Sarawak has the power to control the entry and residence of non-Sarawakians and non-Sabahans.
Miri additionally has the most hours of sunshine (more than six hours a day), while other areas receive sunshine for five to six hours a day.
Sarawak receives special grants from the federal government and charges its own sales tax.
Sarawak has abundant natural resources, and its economy is strongly export-oriented, mainly in oil and gas, timber, and oil palm.
Written by Ahmad Syawal Abdul Hamid, it is also the first novel of Malaysia.
They are known for their silver and brass crafts, wood carvings, and textiles.
Miri City Day is also held in conjunction with Miri May Fest every year.
The High Court in Sarawak is independent of the High Court in Peninsular Malaysia.
The issue of human rights of the Penan and deforestation in Sarawak became an international environmental issue when Swiss activist Bruno Manser entered Sarawak from 1984 until 2000.
The expansion of Sarawak was completed in 1905 when Lawas was ceded to the Brooke government.
Beside empowering the state, Sarawak Energy also exports electric to neighbouring West Kalimantan in Indonesia.
Bus service is also available for travel to the neighbouring areas of Sabah, Brunei, and Pontianak (Indonesia).
1973 saw the birth of Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu (PBB) following a merger of several parties.
Kerangas forest occupies five percent of the total forest area, while Dipterocarpaceae forests occupy mountainous areas.
English and Malay are the only two official languages of the state; there is no official religion.
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) exports accounted for more than half of the state's total exports while crude petroleum exports accounted for 20.8 percent.
In 2015 the total teaching workforce in Sarawak was 40,593.
Sarawak claimed the James Shoal (Beting Serupai) and Luconia Shoals (Beting Raja Jarum/Patinggi Ali) as part of its exclusive economic zone (EEZ).
Sarawak has a considerable number of indigenous students enrolled in Chinese schools.
Sarawak was immediately placed under British Military Administration until April 1946.
Meanwhile, A. M. Azahari, leader of the Brunei People's Party, instigated the Brunei Revolt in December 1962 to prevent Brunei from joining the Malaysian federation.
Cultural performances are also presented here.
The first foragers visited the West Mouth of Niah Caves (located  southwest of Miri) 40,000 years ago when Borneo was connected to the mainland of Southeast Asia.
Brooke ruled the area and expanded the territory northwards until his death in 1868.
During World War II, the state was occupied by the Japanese for three years before being ceded as a British Crown Colony in 1946.
The group was succeeded by the Sarawak Liberation League (SLL) in 1954 (also known as the CCO by government sources).
Western capitalists were restricted from entering the state while Christian missionaries were tolerated.
Meanwhile, the Ibans and other Dayak people were hired as militia.
Meanwhile, Japanese forces decided to seize British Borneo to guard their eastern flank in the Malayan Campaign and to facilitate their invasion of Sumatra and West Java.
As of 2014, 82 percent of the rural areas have a fresh water supply.
Sarawak also sent teams representing Malaysia at the Southeast Asian Games.
Foreign Arrivals (millions)
Sarawak is separated from Kalimantan Borneo by ranges of high hills and mountains that are part of the central mountain range of Borneo.
It was first introduced to the world during Asian Traditional Performing Arts (ATPA) in Japan in 1976.
Sarawak also derive its electrical energy from coal fired power plant and thermal power station using Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).
In 1973, Bong surrendered to chief minister Abdul Rahman Ya'kub; this significantly reduced the strength of the communist party.
An anti-Brooke faction at the Brunei Court was defeated in 1860 at Mukah.
The Sarawak State Museum houses a collection of artefacts such as pottery, textiles, and woodcarving tools from various ethnic tribes in Sarawak, and also ethnographic materials of local cultures.
The regiment is famed for its jungle tracking skills.
Like the Ibans, their traditional settlements are longhouses, but they also construct ''baruk'' roundhouses for community meetings.
The daily was rebooted as the ''New Sarawak Tribune'' in 2010.
The state-owned LAKU Management SdnBhd manages the water supply for Miri, Bintulu, and Limbang.
The term is often used in a nationalistic context.
The northeast monsoon occurs between November and February, causing heavy rainfall; the southwest monsoon sees less rainfall.
As a result, a series of forts were built around Kuching to consolidate the Rajah's power.
Beginning in March 1945, Allied commanders were parachuted into Borneo jungles and established several bases in Sarawak under an operation codenamed "Semut".
The head of the Sarawak state is the Yang di-Pertua Negeri (also known as TYT or State Governor), a position largely symbolic in nature, appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (king) of Malaysia.
Anthony Brooke continued to claim sovereignty as Rajah of Sarawak even after Sarawak became a British Crown colony on 1 July 1946.
Other cities and towns in Sarawak include Miri, Sibu, and Bintulu.
Hospital Sentosa is the only mental hospital in Sarawak.
However, Weng, who had directed the CCO from China since the mid-1960s, called for armed struggle against the government, which after 1974 continued in the Rajang Delta.
Sarawak exhibits notable diversity in ethnicity, culture, and language.
After ten weeks of fighting in Dutch Borneo, the Allied forces surrendered on 1 April 1942.
The TYT appoints the chief minister as the head of government.
Major cities and towns in Sarawak provide public transportation services such as buses, taxis, and limousines.
Chinese traders first came to Sarawak in the 6th century AD.
The major trees found here include: bako (''Rhizophora''), nipah palm (''Nypa fruticans''), and nibong (''Oncosperma tigillarium'').
According to Wetlands International, 10 percent of all Sarawak forests and 33 percent of peat swamp forests were cleared between 2005 and 2010, which is 3.5 times higher than the total rate of deforestation in Asia and 11.7 times more than peat swamp deforestation in Asia.
Sarawak sent its own teams to participate in the 1958 and 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, and 1962 Asian Games before its athletes started representing Malaysia after 1963.
It was played for Queen Elizabeth II during her official visit to Sarawak in 1972.
Both James and Charles Brooke signed treaties with Brunei as a strategy to expand the territorial boundaries of Sarawak.
The Sarawak Tourism Board is responsible for tourism promotion in the state under the purview of the Sarawak Ministry of Tourism.
In 1978, the Democratic Action Party (DAP) was the first West Malaysia-based party to open its branches in Sarawak.
The government system is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system and has the earliest state legislature system in Malaysia.
Sarawak and Sabah are the only two states in Malaysia that declare Good Friday a public holiday.
For villages located outside the operational areas of health clinics, a flying doctor service (FDS) is available once a month.
The official explanation of the word "Sarawak" is that it is derived from the Sarawak Malay word ''serawak'', which means antimony.
In 2012 Sarawak had 63 post offices, 40 mini-post offices, and five mobile post services.
Each ethnic group has its own delicacies with different styles of preparing, cooking, and eating food.
This caused the NKCP to reopen negotiations with the Sarawak government, which led to a peace agreement on 17 October 1990.
Other longhouses include: Iban longhouses in Kapit, Bidayuh longhouses in Kuching, Kelabit longhouses in Bario, Lun Bawang longhouses in Ba'kelalan, and Melanau wooden houses in Sibu.
Stephen Kalong Ningkan (of the SNAP) was the first Chief Minister of Sarawak from 1963 to 1966 following his landslide victory in local council elections.
The Sarawak capital of Kuching has been mentioned as one of the retirement destinations in Malaysia.
However, this case has served as a precedent, leading to more NCR rights being upheld by the high court in the following years.
Well-known musical instruments from the Orang Ulu are the Kayans' sapeh and Kenyah's sampe' and Lun Bawang's bamboo band.
The ''Sarawak Gazette'' was first published by the Brooke government in 1870.
The entire central region of Sarawak is covered under SCORE and is to include major areas such as Samalaju (near Bintulu), Tanjung Manis, and Mukah.
Sarawak saw a reduction in poverty rate from 56.5 percent (1975) to less than 1 percent (2015).
Following the formation of Malaysia, the regiment was absorbed into the Malaysian military forces and is now known as the Royal Ranger Regiment.
Each division is headed by one resident.
Sarawak uses a dual carriageway with the left-hand traffic rule.
Sarawak State Library (also known as PUSTAKA) is the largest library in the state.
On 27 May 1961, Tunku Abdul Rahman, the prime minister of the Federation of Malaya, announced a plan to form a greater federation together with Singapore, Sarawak, Sabah and Brunei, to be called Malaysia.
Tourism plays a major role in the economy of the state contributing 9.3 percent of the state's GDP in 2015.
In contrast, foreign media asserted that Sarawak has lost 90 percent of its forest cover with a mere 3 percent to 5 percent cover left.
A Japanese invasion force led by Kiyotake Kawaguchi landed in Miri on 16 December 1941 (eight days into the Malayan Campaign) and conquered Kuching on 24 December 1941.
Following the discovery of antimony ore in the region now known as Kuching, Pangeran Indera Mahkota (a representative of the Sultan of Brunei) began to develop the area between 1824 and 1830.
This election also marked the beginning of ethnic Melanau domination in Sarawak politics by Abdul Rahman Ya'kub and Abdul Taib Mahmud.
Sarawak has 150,000 registered migrant workers working as domestic workers or in plantation, manufacturing, construction, services and agriculture.
The state is also the habitat of endangered animals, including the borneo pygmy elephant, proboscis monkey, orangutans and rhinoceroses.
However, the federation was opposed by Indonesia, and this led to the three-year Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation.
The total capacity of the state power generation is expected to reach 7,000MW by 2025.
The combined throughput of the four primary ports was 61.04million freight weight tonnes (FWT) in 2013.
At the same time, GDP per capita has jumped from RM 688 (US$223.6) to RM 46,000 (US$13,800), soaring by 60 times.
The Malay language, known as ''Bahasa Sarawak'' (or Sarawak Malay), is the main language among the Sarawak Malays and other indigenous tribes.
They decorate their longhouses with murals and woodcarvings.
However, Tunku interpreted the figures as 80 percent support for the federation.
The capital city, Kuching, is the economic centre of the state and the seat of the Sarawak state government.
This group of people generally enjoy special privileges in education, jobs, finance, and political positions.
Deforestation has affected the life of indigenous tribes, especially the Penan, whose livelihood is heavily dependent on forest produce.
In the same year, there were 2,237 doctors in Sarawak, with 1,759 serving in public sector and 478 in the private sector.
James Brooke escaped and organised a bigger army together with Charles Brooke and his Malayo-Iban supporters.
The then chief minister Abdul Taib Mahmud claimed that the state has 70 percent forest cover in 2011 and 48 percent in 2012.
The Bidayuh mainly stayed in the southern part of Sarawak such as Lundu, Bau, Serian, and the Padawan municipality.
Sarawak consumer price index (CPI) is highly correlated with Malaysian CPI, with inflation averaging between 2.5 and 3.0 percent from 2009 until 2013 with a high in 2008 (10.0 percent) and a low in 2009 (-4.0 percent).
Other minor religions in Sarawak are Baha'i, Hinduism, Sikhism, and animism.
Most of the Melanau tribe also practise Islam.
In Kuching, most of the Chinese settled near the Sarawak River, an area which would later form Chinatown.
Besides, Vyner Brooke's wife, Sylvia Brett, also tried to discredit Anthony Brooke while trying to install her own daughter to the throne.
Sarawak has an equatorial climate with tropical rainforests and abundant animal and plant species.
Iban settlements are usually in the form of a longhouse.
In 1846 Brooke effectively became the Rajah of Sarawak and founded the White Rajah Dynasty of Sarawak after the death of Pangeran Muda Hashim.
The term Dayak is commonly used to refer to the Iban people and the Bidayuh.
From 2000 to 2009 Sarawak had an average annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate of 5.0 percent.
File:Hong San Si Temple 03.jpg|Hong San Si Temple
The Brooke dynasty also encouraged the immigration of Chinese merchants for economic development in the state, especially in the mining and agricultural sectors.
Sarawak has the third highest GDP per capita RM 44,437(US$1331.1) in Malaysia; after Kuala Lumpur and Labuan.
The Sarawak Hospice Society was set up in 1998 to promote hospice care in home settings.
Thousands of CCO members went into Kalimantan and underwent training with the Communist Party of Indonesia.
While the youngest igneous rock in this region is andesite, found at Sematan.
Other notable rebellions that were successfully quashed by the Brookes include those led by an Iban leader Rentap (18531863), and a Malay leader named Syarif Masahor (18601862).
However, since the initiation of Tanjung Manis Industrial Port (TIMP) further downriver, the total throughput of Sibu port has declined.
Headhunting was once an important tradition for the Ibans; the custom is no longer observed.
Currently, the state is divided into 12 divisions:
Since 2013, the proposed Baram Dam project has been delayed due to ongoing protests from local indigenous tribes.
The Sarawak state government has enacted several laws to protect its forests and endangered wildlife species, including the Forests Ordinance 1958, Wild Life Protection Ordinance 1998, and Sarawak Natural Parks and Nature Reserves Ordinance.
Sarawak State Museum is the oldest museum in Borneo.
Sarawak, together with North Borneo and Brunei, formed a single administrative unit named ''Kita Boruneo'' (Northern Borneo) under the Japanese 37th Army headquartered in Kuching.
The majority of Sarawak Chinese are made up from Buddhists and Christians.
As of the 2015 Malaysian census, the population of Sarawak was 2,636,000, making it the fourth most populous state in Malaysia.
Sarawak overall literacy rate was 25 percent in 1960.
Key Tourism Indicators
However, not all Muslims in Sarawak are Malays.
Batu Lintang Teachers' Training College is the third oldest of its kind in Malaysia.
The world's largest underground chamber, the Sarawak Chamber, is located inside the Gunung Mulu National Park.
The first political party, the Sarawak United Peoples' Party (SUPP), was established in 1959, followed by the Parti Negara Sarawak (PANAS) (in 1960) and the Sarawak National Party (SNAP) (in 1961).
Many Muslims come from the Malay, Melanau, and Kayan ethnic groups.
Religious groups are free to hold processions in major towns and cities during festivals.
They are known for several musical instruments such as gigantic drums and a bamboo percussion instrument known as the ''pratuakng''.
However, during the Brooke era, Iban society was restructured into formal offices such as ''tuai rumah'' (headman), ''penghulu'' (regional chief), and ''temenggong'' (paramount chief).
Lane decided to retreat to Singkawang in Dutch Borneo bordering Sarawak.
Claiming that the Brunei revolt was solid evidence of opposition to the Malaysian federation, Indonesian President Sukarno ordered a military confrontation with Malaysia, sending armed volunteers and later military forces into Sarawak.
