The city is connected to all the other major cities by highway or national road like Zenica, Banja Luka, Tuzla, Mostar, Goražde and Foča.
Local communities have a small role in city government and are intended as a way for ordinary citizens to get involved in city government.
The Miljacka river is one of the city's chief geographic features.
"Damascus of the North".
Due to damage the staff and documents were moved to a nearby ground level office to resume the work.
Sarajevo is and has historically been one of the most important musical enclaves in the region.
The cost of reconstruction is supported 80% by the Greek Government
Architecture in Sarajevo quickly developed into a wide range of styles and buildings.
Radio Free Europe, as well as several American and Western European stations are available.
The city has an urban area of .
After the war, Sarajevo was the capital of the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Sarajevo has hosted travellers for centuries, because it was an important trading center during the Ottoman and Austria-Hungarian empires.
Koševo Park, Sarajevo.JPG|Koševo Park
Glavna posta (2991301799).jpg|Sarajevo Main Post office
This type of music began with bands like Indexi, and singer/songwriter Kemal Monteno.
Sarajevo beat out Sapporo, Japan; and Falun/Göteborg, Sweden to host the the Olympic games.
River Bosna at Vrelo Bosne Park in Sarajevo.JPG|River Bosna at ''Vrelo Bosne'' Park
The Axis powers created the Independent State of Croatia and included Sarajevo in its territory.
Sarajevo_Railway-Station_2011-10-01_(3).JPG|Sarajevo train station in 2011
Sarajevo ŽFBH 441-047 2011-10-01.JPG|ŽFBH 441-047 at Sarajevo train station
By all indications, Tornik was a very small marketplace surrounded by a proportionally small village, and was not considered very important by Ragusan merchants.
In response, many residents of Sarajevo organized riots against the Serbs, killing two and destroying their property.
The largest amount of imported goods come from Germany, at 15.8%.
* Sarajevo Graduate School of Business
Bosnia Sitting Volleyball Championships
Songwriters and musicians such as Himzo Polovina, Safet Isović, Zaim Imamović, Zehra Deović, Halid Bešlić, Hanka Paldum, Nada Mamula, Meho Puzić and many more composed and wrote some of their most important pieces in the city.
In WWII, Sarajevo was part of Ustashe's Independent State of Croatia, where many Serbs and Jews were killed.
The city was bombed by the Allies from 1943 to 1944.
The trans-European highway, Corridor 5C, runs through Sarajevo connecting it to Budapest in the north, and Ploče at the Adriatic sea in the south.
In 2019, Sarajevo and East Sarajevo will host the European Youth Olympic Winter Festival (EYOWF).
* American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Sarajevo is the capital of the country of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its sub-entity, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as of the Sarajevo Canton.
The council has 28 members, including a council speaker, two deputies, and a secretary.
It’s nestled between Titova, Koševo, Džidžikovac, Tina Ujevića and Trampina Streets and in the lower part there is a monument dedicated to the Children of Sarajevo.
The Republic Government invested heavily in Sarajevo, building many new residential blocks in Novi Grad Municipality and Novo Sarajevo Municipality, while simultaneously developing the city's industry and transforming Sarajevo into a modern city.
''Oslobođenje'' (Liberation), founded in 1943, is Sarajevo's longest running continuously circulating newspaper and the only one to survive the war.
Zgrade Momo i Uzeir, Sarajevo.jpg|UNITIC World Trade Towers
The earliest is ''Šeher'', which is the term Isa-Beg Ishaković used to describe the town he was going to build.
By mid-summer 1942, around 20,000 Serbs found refuge in Sarajevo from Ustaše terror.
The growth rate in 2012 is expected to be around 10%.
, the population of the city's four municipalities was estimated to be 411,161, whereas the Sarajevo Canton population was estimated at 578,757.
''Saray'' is a common word in Turkish for a ''palace'' or ''mansion'' (from Persian word  ''sarāy'', means "house, palace").
Sarajevo became known for its large marketplace and numerous mosques, which by the middle of the 16th century numbered more than 100.
The travel guide series, ''Lonely Planet'', has named Sarajevo as the 43rd best city in the world, and in December 2009 listed Sarajevo as one of the top ten cities to visit in 2010.
The cloudiest month is December (75% average cloud cover) while the clearest is August (37%).
The news channel covers Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro and the surrounding Balkan states.
Various documents note a place called ''Tornik'' in the region.
Sarajevo-based architect, Muzafer Osmanagić, in order to solve traffic congestion in Sarajevo, has proposed a study called "Eco Energy 2010–2015", idealizing a subway system underneath the bed of the river Miljacka.
* University of Sarajevo
Today, Vrhbosna is a name for a small section of north-eastern Sarajevo.
The city government also has a judicial branch based on the post-transitional judicial system as outlined by the High Representative's "High Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils".
In 2002 the total export for the greater Sarajevo region was worth about 259,569,000KM.
Up until March 2012, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina invested around 600 million Euro in the A1.
Most of Sarajevo's exports (28.2%) head to Germany, with Great Britain following behind at 16.8% and Serbia and Montenegro thirds with 12.8%.
It had long been a multicultural city, and often went by the nickname of "Europe's Jerusalem".
Sarajevo is after Ljubljana and Zagreb the richest city in former Yugoslavia and one of the richest cities in the Balkans.
In 2014 the sections Sarajevo-Zenica and Sarajevo-Tarcin were completed including the Sarajevo Beltway ring road.
By 1660, the population of Sarajevo was estimated to be over 80,000.
According to academic Fran Markowitz there is a number of "administrative apparatuses and public pressures that push people who might prefer to identify as flexible, multiply constituted hybrids or with one of the now unnamed minority groups into one of the three Bosniac-Croat-Serb constituent nations".
By 1807, it had only some 60,000 residents.
Each operate their own municipal government, united they form one city government with its own constitution.
Sarajevo has a wide tourist industry and a fast expanding service sector thanks to the strong annual growth in tourist arrivals.
Though a city named ''Vrhbosna'' existed, the exact settlement in Sarajevo at this time is debated.
The existing terminal will be expanded by approximately .
The festival takes place at the Bosnian Cultural Center (aka "Main Stage"), just down the street from the SFF, at the Sarajevo Youth Stage Theater (aka "Strange Fruits Stage"), at the Dom Vojske Federacije (aka "Solo Stage"), and at the CDA (aka "Groove Stage").
Exterior house - Sarajevo Tunnel Museum (2).jpg|Sarajevo Tunnel Museum
Saborna crkva u Sarajevu noću.jpg|Orthodox Cathedral
Sarajevo has had many nicknames.
Olimpijski Bazen Otoka
Many small independent radio stations exist, including established stations such as Radio M, Radio Stari Grad (Radio Old Town), Studentski eFM Radio, Radio 202, Radio BIR, and RSG.
Sarajevo Beltway was already finished in 2005.
Once, the East Bosnian railway connected Sarajevo to Belgrade.
'''Sarajevo''' (names in other languages) is the capital and largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a population of 275,524.
Between 2015 and 2017 Sarajevo will reconstruct the whole tram line from Marijin Dvor to Ilidža with estimated costs of 25 million KM.
These had been led by Husein Gradaščević.
Sarajevo has only two daily international connections to Zagreb and Ploče.
Sarajevo was founded by the Ottoman Empire in the 1450s upon its conquest of the region, with 1461 used as the city's founding date.
An additional 56,000 people were wounded, including nearly 15,000 children.
Consequently, the different levels of government established strong cultural protection laws and institutions.
There are also connections between Sarajevo and all major cities within Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since 2007, the Sarajevo Marathon is being organized in late September.
As political conditions changed, Sarajevo became the site of warfare.
Bodies charged with cultural preservation in Sarajevo include the Institute for the Protection of the Cultural, Historical and Natural Heritage of Bosnia and Herzegovina (and their Sarajevo Canton counterpart), and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Commission to Preserve National Monuments.
Academy of fine art and Festina lente.jpg|The Academy of Fine Arts was originally built to serve as an Evangelical Church in 1899.
The city also hosts the Sarajevo National Theater, established in 1919, as well as East West Theatre Company and the Sarajevo Youth Theatre.
During World War II the Kingdom of Yugoslavia's army was overrun by German and Italian forces.
During the Middle Ages Sarajevo was part of the Bosnian province of Vrhbosna near the traditional center of the Kingdom of Bosnia.
Tourism in Sarajevo is chiefly focused on historical, religious, cultural sites and winter sports.
Other stations based in the city include NRTV "Studio 99", NTV Hayat, TV 1, Open Broadcast Network, TV Kantona Sarajevo and Televizija Alfa.
In 2011, Sarajevo was nominated to be the European Capital of Culture in 2014 and will be hosting the European Youth Olympic Festival in 2019.
As the largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo is the main center of the country's media.
The rebellion failed and for several more decades the Ottoman state remained in control of Bosnia.
Indeed, Sarajevo Canton generates almost 25% of the country's GDP.
Yugoslavia won one medal, a silver in men's giant slalom awarded to Jure Franko.
''Novi Plamen'', a monthly magazine, is the most left-wing publication currently.
Sarajevo is currently undergoing a major infrastructure renewal; many highways and streets are being repaved, the tram system is undergoing modernization, and new bridges and roads are under construction.
Today, a major city street is named ''Zmaj od Bosne'' (Dragon of Bosnia) in his honor.
The Sarajevo metropolitan area, including Sarajevo, East Sarajevo and surrounding municipalities, is home to 463,992 inhabitants.
The Alija Izetbegović Museum was opened on 19 October 2007 and is located in the old town fort, more specifically in the Vratnik Kapija towers Ploča and Širokac.
The mosque was named "Careva Džamija" (the Tsar's Mosque) in honor of the Sultan Mehmed II.
Architects and engineers wanting to help rebuild Sarajevo as a modern European capital rushed to the city.
Bosnia and Herzegovina Waterpolo League
Butmirska vaza.jpg|Neolithic period Butmir vase
Forty years later, it hosted the 1984 Winter Olympics.
Sarajevo Gazi-Husrev-Beg-Basar01.jpg|The Gazi-Husrev-Beg-Bazaar.
Much of the city's contemporary central municipality (Centar) was constructed during this period.
It is the only remaining illustrated Sephardic Haggadah in the world.
The city itself has its fair share of hilly terrain, as evidenced by the many steeply inclined streets and residences seemingly perched on the hillsides.
In 1981 Sarajevo's GDP per capita was 133% of the Yugoslav average.
Disciples of the notable saints Cyril and Methodius stopped by the region, founding a church at ''Vrelobosna''.
Sports-related tourism uses the legacy facilities of the 1984 Winter Olympics, especially the skiing facilities on the nearby mountains of Bjelašnica, Igman, Jahorina, Trebević, and Treskavica.
Baščaršija was built becoming an old bazaar and a historical and cultural center of the city in the 15th century when Isa-Beg Isaković founded the town .
Many of the Olympic facilities survived the war or were reconstructed, including Olympic Hall Zetra and Asim Ferhatović Stadion.
In 1914, it was the site of the assassination of the Archduke of Austria that sparked World War I.
The name Sarajevo is derived from Turkish ''saray ovası'', meaning ''the field around saray''.
In the 1940s the University of Sarajevo became the city's first secular higher education institute, effectively building upon the foundations established by the Saraybosna Hanıka in 1531.
Sarajevo is also famous for its city lookouts; including an observation deck on Avaz Twist Tower, Park Prinčeva restaurant, Vidikovac lookout (Mt.
It is a Turkish word meaning an advanced city of key importance (''şehir'') which in turn comes from  ''shahr'' (city).
The first Ottoman governor of Bosnia, Isa-Beg Ishaković, transformed the cluster of villages into a city and state capital by building a number of key structures, including a mosque, a closed marketplace, a public bath, a hostel, and of course the governor's castle ("Saray") which gave the city its present name.
With the improvements Sarajevo quickly grew into the largest city in the region.
The Romans never built up the region of modern-day Bosnia, but the Roman colony of Aquae Sulphurae was located near the top of present-day Ilidža, and was the most important settlement of the time.
Sarajevo's 600 years of history, influenced by both Western and Eastern empires, makes it a tourist attraction with splendid variations.
Sarajevo is the leading political, social and cultural center of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a prominent center of culture in the Balkans, with its region-wide influence in entertainment, media, fashion, and the arts.
Opened on New Year's Day in 1885, it was the testing line for the tram in Vienna and the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and operated by horses.
Sarajevo also greatly influenced the pop scene of Yugoslavia with musicians like Dino Merlin, Hari Mata Hari, Tifa, Kemal Monteno, Željko Bebek, and many more.
The valley itself once formed a vast expanse of greenery, but gave way to urban expansion and development in the post-World War II era.
One of the earliest findings of settlement in the Sarajevo area is that of the Neolithic Butmir culture.
After the red resin was placed, it left a floral pattern which led to it being dubbed a Sarajevo Rose.
From 2 May 1992, the Serbs blockaded the city.
Sarajevo Bijela Tabija.JPG|White fortress of the old Vratnik Town
In 1885, Sarajevo was the first city in Europe and the second city in the world to have a full-time electric tram network running through the city, following San Francisco.
Football (soccer) is popular in Sarajevo; the city hosts ''FK Sarajevo'' and ''FK Željezničar'', which both compete in European and international cups and tournaments and are have a very large trophy cabinet in the former Yugoslavia as well as independent Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Sarajevo is located near the geometric center of the triangular-shaped Bosnia-Herzegovina and within the historical region of Bosnia proper.
Since 2003, BH Telecom Indoors is an annual tennis tournament in Sarajevo.
The highway is built by the government and should cost 3.5 billion Euro.
The two main roads are Titova Ulica (Street of Marshal Tito) and the east-west Zmaj od Bosne (Dragon of Bosnia) highway (E761).
The Radiotelevision of Bosnia-Herzegovina is Sarajevo's public television station, one of three in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Evstafiev-sarajevo-building-burns.jpg|Parliament building in flames May 1992
The upgraded airport will also be directly linked to the commercial retail center Sarajevo Airport Center, making it easier for tourists and travellers to spend their time before flight boarding shopping and enjoying the many amenities that will be offered.
Sarajevo is also the home of the East West Theatre Company, the only independent theater company in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the time of the 1991 census, 49.2 per cent of the city's population of 527,049 were Bosniaks, 29.8 percent Serbs, 10.7 percent Yugoslavs, 6.6 percent Croats and 3.6 percent other ethnicities (Jews, Romas, etc.).
Each of these levels of government has their parliament or council, as well as judicial courts, in the city.
They are based on key neighborhoods in the city.
Other scholars say that ''Vrhbosna'' was a major city located at the site of modern-day Sarajevo.
According to these estimates, the Novo Sarajevo municipality is the most densely populated part of Sarajevo with about , while the least densely populated is the Stari Grad, with .
The main railroad station in Sarajevo is located in the north-central area of the city.
Following a German bombing campaign, Sarajevo was captured on 15 April 1941 by the 16th Motorized infantry Division.
Hastahana skate park is a popular place to relax in the Austro-Hungarian neighborhood of Marijin Dvor.
Although the Bosnia Vilayet ''de jure'' remained part of the Ottoman Empire, it was ''de facto'' governed as an integral part of Austria-Hungary with the Ottomans having no say in its day-to-day governance.
Sarajevo industries now include tobacco products, furniture, hosiery, automobiles, and communication equipment.
Numerous other fires weakened the city, which was later rebuilt but never fully recovered from the destruction.
Sarajevo grew rapidly as it became an important regional industrial center in Yugoslavia.
After his men had looted thoroughly, they set the city on fire and destroyed nearly all of it in one day.
being the coldest month of the year and July ( avg.)
Nobel Prize-winner Ivo Andrić attended high school in Sarajevo for two years.
Other notable soccer clubs are ''FK Olimpik'' and ''SAŠK''.
A regional center in education, the city is also home to the Balkans' first institution of tertiary education in the form of an Islamic polytechnic called the Saraybosna Osmanlı Medrese, today part of the University of Sarajevo.
The executive branch () consists of a mayor, with two deputies and a cabinet.
Sarajevo often holds international events and competitions in sports such as tennis and kickboxing.
The Sarajevo Film Festival has been hosted at the National Theater, with screenings at the Open-air theater Metalac and the Bosnian Cultural Center, all located in downtown Sarajevo and has been attended by celebrities such as Angelina Jolie, Brad Pitt, Emile Hirsch, Orlando Bloom, Daniel Craig, Danny Glover, John Malkovich, Morgan Freeman, Steve Buscemi, Bono Vox (Bono holds dual Bosnian and Irish citizenship and is an honorary citizen of Sarajevo), Nick Cave, Coolio, Stephen Frears, Mickey Rourke, Michael Moore, Gérard Depardieu, Darren Aronofsky, Sophie Okonedo, Gillian Anderson, Kevin Spacey, Willem Dafoe, Eric Cantona and many more.
As Sarajevo developed, numerous nicknames came from comparisons to other cities in the Islamic world, i.e.
The Sarajevo Winter Festival, Sarajevo Jazz Festival and Sarajevo International Music Festival are well-known, as is the Baščaršija Nights festival, a month-long showcase of local culture, music, and dance.
Husrev-beg greatly shaped the physical city, as most of what is now the Old Town was built during his reign.
Thousands of Sarajevans lost their lives under the constant bombardment and sniper shooting at civilians by the Serb forces during the siege, the longest siege of a capital city in the history of modern warfare.
Average winds are  and the city has 1,769 hours of sunshine.
It is also the ''de jure'' capital of another entity, Republika Srpska.
Premier League of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Several smaller rivers and streams such as Koševski Potok also run through the city and its vicinity.
The war changed the ethnic and religious profile of the city.
Between 2015 and 2018 the airport will be upgraded for more than 25 Million €.
Companies based in Sarajevo include B&H Airlines, BH Telecom, Bosnalijek, Energopetrol, Sarajevo Tobacco Factory, and Sarajevska Pivara (Sarajevo Brewery).
Serb forces of the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav People's Army besieged Sarajevo from 5 April 1992 to 29 February 1996.
File:Sarajevo Miljacka.JPG|thumb|right|180px|Miljacka river
Various factories and other buildings were built at this time, and a large number of institutions were both Westernized and modernized.
Sarajevo International Airport , also called Butmir, is located just a few kilometers southwest of the city and was voted Best European Airport With Under 1,000,000 Passengers at the 15th Annual ACI-Europe in Munich in 2005.
There are also several international schools in Sarajevo, catering to the expatriate community; some of which are Sarajevo International School and the French International School of Sarajevo, established in 1998.
The city comprises four municipalities Centar, Novi Grad, Novo Sarajevo, and Stari Grad.
Trebević), Zmajevac lookout and Yellow/White fortresses lookouts (in Vratnik) as well as numerous other rooftops throughout the city (i.e.
According to the census, the population of the Sarajevo Canton was 413,593, with 55,181 residents in Centar Sarajevo, 118,553 in Novi Grad, 64,814 in Novo Sarajevo and 36,976 in Stari Grad.
The last official Yugoslav census took place 1991 and recorded 527,049 people living in the city of Sarajevo (ten municipalities).
Sarajevo may 1996.png|Marijin Dvor May 1996
Bosnia Church.jpg|Catholic Cathedral Sacred Heart
The ancient people, who considered most of the West Balkans as their homeland, had several key settlements in the region, mostly around the river Miljacka and the Sarajevo valley.
Sarajevo had the first full-time (dawn to dusk) tram line in Europe, and the second in the world.
Suitable climatic conditions have allowed winter sports to flourish in the region, as exemplified by the Winter Olympics in 1984 that were celebrated in Sarajevo.
The Cathedral of Sacred Heart, for example, was constructed using elements of neo-gothic and Romanesque architecture.
Sarajevo is now home to an important and eclectic mix of new bands and independent musicians, which continue to thrive with the ever-increasing number of festivals, creative showcases and concerts around the country.
Asim Ferhatović Hase
When the siege ended, the concrete scars caused by mortar shell explosions left a mark that was filled with red resin.
Sarajevo Synagoge 03.jpg|Sarajevo Synagogue
Papal documents say that in 1238, a cathedral dedicated to Saint Paul was built in the city.
Sarajevo is Bosnia's main intersection and the most passable city in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the third in region.
The settlement developed unique ceramics and pottery designs, which characterize the Butmir people as a unique culture, as described at the International Congress of Archaeologists and Anthropologists meeting in Sarajevo in 1894.
By 1909, about 50% of the city's inhabitants were Muslim, 25% were Catholic, 15% were Orthodox, and 10% were Jewish.
In 1697, during the Great Turkish War, a raid was led by Prince Eugene of Savoy of the Habsburg Monarchy against the Ottoman Empire, which conquered Sarajevo and left it plague-infected and burned to the ground.
Most of the communications and media infrastructure was destroyed during the war but reconstruction monitored by the Office of the High Representative has helped to modernize the industry as a whole.
* Sarajevo School of Science and Technology
By 2002, 79.6 per cent of the canton's population of 401,118 were Bosniak, 11.2 percent Serb, 6.7 percent Croat and 2.5 percent others (Jews, Romas, etc.
Giro di Sarajevo is also run in the city with over 2,200 cyclists taking part in 2015.
In 1887, under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Sharia Law School began a five-year program.
