From 1365 to 1409, the Arborean giudici Marianus IV, Hugh III and Brancaleone Doria (husband of Eleanor of Arborea), succeeded in occupying all of Sardinia except the heavily fortified towns of the Castle of Cagliari and Alghero, which for years remained as the only Aragonese dominions in Sardinia.
However, after a few hundred years of habitation, they began expanding inward.
The 1973 oil crisis caused the termination of employment for thousands of workers employed in the petrochemical industries, which aggravated the emigration already present in the 1950s and 1960s.
A letter by Pope Nicholas I as early as 864 mentions the "Sardinian judges", without reference to the empire and a letter by Pope John VIII (reigned 872–882) refers to them as ''principes'' ("princes").
In terms of civil liberties, the code made provincial 14th century Sardinia one of the most developed societies in all of Europe.
During this period, the Giudicato of Arborea promulgated the legal code of the kingdom in the ''Carta de Logu'' (‘Charter of the Land’).
On 13 February 1796, in order to prevent the spread of the revolt, the viceroy Filippo Vivalda gave the Sardinian magistrate Giovanni Maria Angioy the role of Alternos, which meant a substitute of the viceroy himself.
During the late Copper age, the so-called Beaker culture, coming from Continental Europe, appeared in Sardinia.
It is suggested that the name had a religious connotation from its use also as the adjective for the ancient Sardinian mythological hero-god Sardus Pater "Sardinian Father" (in modern times misunderstood as being "Father Sardus"), as well as being the stem of the adjective "sardonic".
The granite extraction represents one of the most flourishing industries in the northern part of the island.
It is probably in breeding and cattle ownership the economic base of the early proto-historic and monumental Sardinian civilization from Neolithic to the Iron Age.
While the Phoenicians stuck to the coastline, their relationship with the Sardinians was peaceful.
It can blow quite strongly, but it is usually dry and cool and makes for a sailor's paradise.
The conquest of Sardinia by the Kingdom of Aragon meant the introduction of the feudal system throughout Sardinia.
Networks of city buses serve the main towns.
The driest part of the island is the coast of Cagliari gulf, with less than  per year, the minimum is at Capo Carbonara at the extreme south-east of the island , and the wettest is the top of the Gennargentu mountain with almost  per year.
Evidence of trade with the other civilizations of that time are attested by several artefacts (e.g.
The situation has been reversed with the expansion of seaside tourism; today all Sardinia's major urban centres are located near the coasts, while the island's interior is very sparsely populated.
In 1983 a prominent activist of a separatist party, the Sardinian Action Party (''Partidu Sardu – Partito Sardo d'Azione''), was elected president of the regional parliament, and in the 1980s several other movements calling for independence from Italy were born; in the 1990s some of them became political parties, even if in a rather disjointed manner.
Following an enormous reforestation plan it has become the Italian region with the largest forest extension.
To the west of Sardinia is the Sea of Sardinia, a unit of the Mediterranean Sea; to Sardinia's east is the Tyrrhenian Sea, which is also an element of the Mediterranean Sea.
Because of these successes, the representatives of nobility and clergy (''Stamenti'') formulated five requests addressed to the King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia, but they got refused.
The kingdom was to remain a dominion of the Crown of Aragon (under the Kings of Spain) until the Treaty of Utrecht.
Three main banks are headquartered in Sardinia: the Banco di Sardegna and the Banca di Sassari, both based in Sassari; Banca di Credito Sardo, based in Cagliari, was absorbed by parent company Intesa Sanpaolo in 2014.
The territory then was divided between Pisa, the della Gherardesca family and the Giudicati of Arborea e Gallura.
This gave rise to many abuses, as the reform favoured the landholders while excluding the poor Sardinian farmers and shepherds, who witnessed the abolition of the communal rights and the sale of the land.
Another polyphonic style of singing, more like the Corsican ''paghjella'' and liturgic in nature, is found in Sardinia and is known as ''cantu a cuncordu''.
Sardinia being relatively large and hilly, weather is not uniform; in particular the East is drier, but paradoxically it suffers the worst rainstorms : in autumn 2009, it rained more than  in a single day in Siniscola, and 19 November 2013, locations in Sardinia were reported to have received more than 431&nbsp;mm (17 inches) within two hours.
Birra Ichnusa is the most commercialized beer produced in Sardinia.
This flat bread is always made by hand as it gives a different flavor the more you work the dough.
the votive bronze statuettes found across Sardinia).
Many famines have been reported in Sardinia.
These new people predominantly settled on the west coast, where the majority of the sites attributed to them had been found.
On 23 February 1793, Domenico Millelire, commanding the Sardinian fleet, defeated the fleets of the French Republic near the Maddalena archipelago, of which then-lieutenant Napoleon Bonaparte was a leader.
The Regional Landscape Plan prohibits new building activities on the coast (except in urban centers), next to forests, lakes or other environmental or cultural sites and the Coastal conservation agency ensures the protection of natural areas on the Sardinian coast.
The neolithic revolution was introduced in the 6th millennium BC by the Cardial culture coming from mainland Italy.
A letter by Mieszko I to Pope John XV proves that the Giudicati were known even in Poland, and that they played a prestigious role in Medieval Europe.
By 1951, malaria was successfully eliminated by the ERLAAS, Anti-malaric Regional Authority, and the support of the Rockefeller Foundation, which facilitated the commencement of the Sardinian tourist boom.
Early medieval Sardinian political institutions evolved from the millennium old Roman imperial structures with relatively little Germanic influence.
The legal code was written in Sardinian and established a whole range of citizens' rights.
The kingdom of Aragon also introduced the feudal system into the areas of Sardinia that it ruled.
The island's ranges and plateaux are separated by wide alluvial valleys and flatlands, the main ones being the Campidano in the southwest between Oristano and Cagliari and the Nurra in the northwest.
It consisted of high-ranking military commanders, the clergy and the nobility.
Since 2004 Sardinia has hosted the Rally d'Italia Sardegna, a rally competition in the FIA World Rally Championship schedule.
The Phoenician settlers called on Carthage for help, and when it arrived they successfully took control of part of the southern part of the island.
The per capita income in Sardinia is the highest of the southern half of Italy.
The two most widely spoken forms of the language are Campidanese (''Sardu Campidanesu''), spoken throughout the southern half of the island, and Logudorese (''Sardu Logudoresu''), from the northern-central region, extending almost to the suburbs of Sassari.
It won the Italian Championship in the 1969–70 Serie A season, becoming the first club in Southern Italy to achieve such a result.
In the same month, Sardinians stopped the attempted French landing on the beach of Quartu Sant'Elena, near the Capital of Cagliari.
Sardinia faced the creation of military bases on the island, like Decimomannu Air Base and Salto di Quirra (the biggest scientific military base in Europe) in the same decades.
The Giudicato of Gallura ended in the year 1288, when the last giudice, Nino Visconti (a friend of Dante Alighieri), was driven out by the Pisans, who occupied the territory.
In 2004, BBC presenter Andy Kershaw travelled to the island with Sardinian music specialist Pablo Farba and interviewed many artists.
By controlling the extraction of these raw materials and by commercing them with other countries, the Nuragic civilisation was able to accumulate wealth and reach a level of sophistication that is not only reflected in the complexity of its surviving buildings, but also in its artworks (e.g.
The economic efforts of the last twenty years have reduced the handicap of insularity, especially in the fields of low-cost air travel and advanced information technology.
Today the Island boasts the highest number of horse herds in Italy.
The secondary inland and mountain roads are generally narrow with many hairpin turns, so the speed limits are very low.
Sardinia has become Europe's first region to fully adopt the new Digital Terrestrial Television broadcasting standard.
This parliament, however, had limited powers.
The average temperature is between , with mild winters and hot summers on the coasts (  in January,  in July), and cold winters and cool summers on the mountains (  in January,  in July).
48,979 students were enrolled at universities in 2007–08.
German troops left the island on 8 September 1943, a few days after the Armistice of Cassibile, and retired to Corsica without fighting and bloodshed, after a bilateral agreement between the general Antonio Basso (Commander of the Armed Forces of Sardinia) and the German Karl Hans Lungerhausen, general of the 90th Panzergrenadier Division.
In 1847, the Sardinian parliaments (''Stamenti''), in order to get the Piedmontese liberal reforms they could not afford due to their separated legal system, renounced their state autonomy and agreed to form a union with Piedmont, Savoy, Nice and Liguria in order to have a single parliament, a single magistracy and a single government in Turin; this move aggravated the island's peripheral condition and most of the pro-union supporters, including its leader Giovanni Siotto Pintor, would later regret it.
The nearest land masses are (clockwise from north) the island of Corsica, the Italian Peninsula, Sicily, Tunisia, the Balearic Islands, and Provence.
Sardinia has been for thousands of years specializing in sheep breeding, and, to a lesser extent, goats and cattle that is less productive of agriculture in relation to land use.
It was not until 1999 that the island's languages (Sardinian, Sassarese, Gallurese, Algherese and Tabarchino) were recognised, even if just formally, together with Italian.
The Gallura granite district is composed of 260 companies that work in 60 quarries, where 75% of the Italian granite is extracted.
Sardinia boasts ancient equestrian traditions and is the Italian region with the highest number of horse riders (29% of population)  and boasts also fine darts tradition, which many believe originated in the Sassari region of the country towards the end of the 15th century.
Because of the Venturi effect between Sardinia and Corsica, western wind accelerates between the islands and creates the wind that makes Porto Pollo popular among windsurfing enthusiasts.
'''GDP per capita''' ''nominal''(Euro)
Despite the existence of the indigenous states, the Pope offered this newly created crown to James II of Aragon, promising him support should he wish to conquer Pisan Sardinia in exchange for Sicily.
For example, Leonardo Cubello, with some claim to the crown being from a family related to the Kings of Arborea, was granted the title of Marquis of Oristano and feudal rights on a territory that partly overlapped with the original extension of the Kingdom of Arborea in exchange for his subjection to the King of Aragon.
The submarine gas pipeline GALSI would have brought Algerian gas to the Italian mainland through the island.
Under Byzantine rule, the island was divided into districts called ''merèie'' (μερείαι in Byzantine Greek), which were governed by a judge residing in Caralis (Cagliari) and garrisoned by an army stationed in ''Forum Traiani'' (today Fordongianus) under the command of a ''dux''.
About 40 tourist harbours are located along the Sardinian coasts.
The main communities were in the area of Oristano, where the village of Mussolinia (now called Arborea) was located, and in the area adjacent the city of Alghero, within the region of Nurra, Fertilia was founded.
Historical reasons for this include the repeated Saracen raids during the Middle Ages and then Barbary raids until the early 19th century (making the coast unsafe), widespread pastoral activities inland, and the swampy nature of the coastal plains (reclaimed definitively only in the 20th century).
Cagliari hosted a Formula 3000 race in 2002 and 2003 on a 2.414-km street circuit around Sant'Elia stadium.
It is situated between 38° 51' and 41° 18' latitude north (respectively Isola del Toro and Isola La Presa) and 8° 8' and 9° 50' east longitude (respectively Capo dell'Argentiera and Capo Comino).
The region's official name is ''Regione Autonoma della Sardegna'' / ''Regione Autònoma de Sardigna'' (Autonomous Region of Sardinia), and its capital and largest city is Cagliari.
Three different breeds of dogs are peculiar to Sardinia: the Pastore Fonnese, Dogo Sardo and Levriero Sardo.
The ''Corpo forestale e di vigilanza ambientale della Regione Sarda'' is the Sardinian Forestry Corps.
Sardinia has few major rivers, the largest being the Tirso,  long, which flows into the Sea of Sardinia, the Coghinas (115&nbsp;km) and the Flumendosa (127&nbsp;km).
The territory was divided up between the Doria and Malaspina families of Genoa and the Basserra family of Arborea, while the city of Sassari became a small republic, like the Italian city-states (''comuni'').
The only natural freshwater lake is Lago di Baratz.
Romania), Africa and Asia.
In 2005, Unesco classed the ''cantu a tenore'' among intangible world heritage.
Claudius Claudianus, Claudian, a Latin poet of the 4th century A.D., in his poem "De bello Gildonico", stated that Caralis, modern Cagliari, was founded by people from Tyrus, modern Tyre, Lebanon, probably in the same time of the foundation of Carthage, in the 9th or 8th century B.C.
With the increase in tourism, coal decreased in importance but Sardinia followed the Italian economic miracle.
Combined with the aging of population going rather fast (in 2009, people older than 65 were 18,7%), rural depopulation is quite a big issue: between 1991 and 2001, 71,4% of Sardinian villages have lost population (32 more than 20% and 115 between 10% and 20%), with over 30 of them being at risk to become ghost towns.
Its indigenous language and the other minority languages (Sassarese, Corsican Gallurese, Catalan Algherese and Ligurian Tabarchino) spoken by the Sardinians enjoy "equal dignity" with Italian under regional law.
There is also a restricted area for kitesurfers.
Most Sardinian forests were cut down at this time, in order to provide the Piedmontese with raw materials, like wood, used to make railway sleepers on the mainland.
The aerospace manufacturer Vitrociset, in Villaputzu, is involved in the production of the stealth multirole fighter Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II.
The principal industries are chemicals (Porto Torres, Cagliari, Villacidro, Ottana), petrochemicals (Porto Torres, Sarroch), metalworking (Portoscuso, Portovesme, Villacidro), cement (Cagliari), pharmaceutical (Sassari),  shipbuilding (Arbatax, Olbia, Porto Torres), oil rig construction (Arbatax), rail industry (Villacidro), arms industries at Domusnovas and food (sugar refineries at Villasor and Oristano, dairy at Arborea, Macomer and Thiesi, fish factory at Olbia.
Megalithic building structures called nuraghes are scattered in great numbers throughout Sardinia.
Communication with the central government became daunting if not impossible during and after the Muslim conquest of Sicily between 827 and 902.
In fact, according to the data published by ISTAT in 2006, 52.5% of the Sardinian population mainly speaks Italian in the family environment, while 29.3% alternates Italian and Sardinian and 16.6% mainly uses Sardinian or other non-Italian languages.
Each Giudicato saw to its own defense, maintained its own laws and administration, and looked after its own foreign and trading affairs.
Northern Sardinian Coasts are included in the Pelagos Sanctuary for Mediterranean Marine Mammals, a Marine Protected Area, that covers a surface of about , aimed at the protection of marine mammals.
Home matches are played at the Stadio Sant'Elia.
The Beaker culture was followed in the early Bronze Age by the Bonnanaro culture which shown both reminiscences of the Beaker and influences by the Polada culture.
There are 54 artificial lakes and dams that supply water and electricity.
Once the dough achieves that state it is then removed from the oven where it is then cut into two thin sheets and stacked to go back into the oven.
(This continuity was not novel to Sardinia; like the Visigoths, the Vandals generally maintained the pretence of the empire, nominally acknowledging Constantinople and declaring themselves its deputies.)
In 2013, the island was hit by several cyclones, included the Cyclone Cleopatra, which dumped almost 18 inches (450&nbsp;mm) of rainfall within an hour and a half.
The cork district, in the northern part of the Gallura region, around Calangianus and Tempio Pausania, is composed of 130 companies.
The coasts of Sardinia ( long) are generally high and rocky, with long, relatively straight stretches of coastline, many outstanding headlands, a few wide, deep bays, rias, many inlets and with various smaller islands off the coast.
Sardinia lost more young people than any other Italian region on the front, with 138 casualties per 1000 soldiers compared to the Italian average of 100 casualties.
There is little fishing (and no real maritime tradition), Portoscuso tunas are exported worldwide, but primarily to Japan.
Porto Pollo, north of Palau, is a bay often used by windsurfers and kitesurfers.
In the span of just two years (1987-1988), 224 bombing attacks were reported.
Habitations consisted of round thatched stone huts.
Because of this discontent, on 28 April 1794, during an uprising in Cagliari, two Savoyard officials were killed.
In all likelihood a local noble family acceded to the power, still identifying themselves as vassals of the Byzantines, but independent "de facto" as communications with Constantinople were very difficult.
It is divided into four provinces and a metropolitan city.
In 1793, Sardinians repelled two French invasions.
The guttural sounds produced in this form make a remarkable sound, similar to Tuvan throat singing.
Renewable energies have increased noticeably in recent years, mainly wind power, favoured by the windy climate, but also solar power (Carlo Rubbia, Nobelist in physics, is creating an experimental solar thermal energy central) and biofuel, based on jatropha oil and colza oil.
Another unique instrument is the launeddas.
Beyond this, the tradition of ''cantu a chiterra'' (guitar songs) has its origins in town squares, when artists would compete against one another.
The Sardinian agriculture is now linked to specific products such as cheese, wine, olive oil, artichoke, tomato for a growing product export.
Sardinia has three international airports (Alghero-Fertilia/Riviera del Corallo Airport, Olbia-Costa Smeralda Airport and Cagliari-Elmas Airport) connected with the principal Italian cities and many European destinations, mainly in the United Kingdom, Scandinavia, Spain and Germany, and two regional airports (Oristano-Fenosu Airport and Tortolì-Arbatax Airport).
Sardinia has two public universities: the University of Sassari and the University of Cagliari, founded between the 16th and 17th centuries.
and the International Federation of Celtic Wrestling (I.F.C.W.).
The Sardinian soils, even those plains are slightly permeable, with aquifers of lacking and sometimes brackish water and very small natural reserves.
In fresh food, as well as artichokes, the production of tomatoes (including Camoni tomato) and citrus fruit are of a certain weight.
In 1820, the Savoyards imposed the "Enclosures Act" (''Editto delle Chiudende'') on the island, aimed at turning the land's traditional collective ownership, a cultural and economic cornerstone of Sardinia since the Nuragic times, to private property.
Meridiana is an airline based in the airport of Olbia; it was founded as Alisarda in 1963 by the Aga Khan IV.
These towers were often reinforced and enlarged with battlements.
Rare amphibians, found only on the island, are the Sardinian brook salamander, brown cave salamander, imperial cave salamander, Monte Albo cave salamander, Supramonte cave salamander and Sarrabus cave salamander (''Speleomantes sarrabusensis''); the Sardinian tree frog is also found in Corsica and in the Tuscan Archipelago.
Other roads designed for high-capacity traffic link Sassari with Alghero, Sassari with Tempio Pausania, Sassari – Olbia, Cagliari – Tortolì, Cagliari – Iglesias, Nuoro – Lanusei.
Three reed-canes (two of them glued together with beeswax) produce distinctive harmonies, which have their roots many thousands of years ago, as demonstrated by the bronze statuettes from Ittiri, of a man playing the three reed canes, dated to 2000 BC.
Thus Sardinia is probably the only European country where feudalism was introduced in the transition period from the Medieval to the Modern Era, at a time when feudalism had already been abandoned by many other European countries.
It makes its first appearance on the Nora stone, where the word ''Šrdn'' testifies to the name's existence when the Phoenician merchants first arrived.
Angioy moved from Cagliari to Sassari, and during his journey almost all the villages joined the uprising, demanding an end to feudalism and aiming to declare the island to be a republic, but once he was outnumbered by loyalist forces he fled to Paris and sought support for a French annexation of the island.
From about 1500 BC onwards, villages were built around round tower-fortresses called nuraghi (singular form "Nuraghe", usually pluralized in English as "Nuraghes").
Many Italian freestyle surfers come to Porto Pollo for training and 2007 saw the finale of the freestyle pro kids Europe 2007 contest.
It shows similarities with the Scottish Backhold and the gouren.
Sardinia is the only Italian region without Autostrade, but the road network is well developed with a system of no-toll roads with dual carriageway, called ''superstrade'' (en: super roads), that connect the principal towns and the main airports and seaports; the speed limit is /.
Sardinia was called '''' (the Latinised form of the Greek ''Hyknousa'', ), ''Sandàlion'' ( in Greek, meaning ‘sandal’), ''Sardinia'' and ''Sardó'' () by the Romans and the ancient Greeks.
Beer is the most drunk alcoholic beverage,  Sardinia boasts the highest consumption per capita of beer in Italy (twice higher than national average).
Sardinia has four endemic subspecies of birds found nowhere else in the world: its great spotted woodpecker (ssp ''harterti''), great tit (ssp ''ecki''), common chaffinch (ssp ''sarda''), and Eurasian jay (ssp ''ichnusae'').
Sardinia is the 5th Italian region for rice production, the main paddy fields are located in the Arborea Plain.
The western coast has a higher distribution of rainfalls even for modest elevations (for instance Iglesias, elevation , average annual precipitation ).
The scale, complexity and territorial spread of these buildings attest to the level of wealth accumulated by the Nuragic people, their advances in technology and the complexity of their society, which was able to coordinate large numbers of people with different roles for the purpose of building the monumental Nuraghes.
Latin came to be the dominant spoken language of Sardinia during this period, though Roman culture was slower to take hold, and Roman rule was often contested by the inhabitants of Sardinia's mountainous central regions.
However, in summer, the rare rainfalls can be characterized by short but severe thunderstorms, which can cause flash floods.
They took over valuable natural resources, such as silver and lead mines, and established a military presence in the form of a fortress on Monte Sira in 650 BC.
A work in progress is converting the main routes to highway standards, with the elimination of all intersections.
The battle was fought by about 20,000 Sardinian, Genoese and French knights, enrolled from their kingdom at a time when the population of Sardinia had been greatly depleted by the plague.
Today Sardinia is phasing in as an EU region, with a diversified economy focused on tourism and the tertiary sector.
In the early 1960s, an industrialisation effort was commenced, the so-called ''Piani di Rinascita'' (rebirth plans), with the initiation of major infrastructure projects on the island.
Sardinia is home to one of the oldest forms of vocal polyphony, generally known as cantu a tenore.
For example, the CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia) developed the second European website and 1st in Italy in 1991 and webmail in 1995.
During the Second World War, Sardinia was an important air and naval base and was heavily bombed by the Allies, especially the city of Cagliari.
Millelire became the first recipient of the Gold Medal of Military Valor of the Italian Armed Forces.
CRS4 allowed several telecommunication companies and internet service providers based on the island to flourish, such as Videonline in 1994, Tiscali in 1998 and Andala Umts in 1999.
In this unique letter about Hospito, the Pope prompts him to convert his people who "living all like irrational animals, ignore the true God and worship wood and stone" (''Barbaricini omnes, ut insensata animalia vivant, Deum verum nesciant, ligna autem et lapides adorent'').
Along with lay Christianity, the followers of monastic figures such as St.
According to some scholars, the Nuragic people(s) are identifiable with the Shardana, a tribe of the "Sea Peoples".
The most common ports of call were Caralis, Nora, Bithia, Sulci, and Tharros.
matrica green chemicals
The most famous singer of this genre are Maria Carta and Elena Ledda.
Italian (''Italiano''), which is the official language throughout Italy, is the most widely spoken language on the island, followed by Sardinian (''Sardu'').
It is the region with the lowest total fertility rate (1.087 births per woman) and the second-lowest birth rate of Italy (which is already one of the lowest in the world).
The language has been influenced by Catalan, Spanish and recently Italian, while the once spoken Nuragic contributes many features to it in many ancient remnants.
The Corona de Logu exercised some control over the king: under the rule of the ''bannus consensus'' the king could be deposed or even executed if he did not follow the rules of the kingdom.
Like the imperial systems, the new order also preserved "semi-democratic" forms, with national assemblies called ''Corona de Logu''.
During the First World War, the Sardinian soldiers of the Brigata Sassari distinguished themselves.
We known only two names of those rulers, Salusios (Σαλούσιος) and the protospatharios Turcoturios (Tουρκοτούριος) from two inscriptions), who probably reigned between the 10th and the 11th century.
Sardinia is the Italian region most affected by forest fires during the summer.
The Nuraghes are not the only Nuragic buildings that survive, as there are several sacred wells around Sardinia and other buildings that had religious purposes such as the Giants' grave (monumental collective tombs) and collections of religious buildings that probably served as destinations for pilgrimage and mass religious rites (e.g.
Even agriculture has played a very important role in the economic history of the island, especially in the great plain of Campidano, particularly suitable for wheat farming.
However the common lands (called ''ademprivios'') were never completely abolished, and they are still present in large number to this day (500,000 hectares of common lands were counted in 1956, of which 345,000 constituted by woods).
The Giudicato of Arborea, having Oristano as its capital, had a longer life compared to the other kingdoms.
Although the Giudicati were hereditary lordships, the old Roman/Byzantine imperial notion that personal title or honor was separate from the state still remained, so the Giudicato was not regarded as the personal property of the monarch as was common in later European feudalism.
In AD 530, a coup d'état in Carthage removed King Hilderic, a convert to Nicene Christianity, in favor of his cousin Gelimer, an Arian Christian like most of the élite in his kingdom.
The greatest economic development had taken place inland, in the provinces of Cagliari and Sassari, characterized by a certain amount of enterprise.
Among reptiles worthy of note are Bedriaga's rock lizard, the Tyrrhenian wall lizard and Fitzinger's algyroides, endemic species of Sardinia and Corsica.
Even now, around 60% of all Italian and NATO military installations in Italy are on Sardinia, whose area is less than one-tenth of all the Italian territory and whose population is little more than the 2.5%; furthermore, they comprise over 35.000 hectares used for experimental weapons testing, where 80% of the military explosives in Italy are used.
The history of the four Giudicati would be defined by the contest for influence between the rival rising sea powers of Genoa and Pisa, and later the ambitions of the Kingdom of Aragon.
Sardinian is a distinct branch of the Romance language family: it is not, by any means, an Italian dialect, but in fact closer to its Latin roots than Italian itself, and it has been formally recognized as one of the twelve historical language minorities of Italy since 1997, by regional and Italian law.
The title of ''iudice'' changed with the language and local understanding of the position, becoming the Sardinian ''judike'', essentially a king or sovereign, while ''giudicato'' (), literally ‘judgeship’ or ‘judicature’, came to mean both ‘State’ and ‘palace’ or ‘capital’.
The Strait of Bonifacio is directly north of Sardinia and separates Sardinia from the French island of Corsica.
The island has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen: Csa) along the coasts, plains and low hills and a continental climate on the interior plateaus, valleys and mountain ranges.
The 35th G8 summit was planned by Prodi II Cabinet to be held in Sardinia, on the island of La Maddalena, in July 2009; however, in April 2009, the Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, decided, without convoking the Italian parliament or consulting the Sardinian governor of his own party, to move the summit, even though the works were almost completed, to L'Aquila, provoking heavy protests.
According to the article 12 of the Sardinian Statute modified by the regional parliament in October 2013: "''The Territory of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia is located off the customs line and constitutes a Free Trade Zone enclosed by the surrounding sea; the access points consist of the seaports and the airports.
Vintage railcars and steam locomotives run through the wildest parts of the island.
From 1 November 2008 TV channels are broadcast only in digital.
The Sardinian Giudicati never adopted feudalism, and Arborea maintained its parliament called the ''Corona de Logu''.
The island has an ancient geoformation and, unlike Sicily and mainland Italy, is not earthquake-prone.
The Roman military occupation brought the Nuragic civilization to an end, except for the mountainous interior of the island, which the Romans called Barbaria, meaning "Land populated by Barbarians".
One of the most famous of foods would be ‘pane carasau’ the flat bread of Sardinia, famous for its thin crunchiness.
These were populated by Roman immigrants.
For this it was brought to an end in 1258, when its capital, Santa Igia, was stormed and destroyed by an alliance of Sardinian and Pisan forces.
Other mountain chains are Monte Limbara () in the northeast, the Chain of Marghine and Goceano () running crosswise for  towards the north, the Monte Albo (), the Sette Fratelli Range in the southeast, and the Sulcis Mountains and the Monte Linas ().
The bay is divided by a thin tongue of land that separates it in an area for advanced and beginning/intermediate windsurfers.
By the time of ''De Administrando Imperio'', completed in 952, the Byzantine authorities no longer listed Sardinia as an imperial province, suggesting they considered it lost.
The dates and circumstances of the end of Byzantine rule in Sardinia are not known.
The island is inhabited by terrestrial tortoises and sea turtles like Hermann's tortoise, the spur-thighed tortoise, marginated tortoise (''Testudo marginata sarda''), Nabeul tortoise, loggerhead sea turtle and green sea turtle.
