Today, modern fabrics like polyester, georgette and charmeuse are also commonly used.
The traditional Kandyan (osaria) style consists of a full blouse which covers the midriff completely and is partially tucked in at the front as is seen in this 19th-century portrait.
The Begum of Savanur remembers how sumptuous the chiffon sari became at their gatherings.
Eugene Novack who ran the New York store, Royal Saree House told that he had been selling it mainly to the Indian women in New York area but later many American business women and housewives became his customers who preferred their saris to resemble the full gown of the western world.
Cotton was first cultivated and woven in Indian subcontinent around 5th millennium BC.
Most sought after brocade silk sarees are Banasari, Kanchipuram, Paithani, Mysore, Uppada, Bagalpuri, Balchuri, Maheshwari, Chanderi, Mekhela, Ghicha, Narayan pet and Eri etc.
Women traditionally wore various types of regional handloom sarees made of silk, cotton, ikkat, block-print, embroidery and tie-dye textiles.
The French cultural anthropologist and sari researcher Chantal Boulanger categorised sari drapes in the following families:
In Nepal, choli is known as ''cholo'' or ''chaubandi cholo'' and is traditionally tied at the front.
This necessitated a change of dress.
The word ''sari'' described in Sanskrit शाटी  which means 'strip of cloth' and शाडी  or साडी  in Pali, and which was corrupted to  in modern Indian languages.
Usually made of unbleached cotton and decorated with gold or coloured stripes and/or borders.
Early ''cholis'' were front covering tied at the back; this style was more common in parts of ancient northern India.
He says that a married lady was expected to put on a veil while moving in the public.
The sari is worn as daily wear by Pakistani Hindus, by elderly Muslim women who were used to wearing it in pre-partition India and by some of the new generation who have reintroduced the interest in saris.
In 2010, Bollywood actress Deepika Padukone wanted to represent her country at an international event, wearing the national costume.
The style worn by Brahmin women of differs from that of the Marathas.
There was an Indian flavour to the red carpet at the annual Fashion Rocks concert in New York, with designer Rocky S walking the ramp along with Jessica, Ashley, Nicole, Kimberly and Melody – the Pussycat Dolls – dressed in saris.
In Southern parts of India, choli is known as ''ravikie'' which is tied at the front instead of back, kasuti is traditional form of embroidery used for cholis in this region.
In most of the courts the sari was embellished with stitching hand-woven borders in gold from Varanasi, delicate zardozi work, gota, makaish and tilla work that embellished the plain fabric, simultaneously satisfying both traditional demands and ingrained love for ornamentation.
Based on sculptures and paintings, tight bodices or ''cholis'' are believed have evolved between 2nd century B.C to 6th century A.D in various regional styles.
Jnanadanandini Devi, the wife of Rabindranath Tagore's elder brother Satyendranath came up with a different way to wear the saree after her stay in Bombay.
in 2014, American singer Selena Gomez was seen in a sari for an UNICEF charity event at Nepal.
It further evolved into ''Bhairnivasani'' skirt, today known as ''ghagri'' and ''lehenga''.
Although Dhakai Jamdani (hand made shari) is worldwide known and most famous to all women who wear shari but there are also many variety of shari in Bangladesh.There are many regional variations of them in both silk and cotton.
Many Bollywood celebrities, like Aishwarya Rai, have worn it at international events representing the Indian culture.
The sari is the most commonly worn women's clothing in Nepal where a special style of sari draping is called ''haku patasihh''.
This complete three-piece dress was known as ''Poshak'', generic term for costume.
Saris, worn predominantly in India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and Nepal are usually draped with one end of the cloth fastened around the waist, and the other end placed over the shoulder baring the midriff.
While the sari is typical to Indian traditional wear, clothing worn by South-East Asian countries like Burma, Malaysia, Philippines, and Singapore resemble it, where a long rectangular piece of cloth is draped around the body.
In ancient India, although women wore saris that bared the midriff, the Dharmasastra writers stated that women should be dressed such that the navel would never become visible.
Because of the harsh extremes in temperature on the Indian Subcontinent, the sari fills a practical role as well as a decorative one.
Rajatarangini (meaning the 'river of kings'), a tenth-century literary work by Kalhana, states that the ''choli'' from the Deccan was introduced under the royal order in Kashmir.
At some courts it was worn with jaali, or net kurtas and embossed silk waist length sadris or jackets.
* Manipuri - This sari style is also worn with three-set garment known as ''Innaphi'' viel, ''Phanek'' lower wrap and long sleeved ''choli''.
More expensive saris had elaborate geometric, floral, or figurative ornaments or brocades created on the loom, as part of the fabric.
Sri Lankan women wear saris in many styles.
File:Women in Sarees.jpg|Women in sari 1912
The nivi is today's most popular sari style from Andhra Pradesh.
* Assamese – This sari style is three-set garment known ''Mekhela chador''.
The new saris were unveiled at the Taj property in Mumbai.
In this style, the pleats are created in the rear, instead of the front.
The women of Nehru–Gandhi family like Indira Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi wear the special blouse for the campaign trail which is longer than usually and is tucked in to prevent any midriff show while waving to the crowds.
It is worn with 18 molas saree with three four rounds at the waist and a knot after crisscrossing over shoulders.
The ''punchra'' work is imitated with inexpensive machine-made tassel trim.
Sari is the most popular dress for women in Bangladesh, both for casual and formal occasion.
A bordered sari will be just perfect for an Air-Hostess style drape where the ''pallu'' is heavily pleated and pinned on the shoulder.
It will be subsequently replicated at all 10 Luxury Hotels of the group across the country for duty managers and front office staff.
The nivi sari was popularised through the paintings of Raja Ravi Varma.
The bottom portion, draped from the waist downwards is called ''Mekhela'' and veil is known as ''Chadar'' and is worn with long sleeve ''choli''.
This can create an elaborate appearance on the front, while looking ugly on the back.
BJP politician Sushma Swaraj maintains her prim housewife look with a pinned-up ''pallu'' while general secretary of AIADMK Jayalalithaa wears her saris like a suit of armour.
For this reason, it is the clothing of choice of air hostesses on Air India.
The Kandyan style is considered the national dress of Sinhalese women.
Red is most favored color for wedding saris and are traditional garment choice for brides in Indian culture.
are traditionally worn for festive and formal occasions.
The loose end of the sari is draped back-to-front over the right shoulder, and is pinned to the rest of the sari.
Traditional Madisar is worn using 9 yards saree.
They create a graceful, decorative effect which poets have likened to the petals of a flower.
In past times, saris were woven of silk or cotton.
She had saris woven in France to her personal specifications, in white chiffon, and introduced the silk chiffon sari to the royal fashion repertoire.
The traditional sari made an impact in the United States during the 1970s.
File:Girl standing in a veranda wearing a Pochampalli sari.jpg|Girl in pochampally sari, 1895
Silk was woven around 2450 BC and 2000 BC.
* Kunbi style or ''denthli'':Goan Gauda and Kunbis, and those of them who have migrated to other states use this way of draping Sari or ''Kappad'',this form of draping is created by tying a knot in the fabric below the shoulder and a strip of cloth which crossed the left shoulder was fasten on the back.
e.g.- Tanta/Tant cotton shari, Dhakai Banarasi sari, Rajshahi silk, Tangail Tant saree, Tassar silk shari, Manipuri shari and Katan shari are the most popular in Bangladesh.
In modern times, saris are increasingly woven on mechanical looms and made of artificial fibres, such as polyester, nylon, or rayon, which do not require starching or ironing.
The blouse has short sleeves and is usually cropped at the midriff.
It is draped diagonally in front of the torso.
This required a chemise or jacket (old name for blouse) and petticoat to be worn under the saree and made it possible for women to come out of the secluded women's quarters in this attire.
However, modern intermingling of styles has led to most wearers baring the midriff.
Some nivi styles are worn with the ''pallu'' draped from the back towards the front, coming from the back over the right shoulder with one corner tucked by the left hip, covering the torso/waist.
In the ''Pratimānātaka'', a play by Bhāsa describes in context of ''Avagunthana'' veil that "''ladies may be seen without any blame (for the parties concerned) in a religious session, in marriage festivities, during a calamity and in a forest''".
Recently, in a makeover design, Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces, decided the welcoming staff at the group's Luxury Hotels would be draped in the rich colours and designs of the Banarasi six yards.
Newcomers to the sari report that it is comfortable to wear, requiring no girdles or stockings and that the flowing garb feels so feminine with unusual grace.
File:Bengali Sari.jpg|Girl in Bengali sari; in this style sari is worn without any pleats.
When worn as a sari, an extra-long cloth of nine yards is used and the ends are then passed up over the shoulders and the upper body.
The sari is associated with grace and is widely regarded as a symbol of grace in cultures of the Indian subcontinent.
During the 1960s, the mini sari known as 'hipster' sari created a wrinkle in Sri Lankan fashion, since it was worn below the navel and barely above the line of prosecution for indecent exposure.
It is the uniform of the air hostesses of SriLankan Airlines.
File:Gujrati Sari.jpg|Girl in Gujarati sari; in this style the loose end is worn on the front
After one more turn around the waist, the loose end is draped over the shoulder.
''Zardozi'' embroidery uses gold and silver thread, and sometimes pearls and precious stones.
The Shalwar kameez, however, is worn throughout the country on a daily basis.
Uttariya was a shawl-like veil worn over the shoulder or head, it evolved into what is known today known as dupatta and ghoongat.
The ornaments generally accepted by the Hindu culture that can be worn in the midriff region are the waist chains.
Two ways of draping the sari are popular and tend to dominate: the Indian style (classic nivi drape) and the Kandyan style (or ''osaria'' in Sinhalese).
Taj had adopted three villages in Varanasi and employed 25 master weavers there for the project.
It is worn across the right hip to over the left shoulder, partly baring the midriff.
The word 'Sattika' is mentioned as describing women's attire in ancient India in Sanskrit literature and Buddhist literature called Jatakas.
This ancient form of bodice or choli are still common in the state of Rajasthan today.
This may indicate that it was not necessary for unmarried females to put on a veil.
Simple hand-woven villagers' saris are often decorated with checks or stripes woven into the cloth.
On her very first red carpet appearance at the Cannes International Film Festival, she stepped out on the red carpet in a Rohit Bal sari.
File:Dancer in Sari.jpg|Dancer in Kerala sari
The cloth is wrapped around the lower body once, then hand-gathered into even pleats below the navel.
The pleats are tucked into the waistband of the petticoat.
They are printed by machine, or woven in simple patterns made with ''floats'' across the back of the sari.
To get the perfect "Air-hostess" a complimentary U-shaped blouse that covers the upper body completely is worn which gives a very elegant and formal look.
File:Nauvari Saree.jpg|Girl in nauvari sari a form of kachha nivi worn in Maharashtra.
They are considered to be a part of bridal jewellery.
The chiffon sari did what years of fashion interaction had not done in India.
The loose end is a lot longer and that goes around the body over the left shoulder.
The sari nevertheless remains a popular garment among the middle and upper class for many formal functions.
* Nepal - Nepali sari is worn in various forms of traditional nivi style, saris are worn with Nepali blouse known as cholo.
The rich could afford finely woven, diaphanous silk saris that, according to folklore, could be passed through a finger ring.
Same goes for the ''pallu'' pleats that are pinned at the shoulder.
But that's because she's inherited the best collection of saris from her mother-in-law.
This allows free movement while covering the legs.
This led to a professional style of draping a sari which is referred to "Air-Hostess style sari".
Some images of maharanis in the Deccan show the women wearing a sleeveless, richly embellished waistcoat over their blouses.
* Madisar – this drape is typical of Iyengar/Iyer Brahmin ladies from Tamil Nadu.
Sarees are also worn by many Muslim women in Sindh to show their status or to enhance their beauty.
* Malayali style – the two-piece sari, or Mundum Neryathum, worn in Kerala.
These are different from the sari as they are wrapped around the lower-half of body as a skirt, worn with a shirt/blouse, resembling a sarong, as seen in the Burmese Longyi, Filipino Malong, Tapis, Laotian Xout lao, Thai Sinh's, and Timorese Tais.
Image:Telugu Lady.jpg|Woman in nivi sari & vaddanam
In one of his paintings, the Indian subcontinent was shown as a mother wearing a flowing nivi sari.
The modern style of wearing a saree originates from the Tagore family.
This is rather similar to the pleated rosette used in the Dravidian style noted earlier in the article.
The loose end is called the ''pallu'', ''pallav'', ''seragu'', or ''paita'' depending on the language.
Sarees can be seen worn commonly in metropolitan cities such as Karachi and Islamabad and are worn regularly to weddings and other business type of functions.
While an international image of the modern style sari may have been popularised by airline stewardesses, each region in the Indian subcontinent has developed, over the centuries, its own unique sari style.
* Nivi – styles originally worn in Andhra Pradesh; besides the modern nivi, there is also the ''kaccha nivi'', where the pleats are passed through the legs and tucked into the waist at the back.
Maharani Indira Devi of Cooch Behar popularised the chiffon sari.
The final tail of the sari is neatly pleated rather than free-flowing.
However, the sari can be draped in several different styles, though some styles do require a sari of a particular length or form.
The style also differs from community to community.This style is popular in Maharashtra, Goa,parts of Karnataka.
Likewise, ''Stanapatta'' evolved into ''choli'' by 1st century A.D.
The earliest known depiction of the sari in the Indian subcontinent is the statue of an Indus Valley priest wearing a drape.
Sometimes threads of different colours were woven into the base fabric in patterns; an ornamented border, an elaborate ''pallu'', and often, small repeated accents in the cloth itself.
Mastering the "Air-hostess" style drape helps to create the desired impact in a formal setting like an interview or a conference.
Silk Ikat and cotton sarees known as Patola, Pochampally, Bomkai, Khandua, Sambalpuri, Gadwal, Berhampuri, Bargarh, Jamdani, Tant, Mangalagiri, Guntur, Narayan pet, Chanderi, Maheshwari, Nuapatn, Tussar, Ilkal, Kotpad and Manipuri were worn for both festive and everyday attire.
Different courts adopted their own styles of draping and indigenising the sari.
Saris are worn as uniforms by the female hotel staff of many five star luxury hotels in India as symbol of culture.
The Kandyan style is generally more popular in the hill country region of Kandy from which the style gets its name.
The sari is usually worn over a petticoat (called 'parkar' (परकर) in Marathi  or ''lehenga'' in the north; ''pavadai'' (பாவாடை) in Tamil, ''pavada'' (or occasionally ''langa'') in Malayalam, Kannada and Telugu, ''chaniyo'', ''parkar'', ''ghaghra'', or ''ghagaro'' in the west; and ''shaya'' in eastern India), with a fitted upper garment commonly called a blouse (''ravike'' in South India and ''choli'' elsewhere).
The sari has gained its popularity internationally because of the growth of Indian fashion trends globally.
Traditionally the Bengali style is worn without pleats where the saree is wrapped around in an anti-clockwise direction around the waist and then a second time from the other direction.
Gota Patti is popular form of traditional embroidery used on saris for formal occasions, various other types of traditional folk embroidery such mochi, pakko, kharak, suf, kathi, phulkari and gamthi are also commonly used for both informal and formal occasion.
* Gujarati/Rajasthani/Pakistani – after tucking in the pleats similar to the nivi style, the loose end is taken from the back, draped across the right shoulder, and pulled across to be secured in the back
Cheap modern versions of ''zardozi'' use synthetic metallic thread and imitation stones, such as fake pearls and Swarovski crystals.
Ashley Judd donned a purple sari at the YouthAIDS Benefit Gala in November 2007 at the Ritz Carlton in Mclean, Virginia.
He also said that men appeared intrigued by the fragility and the femininity it confers on the wearer.
* Tribal styles – often secured by tying them firmly across the chest, covering the breasts.
It is not only warming in winter and cooling in summer, but its loose-fitting tailoring is preferred by women who must be free to move as their duties require.
Similarly, the female politicians of India wear the sari in a professional manner.
It homogenised fashion across this land.
* Khasi - Khasi style of sari is known as ''Jainsem'' which is made up of several pieces of cloth, giving the body a cylindrical shape.
This could be equivalent to modern day 'Sari'.
The ''shari'' is worn by women throughout Bangladesh.
All saris were handwoven and represented a considerable investment of time or money.
* Bengali and Odia style is worn without any pleats.
Though local preferences play a role, most women decide on style depending on personal preference or what is perceived to be most flattering for their figure.
The long end of the ''pallu'' hanging from the back of the shoulder is often intricately decorated.
There is enough cloth left to cover the head as well.
Sometimes warp and weft threads were tie-dyed and then woven, creating ''ikat'' patterns.
Pamela Anderson made a surprise guest appearance on Bigg Boss, the Indian version of Big Brother, dressed in a sari that was specially designed for her by Mumbai-based fashion designer Ashley Rebello.
Following are other well-known varieties, distinct on the basis of fabric, weaving style, or motif, in South Asia:
Early Sanskrit literature has a wide vocabulary of terms for the veiling used by women, such as ''Avagunthana'' (oguntheti/oguṇthikā), meaning cloak-veil, ''Uttariya'' meaning shoulder-veil, ''Mukha-pata'' meaning face-veil and ''Sirovas-tra'' meaning head-veil.
These accents are called ''buttis'' or ''bhuttis'' (spellings vary).
Śūdraka, the author of Mṛcchakatika set in fifth century BC says that the ''Avagaunthaha'' was not used by women everyday and at every time.
Hand-woven, hand-decorated saris are naturally much more expensive than the machine imitations.
An air hostess style sari is tied in just the same way as a normal sari except that the pleats are held together quite nicely with the help of pins.
* Kodagu style – this drape is confined to ladies hailing from the Kodagu district of Karnataka.
11th century.jpg| Green Tara depicted with sari, c.11th century.
In 3rd century CE, Mahayana Buddhists attempt to counter this growing veiling practice (oguntheti/oguṇthikā) in Lalitavistara Sūtra.
File:Newar bride 1941.jpg|Nepalese bride and two women in sari, 1941
''Resham'' work is embroidery done with coloured silk thread.
While the overall market for handweaving has plummeted (leading to much distress among Indian handweavers), hand-woven saris are still popular for weddings and other grand social occasions.
Dyes used during this period are still in use, particularly indigo, lac, red madder and turmeric.
The centre of the sari (held lengthwise) is placed at the centre back, the ends are brought forward and tied securely, then the two ends are wrapped around the legs.
Stylist Prasad Bidapa has to say, "I think Sonia Gandhi is the country's most stylish politician.
The ancient Sanskrit work, ''Kadambari'' by Banabhatta and ancient Tamil poetry, such as the ''Silappadhikaram'', describes women in exquisite drapery or sari.
The vision finally took shape after 14 months, once the weavers had a good work environment, understood the designs and fine-tuned the motifs.
File:Tamil Sari.jpg|Woman in Tamil sari; in this style the loose end is wrapped around the waist.
File:Ceylon India 1880.jpg|Kandyan Sinhalese lady wearing A traditional Kandyan sari (osaria)
In Pakistan, the sarees are still popular and worn on special occasions.
There are more than 80 recorded ways to wear a sari.
The increased interaction with the British saw most women from royal families come out of purdah in the 1900s.
The conservative people described the 'hipster' as "''an absolute travesty of a beautiful costume almost a desecration''" and "''a hideous and purposeless garment''".
Sumtsek hall at Alci monastery, Ladakh, ca.
In the history of Indian clothing the sari is traced back to the Indus Valley Civilisation, which flourished during 2800–1800 BC around the northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent.
The sari is draped around the waist and a shawl is worn covering the upper half of the sari, which is used in place of a ''pallu''.
Between 2nd century B.C to 1st century A.D, ''Antariya'' and ''Uttariya'' was merged to form a single garment known as sari mentioned in Pali literature, which served the purpose of two garments in one-piece.
She was widowed early in life and followed the convention of abandoning her richly woven Baroda shalus in favour of the unadorned mourning white as per tradition.
Even the vertical pleats that are tucked at the navel are severely pleated and pressed.
The sari evolved from ''three-piece'' attire known as ''Antariya'' lower garment, ''Uttariya'' veil worn over shoulder or head and ''Stanapatta'' a chestband, which finds mentioned in Sanskrit literature and Buddhist Pali literature during 6th century B.C.
File:Mysore Women.jpg|Women in Mysore sari
* Maharashtrian/Konkani/Kashta; this drape is very similar to that of the male Maharashtrian dhoti, though there are many regional and societal variations.
The term for female bodice, the ''choli'' evolved from ancient ''Stanapatta''.
Fashion designer Aaditya Sharma declared, "I can drape a sari in 54 different styles".
I'm also happy that she supports the Indian handloom industry with her selection."
The navel can be revealed or concealed by the wearer by adjusting the ''pallu'', depending on the social setting.
In ancient Indian tradition and the Natya Shastra (an ancient Indian treatise describing ancient dance and costumes), the navel of the Supreme Being is considered to be the source of life and creativity, hence the midriff is to be left bare by the sari.
File:Marathi Women.jpg|Women in nauvari sari
This form of veiling by married women is still prevalent in Hindi-speaking areas, and is known as ''ghoonghat'' where the loose end of a sari is pulled over the head to act as a facial veil.
* ''Gobbe Seere'' – This style is worn by women in the Malnad or Sahyadri and central region of Karnataka.
Its softness, lightness and beautiful, elegant, caressing drape was ideally suited to the Indian climate.
Tie-dyed and block-print sarees known as Bandhani, Leheria/Leheriya, Bagru, Ajrakh, Sungudi, Kota Dabu/Dabu print, Bagh and Kalamkari were traditionally worn during monsoon season.
Also the Kerala sari, a sort of mundum neryathum.
