As well, the Saskatoon Hilltops of the Canadian Junior Football League host their games at Gordie Howe Bowl.
Batoche is located  north of the city.
For over 25 years, Saskatoon has hosted a gathering of antique automobiles, (mainly from the 1960s) that has grown into an event called "Cruise Weekend".
In 1955 Montgomery Place and in 1956 the neighbouring town of Sutherland were annexed by the fast-growing City of Saskatoon.
Saskatoon has a very dry climate and sees only  of precipitation per year on average, with the summer being the wettest season.
Calgary developer Lake Placid has proposed a 200 million dollar mega hotel/condo project to be built on the site although Lake Placid had difficulty securing financing and missed an October 30, 2009, deadline to submit a 4.5 million dollar payment for the parcel of land which seemingly killed the deal.
Saskatoon John G. Diefenbaker International Airport with 105,620 aircraft movements in 2008 was listed as the 19th busiest airport in Canada, 12th busiest in passenger traffic.
The world's largest publicly traded uranium company, Cameco, and the world's largest potash producer, PotashCorp, have corporate headquarters in Saskatoon.
Nearly two-thirds of the world's recoverable potash reserves are located in the Saskatoon region.
Straddling a bend in the South Saskatchewan River and located along the Trans-Canada Yellowhead Highway, it is centrally located in the province and has served as the cultural and economic hub of the region since its establishment in 1882 as a Temperance colony.
However, crime statistics produced by the Saskatoon Police Service shows that crime is on the decline.
Saskatoon/Corman Air Park is a general aviation airport located 15&nbsp;km south-east of Saskatoon.
Existing and historic hotels with royal namesakes include the King George Hotel which has been recently converted to  ultra-luxury condominiums, the King Edward Hotel, the Queen's Hotel and the Patricia Hotel.
As for women's hockey, there is a strong youth female hockey presence in Saskatoon with a Midget AAA team and several youth teams in the city.
The  Affinity Gallery is located on the main floor of the  Saskatchewan Craft Council building in the trendy Broadway Ave. area.
The Saskatchewan Railway Museum is located just outside the city.
West of the river the demarcation line for north and south addresses is 22nd Street, while east and west are divided by Idylwyld Drive (north of 20th Street) and Avenue A (south of 20th).
The highest temperature ever recorded in Saskatoon was  on 6 June 1988.
This was due to Saskatchewan's and especially Saskatoon's small size in relation to both St. Louis and the other cities in the NHL at the time.
The Capitol closed in the early 1980s to make way for the Scotia Centre office tower; its name was transferred to the aforementioned Capitol 4 a block away.
The city's annual exhibition (now called the Saskatoon Exhibition but also known in previous years as Pioneer Days and "The Ex") is held every August at Prairieland Park.
Starting in 2016, the Saskatchewan Rush played in the National Lacrosse League after moving from Edmonton.
The health region also operates hospitals in smaller neighbouring communities.
It is Saskatchewan's largest arena, with a capacity of 15,000 for sporting events and 14,000 for concerts.
Recent data suggests that Saskatchewan has the highest rate of new HIV cases in Canada and that 1/4 cases of HIV infected babies are from Saskatchewan.
In connecting artists to the community and welcoming them to become involved, AKA Gallery strives to enrich artistic practices and critical discourses on a local, regional, and national level.
Their facilities include 6,171 seat Griffiths Stadium, 700 seat Rutherford Arena, and the state-of-the-art Physical Activity Complex, which is completely new with the exception of a small swimming pool which was not updated, that opened in August 2003 with the opening of the new College of Kinesiology Building.
The Ukrainian Museum of Canada  www.umc.sk.ca is located on the banks of the South Saskatchewan River.
The aim of the group was to escape the liquor trade in that city and set up a "dry" community in the Prairie region.
The Saskatoon railway station is located in the west end of the city; it was opened in the late 1960s as a replacement for Saskatoon's original main station which was located on 1st Avenue downtown—the relocation of the station sparked a major redevelopment of the downtown that included the construction of the Midtown Plaza, TCU Place (aka Centennial Auditorium) and other developments.
Saskatoon was a major league hockey city from 1921 to 1926 when the WCHL/WHL Sheiks/Crescents played.
Pike Lake and Blackstrap Provincial Parks are  south of the city.
An up to date schedule is posted at Saskatoon Transit Route & Schedule Adjustments.
Among the many movie theatres of the past that have come and gone was the Capitol Theatre, which opened in 1929 with a showing of the first talkie to be exhibited in Saskatoon.
Lieutenant Governors Barnhart, Fedoruk, McNab, Monroe, Porteous and Worobetz were all former residents of Saskatoon.
The route system was revamped on July 2, 2006, creating increased access to most parts of the city.
The Hotel Bessborough was named for a Canadian Governor General who visited the landmark under construction in the 1930s.
Governors General and Lieutenant Governors also pay regular visits to Saskatoon.
According to the Mendel Art Gallery website, the new Gallery will be a multistory building, adjacent to Persephone Theatre, in the range of .
Winds rose to over  and an estimated  of snow fell throughout the day.
The majority of the accusations turned out to be false; however, several starlight tours did take place.
In 2002, 378 Saskatoon residents were presented with Canada's Golden Jubilee Medal by vice-regals to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Queen's accession to the throne.
Royal University Hospital is a teaching and research hospital that operates in partnership with the University of Saskatchewan.
Saskatoon/John G. Diefenbaker International Airport provides scheduled and charter airline service for the city, and is a significant hub for mining and remote locations in Northern Saskatchewan.
The city has four distinct seasons and is in plant hardiness zone 3b.
Live theatre is a central, vibrant part of Saskatoon's culture.
The Queen was presented with the key to the city on the same visit, after touring the Canadian Light Source synchrotron and greeting thousands of well-wishers on a walkabout at the University of Saskatchewan.
The following services also have jurisdiction in Saskatoon: Corman Park Police Service, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Canadian National Railway Police Service and the Canadian Pacific Railway Police Service.
Saskatoon has welcomed members of Canada's Royal Family since 1919.
Saskatoon hosts many festivals and events in the summer, including the Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan Festival, The Great Plains Comedy Festival, the Jazz Festival, the Saskatchewan Children's Festival, the Saskatoon Fringe Theatre Festival (a showcase of alternative theatre), Saskatoon Folkfest (a cultural festival), Doors Open Saskatoon and the Canada Remembers Airshow.
Cross-country skiing is popular during the winter months, along with skating in Kiwanis Memorial Park.
The biggest chance for a return of major professional hockey came in 1982.
Saskatoon has the second highest percentage of First Nations population among major Canadian cities at nearly 9%, behind Winnipeg at 10.2%  and Regina close by with 8%; in certain neighbourhoods such as Pleasant Hill, this percentage exceeds 40%.
It was at one time considered that Saskatoon's Broadway Bridge would be renamed George V Bridge.
The city zoo is also housed within the park and features over 80 species of animals.
It ''does not'' include the two large annexations of land that occurred in the summer of 2010.
Sovereigns and consorts who have visited include Edward VIII as Prince of Wales in 1919, King George Vl and Queen Elizabeth in 1939, and Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh, as Princess Elizabeth in 1951 and afterwards as Queen in 1959, 1978, 1987 and 2005.
Another of Saskatoon's nicknames, "Hub City", refers to its ideal central location within Canada for distribution and logistics.
Saskatoon is a stop on The Canadian passenger transcontinental rail route operated by Via Rail.
Laff Trax Comedy Theatre is Saskatoon's live comedy club performing several shows a week at different venues throughout the city.
The Saskatoon bus terminal is also served by Greyhound Canada inter-provincial service between Manitoba and Alberta.
The total estimated costs for the Gallery, which will serve as the destination centre for the River Landing project, will be approximately $51 million.
On the east side, Lorne Avenue demarcates east and west while Aird Street marks the north/south boundary, except in the Sutherland community where a separate east/west demarcation takes place with Central Avenue as the boundary (there is, however, no separate north/south divide).
In 2005, it began a major renovation project that will expand the size of the gallery by seventy percent.
Saskatchewan International Raceway has been in operation for over 40 years; SIR is home to 1/4 mile NHRA drag racing and holds racing events from May to September.
In 2010, total crimes against people went up 1.28% and total crimes against property fell by 11.75%.
The most recent version of the plan called River Landing is ongoing.
Construction of Saskatoon's ring road, Circle Drive, began in the mid-1960s (after first being proposed in 1913), and was completed on July 31, 2013 with the opening of the $300-million South Circle Drive project.
As well, just north of the city lies Auto Clearing Motor Speedway; the track is home to local stock car racing, as well as races for several different Western Canadian series.
Saskatoon also boasts the only burlesque group in the Prairies, the Rosebud Burlesque.
Most First Nations residents are of Cree or Dakota cultural background although to a lesser extent Saulteaux, Assiniboine, and Dene communities also exist.
Canadian musician Joni Mitchell calls Saskatoon her hometown.
Kinsmen/Henk Ruys Soccer Centre has four sport court indoor fields while the SaskTel Sports Centre has two outdoor full size turf fields, one indoor full sized turf field, one indoor half sized turf field and one sport court field.
In September 2005, however, the City of Saskatoon announced that it had entered discussions with the Mendel to the end of having the Mendel abandon its renovation/expansion project in favor of instead relocating the facility to a new arts and culture centre that is planned for the south downtown area.
AKA Gallery is an artist-run centre that facilitates the production, presentation and interpretation of a diversity of contemporary art with an emphasis on innovative artistic practices.
The facility will allow up to three times the present available gallery space and will include studio and classroom space for education programs including an adaptive community studio and lecture theatre, meeting rooms and space for administrative functions.
For years, a parcel of land west of the Traffic Bridge, south of 19th Street, and east of Avenue C has been the subject of on-again, off-again redevelopment plans.
The lowest point in the city is the river, while the highest point is disputed between the suburb of Sutherland in the east side and the Silverwood-River Heights areas in the city's north end.
Saskatoon is also home to the Canadian Light Source, Canada's national synchrotron facility.
Minority faiths include Sikhism, Buddhism (0.7%), Judaism, Hinduism, and Islam (0.6%).
Historic neighbourhoods of Saskatoon include Nutana and Riversdale, which were both separate towns before amalgamating with the town of Saskatoon and incorporating as a city in 1906.
The Saskatoon area was inhabited long before any permanent settlement was established, to which the ongoing archaeological work at Wanuskewin Heritage Park and other locations bears witness.
Saskatoon is divided into east and west sides by the South Saskatchewan River.
In 1885 the Northwest Rebellion affected the tiny community in a variety of ways.
The above land area figure was provided by the City of Saskatoon in January 2006 and takes into account recent annexations up to that point.
A few died in care and were buried in the Pioneer Cemetery near the Exhibition Grounds.
Saskatoon is also the new home of BHP Billiton's Diamonds and Specialty Products business unit.
The Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority (SREDA) has also been ranked amongst Canada's top ten economic development organizations by Site Selection magazine.
This museum, one of four throughout the province, documents early pioneer life in Saskatchewan.
Non-stop scheduled destinations include Calgary, Edmonton, Las Vegas, Minneapolis, Ottawa, Prince Albert, Regina, Toronto, Vancouver, and Winnipeg.
Saskatoon's major arts venue is TCU Place, which is located adjacent to Midtown Plaza downtown.
The Forestry Farm was a historic nursery (dating from 1913) responsible for growing many of the trees planted within the prairie provinces.
Wanuskewin Heritage Park is a National Historic Site situated five km to the north of Saskatoon.
Innovation Place founded in 1980 brings together almost 150 agriculture, information technology, and environmental, life sciences and agricultural biotechnology industries in a science park or technology park setting.
Motor racing is a popular sport in Saskatoon.
The Saskatoon Farmers' Market and some commercial sites have also been developed.
Canada's First Nations population has been increasingly urbanized, and nowhere is that more apparent than in Saskatoon, where the First Nations population increased by 382% from 1981 to 2001; however, a portion of this increase, possibly as much as half, is believed to be due to more people identifying themselves as Aboriginal in the census rather than migration or birth rate.
Recent debates about moving all the railways out of the city are raising questions about a future LRT system, but the city's Mayor says the population is too small.
Since opening in 1967, it has hosted scores of concerts, theatrical performances, live events such as the Telemiracle telethon, high school graduation and university convocation ceremonies, and conventions.
It is then divided into Suburban Development Areas (SDA) which are composed of neighbourhoods.
Saskatoon experiences a borderline semi-arid/humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification ''BSk''/''Dfb'').
Saskatoon is host to a number of live theatre venues such as the Persephone Theatre, which is located in the Remai Arts Centre at River Landing in downtown Saskatoon, The Refinery and the Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company.
'''Saskatoon''' () is the largest city in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan.
Saskatoon is named after the berry of the same name, which is native to the region, and is itself derived from the Cree ''''.
Street addresses are demarcated into north and south (for avenues aligned in those directions) and similar east and west (for streets aligned in those directions).
Affinity Gallery presents up to eight exhibitions annually, including DIMENSIONS; Canada's longest running, open, juried craft exhibition.
There are currently no baseball teams in Saskatoon.
Some 78.5% of Saskatoon's inhabitants profess to be Christian, mostly Protestant (40.1%) and Roman Catholic (32.5%).
The many provincial transportation connections and geographic location of Saskatoon give it one of its nicknames ''The Hub City''.
Saskatoon is developing the South Central Business District, or block 146, which is called the River Landing Project.
The Saskatchewan Transportation Company connects Saskatoon via bus service to nearly 200 towns and villages in the province.
Saskatoon’s digital media scene is growing with start-up tech companies such as Noodlecake, OneStory, Point2, Vendasta Technologies, and Zu.
Similarly, the old rail town of Sutherland was annexed by the city in 1956 and is now another historic neighbourhood of Saskatoon, just beyond the University lands.
The Canadian Pacific Railway and the Canadian National Railway have connections to Saskatoon.
This increase in HIV cases has been in part attributed to growing IV drug use, a gang problem, poverty and prostitution in the city of Saskatoon, which has a higher rate of HIV than other areas.
The city's other movie theatres are the Rainbow Cinemas (a second-run cinema) and the Centre Cinemas, located adjacent to each other in The Centre mall on the city's east side.
The Huskies have made nine Vanier Cup appearances since 1990, and were the first team from outside of Ontario to host the Vanier Cup, hosting the game in 2006.
As of May 2010, landscaping and the development of the Frank & Ellen Remai Arts Centre a new performance venue for the Persephone Theatre had been completed on River Landing, joining a senior citizens residence that had been built in River Landing in the 1990s.
These include King George, Queen Elizabeth and Massey Place neighbourhoods, and Victoria, Coronation and Princess Diana parks.
In 2007, two new sports teams came into being in Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan SWAT of the Rocky Mountain Lacrosse League and the Saskatoon Accelerators in the Canadian Major Indoor Soccer League.
Saskatoon Soccer Centre controls both buildings.
The Hilltops have won 18 national junior championships throughout their history.
Local improv groups such as The No-No's and Saskatoon Soaps have weekly and monthly performances respectively at various venues around the city.
The Accelerators play at the Kinsmen/Henk Ruys Soccer Centre, while the SWAT play at the Gordie Howe Kinsmen Arena.
On November 16, 2009, it was revealed by Lake Placid that the financing should be secure within a week.
No admission is charged and everyone is free to walk around and enjoy the atmosphere.
Saskatoon is also home to amateur teams at the Junior B and Midget AAA levels, as well as several youth teams.
Other landmarks in the city include the iconic Traffic Bridge (which was demolished in 2016 and is expected to be replaced by a new structure evoking the appearance of the original), the University of Saskatchewan campus, and the large Viterra grain terminal which has dominated the western skyline of the city for decades and is large enough to be visible from Pike Lake Provincial Park 32&nbsp;km away.
In April 2010, Saskatoon City Council voted in favour of entering new negotiations with Lake Placid over the site.
In the past there have been various teams including the Saskatoon Yellow Jackets, Saskatoon Riot, Saskatoon Smokin' Guns, Saskatoon Stallions, and the Saskatoon Legends.
The extreme temperatures are typically accompanied by below average levels of humidity.
Bill Hunter, a local sports promoter, attempted to purchase the St. Louis Blues of the NHL and move it to Saskatoon, but the move was prevented by the league.
The foremost attraction for Ukrainian culture in Saskatoon, it houses various artifacts such as textiles, tools, musical instruments, and clothing, with many pieces on display for public viewing.
Connections to the crown include the royal namesakes of about one hundred neighbourhoods, parks, streets, schools and other places.
Landmarks and institutions also have connections and these include the Royal University Hospital, one of four royal designations in Saskatchewan.
Summer activities include cycling, jogging and walking through parks and natural areas.
Canadian football is one of the most successful on field sports in Saskatoon.
Its permanent collection exceeds 5,000 works of art.
Saskatoon is also home of the Saskatchewan Western Development Museum.
The remainder of the city's theatres are multiplexes.
The economy of Saskatoon has been associated with potash, oil and agriculture (specifically wheat), resulting in the moniker "POW City".
Currently, the City of Saskatoon is waiting for design proposals on the Art Gallery of Saskatchewan.
In terms of race, according to the 2001 census, 190,120 or 85.4% of the city's population were white Canadians, 19,900 or 8.9% were Aboriginals, with less than 5% belonging to other visible minority Canadians such as Han Chinese, South Asians, etc.
The Meewasin Valley Trail follows the South Saskatchewan River through Saskatoon.
It is Saskatchewan's only public exhibition gallery dedicated to the celebration of Fine Craft as an art form.
The Rural Municipality of Corman Park No.
Saskatoon lies on a long belt of rich, potassic chernozem in middle-southern Saskatchewan and is found in the aspen parkland biome.
The Mendel Art Gallery is situated on the bank of the South Saskatchewan River.
In the late 1990s, the Saskatoon Exhibition was rescheduled to August so that it no longer was in direct competition with the Calgary Stampede, which frequently overlapped the event.
The 2006 census crime data, released July 18, 2007, showed Saskatoon leading Canada in violent crime, with 1,606 violent crimes per 100,000 residents annually.
The frost-free growing season lasts from 21 May to 15 September, but due to Saskatoon's northerly location, damaging frosts have occurred as late as June 14 and again as early as August.
The Conference Board again predicted the city would rate first for economic increase in 2012, showing a growth rate of 4.2%.
In 2009, the NASCAR Canadian Tire Series make its inaugural stop at Auto Clearing Motor Speedway, signaling a move to a larger profile track in Saskatoon.
Adapting a responsive approach to programming and related activities, AKA Gallery aims to be a catalyst for the development and sustainability of a lively and engaged community of artists and audiences.
Blackstrap Park is often used for school field trips.
The University of Saskatchewan Huskies are one of the top University football programs in Canada, with three Vanier Cup national championships and 19 Hardy Trophy Canada West championships.
Saskatoon is also home to two full size soccer facilities.
In 1966 the nursery operations were discontinued and part of the region turned into a municipal park.
In the winter the Meewasin Skating Rink is open free to the public; it is located in Kiwanis Memorial Park beside the Delta Bessborough hotel.
As well Saskatoon is home to several golf courses and various parks which include tennis courts, ball diamonds and soccer pitches for spring, summer and fall use and outdoor rinks for winter use.
Following the fighting at the Battle of Fish Creek, and the Battle of Batoche, wounded Canadian soldiers convalesced at the Marr Residence which is today a historic site.
The site will also incorporate an underground parking facility with 250 parking spaces.
Seasonal and Charter service is provided to Mexico, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Phoenix and Churchill, MB.
Musical acts from Saskatoon include Joni Mitchell, Kyle Riabko, Wide Mouth Mason, The Northern Pikes, The Sheepdogs, and The Deep Dark Woods, as well as countless others popular at both local and regional levels.
Long range planning is underway for an expected city population of 325,000 by 2028 (2011 MXD report).
These portions of land have been zoned under the provincial land management acts.
There will also be a bistro, restaurant, and catering support.
For rock concerts and major shows, SaskTel Centre is the main venue.
The only movie theatre in the downtown core is the Galaxy Cinemas; the Capitol 4 shut down on April 3, 2008.
The Meewasin Valley Centre, in Friendship Park, has information on Saskatoon's history, the South Saskatchewan River, and the future of the Meewasin Valley.
The decision to drop the Mendel name has been controversial.
Emphasis will be placed on meeting functional requirements while also providing an appropriate signature architectural presence in the city’s south downtown.
The Bessborough and the Mendel Art Gallery are currently the only major structures located on the river side of Spadina Crescent.
Transit services in Saskatoon are provided by Saskatoon Transit.
Access points are found throughout the city with interpretive signage and washrooms located along the route.
There is a significant Indigenous population in the city, and several urban Reserves within its boundaries.
There were accusations in the early 1990s that the Saskatoon police were engaging in starlight tours, where officers would arrest Aboriginal men and drive them out of the city in the dead of winter to abandon them.
It is also home to the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra.
The Art Gallery will be built matching contributions of $13 million from the Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan.
It is known for its relatively diverse and vibrant culture, as well as its eight (plus two planned) river crossings, earning it the nicknames "Paris of the Prairies" and "Bridge City."
The lowest temperature ever recorded was  on 1 February 1893.
Saskatoon also has a substantial Métis population and is close to the historically significant Southbranch Settlements to the north, as well as the Prairie Ronde settlement near Dundurn, Saskatchewan.
Another 19.6% of Saskatoon's inhabitants do not profess a religious faith at all.
Nutana, Riversdale, their historic main streets of Broadway Avenue and 20th Street respectively, as well as the downtown core and other central neighbourhoods, are seeing significant reinvestment and redevelopment today.
The Broadway Theatre primarily shows arthouse films – while the two-screen Roxy Theatre is an "atmospheric-style" second-run theatre that reopened in 2005 after sitting unused for over a decade.
For horse racing fans, Marquis Downs at Prairieland Park offers live horse racing from May to October.
The following year settlers, led by John Neilson Lake, arrived on the site of what is now Saskatoon and established the first permanent settlement.
Other members of the Royal Family who have visited include Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon in 1980, the Prince of Wales (Charles) in 2001, the Princess Anne in 1982 and (as Princess Royal) in 2004, the Duke and Duchess of York (Andrew and Sarah) in 1989, and the Prince Edward in 1978.
A town charter for the west side of the river was obtained in 1903 (Nutana became a village in that year).
It is noted for its interior recreation of a "Boom Town" main street, including one original building relocated from its original site.
Saskatoon is also known as "Bridge City" or "City Of Bridges" because of its number of bridges that cross the Saskatchewan River which divides the city.
In 1882, the Toronto-based Temperance Colonization Society was granted 21 sections of land straddling the South Saskatchewan River, between what is now Warman and Dundurn.
The Forestry Farm Park and Zoo is a National Historic Site situated in the north east region of the city.
The Prince of Wales Promenade along the South Saskatchewan River is a focal point on the riverfront trails.
The "Blizzard of 2007" was described by many residents as the worst they had seen and paralyzed the city with its low visibility, extreme cold and large volume of snow.
The City of Saskatoon and other key partners have also committed funding in support of this project.
In addition to hospitals the health region operates long-term care facilities, clinics and other health care services.
As of December 31, 2012, the SPS had 442 sworn members, 59 Special Constables, and 136 civilian positions.
The Art Gallery of Saskatchewan was announced in April 2009 as the replacement for the Mendel Art Gallery, which will be constructed at River Landing, around the previously constructed Remai Arts Centre, which houses the Persephone Theatre company.
Saskatoon is expected to see a 4.2 percent growth in gross domestic product for the year 2012.
