North of Lemsford connecting 32 and 30
As a result, its climate is extremely continental, rendering severe winters all throughout the province.
Under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan (BCATP), twenty Service Flying Training Schools (RAF) were established at various Saskatchewan locations in World War II.
In the 1960s there were applications for abandonment of branch lines.
A seminal event in the history of what was to become Western Canada was the 1874 "March West" of the federal government's new North-West Mounted Police.
It declined and disappeared, subject to widespread political and media opposition, plus internal scandals involving the use of the organization's funds.
In 1913, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association was established as Saskatchewan's first ranchers' organization.
2 These values reflect the debt of the General Revenue Fund alone at the end of the fiscal year.
The main Saskatchewan waterways are the North Saskatchewan River or South Saskatchewan River routes.
Between Hague and Aberdeen
Midale and Yellow Grass near the U.S. border are tied for the highest ever recorded temperatures in Canada with  observed at both locations in July 1937.
Natural gas is found almost entirely in the western part of Saskatchewan, from the Primrose Lake area through Lloydminster, Unity, Kindersley, Leader, and around Maple Creek areas.
This also is part of the Asia-Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative to improve access to the CPR terminal and increase Asia-Pacific trade.
English as the school language helped to provide economic stability, because one community could communicate with another and goods could be traded and sold in a common language.
South Saskatchewan River
In 1970, the first annual Canadian Western Agribition was held in Regina.
South Saskatchewan River
wholesale and retail trade
''Roland J. Groome Airfield'' is the official designation for the Regina International Airport (YQR) as of August 3, 2005; the airport was established in 1930.
Finally, in 1885, the Métis, led by Louis Riel, staged the North-West Rebellion and declared a provisional government.
Historically, Saskatchewan's economy was primarily associated with agriculture.
It has seven colours: gold, brown, green, red, yellow, white and black.
Budweiser also gifted the “hockey player” province a trophy made of white birch—Saskatchewan’s provincial tree—which bears the name of every pro player in history.
Its name derived from the Saskatchewan River.
As more settlers came to the prairies on the railway, the population grew.
In 1803 the Louisiana Purchase transferred from France to the United States part of what is now Alberta and Saskatchewan.
Hockey is the most popular sport in the province.
South Saskatchewan River
East of Marcelin, 40 connecting to 11 Wingard
Between 3, Weldon via 682 and 302, Prince Albert
In total, there are 3,050 bridges maintained by the Department of Highways in Saskatchewan.
15 Wing Moose Jaw is home to the Canadian Forces formation aerobatics team, the ''Snowbirds''.
Saskatchewan's official tartan was registered with the Court of Lord Lyon King of Arms in Scotland in 1961.
The provincial licence plates display the slogan "Land of Living Skies".
The money from such settlements has enabled First Nations to invest in businesses and other economic infrastructure.
Residents primarily live in the southern prairie half of the province, while the northern boreal half is mostly forested and sparsely populated.
Notable NHL figures born in Saskatchewan include Keith Allen, Gordie Howe, Bryan Trottier, Bernie Federko, Clark Gillies, Fern Flaman, Bert Olmstead, Harry Watson, Elmer Lach, Max Bentley, Sid Abel, Doug Bentley, Eddie Shore, Clint Smith, Bryan Hextall, Johnny Bower, Emile Francis, Glenn Hall, Chuck Rayner, Brad McCrimmon, Patrick Marleau, Dave Manson, Theo Fleury, Terry Harper, Wade Redden, Brian Propp, Scott Hartnell, Ryan Getzlaf, and Chris Kunitz.
The Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure operates over  of highways and divided highways.
The tax on paid-up capital was reduced from 0.6% to 0.3% on July 1, 2006, to 0.15% on July 1, 2007, and abolished altogether on July 1, 2008.
Log cabins, and dwellings were constructed for the assembly of the community, school, church, dances and meetings.
The Cypress Hills, located in the southwestern corner of Saskatchewan and Killdeer Badlands (Grasslands National Park), are areas of the province that remained unglaciated during the last glaciation period, the Wisconsin glaciation.
The first permanent European settlement was a Hudson's Bay Company post at Cumberland House, founded in 1774 by Samuel Hearne.
The federal and provincial governments have negotiated on numerous land claims, and developed a program of "Treaty Land Entitlement", enabling First Nations to buy land to be taken into reserves with money from settlements of claims.
''Source: Government of Saskatchewan.''
But in that fourth quarter, 359 women were still on waiting lists for immediate or future care.
Also, the Government of Canada will contribute $27 million to Regina to construct a Canadian Pacific Railway CPR intermodal facility and improve infrastructure transportation to the facility from both national highway networks, Sk Hwy 1, the TransCanada Highway and Sk Hwy 11, Louis Riel Trail.
One of them being at the Sk Hwy 219 / Lorne Ave intersection with Circle Drive, the other at the Senator Sid Buckwold Bridge (Idylwyld Freeway) and Circle Drive.
Saskatchewan grows a large portion of Canada's grain.
Saskatchewan has been inhabited for thousands of years by various indigenous groups, and first explored by Europeans in 1690 and settled in 1774.
Resiliency of ecosystems may decline with large changes in temperature.
In 2005, Saskatchewan Environment held a province-wide vote to recognize Saskatchewan's centennial year, receiving more than 10,000 on-line and mail-in votes from the public.
''The Canadian'' is a transcontinental service linking Toronto with Vancouver.
The province celebrated the 75th anniversary of its establishment in 1980, with Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, presiding over the official ceremonies.
In 2005, Saskatchewan celebrated its centennial.
Saskatchewan is part of the Western Provinces and is bounded on the west by Alberta, on the north by the Northwest Territories, on the north-east by Nunavut, on the east by Manitoba, and on the south by the American states of Montana and North Dakota.
The 1920s saw the largest rise in rail line track as the CPR and CNR fell into competition to provide rail service within ten kilometres.
In 1961, Douglas left provincial politics to become the first leader of the federal New Democratic Party.
This farm-industry trade show, with its strong emphasis on livestock, is rated as one of the five top livestock shows in North America, along with those in Houston, Denver, Louisville and Toronto.
148,535 (15.4%) responded "no religion".
This trophy can currently be seen at Victoria Bar in Regina.
To honour it, the Royal Canadian Mint issued a commemorative five-dollar coin depicting Canada's wheat fields as well as a circulation 25-cent coin of a similar design.
These displayed values were obtained by adding the corporate income tax for each year with the corporate capital tax.
According to Leanne Smith, the director for maternal services in the Saskatoon Health Region declared that half of the women who apply for the midwifery program are turned away.
As Saskatchewan's borders largely follow the geographic coordinates of longitude and latitude, the province is roughly a quadrilateral, or a shape with four sides.
As a result, about 761,000 acres have been turned into reserve land and many First Nations continue to invest their settlement dollars in urban areas", including Saskatoon.
Its farming equivalent, the Saskatchewan Grain Growers Association, was the dominant political force in the province until the 1920s; it had close ties with the governing Liberal party.
On September 1, 1905, Saskatchewan became a province, with inauguration day held September 4.
Despite poor equipment and lack of provisions, the men on the march persevered and established a federal presence in the new territory.
It became a province in 1905, and in the early 20th century the province became known as a stronghold for Canadian democratic socialism; North America's first social-democratic government was elected in 1944.
transportation, communications, utilities
"In 1992, the federal and provincial governments signed an historic land claim agreement with Saskatchewan First Nations.
Transportation in Saskatchewan includes an infrastructure system of roads, highways, freeways, airports, ferries, pipelines, trails, waterways and railway systems serving a population of approximately 1,003,299 (according to 2007 estimates) inhabitants year-round.
The provincial Health Ministry received 47 letters about midwifery services in 2012, most of which asked for more midwives.
6 These values are the credit ratings from Standard & Poor's as of the end of the Fiscal Year.
In the late 1850s and early 1860s, scientific expeditions led by John Palliser and Henry Youle Hind explored the prairie region of the province.
Following World War II, the transition from many one-room school houses to fewer and larger consolidated modern technological town and city schools occurred as a means of ensuring technical education.
North of Lancer connecting 32 and 30
Survivors and descendants founded Wood Mountain Reserve in 1914.
Saskatchewan contains two major natural regions: the Canadian Shield in the north and the Interior Plains in the south.
As of 2011, 9,772 people lived on the Saskatchewan side, which would make it Saskatchewan's 10th largest municipality.
The overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan's population is located in the southern third of the province, south of the 53rd parallel.
The flag features the provincial shield in the upper quarter nearest the staff, with the floral emblem, the Prairie Lily, in the fly.
Saskatchewan's other symbols include the tartan, the license plate, and the provincial flower.
Saskatchewan's GDP in 2006 was approximately C$45.922 billion, with economic sectors breaking down in the following way:
Between 25 and 3 on Grid Road
Bombardier was awarded a long-term contract in the late 1990s for $2.8 billion from the federal government for the purchase of military aircraft and the running of the training facility.
The Crown also entered into a series of numbered treaties with the indigenous peoples of the area, which serve as the basis of the relationship between First Nations, as they are called today, and the Crown.
Light crude is found in the Kindersley-Swift Current areas as well as the Weyburn-Estevan fields.
South Saskatchewan River
Some First Nations have used their settlement to invest in urban areas, including Saskatoon.
The province has 14 major drainage basins made up of various rivers and watersheds draining into the Arctic Ocean, Hudson Bay and the Gulf of Mexico.
While studies, as early as 1988 (Williams, et al., 1988) have shown that climate change will affect agriculture, whether the effects can be mitigated through adaptations of cultivars, or crops, is less clear.
The prosperity of the Roaring Twenties and the success of farmers in proving up on their homesteads helped provide funding to standardize education.
Since then, the government has recognized the Métis as an aboriginal people with status rights, and provided them with various benefits related to that status.
Northern Saskatchewan is mostly covered by boreal forest except for the Lake Athabasca Sand Dunes, the largest active sand dunes in the world north of 58°, and adjacent to the southern shore of Lake Athabasca.
There are also municipal roads which comprise different surfaces.
Since the late 20th century, First Nations have become more politically active in seeking justice for past inequities, especially related to government taking of indigenous lands.
North Saskatchewan River
The walleye was the overwhelming favourite of the six native fish species nominated for the designation, receiving more than half the votes cast.
It was renamed the ''John G. Diefenbaker Airport'' in the official ceremony, June 23, 1993.
SaskPower since 1929 has been the principal supplier of electricity in Saskatchewan, serving more than 451,000 customers and managing $4.5 billion in assets.
The North-West Mounted Police set up several posts and forts across Saskatchewan, including Fort Walsh in the Cypress Hills, and Wood Mountain Post in south-central Saskatchewan near the United States border.
The largest denominations by number of adherents according to the 2001 census were the Roman Catholic Church with 286,815 (30%); the United Church of Canada with 187,450 (20%); and the Lutherans with 78,520 (8%).
Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh visited Regina, Saskatoon, and Lumsden, and the Saskatchewan-reared Joni Mitchell issued an album in Saskatchewan's honour.
Southern areas have very warm or hot summers.
In 1870, Canada acquired the Hudson's Bay Company's territories and formed the North-West Territories to administer the vast territory between British Columbia and Manitoba.
finance, insurance, real estate, leasing
The first Canadian transcontinental railway was constructed by the Canadian Pacific Railway between 1881 and 1885.
Today the only two passenger rail services in the province are ''The Canadian'' and Winnipeg – Churchill train, both operated by Via Rail.
After 16 years of New Democratic governments under premiers Roy Romanow and Lorne Calvert, the 2007 provincial election was won by the Saskatchewan Party under Brad Wall.
Beef cattle production in the province is only exceeded by Alberta.
The Government of Canada has agreed to contribute $20 million for two new interchanges in Saskatoon.
The flag of Saskatchewan was officially adopted on September 22, 1969.
Under his Cooperative Commonwealth Federation government, Saskatchewan became the first province to have Medicare.
Since the late twentieth century, land losses and inequities as a result of those treaties have been subject to negotiation for settlement between the First Nations in Saskatchewan and the federal government, in collaboration with provincial governments.
It is funded primarily with local and federal government funds.
Riel, who surrendered and was convicted of treason in a packed Regina courtroom, was hanged on November 16, 1885.
Communities were seeking education for their children similar to the schools of their home land.
The Saskatchewan Department of Highways and Transportation estimates that 80% of traffic is carried on the 5,031-kilometre principal system of highways.
The Dominion Lands Act permitted settlers to acquire one quarter of a square mile of land to homestead and offered an additional quarter upon establishing a homestead.
The Klan, briefly allied with the provincial Conservative party because of their mutual dislike for Premier James G. "Jimmy" Gardiner and his Liberals (who ferociously fought the Klan), enjoyed about two years of prominence.
3 These values reflect the combined debt of the Government Service Enterprises (Crown Corporations) at the end of the fiscal year.
Under the Agreement, the First Nations received money to buy land on the open market.
Saskatchewan does not have an NHL or minor professional franchise, but five teams in the junior Western Hockey League are located in the province: the Moose Jaw Warriors, Prince Albert Raiders, Regina Pats, Saskatoon Blades and Swift Current Broncos.
Many Métis people, who had not been signatories to a treaty, had moved to the Southbranch Settlement and Prince Albert district north of present-day Saskatoon following the Red River Rebellion in Manitoba in 1870.
5 The Provincial Sales Tax (PST) rate was reduced from 7% to 5% on October 28, 2006.
In the early 1880s, the Canadian government refused to hear the Métis' grievances, which stemmed from land-use issues.
As of December 2013, the population of Saskatchewan was estimated at 1,114,170.
Airlines offering service to Saskatchewan are Air Canada, WestJet Airlines, United Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Transwest Air, Sunwing Airlines, Norcanair Airlines, La Ronge Aviation Services Ltd, La Loche Airways, Osprey Wings Ltd, Buffalo Narrows Airways Ltd, Île-à-la-Crosse Airways Ltd, Voyage Air, Pronto Airways, Venture Air Ltd, Pelican Narrows Air Service, Jackson Air Services Ltd, and Northern Dene Airways Ltd.
Of the total population, roughly half live in either the province's largest city, Saskatoon, or the provincial capital, Regina.
The lowest point is the shore of Lake Athabasca, at .
Sitting atop the trophy was a golden Budweiser Red Light, synched to every current Saskatchewan player in the pros.
Major Saskatchewan-based Crown corporations are Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI), SaskTel, SaskEnergy (the province's main supplier of natural gas), and SaskPower.
North Saskatchewan River
Asphalt concrete pavements comprise almost , granular pavement almost , non structural or thin membrane surface TMS are close to  and finally gravel highways make up over  through the province.
Immigration peaked in 1910, and in spite of the initial difficulties of frontier life – distance from towns, sod homes, and backbreaking labour – new settlers established a European-Canadian style of prosperous agrarian society.
In the northern sector, ice roads which can only be navigated in the winter months comprise another approximately  of travel.
All of the listed communities are considered cities by the province, with the exception of Corman Park, which is a rural municipality.
In the northern part of the province, forestry is also a significant industry.
However the 49th parallel boundary and the 60th northern border appear curved on globes and many maps.
The company then filmed this frozen monument for a national television commercial, thanking the province for creating so many goal scorers throughout hockey’s history.
European-Canadian settlement of the province started to take off as the Canadian Pacific Railway was built in the early 1880s, and the Canadian government divided up the land by the Dominion Land Survey and gave free land to any willing settlers.
Saskatchewan is bordered on the west by Alberta, on the north by the Northwest Territories, on the east by Manitoba, to the northeast by Nunavut, and on the south by the American states of Montana and North Dakota.
Oil and natural gas production is also a very important part of Saskatchewan's economy, although the oil industry is larger.
The first 76 North-West Territories school districts and the first Board of Education meeting formed in 1886.
Between 302 and 55 east of Prince Albert
The first known European to enter Saskatchewan was Henry Kelsey in 1690, who travelled up the Saskatchewan River in hopes of trading fur with the province's indigenous peoples.
they are all parallels and meridians).
More than 490 NHL players have been born in Saskatchewan, the highest per capita output of any Canadian province, U.S. state, or European country.
connecting Estuary and Laporte
Between 16 and 26 via 764
The provincial flower of Saskatchewan is the Western Red Lily.
In 2005, 25 years later, her sister, Queen Elizabeth II, attended the events held to mark Saskatchewan's centennial.
For many years, Saskatchewan was one of Canada's more progressive provinces, reflecting many of its citizens' feelings of alienation from the interests of large capital.
The river was known as ''kisiskāciwani-sīpiy'' ("swift flowing river") in the Cree language.
Saskatchewan has been populated by various indigenous peoples of North America, including members of the Sarcee, Niitsitapi, Atsina, Cree, Saulteaux, Assiniboine (Nakoda), Lakota and Sioux.
However, increasing diversification has resulted in agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting only making up 6.8% of the province's GDP.
Heavy crude is extracted in the Lloydminster-Kerrobert-Kindersley areas.
School buses, highways, and family vehicles create ease and accessibility of a population shift to larger towns and cities.
Provincial politics in Saskatchewan is dominated by the social-democratic New Democrats and the centre-right Saskatchewan Party, with the latter holding the majority in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as of 2012.
The effects of climate change in Saskatchewan are now being observed in parts of the province.
The province's economy is based on agriculture, mining, and energy.
School vouchers have been newly proposed as a means of allowing competition between rural schools and making the operation of co-operative schools practicable in rural areas.
South Saskatchewan River
The provincial government has responded to the threat of climate change by introducing a plan to reduce carbon emissions, "The Saskatchewan Energy and Climate Change Plan," in June, 2007.
It was further reduced to 13% on July 1, 2007, and finally to 12% on July 1, 2008.
At its founding convention in 1913, the members established three goals: to watch over legislation; to forward the interests of the stock growers in every honourable and legitimate way; and to suggest to parliament legislation to meet changing conditions and requirements.
Bombardier runs the NATO Flying Training Centre at 15 Wing, near Moose Jaw.
Text books, normal schools for educating teachers, formal school curricula and state of the art school house architectural plans provided continuity throughout the province.
This list does not include Lloydminster, which has a total population of 27,804 but straddles the Alberta–Saskatchewan border.
The winning design was by Anthony Drake, then living in Hodgeville.
Other species in the running were the lake sturgeon, lake trout, lake whitefish, northern pike and yellow perch.
A province-wide competition was held to design the flag, and drew over 4,000 entries.
Ministry of Health data shows that midwives saw 1,233 clients in the 2012-13 fiscal year (which runs April to March).
Ferries of Saskatchewan
The upper green (in forest green) half of the flag represents the northern Saskatchewan forest lands, while the golden lower half of the flag symbolizes the southern wheat fields and prairies.
Other notable cities include Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Swift Current, North Battleford, and the border city Lloydminster (partially within Alberta).
Combines and tractors mean that the farmer could successfully manage more than a quarter section of land, so there was a shift from family farms and subsistence crops to cash crops grown on many sections of land.
Saskatchewan is a landlocked province with large distances to moderating bodies of waters.
The number of one-room school house districts across Saskatchewan totalled approximately 5,000 at the height of this system of education in the late 1940s.
Among Canadian provinces, only Alberta exceeds Saskatchewan in overall oil production.
The province's highest point, at , is located in the Cypress Hills less than 2&nbsp;km from the provincial boundary with Alberta.
They do not reflect the debt of Government Service Organizations (Health Authorities, Crop Insurance Corporation, etc.
Between Warman and Aberdeen on 784
There is evidence of reduction of biomass in Saskatchewan's boreal forests (as with those of other Canadian prairie provinces) that is linked by researchers to drought-related water stress, stemming from global warming, most likely caused by greenhouse gas emissions.
In 1944 Tommy Douglas became premier of the first avowedly socialist regional government in North America.
In 1885, post-Confederation Canada's first "naval battle" was fought in Saskatchewan, when a steamship engaged the Métis at Batoche in the North-West Rebellion.
SaskPower is a major employer in the province with almost 2,500 permanent full-time staff located in 71 communities.
Along with Alberta, Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces that are land-locked.
They were defeated by a Canadian militia brought to the Canadian prairies by the new Canadian Pacific Railway.
4 The highest rate of provincial corporate income tax was reduced from 17% to 14% on July 1, 2006.
The major highways in Saskatchewan are the Trans Canada expressway, Yellowhead Highway northern Trans Canada route, Louis Riel Trail, CanAm Highway, Red Coat Trail, Northern Woods and Water route, and Saskota travel route.
Saskatchewan has over 250,000&nbsp;kilometres (150,000&nbsp;mi) of roads and highways, the highest amount of road surface of any Canadian province.
This is part of the Asia-Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative to improve access to the Canadian National Railway's intermodal freight terminal thereby increasing Asia-Pacific trade.
Highway 42 and Highway 373
Most of his Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) represented rural and small-town ridings.
South Saskatchewan River
The pioneering boom formed ethnic bloc settlements.
North Saskatchewan River
Municipalities in the province with a population of 5,000 or more can receive official city status.
