201,829 people had come to see his last three starts.
Paige struck out Monte Irvin and Lenny Pearson, but Doby stole second and Paige gave up a single to Johnny Davis, which tied the game.
I tried lifting my arm.
Then, on August 14, 1955, Paige signed a contract with the Greensboro Patriots of the Carolina League.
Paige and Lahoma had seven children together; Lahoma also had a daughter from an earlier marriage.
It was decided that all who had been chosen and all who would be chosen would get their plaques in the "regular" section of the Hall of Fame.
He joined the semi-pro Mobile Tigers where his brother Wilson was already pitching.
When my foot hit the ground that boy started swinging, so by the time I came around with the whip he was way off stride and couldn't get anywhere near the ball.
Overall, Feller had pitched 54 innings against Paige's team and given up 15 runs, an average of 2.50 per nine innings.
He ended the season with a 19–3 record, a 1.93 ERA, and 208 strikeouts in 205 innings.
Satchel was born Leroy Robert Page to John Page, a gardener, and Lula Page (née Coleman), a domestic worker, in a section of Mobile, Alabama known as Down the Bay.
In a December game against Mayagüez, Paige set a league record by striking out 17.
Interestingly, Peninsula used their backup catcher that day, rather than play their regular starter, a young Johnny Bench.
Paige, however, continued on to California where he joined a lesser team, Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals, which was scheduled to play Feller's All-Stars.
Paige was the West's starting pitcher in the 1943 East-West All-Star Game, played before a record 51,723 fans in Comiskey Park.
Leonard, unnerved by the rising swoop of the ball, repeatedly asked the umpire to check the ball for scuffing.
In his first game back in the major leagues, on July 18, 1951, against the Washington Senators, Paige pitched six innings of shutout baseball until the seventh when he gave up three runs.
On October 24 Paige won his first California game 8–1, allowing five hits and striking out 11, including Babe Herman four times.
The opposing team included a number of major league players out of the Bay Area, including Ernie Lombardi, Augie Galan, Cookie Lavagetto, and Gus Suhr, as well as Pacific Coast League star Joe DiMaggio, who was making his last stop as a minor leaguer before joining the New York Yankees.
In August, the All-Stars won the ''Denver Post'' tournament.
By late fall his team was playing well against major Negro league teams.
In the remainder of the game, he did not allow a hit or a run and struck out six, while the Monarchs' hitters scored two runs in the seventh to take the lead and three more in the eighth to win, 9–5, and sweep the series.
Up next was Whitey Platt, and Paige decided to take command.
Paige himself was the source of many of these dates.
He is buried on Paige Island in the Forest Hill Memorial Park Cemetery in Kansas City.
The pain wouldn't quit.
He tried to pitch through the pain, and managed to beat Dihigo in their first match-up in early September, allowing one run in eight innings.
One sportswriter wrote that Paige looked like a "squeezed lemon."
At the age of ten, Satchel was playing "top ball" which was what got him into baseball.
Paige then joined the real Globetrotters when he joined one of their most popular "reams"—the "baseball routine".
Feller's team included 1946 American League batting champion, Mickey Vernon, at first base, Johnny Beradino at second, Phil Rizzuto at shortstop, and Ken Keltner at third.
Abe and Effa Manley, owners of the Newark Eagles, still claimed that they still held the rights to Paige's Negro league contract, and retaliated against Wilkinson by signing players from Wilkinson's Negro American League.
Feller leased two DC-3 airplanes, with "Bob Feller All-Stars" painted on one fuselage and "Satchel Paige All-Stars" on the other.
On July 9, 1948, Paige became the oldest man ever to debut in the major leagues, at the age of 42 years and two days.
Gibson fouled off the first two pitches, then whiffed on the third.
He got in the game in the eighth inning.
Paige recalled driving all night from Pittsburgh and parking near the stadium, then falling asleep in the car.
Paige gave up two runs in the first, threw a scoreless second and then left, never to return as a player in organized baseball again.
He finished the winter with a 6–0 record and 70 strikeouts in 58 innings.
With the Crawfords playing five future Hall of Famers, many Negro league historians regard the 1930s Crawfords as the greatest team in Negro league history.
Churchill added other Negro league players to the team—pitchers Barney Morris, and Hilton Smith, catcher Quincy Trouppe, and pitcher/catcher Double Duty Radcliffe.
He got Eddie Joost to fly out to end the inning, but gave up two runs the next inning when Ferris Fain doubled and Hank Majeski hit a home run.
Over the next two seasons, Paige went 12–5 and 10–9 while recording 176 strikeouts in 1929.
At the age of 55, in 1961, Paige signed on with the Triple-A Portland Beavers of the Pacific Coast League, pitching twenty-five innings, striking out 19 and giving up eight earned runs.
Paige ended the year with a disappointing 3–9 record, but a respectable 3.53 ERA.
In 1946, Bob Feller organized the first barnstorming tour to use airplanes to travel from site to site.
Paige entered the game at the start of the eighth inning with the East leading 8–1 and pitched the last two innings.
A third version, told by the general manager of the Santa Clara Leopards, says that he left Cuba in haste after legal charges were brought against him regarding an amorous incident with "a young lady from the provincial mulatto bourgeoisie."
In a game that was sometimes described as the greatest game in Negro league history, Paige and Jones battled to a 1–1 tie that was called because of darkness.
At that point in the season, Paige was 5–1 with an astoundingly low 1.33 ERA.
In September, Paige joined a Negro all-star team organized by Tom Wilson, called the Philadelphia Giants, to play in the California Winter League.
Wilkinson and Tom Baird, Paige assembled a team that included first basemen Buck O'Neil, second baseman Hank Thompson, shortstops Chico Renfroe and Artie Wilson, third basemen Howard Easterling and Herb Souell, outfielders Gene Benson and Johnny Davis, catcher Quincy Trouppe, and pitchers Barney Brown, Gentry Jessup, Rufus Lewis, Hilton Smith, and Neck Stanley.
In 1941, the Monarchs won their third consecutive Negro American League championship.
Wilkinson purchased a Douglas DC-3 airplane just to ferry Paige around to these outside appearances.
Before the 1939 season, Paige suffered an arm injury that robbed his fastball of some velocity.
That winter, a northern California promoter, Johnny Burton, hired Paige to front a team called the "Satchel Paige All-Stars", in a game to be held on February 7, 1936 in Oakland against a white all-star squad.
A team that featured shortstop Perucho Cepeda and outfielder Tetelo Vargas, the Guayama Witch Doctors were the 1938–39 champions.
For this game in Cleveland, 78,382 people came to see Paige, a full 6,000 more people than the previous night game attendance record.
Bartell stole second on the first pitch, then went to third on a wild pitch.
Paige did face Feller twice, however, while playing with Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals in Los Angeles.
In 1952, Rogers Hornsby, an alleged former member of the Ku Klux Klan, took over as manager of the Browns.
On July 4, Paige threw his second no-hitter, this time against the Homestead Grays.
''The Denver Post'' conducted an annual baseball tournament (sometimes known as the "Little World Series") that attracted semi-pro and independent professional teams from across the country.
In the title game against an overmatched semi-pro team from Borger, Texas, Paige pitched a 7–0 shutout, striking out 18.
Two weeks before his thirteenth birthday, Paige was arrested for shoplifting.
Though no standings were published, according to historian John Holway, they had a 24–6 team record for a winning percentage of .800, placing them five games ahead of the second-place New Orleans/St.
Paige finished the game, but was charged with the loss in the 7–4 game.
It came at Philadelphia's Shibe Park.
While Feller's team would face several other opponents, the majority of the games were against Paige's team.
Wilkinson and Paige each kept a share of the fees.
When Paige told the story in his autobiography, he mythologized the story.
Buck O'Neil, a former teammate and longtime friend of Paige, claimed in the 1994 documentary ''Baseball'' that Babe Ruth batted against Paige once.
I put that foot of mine down, stopping for a second, before the ball left my hand.
(Several sources credit his 1929 strikeout total as the all-time single-season record for the Negro leagues, though there is variation among the sources about the exact number of strikeouts.)
It's a lot like Mariano Rivera, except he wasn't doing it for one inning at a time.
Game four took place in Shibe Park in Philadelphia, and Paige was scheduled to start, but he did not show up until the fourth inning.
On July 28, 2006, a statue of Satchel Paige was unveiled in Cooper Park, Cooperstown, New York commemorating the contributions of the Negro leagues to baseball.
Day and Paige both pitched complete games, with Paige giving up four runs on eight hits and Day giving up one run on five hits for a Grays victory.
Paige's team broke the tie in the seventh inning when Hank Thompson walked and stole second and Souell drove him home with a single up the middle.
You'd look at that big ol' slow arm movin' and—''chooo''— that ball's just right by you.
In August 1968, the owner of the Atlanta Braves, William Bartholomay, signed Paige to a contract running through the 1969 season as a pitching coach/pitcher, although it was mainly done so that Paige could gain service time to receive a major league pension.
The Monarchs added another three in the top of the ninth and won 8–4.
Larry Doby, who broke the color barrier in the American League at the age of 23 the same year Robinson did in the National League, would be a teammate of Paige.
Buck O'Neil, who had batted against Paige in 1935 and 1936 and faced him again in a game against the parent Monarchs, recalled a dropoff in speed but an improvement in deception.
Paige was a right-handed pitcher, and at age 42 in 1948, he was the oldest major league rookie while playing for the Cleveland Indians.
Satchel's mother, Lula, would even comment on how Satchel would rather "play baseball than eat.
On September 22, 1939, in the second game of a double-header against the powerful American Giants, Paige won a 1–0 game, striking out 10 men in the seven innings before the game was called on account of darkness.
Lula and her children changed the spelling of their name from Page to Paige in the mid-1920s, just before the start of Satchel's baseball career.
Playing for the East, Paige came in during the sixth inning with a man on second and the score tied 0–0, and proceeded to strike out Alec Radcliffe and retire Turkey Stearnes and Mule Suttles on soft fly balls.
But even that made my arm ache like a tooth was busting every time I threw.
He then walked Duke Snider, and Enos Slaughter lined a hit to center to score Campanella.
Paige went the distance, giving up two singles and one double for his second consecutive three hit shutout.
Despite the imbalance in talent, Paige kept the game to a 1–1 tie through nine innings, striking out 12 and giving up one run on three hits.
The tour would require 13,000 miles of travel.
A Yankee scout watching the game wired the club that day a report that read, "DiMaggio everything we'd hoped he'd be: Hit Satch one for four."
Veeck made a deal with Osborn that he could line up his best nine hitters, rotating them in from their positions in the field, and Veeck agreed to pay ten dollars to any of them who get a clean hit off of Paige.
American League President Will Harridge eventually ruled the Hesitation Pitch definitely illegal and, if thrown again, it would result in a balk.
Paige got his first big league victory on July 15, 1948, the night after he pitched in an exhibition game against the Brooklyn Dodgers in front of 65,000 people in Cleveland's Municipal Stadium.
Paige and Dean would continue to barnstorm against each other until 1945.
Several same-day multi-city doubleheaders were to be played.
Not as hard as he had thrown, but you're talkin' about somebody thrown' ninety-eight, a hundred miles an hour.
Paige was paid $10,000 for his story and technical advice.
I just sat there, sweating, hurting enough to want to cry, getting sicker in the stomach and getting scared—real scared.
He pitched three scoreless innings without giving up a hit, struck out four, walked one, and was credited as the winning pitcher in the West's 2–1 victory.
On September 25, against the Boston Red Sox, Finley invited several Negro league veterans including Cool Papa Bell to be introduced before the game.
Satchel Paige Elementary School in Kansas City is named in his honor.
The 72,562 people that saw the game set a new attendance record for a major league night game.
In April 1926, shortly after his arrival, he recorded nine strikeouts over six innings against the Atlanta Black Crackers.
Modern sports medicine specialists suggest that Paige suffered from a partially torn rotator cuff in his shoulder caused by repetitive stress.
In addition to Smith, Paige's teammates included first baseman Buck O'Neil, shortstop and manager Newt Allen, and center fielder Willard Brown.
Two days later, Paige came into the second game in a similar situation as the first, but the result was quite different.
And then he'd come up and throw you a change of pace and, oh, man."
Paige was released after the season when Veeck once again had to sell the team.
As his main opponent, he asked Paige to head a team of Negro league all-stars.
The tournament was held at Lawrence-Dumont Stadium in Wichita, Kansas and offered a $7,000 purse.
Byrd taught Paige to kick his front foot high and to swing his arm around so it looked like his hand was in the batter's face when he released the ball.
He recalled that the next morning, "My stomach got sick with the pain that shot up my right arm.
Paige had an excellent season overall, however, leading the league with an 8–2 record.
He played with the St. Louis Browns until age 47, and represented them in the All-Star Game in 1952 and 1953.
Later, while playing in the California Winter League, Paige faced Dean in front of 18,000 fans in Los Angeles, with Dean's team including major league stars like Wally Berger.
Paige eventually realized that by integrating baseball in the minor leagues first with Robinson, the white major league players got the chance to "get used to" the idea of playing alongside black players.
Puerto Rican pitcher Ramón Bayron recalled, "It took special eyes to see his pitches."
In Paige's first game as a Marlin, he pitched a complete-game, four-hit shutout.
Paige then threw his "Hesitation Pitch" (see "pitching style" section below), which surprised Platt so much that he threw his bat 40 feet up the third base line.
In the Dominican Republic, the American players were shadowed by armed guards.
He was fined several times throughout the year and finished 10–10, saying that he would not return to Miami the following season.
The fans started booing him, so he decided that "somebody was going to have to be showed up for that."
The Dragones won the first four, with Paige contributing two of them.
When Veeck bought an 80% interest in the St. Louis Browns he soon signed Paige.
Paige—homesick for carousing, hating the food, despising the constant inspections and being thoroughly baffled by the language—went 6–5 in Cuba.
Paige received his first East–West All Star Game selection in 1934.
The final, championship game was his third start in five days and he faced the Kansas City Monarchs—at the time an independent, barnstorming team—who were participating in the tournament with a lineup augmented by Negro league stars Turkey Stearnes and Sam Bankhead.
Paige never actually played on the team, though.
Unfortunately, Greensboro had already scheduled Paige to pitch in a regular season game which was sold out in advance and could not change it to an exhibition.
In 1932, Greenlee signed Josh Gibson, Oscar Charleston and Ted "Double Duty" Radcliffe away from Cumberland Posey's Homestead Grays to assemble one of the finest baseball clubs in history.
And he also threw hundreds and hundreds of innings."
"He could still throw hard.
By the spring of 1931, the Depression was taking its toll on the Negro leagues, and the Black Barons had temporarily disbanded.
The following year, Osborn was replaced as manager by Kerby Farrell, who was not as forgiving when it came to Paige missing curfews or workouts.
Two weeks later they faced off again, and this time Paige could barely lift his arm.
Because of Paige's strong gate appeal, there was considerable demand by outside teams to lease Paige's services to pitch for a single game.
He ended the season with a 3–4 record and a 4.79 ERA.
Oh, he named them different names—Bat Dodger, Midnight Rider, Midnight Creeper, Jump Ball, Trouble Ball—but essentially they were all fastballs.
In June 1931, the Crawford Colored Giants, an independent club owned by Pittsburgh underworld figure Gus Greenlee, made Paige an offer of $250 a month.
Appearing in front of a crowd of 20,000 fans at Yankee Stadium, Paige pitched a complete game, 5–3 victory, striking out eight.
He called in his outfielders and had them sit down in the infield.
In the 1942 East-West All-Star Game, Paige entered in the top of the seventh with the score tied 2–2.
On May 31, Paige teamed up with the Homestead Grays to face Dean's All-Stars again before 22,000 fans at Griffith Stadium.
In 1968, Paige assumed the position of deputy sheriff in Jackson County, Missouri, with the understanding that he need not bother to actually come to work in the sheriff's office.
In 1946 or 1947, Paige married his longtime girlfriend Lahoma Brown.
They swept the tournament in seven games to win the $5,000 prize, with Paige winning three of them.
The first game was played at the Polo Grounds and Hilton Smith started for the Monarchs.
Late in 1960, Paige began collaborating with writer David Lipman on his autobiography, which was published by Doubleday in April 1962, and ran to three printings.
In 1938, Greenlee, who still held Paige's NNL contract, again made an unsuccessful attempt to sign Paige.
After he arrived in Mexico, the pain developed into the first major injury of his career.
While his outstanding control as a pitcher first got him noticed, it was his infectious, cocky, enthusiastic personality and his love for the game that made him a star.
Paige first played for the semi-professional Mobile Tigers from 1924 to 1926.
With help from J.L.
Another version, also told by Paige, says that when he called on an attractive local girl at her home, she and her family interpreted his attentions as an official engagement and sent the police to enforce it, leading Paige to flee the island with police in pursuit.
Paige, and all other black players, knew that quibbling about the choice of the first black player in the major leagues would do nothing productive, so, despite his inner feelings, Paige said of Robinson, "He's the greatest colored player I've ever seen."
Paige went 10–4, allowing 3.19 runs per game and striking out 92 in 132 innings.
Managed by Newt Joseph, the team also included Byron "Mex" Johnson, but otherwise it mostly functioned as a minor-league team staffed by marginal, aging, or young players.
Floyd worked with massage, hot and cold water, ointments, and chiropractics.
Paige ended the 1948 season with a 6–1 record with a 2.48 ERA, 2 shutouts, 43 strikeouts, 22 walks and 61 base hits allowed in 72 innings.
So when I stretched, I paused just a little longer with my arms above my head.
Paige allowed three hits and no walks, and struck out eight, including Ralph Kiner twice.
The Monarchs defeated Dean's All-Stars 3–1 in front of a crowd of 29,775.
And the balls I was throwing never would fool anybody in the Negro leagues, not without a fast ball to go with them."
The next day, Paige's team won again in Columbus.
In 1934 it was open, for the first time, to black players.
Dumont invited 32 semi-pro teams, paying $1,000 for Paige and his Bismarck teammates to attend.
The outfielders were Jeff Heath, Charlie Keller, and Sam Chapman; after the World Series was over, National League batting champion Stan Musial would also join the tour.
A week later a rematch was held at Yankee Stadium, and this time Paige beat Taylor handily.
In 1946, many of the Monarchs' players, including Willard Brown, Connie Johnson, Buck O'Neil, Ford Smith, and Ted Strong, returned from military service, and the team led the NAL in both the first and second halves, capturing the league pennant.
Playing in the same city as a white major league team, Paige recalled, "I'd look over at the Cleveland Indians' stadium, called League Park ... All season long it burned me, playing there in the shadow of that stadium.
Paige continued to play, and the available statistics show a slip in performance in 1943, with a 6–8 record and a 4.59 run average (his highest average since 1929) reported for the Monarchs.
Paige then signed for $300 a month and a percentage of the gate to play for the Monarchs again.
He said he was not making enough money at a dime a bag, so he used a pole and rope to build a contraption that allowed him to cart up to four bags at once.
In August, he jumped the Crawfords, accepting an offer from Neil Churchill's North Dakota semi-pro team, the Bismarcks (sometimes known as the "Bismarck Churchills" today), of $400 and a late model car for just one month's work.
Late in the 1940 season, Paige was promoted to the Monarchs.
Nevertheless, Paige took the loss when he gave up a run in the fourth when Keltner singled and later scored on a sacrifice fly by Heath.
Paige once again returned to his barnstorming days with Abe Saperstein.
In 1966, Paige pitched in his last game in organized baseball, getting some measure of revenge when he pitched for the Carolina League's Peninsula Grays of Hampton, Virginia, against the very same Greensboro Patriots who had been forced to release him before his first pitch back in 1955.
His actual birthdate, July 7, 1906, was determined in 1948 when Cleveland Indians owner Bill Veeck traveled to Mobile, Alabama and accompanied Paige's family to the County Health Department to obtain his birth certificate.
In Cleveland, Paige struck out 13 while beating Dean 4–1, although for that game Dean was playing with a minor league team.
It was Paige's first experience playing with an integrated team in the United States.
Paige gave up three runs on three hits in the sixth, including a home run to Irvin.
In 1959, Paige's mother told a reporter that he was 55 rather than 53, saying she knew this because she wrote it down in her Bible.
The Indians were in a heated pennant race on August 20, 1948.
After that series, Feller's team continued on to Denver and California, while most of Paige's team left the tour.
Larry Doby pinch-hit for Paige the following inning.
When Branch Rickey signed Jackie Robinson, a former teammate of Paige, Paige realized that it was for the best that Paige himself was not the first black player in major league baseball.
Paige was released from the reform school in December 1923, six months early.
Other than Negro league catcher, Ebel Brooks, Paige's team was composed of local semi-pro players.
Paige returned to his hotel room.
Feller scheduled 35 games in 31 cities in 17 different states, all to be played in 27 days.
DiMaggio then hit a hard hopper to the mound that Paige deflected; DiMaggio beat the second baseman's throw to drive in the winning run.
Because many in the press saw the suggestion of a "Negro wing" as separate-but-equal and denounced major league baseball for the idea, by the time that Paige's induction came around on August 9, Kuhn convinced the owners and the private trust of the Hall of Fame that there should be no separate wing after all.
After the buzz died down he took a job with the Tulsa Oilers minor league team in the early 1970s as their pitching coach.
He also pitched for a semi-pro team named the Down the Bay Boys, and he recalled that he once got into a jam in the ninth inning of a 1–0 ballgame when his teammates made three consecutive errors, loading the bases for the other team with two outs.
