It is only when Saturn lies near the point that the moon’s orbit crosses the “plane of the ecliptic” that occultations can happen – and then they occur every time the moon swings by, until Saturn moves away from the crossing point.
On 19 July 2013, "The Day the Earth Smiled", Cassini was pointed towards Earth to capture an image of the Earth and the Moon (and, as well, Venus and Mars) as part of a natural light, multi-image portrait of the entire Saturn system.
On 8 January 2015, NASA reported determining the center of the planet Saturn and its family of moons to within .
It was the first time NASA informed the people of Earth that a long-distance photo was being taken in advance.
Titan is the only satellite in the Solar System with a major atmosphere, in which a complex organic chemistry occurs.
Almost a year later, in August 1981, Voyager 2 continued the study of the Saturn system.
Saturn has 62 known moons, 53 of which have formal names.
Pioneer 11 carried out the first flyby of Saturn in September 1979, when it passed within 20,000&nbsp;km of the planet's cloud tops.
Instead, the age of these planetary rings is probably some hundreds of millions of years.
Trace amounts of ammonia, acetylene, ethane, propane, phosphine and methane have been detected in Saturn's atmosphere.
This core is similar in composition to the Earth, but more dense.
Voyager&nbsp;1 performed a close flyby of Titan, increasing knowledge of the atmosphere of the moon.
In 2004, they estimated that the core must be 9–22&nbsp;times the mass of the Earth, which corresponds to a diameter of about 25,000&nbsp;km.
Titan, the largest moon, comprises more than 90% of the mass in orbit around Saturn, including the rings.
There have been three main phases in the observation and exploration of Saturn.
Saturn's usually bland atmosphere occasionally exhibits long-lived ovals and other features common on Jupiter.
These features are cloud clearings that reside in deeper cloud layers.
With an average orbital speed of 9.69&nbsp;km/s, it takes Saturn 10,759 Earth days (or about &nbsp;years), to finish one revolution around the Sun.
For example, images from the Galileo spacecraft did not show an eyewall in the Great Red Spot of Jupiter.
The polar regions are considered to have rotation rates similar to ''System I''.
The entire structure rotates with a period of  (the same period as that of the planet's radio emissions) which is assumed to be equal to the period of rotation of Saturn's interior.
Eyewall clouds had not previously been seen on any planet other than Earth.
The winds on Saturn are the second fastest among the Solar System's planets, after Neptune's.
The quantity of elements heavier than helium is not known precisely, but the proportions are assumed to match the primordial abundances from the formation of the Solar System.
Cassini has since conducted multiple flybys of Titan and other icy satellites.
Since early 2005, scientists have been tracking lightning on Saturn.
The Greek scientist Ptolemy based his calculations of Saturn's orbit on observations he made while it was in opposition.
Since then, Earth-based telescopy has improved to the point where regular observations can be made.
Saturn and its rings are best seen when the planet is at, or near, opposition, the configuration of a planet when it is at an elongation of 180°, and thus appears opposite the Sun in the sky.
Saturn's moon Enceladus, which seems similar in chemical makeup to comets, has often been regarded as a potential habitat for microbial life.
There are two main hypotheses regarding the origin of the rings.
In 2006, NASA reported that Cassini had found evidence of liquid water reservoirs that erupt in geysers on Saturn's moon Enceladus.
Saturn's rotation causes it to have the shape of an oblate spheroid; that is, it is flattened at the poles and bulges at its equator.
An alternative or additional mechanism may be generation of heat through the "raining out" of droplets of helium deep in Saturn's interior.
This is the result of the fact that the moon’s orbit around the Earth is tilted to the orbit of the Earth around the Sun – and so most of the time, the moon will pass above or below Saturn in the sky, and no occultation will occur.
Whereas temperatures on Saturn are normally −185&nbsp;°C, temperatures on the vortex often reach as high as −122&nbsp;°C, suspected to be the warmest spot on Saturn.
The second hypothesis is that the rings are left over from the original nebular material from which Saturn formed.
Babylonian astronomers systematically observed and recorded the movements of Saturn.
Surface features of various moons were seen for the first time.
The south pole storm may have been present for billions of years.
In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope imaged an enormous white cloud near Saturn's equator that was not present during the Voyager encounters and in 1994, another, smaller storm was observed.
Saturn has been known since prehistoric times.
On 23 June 2014, NASA claimed to have strong evidence that nitrogen in the atmosphere of Titan came from materials in the Oort cloud, associated with comets, and not from the materials that formed Saturn in earlier times.
The sides of the hexagon are each about  long, which is longer than the diameter of the Earth.
NASA reported in November 2006 that Cassini had observed a "hurricane-like" storm locked to the south pole that had a clearly defined eyewall.
Cassini photographs have led to other significant discoveries.
The latest estimate of Saturn's rotation (as an indicated rotation rate for Saturn as a whole) based on a compilation of various measurements from the Cassini, Voyager and Pioneer probes was reported in September 2007 is 10&nbsp;hr 32&nbsp;min 35&nbsp;sec.
Cassini's flyby of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, has captured radar images of large lakes and their coastlines with numerous islands and mountains.
Examination of Saturn's gravitational moment, in combination with physical models of the interior, allowed French astronomers Didier Saumon and Tristan Guillot to place constraints on the mass of Saturn's core.
''System I'' has a period of 10&nbsp;hr 14&nbsp;min 00&nbsp;sec (844.3°/d) and encompasses the Equatorial Zone, the South Equatorial Belt and the North Equatorial Belt.
If the periodicity is maintained, another storm will occur in about 2020.
Sixty-two moons are known to orbit Saturn, of which fifty-three are officially named.
In May 2011, NASA scientists at an Enceladus Focus Group Conference reported that Enceladus "is emerging as the most habitable spot beyond Earth in the Solar System for life as we know it".
Beyond the main rings at a distance of 12 million km from the planet is the sparse Phoebe ring, which is tilted at an angle of 27° to the other rings and, like Phoebe, orbits in retrograde fashion.
In addition, Pioneer 11 measured the temperature of Titan.
It is the only satellite with hydrocarbon lakes.
Voyager data indicate peak easterly winds of 500&nbsp;m/s (1800&nbsp;km/h).
During the early 20th century, research on Titan led to the confirmation in 1944 that it had a thick atmosphere – a feature unique among the Solar System's moons.
Together, Jupiter and Saturn hold 92% of the total planetary mass in the Solar System.
Although Saturn's core is considerably denser than water, the average specific density of the planet is 0.69&nbsp;g/cm3 due to the atmosphere.
Saturn's rings require at least a 15-mm-diameter telescope to resolve and thus were not known to exist until Galileo first saw them in 1610.
The orbiter completed two Titan flybys before releasing the Huygens probe on 25 December 2004.
Australian astronomy experts Hill and Horner explain the seasonal nature of Saturnian occultations:
Most people will require an optical aid (very large binoculars or a small telescope) that magnifies at least 30 times to achieve an image of Saturn's rings, in which clear resolution is present.
It lacks a definite surface, though it may have a solid core.
It sent back the first high-resolution images of the planet, its rings and satellites.
This is surrounded by a thicker liquid metallic hydrogen layer, followed by a liquid layer of helium-saturated molecular hydrogen that gradually transitions to a gas with increasing altitude.
The moon Titan orbits within the outer part of Saturn's magnetosphere and contributes plasma from the ionized particles in Titan's outer atmosphere.
The Romans considered Saturnus the equivalent of the Greek god Cronus.
The outermost layer spans 1,000&nbsp;km and consists of gas.
''System&nbsp;III'' refers to Saturn's internal rotation rate.
HST imaging of the south polar region indicates the presence of a jet stream, but no strong polar vortex nor any hexagonal standing wave.
Pan and Atlas cause weak, linear density waves in Saturn's rings that have yielded more reliable calculations of their masses.
Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, the other giant planets in the Solar System, are also oblate but to a lesser extent.
Saturnian occultations will take place 12 or more times over a 12-month period, followed by about a five-year period in which no such activity is registered.
Water ice clouds begin at a level where the pressure is about 2.5 bar and extend down to 9.5 bar, where temperatures range from 185–270&nbsp;K. Intermixed in this layer is a band of ammonium hydrosulfide ice, lying in the pressure range 3–6 bar with temperatures of 290–235&nbsp;K. Finally, the lower layers, where pressures are between 10–20 bar and temperatures are 270–330&nbsp;K, contains a region of water droplets with ammonia in aqueous solution.
He thought of them as two moons on Saturn's sides.
Saturn is the only planet of the Solar System that is less dense than water—about 30% less.
The first era was ancient observations (such as with the naked eye), before the invention of the modern telescopes.
The visible features on Saturn rotate at different rates depending on latitude and multiple rotation periods have been assigned to various regions (as in Jupiter's case).
In 1675, Cassini discovered the gap now known as the Cassini Division.
One hypothesis is that the rings are remnants of a destroyed moon of Saturn.
Its primary mission ended in 2008 when the spacecraft had completed 74&nbsp;orbits around the planet.
The probes discovered and confirmed several new satellites orbiting near or within the planet's rings, as well as the small Maxwell Gap (a gap within the C Ring) and Keeler gap (a 42&nbsp;km wide gap in the A Ring).
As a result, Saturn's magnetosphere is much smaller than Jupiter's.
These descending droplets may have accumulated into a helium shell surrounding the core.
(In modern Greek, the planet retains its ancient name ''Cronus''—Κρόνος: ''Kronos''.)
When Voyager 2 entered the magnetosphere, the solar wind pressure was high and the magnetosphere extended only 19 Saturn radii, or 1.1 million km (712,000&nbsp;mi), although it enlarged within several hours, and remained so for about three days.
Some of the moons of Saturn, including Pandora and Prometheus, act as shepherd moons to confine the rings and prevent them from spreading out.
In Ottoman Turkish, Urdu and Malay, its name is 'Zuhal', derived from Arabic زحل.
Ancient Chinese and Japanese culture designated the planet Saturn as the "earth star" ().
Most scientists think  it is a standing wave pattern in the atmosphere.
In addition, there is evidence of dozens to hundreds of moonlets with diameters of 40–500 meters in Saturn's rings, which are not considered to be true moons.
Many of the other moons are small: 34 are less than 10&nbsp;km in diameter and another 14 between 10 and 50&nbsp;km in diameter.
Standard planetary models suggest that the interior of Saturn is similar to that of Jupiter, having a small rocky core surrounded by hydrogen and helium with trace amounts of various volatiles.
The total mass of these heavier elements is estimated to be 19–31&nbsp;times the mass of the Earth, with a significant fraction located in Saturn's core region.
This core is surrounded by a deep layer of metallic hydrogen, an intermediate layer of liquid hydrogen and liquid helium, and finally outside the Frenkel line a gaseous outer layer.
Saturn's interior is probably composed of a core of iron–nickel and rock (silicon and oxygen compounds).
Saturn has a pale yellow hue due to ammonia crystals in its upper atmosphere.
The proportion of helium is significantly deficient compared to the abundance of this element in the Sun.
This was based on Five Elements which were traditionally used to classify natural elements.
Its strength at the equator – 0.2&nbsp;gauss (20&nbsp;µT) – is approximately one twentieth of that of the field around Jupiter and slightly weaker than Earth's magnetic field.
Evidence of this possibility includes the satellite's salt-rich particles having an "ocean-like" composition that indicates most of Enceladus's expelled ice comes from the evaporation of liquid salt water.
A Saturnian opposition occurs every year—approximately every 378 days—and results in the planet appearing at its brightest.
Saturn is the most distant of the five planets easily visible to the naked eye from Earth, the other four being Mercury, Venus, Mars and Jupiter.
Unfortunately, during the flyby, the probe's turnable camera platform stuck for a couple of days and some planned imaging was lost.
Its angel is Cassiel.
In the past, astronomers once thought the rings formed alongside the planet when it formed billions of years ago.
A precise value for the rotation period of the interior remains elusive.
In March 2007, additional images near Titan's north pole revealed hydrocarbon seas, the largest of which is almost the size of the Caspian Sea.
For example, during the opposition of 17 December 2002, Saturn appeared at its brightest due to a favorable orientation of its rings relative to the Earth, even though Saturn was closer to the Earth and Sun in late 2003.
Jupiter's thermal energy is generated by the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism of slow gravitational compression, but this alone may not be sufficient to explain heat production for Saturn, because it is less massive.
The hexagonal feature does not shift in longitude like the other clouds in the visible atmosphere.
Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and the second-largest in the Solar System, is larger than the planet Mercury, although less massive, and is the only moon in the Solar System to have a substantial atmosphere.
Saturn has a hot interior, reaching 11,700&nbsp;°C at its core, and it radiates 2.5 times more energy into space than it receives from the Sun.
Images had shown jets of icy particles being emitted into orbit around Saturn from vents in the moon's south polar region.
However, both the Earth and Saturn orbit the Sun on eccentric orbits, which means their distances from the Sun vary over time, and therefore so do their distances from each other, hence varying the brightness of Saturn from one opposition to the other.
Based on radio emissions from the planet in the period of the Voyager flybys, it has been assigned a rotation period of 10&nbsp;hr 39&nbsp;min 22.4&nbsp;sec (810.8°/d).
The pattern's origin is a matter of much speculation.
Although only one-eighth the average density of Earth, with its larger volume Saturn is just over 95 times more massive.
Saturn's finer cloud patterns were not observed until the flybys of the Voyager spacecraft during the 1980s.
Saturn, one of them is known as "Shani" and judges everyone based on the good and bad deeds performed in life.
Astronomers use three different systems for specifying the rotation rate of Saturn.
The irregularly shaped satellite Hyperion, which has a resonance with Titan, was discovered in 1848 by a British team.
Saturn has a prominent ring system that consists of nine continuous main rings and three discontinuous arcs and that is composed mostly of ice particles with a smaller amount of rocky debris and dust.
Saturn's magnetosphere, like Earth's, produces aurorae.
In April 2013 Cassini sent back images of a hurricane at the planet's north pole 20 times larger than those found on Earth, with winds faster than 530&nbsp;km/h.
The color was most likely caused by Rayleigh scattering.
Saturn has an intrinsic magnetic field that has a simple, symmetric shape – a magnetic dipole.
The particles that make up the rings range in size from specks of dust up to 10&nbsp;m. While the other gas giants also have ring systems, Saturn's is the largest and most visible.
In March 2007, it was found that the variation of radio emissions from the planet did not match Saturn's rotation rate.
The average distance between Saturn and the Sun is over 1.4 billion kilometres (9 AU).
In the upper cloud layers, with the temperature in the range 100–160&nbsp;K and pressures extending between 0.5–2 bar, the clouds consist of ammonia ice.
In November 1980, the Voyager 1 probe visited the Saturn system.
In June 2004, it had conducted a close flyby of Phoebe, sending back high-resolution images and data.
This photochemical cycle is modulated by Saturn's annual seasonal cycle.
This does not include the hundreds of moonlets comprising the rings.
Saturn is named after the Roman god of agriculture; its astronomical symbol (♄) represents the god's sickle.
The probe's mission was extended to September 2010 and then extended again to 2017, to study a full period of Saturn's seasons.
What's different here is that pockets of liquid water may be no more than tens of meters below the surface."
They have revealed a previously undiscovered planetary ring, outside the brighter main rings of Saturn and inside the G and E&nbsp;rings.
Because it is close to System&nbsp;II, it has largely superseded it.
The water vapor emitted into Saturn's orbit by this activity becomes charged and creates a drag upon Saturn's magnetic field, slowing its rotation slightly relative to the rotation of the planet.
Previous Great White Spots were observed in 1876, 1903, 1933 and 1960, with the 1933 storm being the most famous.
Polygonal shapes have been replicated in the laboratory through differential rotation of fluids.
The flyby changed the spacecraft's trajectory out from the plane of the Solar System.
Ultraviolet radiation from the Sun causes methane photolysis in the upper atmosphere, leading to a series of hydrocarbon chemical reactions with the resulting products being carried downward by eddies and diffusion.
Phoebe was the first such satellite found and it takes more than a year to orbit Saturn in a retrograde orbit.
The source of this ring is hypothesized to be the crashing of a meteoroid off Janus and Epimetheus.
Jupiter has 318&nbsp;times the Earth's mass, while Saturn is 95 times the mass of the Earth.
The 1990 storm was an example of a Great White Spot, a unique but short-lived phenomenon that occurs once every Saturnian year, roughly every 30 Earth years, around the time of the northern hemisphere's summer solstice.
The perihelion and aphelion distances are, respectively, 9.022 and 10.053&nbsp;AU, on average.
Saturn's atmosphere exhibits a banded pattern similar to Jupiter's, but Saturn's bands are much fainter and are much wider near the equator.
Such a "disappearance" will next occur in 2025, but Saturn will be too close to the Sun for any ring-crossing observation to be possible.
The outer atmosphere is generally bland and lacking in contrast, although long-lived features can appear.
Also, Saturn appears brighter when the rings are angled such that they are more visible.
A persisting hexagonal wave pattern around the north polar vortex in the atmosphere at about 78°N was first noted in the Voyager images.
Before the SOI, Cassini had already studied the system extensively.
In ancient Roman mythology, the god Saturnus, from which the planet takes its name, was the god of agriculture.
The outer atmosphere of Saturn contains 96.3% molecular hydrogen and 3.25% helium by volume.
On 1 July 2004, the Cassini–Huygens space probe performed the SOI (Saturn Orbit Insertion) maneuver and entered orbit around Saturn.
Saturn's second-largest moon, Rhea, may have a tenuous ring system of its own, along with a tenuous atmosphere.
Over 100 geysers have been identified on Enceladus.
The power of the lightning is approximately 1,000&nbsp;times that of lightning on Earth.
On 6 June 2013, scientists at the IAA-CSIC reported the detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the upper atmosphere of Titan, a possible precursor for life.
'''Saturn''' is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second-largest in the Solar System, after Jupiter.
Huygens discovered Saturn's moon Titan; Giovanni Domenico Cassini later discovered four other moons: Iapetus, Rhea, Tethys and Dione.
It was not until Christiaan Huygens used greater telescopic magnification that this notion was refuted.
Twice every Saturnian year (roughly every 15 Earth years), the rings briefly disappear from view, due to the way in which they are angled and because they are so thin.
More close-up images of Saturn's moons were acquired, as well as evidence of changes in the atmosphere and the rings.
It is a gas giant with an average radius about nine times that of Earth.
As with all the planets in the Solar System, occultations of Saturn occur in “seasons”.
Also, from time to time Saturn is occulted by the Moon (that is, the Moon covers up Saturn in the sky).
From 2004 to 2 November 2009, the probe discovered and confirmed eight new satellites.
In the 21st century observations continue from the Earth (or Earth-orbiting observatories) and from the Cassini orbiter at Saturn.
In ancient times, it was the most distant of the five known planets in the Solar System (excluding Earth) and thus a major character in various mythologies.
Huygens descended onto the surface of Titan on 14 January 2005, sending a flood of data during the atmospheric descent and after the landing.
In October 2006, the probe detected an 8,000&nbsp;km diameter cyclone-like storm with an eyewall at Saturn's south pole.
The elliptical orbit of Saturn is inclined 2.48° relative to the orbital plane of the Earth.
As the droplets descend through the lower-density hydrogen, the process releases heat by friction and leaves Saturn's outer layers depleted of helium.
Its equatorial and polar radii differ by almost 10%: 60,268&nbsp;km versus 54,364&nbsp;km, respectively.
All other Saturnian latitudes, excluding the north and south polar regions, are indicated as ''System&nbsp;II'' and have been assigned a rotation period of 10&nbsp;hr 38&nbsp;min 25.4&nbsp;sec (810.76°/d).
Saturn appears to the naked eye in the night sky as a bright, yellowish point of light with an apparent magnitude of usually between +1 and 0.
It proved that Titan's atmosphere is impenetrable in visible wavelengths, therefore no surface details were seen.
The Greeks had made the outermost planet sacred to Cronus, and the Romans followed suit.
In Hindu astrology, there are nine astrological objects, known as Navagrahas.
The other type is visitation by spacecraft, either by orbiting or flyby.
Saturn's magnetic field strength is around one-twentieth of Jupiter's.
Some ice in the E ring comes from the moon Enceladus's geysers.
The nomenclature used to describe these bands is the same as on Jupiter.
The composition of the clouds varies with depth and increasing pressure.
Images were taken of the planet and a few of its moons, although their resolution was too low to discern surface detail.
In images from the Cassini spacecraft during 2007, Saturn's northern hemisphere displayed a bright blue hue, similar to Uranus.
Traditionally, most of Saturn's moons have been named after Titans of Greek mythology.
Thermography has shown that Saturn's south pole has a warm polar vortex, the only known example of such a phenomenon in the Solar System.
In April 2014, NASA scientists reported the possible beginning of a new moon, within the A Ring, of the planet Saturn, which was imaged by Cassini on 15 April 2013.
This magnetosphere is efficient at deflecting the solar wind particles from the Sun.
In 1899 William Henry Pickering discovered Phoebe, a highly irregular satellite that does not rotate synchronously with Saturn as the larger moons do.
This variance may be caused by geyser activity on Saturn's moon Enceladus.
This vortex is comparable to the size of Earth, and it has winds of 550&nbsp;km/h.
