At trial, there is a presumption of guilt and the accused is often unable to examine witnesses and evidence or present a legal defense.
The royal family dominates the political system.
However, nepotism and patronage are widespread when doing business in the country.
High taxes and a growth in unemployment have contributed to discontent, and has been reflected in a rise in civil unrest, and discontent with the royal family.
He united the four regions into a single state through a series of conquests beginning in 1902 with the capture of Riyadh, the ancestral home of his family, the House of Saud.
The following year Prince Nayef also died before ascending to the throne.
Censorship has limited the development of Saudi literature, although several Saudi novelists and poets have achieved critical and popular acclaim in the Arab world—albeit generating official hostility in their home country.
According to the educational plan for secondary (high school) education 1435–1438 Hijri, students enrolling in the "natural sciences" path are required to take five religion subjects which are: Tawhid, Fiqh, Tafseer, Hadith and Islamic Education and Quran.
* Agal () is an item of Arab headgear constructed of cord which is fastened around the Ghutrah to hold it in place.
The capital Riyadh, located in the heart of the country, is supplied with desalinated water pumped from the Persian Gulf over a distance of 467&nbsp;km.
Crime has not been a significant problem.
This "tolerance and moderation" has been called into question by the Baltimore Sun, based on the reports from Amnesty International regarding Raif Badawi, and in the case of a man from Hafr al-Batin sentenced to death for rejecting Islam.
In December 2011, the Saudi interior ministry arrested three reporters and held them for almost two weeks for questioning after they uploaded a video on the topic to YouTube.
The kingdom uses the lunar Islamic calendar, not the international Gregorian calendar.
This and the presence of increasingly large numbers of foreign workers greatly affected traditional Saudi norms and values.
In 2007, King Abdullah issued royal decrees reforming the judiciary and creating a new court system, and, in 2009, the King made a number of significant changes to the judiciary's personnel at the most senior level by bringing in a younger generation.
public sector in Saudi Arabia.
However, his authority was hindered by conflict with Fahd's full brothers (known, with Fahd, as the "Sudairi Seven").
On the other hand, juvenile delinquency in practices such as Tafheet (illegal racing), drug-use and excessive use of alcohol are increasing.
Oil provided Saudi Arabia with economic prosperity and substantial political leverage internationally.
According to estimates there are about 1,500,000 Christians in Saudi Arabia, almost all foreign workers.
American politicians and media accused the Saudi government of supporting terrorism and tolerating a ''jihadist'' culture.
The 345 reported executions between 2007 and 2010 were all carried out by public beheading.
In particular, ISIS reprinted and distributed large quantities of an old edition of Tawhid textbook which was authored by Mohammed bin Abdulwahab, the founder of Wahhabism.
In a country that is said to "belong" to the royal family and is named for them, the lines between state assets and the personal wealth of senior princes are blurred.
However, open protest against the government, even if peaceful, is not tolerated.
The World Economic Forum 2010 Global Gender Gap Report ranked Saudi Arabia 129th out of 134 countries for gender parity.
Although Saudi Arabia imposes a strict dress code on women throughout the country by using religious police, female anchors working for Al-Arabia news network which is partly owned by Prince Abdulaziz, the son of the late King Fahad, are prohibited from wearing a veil and are encouraged to adopt a Western dress code.
*While for several decades Saudis have been able to expect undemanding, well-paid government jobs, the failure of oil revenue to keep up with population growth has raised unemployment, and poor education limits employment opportunity in the private sector.
15 of the 19 hijackers involved in 9/11 attacks on New York, Washington and Virginia were Saudi nationals.
Kebabs are popular, as is ''shāwarmā'' (shawarma), a marinated grilled meat dish of lamb, mutton, or chicken.
Although the Arab Revolt of 1916 to 1918 failed in its objective, the Allied victory in World War I resulted in the end of Ottoman suzerainty and control in Arabia.
Other sources had complained of an absence of laws criminalizing violence against women.
The main topographical feature is the central plateau which rises abruptly from the Red Sea and gradually descends into the Nejd and toward the Persian Gulf.
Over 500,000 undocumented migrant workers — mostly from Somalia, Ethiopia, and Yemen — have been detained and deported since 2013.
The few fertile areas are to be found in the alluvial deposits in wadis, basins, and oases.
It led to rapid technological (but not cultural) modernisation, urbanization, mass public education and the creation of new media.
King Abdullah Economic City) to be completed by 2020, in an effort to diversify the economy and provide jobs.
Saudi Arabia has centuries-old attitudes and traditions, often derived from Arab civilization.
The United Kingdom has also been a major supplier of military equipment to Saudi Arabia since 1965.
King Fahd allowed American and coalition troops to be stationed in Saudi Arabia.
In August 2014 both countries appeared to be exploring ways of ending the rift.
Women face discrimination in the courts, where the testimony of one man equals that of two women in family and inheritance law.
According to critics, Saudi curriculum is not just dominated by Islam but suffers from Wahhabi dogma that propagates hatred towards non-Muslim and non-Wahhabis and lacks technical and other education useful for productive employment.
Saudi Arabian dress strictly follows the principles of hijab (the Islamic principle of modesty, especially in dress).
The kingdom is categorized as a World Bank high-income economy with a high Human Development Index, and is the only Arab country to be part of the G-20 major economies.
The vast wealth generated by oil revenues was beginning to have an even greater impact on Saudi society.
Saudi Arabia expelled 800,000 Yemenis in 1990 and 1991 and has built a Saudi–Yemen barrier against an influx of illegal immigrants and against the smuggling of drugs and weapons.
Saudi Arabia occupies about 80% of the Arabian Peninsula (the world's largest peninsula), lying between latitudes 16° and 33° N, and longitudes 34° and 56° E. Because the country's southern borders with the United Arab Emirates and Oman are not precisely marked, the exact size of the country is undefined.
Saudi Arabia also conducts dozens of executions each year, mainly for murder and drug smuggling, although there are people who have been executed for deserting Islam and crimes against the Faisal bin Musaid.
The most powerful clan faction is known as the 'Sudairi Seven', comprising the late King Fahd and his full brothers and their descendants.
It is, in fact, a number of linked deserts and includes the  Rub' al Khali ("Empty Quarter") in the southern part of the country, the world's largest contiguous sand desert.
This requirement applies to non-Muslim women too and failure to abide can result in police action, particularly in more conservative areas of the country.
In addition, there is an Al Mukhabarat Al A'amah military intelligence service.
In November 2013, Saudi Arabia expelled thousands of illegal Ethiopian residents from the Kingdom.
Shia also face systematic discrimination in employment, education, the justice system according to Human Rights Watch.
Saudi Arabia and the United States are strategic allies, and since President Barack Obama took office in 2009, the U.S. has sold $110 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia.
Institutes devoted to Islamic studies, in particular, abound.
Saudi Arabia has since been an absolute monarchy, effectively a hereditary dictatorship governed along Islamic lines.
The last reported execution for sorcery took place in September 2014.
Western-based organizations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch condemn both the Saudi criminal justice system and its severe punishments.
In 1902, Abdul Rahman's son, Abdul Aziz—later to be known as Ibn Saud—recaptured control of Riyadh bringing the Al Saud back to Nejd.
Most Saudis live in Hejaz (35%), Najd (28%), and the Eastern Province (15%).
Oil prices quadrupled.
Many reports abound, of foreigner workers being tortured either by employers or others.
The number who had confidence about the direction of their country dropped from 98% (in 2010) to 62%.
The ultra-conservative Wahhabism religious movement within Sunni Islam has been called "the predominant feature of Saudi culture", with its global spreading largely financed by the oil and gas trade.
Saudi Arabia is widely accused of having one of the worst human rights records in the world.
In 1979, two events occurred which greatly concerned the government, and had a long-term influence on Saudi foreign and domestic policy.
The SANG is not a reserve but a fully operational front-line force, and originated out of Ibn Saud's tribal military-religious force, the Ikhwan.
Saudi Arabian cuisine is similar to that of the surrounding countries in the Arabian Peninsula, and has been influenced by Turkish, Indian, Persian, and African food.
It is separated from Israel and Egypt by the Gulf of Aqaba.
In response, King Abdullah announced on 22 February 2011 a series of benefits for citizens amounting to $36 billion, of which $10.7 billion was earmarked for housing.
Institutional capacity and governance
As recently as the early 1960s, Saudi Arabia's slave population was estimated at 300,000.
France authorized $18 billion in weapons sales to Saudi Arabia in 2015 alone.
sanitation infrastructure, beginning with desalination and wastewater
This radical teaching takes place in Saudi funded mosques and madrasas across the Islamic world from Morocco to Pakistan to Indonesia.
After his accession to the throne in 2005, King Abdullah took steps to reduce the powers of the ulema, for instance transferring control over girls' education to the Ministry of Education.
It also aims to create an education system which will provide a more secular and vocationally based training.
Retaliatory punishments, or Qisas, are practised: for instance, an eye can be surgically removed at the insistence of a victim who lost his own eye.
The rule of the Al Saud faces political opposition from four sources: Sunni Islamist activism; liberal critics; the Shi'ite minority—particularly in the Eastern Province; and long-standing tribal and regionalist particularistic opponents (for example in the Hejaz).
The Saudi system of justice has been criticized for its "ultra-puritanical judges", who are often harsh in their sentencing (with beheading for the crime of witchcraft), but also sometimes overly lenient (for cases of rape or wife-beating) and slow, for example leaving thousands of abandoned women unable to secure a divorce.
In February–April 2005, the first-ever nationwide municipal elections were held in Saudi Arabia.
systems is being gradually delegated to private companies as well.
Daily life is dominated by Islamic observance.
* Abaya () is a women's garment.
In 1916, with the encouragement and support of Britain (which was fighting the Ottomans in World War I), the Sharif of Mecca, Hussein bin Ali, led a pan-Arab revolt against the Ottoman Empire to create a united Arab state.
The relations with the U.S. became strained following 9/11.
However, there is evidence that the vast majority was, in fact, spent on propagating and extending the influence of Wahhabism at the expense of other forms of Islam.
Under Saudi law, every adult female must have a male relative as her "guardian", whose permission she is required to have in order to travel, study, or work.
In 1991, Saudi Arabian forces were involved both in bombing raids on Iraq and in the land invasion that helped to liberate Kuwait.
He was later released due to intervention by British government.
In spite of this, a 2015 study estimates 60,000 Muslims converted to Christianity in Saudi Arabia.
Per capita income fell from a high of $11,700 at the height of the oil boom in 1981 to $6,300 in 1998.
Osama bin Laden was a Saudi national (until stripped of his nationality in 1994).
There are several species of snakes, many of which are venomous, and numerous types of lizards.
Women were finally allowed to vote on December 12, 2015.
In the winter the temperature rarely drops below .
It plays a prominent role in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and in 2005 joined the World Trade Organization.
It is the only nation with both a Red Sea coast and a Persian Gulf coast, and most of its terrain consists of arid inhospitable desert or barren landforms.
*Tendency for parents to leave child rearing to foreign servants who are unable to "pass down by example the core Islamic values and traditions that have always formed the bedrock of Saudi society."
Scuba diving, windsurfing, sailing and basketball are also popular, played by both men and women, with the Saudi Arabian national basketball team winning bronze at the 1999 Asian Championship.
Women were not allowed to take part in the poll.
Proselytizing by non-Muslims and conversion by Muslims to another religion is illegal,  and  the distribution of "publications that have prejudice to any other religious belief other than Islam" (such as Bibles), was reportedly punishable by death.
Saudi Arabia has a "Counter-Radicalization Program" the purpose of which is to "combat the spread and appeal of extremist ideologies among the general populous" and to "instill the true values of the Islamic faith, such as tolerance and moderation."
The CIA Factbook estimated that  foreign nationals living in Saudi Arabia made up about 21% of the population.
From the 18th century onward, Wahhabi fundamentalism discouraged artistic development inconsistent with its teaching.
Saudi Arabia ranks among the top 10 in the world in government spending for its military, representing about 7% of gross domestic product in 2005.
Traditionally, men usually wear a white ankle length garment woven from wool or cotton (known as a thawb), with a keffiyeh (a large checkered square of cotton held in place by an agal) or a ghutra (a plain white square made of finer cotton, also held in place by an agal) worn on the head.
Additionally, traditional tribal law and custom remain significant.
Ideological divisions include issues over the speed and direction of reform, and whether the role of the ulema should be increased or reduced.
Foreign Muslims who have resided in the kingdom for ten years may apply for Saudi citizenship.
Those who do not recognize Saudi rule (particularly the Islamic State) call the nation the "land of Haramayn (the two holy places)" in reference to Mecca and Medina.
The royal family is politically divided by factions based on clan loyalties, personal ambitions and ideological differences.
The extent of corruption has been described as systemic and endemic, and its existence was acknowledged and defended by Prince Bandar bin Sultan (a senior member of the royal family) in an interview in 2001.
Among its plans were to launch "economic cities" (e.g.
Hejaz is the most populated region in Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia has had five-year "Development Plans" since 1970.
Saudi Arabia is almost unique in giving the ulema (the body of Islamic religious leaders and jurists) a direct role in government, the only other example being Iran.
The first "Saudi state" established in 1744 in the area around Riyadh, rapidly expanded and briefly controlled most of the present-day territory of Saudi Arabia, but was destroyed by 1818 by the Ottoman viceroy of Egypt, Mohammed Ali Pasha.
The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom had unsuccessfully urged President Barack Obama to raise human rights concerns with King Abdullah on his March 2014 visit to the Kingdom especially the imprisonments of Sultan Hamid Marzooq al-Enezi, Saud Falih Awad al-Enezi, and Raif Badawi.
Polygamy is permitted for men, and men have a unilateral right to divorce their wives (talaq) without needing any legal justification.
Atheism or "calling into question the fundamentals of the Islamic religion on which this country is based" is considered a terrorist crime.
Following a number of incidents during the Hajj season, the deadliest of which killed at least 2,070 pilgrim in 2015 Mina stampede, Saudi Arabia has been accused of mismanagement and focusing on increasing money revenues while neglecting pilgrims’ welfare.
This culture has been heavily influenced by the austerely puritanical Wahhabi form of Islam, which arose in the eighteenth century and now predominates in the country.
The official and dominant form of Sunni Islam in Saudi Arabia is commonly known as Wahhabism (proponents prefer the name Salafism, considering ''Wahhabi'' derogatory) and is often described as 'puritanical', 'intolerant', or 'ultra-conservative' by observers, and as "true" Islam by its adherents.
Indeed, Osama bin Laden and fifteen out of the nineteen 9/11 hijackers were from Saudi Arabia; in ISIL-occupied Raqqa, in mid-2014, all 12 judges were Saudi.
Other denominations, such as the minority Shia Islam, are systematically suppressed.
In 1938, vast reserves of oil were discovered in the Al-Ahsa region along the coast of the Persian Gulf, and full-scale development of the oil fields began in 1941 under the US-controlled Aramco (Arabian American Oil Company).
Islam is the state religion of Saudi Arabia and its law requires that all citizens be Muslims.
Taking into account the impact of the real oil price changes on the Kingdom's real gross domestic income, the real command-basis GDP was computed to be 330.381 billion 1999 USD in 2010.
This process is not reported by the Saudi media.
An example of sentencing is that UK pensioner and cancer victim Karl Andree, aged 74, faced 360 lashes for home brewing alcohol.
Its modern existence, however, is attributable to it being effectively Abdullah's private army since the 1960s and, unlike the rest of the armed forces, is independent of the Ministry of Defense and Aviation.
After the conquest of the Hejaz, the Ikhwan leadership's objective switched to expansion of the Wahhabist realm into the British protectorates of Transjordan, Iraq and Kuwait, and began raiding those territories.
In 2005, the first municipal elections were held.
Between 1996 and 2000, Saudi Arabia acceded to four UN human rights conventions and, in 2004, the government approved the establishment of the National Society for Human Rights (NSHR), staffed by government employees, to monitor their implementation.
The King has announced that the per capita income is forecast to rise from $15,000 in 2006 to $33,500 in 2020.
When prince Sultan died before ascending to the throne on 21 October 2011, King Abdullah appointed Prince Nayef as crown prince.
It is geographically the largest country in the Arabian Plate.
With the help of the Ikhwan, the Hejaz was conquered in 1924–25 and on 10 January 1926, Ibn Saud declared himself King of the Hejaz.
Saudi Arabia allows Christians to enter the country as foreign workers for temporary work, but does not allow them to practice their faith openly.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the Ottoman Empire continued to control or have a suzerainty over most of the peninsula.
Consuming non-renewable groundwater resulted in the loss of an estimated four fifths of the total groundwater reserves by 2012.
Coffee, served in the Turkish style, is the traditional beverage.
Except for the southwestern province of Asir, Saudi Arabia has a desert climate with extremely high day-time temperatures and a sharp temperature drop at night.
The average age of the king and crown prince is 74, making them a half century older than most of the population.
The large expatriate communities also speak their own languages, the most numerous of which are Tagalog (700,000), Rohingya (400,000), Urdu (380,000), and Egyptian Arabic (300,000).
The percentage of Saudi Arabian citizens who are Christians is officially zero, as Saudi Arabia forbids religious conversion from Islam (apostasy) and punishes it by death.
The primary source of law is the Islamic Sharia derived from the teachings of the Qu'ran and the Sunnah (the traditions of the Prophet).
Saudi Arabia is sometimes called "the Land of the Two Holy Mosques" in reference to Al-Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca), and Al-Masjid an-Nabawi (in Medina), the two holiest places in Islam.
Although the Al ash-Sheikh's domination of the ulema has diminished in recent decades, they still hold the most important religious posts and are closely linked to the Al Saud by a high degree of intermarriage.
Outside of the Al-Saud, participation in the political process is limited to a relatively small segment of the population and takes the form of the royal family consulting with the ulema, tribal sheikhs and members of important commercial families on major decisions.
Although now extremely wealthy, Saudi Arabia's economy was near stagnant.
There are virtually no rivers or lakes in the country, but wadis are numerous.
Former CIA director James Woolsey described it as "the soil in which Al-Qaeda and its sister terrorist organizations are flourishing."
More traditional sports such as camel racing became more popular in the 1970s.
No political parties or national elections are permitted.
Saudi Arabia is unique among modern Muslim states in that Sharia is not codified and there is no system of judicial precedent, giving judges the power to use independent legal reasoning to make a decision.
* Thawb () is the standard Arabic word for garment.
Although repeated theft can be punishable by amputation of the right hand, only one instance of judicial amputation was reported between 2007 and 2010.
Negotiations to join had focused on the degree to which Saudi Arabia is willing to increase market access to foreign goods and in 2000, the government established the Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority to encourage foreign direct investment in the kingdom.
Ibn Saud avoided involvement in the Arab Revolt, and instead continued his struggle with the Al Rashid.
Saudi Arabia received 41 per cent of UK arms exports in 2010–14.
According to a leading Saudi feminist and journalist, Wajeha al-Huwaider, "Saudi women are weak, no matter how high their status, even the 'pampered' ones among them, because they have no law to protect them from attack by anyone."
In 1975, Faisal was assassinated by his nephew, Prince Faisal bin Musaid and was succeeded by his half-brother King Khalid.
Instruments include the rabābah, an instrument not unlike a three-string fiddle, and various types of percussion instruments, such as the ṭabl (drum) and the ṭār (tambourine).
Royal decrees supplement Sharia in areas such as labor, commercial and corporate law.
Although male-only municipal elections were held on 29 September 2011, Abdullah allowed women to vote and be elected in the 2015 municipal elections, and also to be nominated to the Shura Council.
Although there was dramatic change in the social and economic life of the country, political power continued to be monopolized by the royal family leading to discontent among many Saudis who began to look for wider participation in government.
Wahhabi Islam has been called "the predominant feature of Saudi culture."
A large part of the curriculum at all levels is devoted to Islam, and, at the secondary level, students are able to follow either a religious or a technical track.
Increases in oil prices in the aughts  helped boost per capita GDP to $17,000 in 2007 dollars (about $7,400 adjusted for inflation), but have declined since oil price drop in mid-2014.
The number of princes is estimated to be at least 7,000, with most power and influence being wielded by the 200 or so male descendants of Ibn Saud.
On 25 September 2011, Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah has announced that women will have the right to stand and vote in future local elections and join the advisory Shura council as full members.
Saudi Arabia joined the UN in 1945 and is a founding member of the Arab League, Gulf Cooperation Council, Muslim World League, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation).
Atheists are legally designated as terrorists.
Authors of the video claim that 22% of Saudis may be considered poor (2009).
During the Islamic revival movement in the 1980s, and as a political response to an increase in Islamist activism including the 1979 seizure of the Grand Mosque in Mecca, the government closed all cinemas and theaters.
Since 2000, the government has
The Tadawul All Share Index (TASI) of the Saudi stock exchange peaked at 16,712.64 in 2005, and closed at 8,535.60, at the end of 2013.
The new kingdom was one of the poorest countries in the world, reliant on limited agriculture and pilgrimage revenues.
, together with Qatar and Turkey, Saudi Arabia is openly supporting the Army of Conquest, an umbrella group of anti-government forces fighting in the Syrian Civil War that reportedly includes an al-Qaeda linked al-Nusra Front and another Salafi coalition known as Ahrar al-Sham.
Throughout the rest of the 19th century, the Al Saud contested control of the interior of what was to become Saudi Arabia with another Arabian ruling family, the Al Rashid.
The word "Saudi" is derived from the element ''as-Suʻūdīyah'' in the Arabic name of the country, which is a type of adjective known as a nisba, formed from the dynastic name of the Saudi royal family, the Al Saud (آل سعود).
* Ghutrah () is a traditional headdress typically worn by Arab men.
90% of books published in the kingdom were on religious subjects, and most of the doctorates awarded by its universities were in Islamic studies.
Domesticated animals include Arabian camels or dromedaries, sheep, goats, donkeys, and chickens.
Saudi Sign Language is the principal language of the deaf community.
As a result, they turned against Ibn Saud and, after a two-year struggle, were defeated in 1929 at the Battle of Sabilla, where their leaders were massacred.
There has been mounting pressure to reform and modernize the royal family's rule, an agenda championed by King Abdullah both before and after his accession in 2005.
The average age at first marriage among Saudi females is 25 years in Saudi Arabia, with child marriage no longer common.
The King's intent was to respond to dissent while making as few actual changes in the status quo as possible.
Cultural life rapidly developed, primarily in the Hejaz, which was the center for newspapers and radio.
In January 2016, Saudi Arabia executed the prominent Shia cleric Sheikh Nimr who had called for pro-democracy demonstrations and for free elections in Saudi Arabia.
The SANG has been a counterbalance to the Sudairi faction in the royal family: Prince Sultan, the Minister of Defense and Aviation, is one of the so-called 'Sudairi Seven' and controls the remainder of the armed forces.
four cities were planned.
In 2005 the armed forces had the following personnel: the army, 75,000; the air force, 18,000; air defense, 16,000; the navy, 15,500 (including 3,000 marines); and the SANG had 75,000 active soldiers and 25,000 tribal levies.
In public women are required to wear a black abaya or other black clothing that covers everything under the neck with the exception of their hands and feet, although most women cover their head in respect for their religion.
