Nudity is expected in the segregated saunas but usually forbidden in the mixed saunas.
Sauna may help rheumatic pain (with cold shower) but not neuropathic pain,  and has also shown usefulness for appetite loss and mild depression.
In the resting area, there are also other bed-like structures made of marble or stone attached to the ground where people lie down to rest between different rounds of sauna or at the very end of their banya session.
In some saunas and steam rooms, scented salts are given out which can be rubbed into the skin for extra aroma and cleaning effects.
The banya is a large setting with many different rooms.
In an infrared dry sauna, the heaters produce infrared rays that superficially heat skin and other exposed surfaces but not the air.
Also in German-speaking countries, there are many facilities for washing after using the sauna, with 'dunking pools' (pools of very cold water in which a person dips themselves after using the sauna) or showers.
In this large area, there are marble bed-like structures where people lie down and receive a massage either by another sauna-member or by a designated masseur.
Hungarian ''lélek'' and Khanty ''lil'', which both mean "soul", referring to the sauna's old, spiritual essence.
Some Hungarian saunas have so-called "snow rooms" that look like little cages with snow and icicles, where visitors can cool down for a couple of minutes after each sauna session.
Finer control over the temperature experienced can be achieved by choosing a higher level bench for those wishing a hotter experience or a lower level bench for a more moderate temperature.
The Karo people of Indonesia have the ''oukup''.
These differed from present-day saunas in that they were heated by heating a pile of rocks called ''kiuas'' by burning large amounts of wood about 6 to 8 hours, and then letting the smoke out before enjoying the ''löyly'', or sauna heat.
Sauna use may temporarily relieve symptoms of the common cold.
Provided the sauna is not crowded, lying on a bench is considered preferable as it gives more even temperature over the body.
More than 50% were men over the age of 50, and 30% were over 70.
Also in respect to socialising in the sauna the Swiss tend more to be like the Finns, Scandinavians or Russians.
Unlike sauna traditions, and most forcefully in the case of the Inipi, the sweat lodge ceremonies have been robustly defended as an exclusively Native expression of spirituality rather than a recreational activity.
In Iran, most gyms, hotels and almost all public swimming pools have indoor saunas.
The folk tradition related to the Estonian sauna is mostly identical to that surrounding the Finnish sauna.
The same meaning of "spirit" is also used in Latvian.
In the Netherlands and Flanders, some saunas might offer women-only (or "bathing suit only") times for people who are less comfortable with mixed-gender nudity; ''Algemeen Dagblad'' reported in 2008 that women-only, bathing suit-required times are drawing Muslim women to the sauna.
A '''sauna''' (  or ; ), or '''sudatory''', is a small room or building designed as a place to experience dry or wet heat sessions, or an establishment with one or more of these facilities.
Continuously heating stoves have a small heat capacity and can be heated up on a fast on-demand basis, whereas a heat storage stove has a large heat (stone) capacity and can take much longer to heat.
The "wet heat" would cause scalding if the temperature were set much higher.
Some pool, major sport, and resort complexes also contain a sauna.
Some saunas have a thermostat to adjust temperature, but management and other users expect to be consulted before changes are made.
There is also a large public locker area where one keeps one's clothes as well as two other more private locker areas with individual doors that can lock these two separate locker rooms.
A properly heated "savusauna" gives heat up to 12 hours.
Additionally, there is risk of heat prostration or the even more serious hyperthermia.
The word 'sauna' is used a lot for its 'English appeal', however it does not strictly refer to the original Fennoscandian steam rooms that have become popular throughout the world.
In Australia and Canada, saunas are found mainly in hotels, swimming pools, and health clubs and if used by both men and women, nudity is forbidden.
The hottest Finnish saunas have relatively low humidity levels in which steam is generated by pouring water on the hot stones.
These countries boast the hottest saunas and the tradition of massaging fellow sauna-goers with leafy, wet birch bunches ('vasta' or 'vihta' in Finnish, 'viht' in Estonian, 'slota' in Latvian, 'vanta' in Lithuanian, 'веник' (venik) in Russian).
There still exists an old Finnish saying, "saunassa ollaan kuin kirkossa," – one should behave in the sauna as in church.
Foreign visitors should also be aware that some small establishments advertised as 'saunas' are in fact brothels and it is rare to have a legitimate sauna with no other health spa or gym facilities in the UK.
These include: In Africa, the sifutu.
Jewellery or anything metallic, including glasses, will get hot in the sauna and can cause discomfort or burning.
This allows air temperatures that could boil water to be tolerated and even enjoyed for longer periods of time.
*amount of water thrown on the heater, this increases humidity, so that sauna bathers perspire more copiously.
While right after World War II, public bathhouses were commonplace in Japan, the number of customers have dwindled as more people were able to afford houses and apartments equipped with their own private baths as the nation became wealthier.
Pedra Formosa is the original name given to the central piece of the steam bath in pre-Roman times.
One word in Finnish, strictly connected to the sauna, is ''löyly''.
In folk tradition sauna was not only the place where one washed, but also used as the place where brides were ceremoniously washed, where women gave birth and the place the dying made their final bed.
A wider range of sauna etiquette is usually acceptable in the United States compared to other countries, with the exception that most mixed-sex saunas usually require some clothing such as a bathing suit to be worn.
When men and women use the sauna together in Sweden swimwear is normally used.
This type of heating is used in urban saunas.
In contrast, the sauna bathers are at about , which is below the dew point, so that water is condensed on the bathers' skin.
There is at least one sauna (Finnish style), one cold pool of water, a relaxation area, another sauna where fellow-sauna goers beat other fellow-sauna goers with the leafy birch, a shower area, a small cafeteria with a TV and drinks, and a large common area that leads to the other areas.
When the Finns migrated to other areas of the globe they brought their sauna designs and traditions with them.
Temperature on different parts of the body can be adjusted by shielding from the steam radiator with a towel.
The second type of sauna is the Finnish sauna type one can find in any gym throughout the world or a hotel.
Perspiration is a sign of autonomic responses trying to cool the body.
The steam and high heat make the bathers perspire.
Such creatures are believed to exist in different cultures.
The Russian banya has an entirely corresponding character called a ''bannik''.
Saunas overcome this problem by controlling the humidity.
Users are advised to leave the sauna if the heat becomes unbearable, or if they feel faint or ill.
Here it can be single-sex or mixed-sex.
Public saunas can be found throughout the Netherlands and Flanders, both in major cities and in smaller municipalities, mixed-gender nudity is the generally accepted rule.
This heat is soft and clean because, thanks to combustion, the stove stones glow red, even white-hot, and are freed of dust at the same time.
male and female together).
Separate single-sex saunas for both genders are rare, most places offer women-only and mixed-gender saunas, or organise women-only days for the sauna once a week.
Finnish sauna is traditionally the same as Russian banya despite the popular misconception that Finnish sauna is very dry.
Today sauna culture enjoys its greatest popularity in the Lake Superior Region, specifically the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, especially the Keweenaw Peninsula, and parts of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa, which are home to large populations of Swedish and particularly Finnish Americans.
In gyms or health clubs with separate male and female change rooms, nudity is permitted, however members are usually asked to shower before using the sauna and to sit on a towel.
Heating caused by fresh steam can be very different in different parts of the sauna.
The historian Estrabão (Portuguese Wikipedia) spoke of Lusitans traditions that consisted of having steam bath sessions followed by cold water baths.
Steam baths, such as the Turkish bath, where the humidity approaches 100%, will be set to a much lower temperature of around  to compensate.
There are at least 2 million saunas according to official registers.
The konglish word ''sauna'' (사우나) usually refers to bathhouses with Jacuzzis, hot tubs, showers, steam rooms, and related facilities.
Today, public perception of saunas, sauna "etiquette" and sauna customs vary hugely from country to country.
Infrared saunas may use a variety of materials in their heating area such as charcoal, active carbon fibers, and other materials.
Having a sauna room on a private property is considered a luxury rather than a necessity.
The stones are heated up and kept on temperature using electric heating elements.
Heating caused by direct radiation will be greatest closest to the stove.
The oldest known saunas in Finland were made from pits dug in a slope in the ground and primarily used as dwellings in winter.
Hungarians see the sauna as part of a wider spa culture.
In some spa centres there are the so-called special "snow rooms."
In Iran, unlike Finland, sitting in sauna is mostly seen as part of the spa/club culture, rather than a bathing ritual.
Public saunas are segregated and nudity is prohibited.
This induces relaxation and promotes sweating.
Originally this word meant "spirit" or "life", as in e.g.
As a result of the Industrial Revolution, the sauna evolved to use a metal woodstove, or kiuas , with a chimney.
In Ancient Rome there was the ''thermae''.
The most common modern sauna types are those with electric stoves.
There is thermostat and a timer (eight hour maximum continuous heating time) on the stove.
Single-sex saunas are rare, as well as those which tolerate nudity.
Many cultures have sweat baths, though some have more spiritual uses while others are purely secular.
The sauna featured a fireplace where stones were heated to a high temperature.
Fire-heated saunas are common in cottages, where the extra work of maintaining the fire is not a problem.
Saunas can be divided into two basic types: conventional saunas that warm the air or infrared saunas that warm objects.
The first Finnish saunas are what nowadays are called ''savusaunas'', or smoke saunas.
There is evidence that the heat has dramatic effects on spermatogenesis.
Few people can sit directly in front of the heater without feeling too hot from radiant heat, but their overall body temperature may be insufficient.
In Asia the Japanese ''Mushi-Buro'' and the Korean ''jjimjilbang''.
When the sauna bath is started and the ''löyly'' shutter opened a soft warmth flow into the otherwise relatively cold () sauna.
In Thailand, women spend hours in a makeshift sauna tent during a month following childbirth.
In Japan, many saunas exist at sports centers and public bathhouses (sentō).
Aufguss sessions can take up to 10 minutes, and take place according to a schedule.
In a typical Finnish sauna, the temperature of the air, the room and the benches is above the dew point even when water is thrown on the hot stones and vaporized.
Cold showers or baths shortly after a sauna, as well as exposure to fresh air in a special balcony, garden or open-air room (''Frischluftraum'') are considered a must.
There is a firebox and a smokestack, and stones are placed in a compartment directly above the firebox.
This process releases heat and makes the steam feel hot.
The heat retained in the rocks, and the earlier fire, becomes the main source for heating the sauna.
In summer, a session is often started with a cold shower.
(''Löyly'', pronounced , can be understood as "sauna steam").
In Portugal, the steam baths were commonly used by the Castrejos people, prior to the arrival of the Romans in the western part of the Iberian Peninsula.
A cold water pool (and/or more recently a cold jacuzzi) is almost always accompanied and towels are usually provided.
A good sauna has a relatively small temperature gradient between the various seating levels.
Elsewhere, sauna facilities are normally provided at health clubs and at hotels, but there is no tradition or ritual to their use.
In the United States, the earliest saunas were Swedish ''bastu''s in the colony New Sweden around the Delaware River.
In Russia, public saunas are strictly single-sex  , while in Finland, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia, both types occur.
It could be in the locker room or mixed (i.e.
It is very common for swimming pools to have two saunas which are known in Persian as "سونای خشک" dry sauna & "سونای بخار" steam sauna, with the dry type customarily boasting a higher temperature.
As the person’s body is often the coolest object in a sauna room, steam will condense into water on the skin; this can be confused with perspiration.
Smoke sauna (Finnish ''savusauna'', Estonian ''suitsusaun'', Võro ''savvusann'') is one of the earliest forms of the sauna.
Ancient Estonians believed saunas were inhabited by spirits.
Contrary to Russia and Nordic countries, pouring water on hot stones to increase humidity (''Aufguss'', lit: "Onpouring") is not normally done by the sauna visitors themselves; larger sauna areas have a person in charge (the ''Saunameister'') for that, either an employee of the sauna complex or a volunteer.
Indeed, among Finnish farms in Great Lakes "sauna country", the cultural geographer Matti Kaups, found that 90% had sauna structures-more even than the farms in Finland.
File:Geysirhöhle.jpg|Sauna with geysir
In ex-USSR there are three different types of saunas.
In Russia, a felt "banya hat" may be worn to shield the head from the heat; this allows the wearer to increase the heat on the rest of the body.
The saunas are almost always gender separated, often required by law, and nudity is a required part of proper sauna etiquette.
Thus, they remain dry.
Other facilities offer nude single-sex saunas, nude mixed-gender saunas and clothed mixed-gender saunas on the same premises.
As a result, many sentōs have added more features such as saunas in order to survive.
These rules are strictly enforced in some public saunas.
There are two main types of stoves: continuous heating and heat storage-type.
Consequently, the heat of fresh steam may sometimes be felt most strongly in the furthest corners of the sauna.
*positioning when in the sauna
The first one, previously very popular especially during the Soviet Era, is the public sauna or the banya, (also known as the Russian banya), as it is referred to among the locals, is similar in context to public bath houses in Russia and in all ex-Soviet nations.
In Korea, saunas are essentially public bathhouses.
When bathing the heat-storage sauna will become as hot as a continuous fire type-sauna () but more humid.
He was always treated with respect, otherwise he might cause much trouble for people.
The sauna was (and still is) an important part of daily life, and families bathed together in the home sauna.
In the Americas there is the Nahuatl (Aztec) ''temāzcalli'' , Maya ''zumpul-ché'', and the Mixtec ''Ñihi''; and, in Canada and the United States, a number of First Nations and Native American cultures have various kinds of spiritual sweat lodges (Lakota: ''inipi'', Anishinaabemowin: ''madoodiswan'').
For safety reasons water is not placed on these types of heaters.
Some North American, Western European, Japanese, Russian and South African public sport centres and gyms include sauna facilities.
It was customary to warm up the sauna just for the ''tonttu'' every now and then, or to leave some food outside for him.
Contact lenses dry out in the heat.
The tradition almost died out, but was revived by enthusiasts in the 1980s.
Once the Aufguss session has started it is not considered good manners to enter the sauna, as opening the door would cause loss of heat (Sauna guests are expected to enter the sauna just in time before the Aufguss.
Finnish Sauna Society believes the number can actually be as high as 3.2 million saunas (population 5.5 million).
The Finns use a bundle of birch twigs with fresh leaves, to gently slap the skin and create further stimulation of the pores and cells.
In  Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Russia sauna-going plays a central social role.
Therapeutic sauna sessions are often carried out in conjunction with physiotherapy or hydrotherapy, gentle exercises that do not exacerbate symptoms.
The third type of sauna is one that is rented by a group of friends.
Under many circumstances, temperatures approaching and exceeding  would be completely intolerable and possibly fatal if exposed to long periods of time.
During wintertime, Finns often run outdoors for either ice swimming or, in the absence of lake, just to roll around in the snow naked and then go back inside.
Leaving the session is allowed, but grudgingly tolerated).
Users increase duration and the heat gradually over time as they adapt to sauna.
The same approximate meaning is used across the Finnic languages such as in Estonian ''leil''.
The sauna heater and rocks are very hot—one must stay well clear to avoid injury, particularly when water is poured on the sauna rocks, which creates an immediate blast of steam.
It has also been recommended for reducing symptoms in chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia, and rheumatoid arthritis, and for anorexia nervosa, and been proposed for treatment of other conditions including glaucoma, Sjogren syndrome, and obstructive lung disease, and for recuperation after childbirth.
Air temperatures averaged around  but sometimes exceeded  in a traditional Finnish sauna.
The Swedish Governor at the time had a bathhouse on Tinicum Island.
When pouring water onto the heater, it will cool down the heater, but carry more heat into the air via advection, making the sauna warmer.
It is simply a room containing a pile of rocks, but without a chimney.
The structure was a low stone mound with a small entrance.
Besides the Finnish Americans, the older generation of Korean-Americans still uses the saunas as it is available to them.
In some countries the closest and most convenient access to a sauna is at a gymnasium.
There are few restrictions and their use is casual; bathers may enter and exit the sauna as they please, be it nude, with a towel, dripping wet in swimsuits or even in workout clothes (the latter being very unusual).
Even though outdoor temperatures remain warmer and more humid, this does not affect the general application or intended sauna experience offered within these commercial environments offering a traditional sauna and or steam shower experience.
The upper part of the stove is often insulated with rock wool and firebricks.
Steam vapour, also called ''löyly'' , was created by splashing water on the heated rocks.
Shielding the face with a towel has been found to reduce the perception of heat.
This led to further evolution of the sauna, including the electric sauna stove, which was introduced in 1938 by Metos Ltd in Vaasa  and far infrared saunas, which have gained some popularity in the last several decades.
It is said that he warned the people if a fire was threatening the sauna, or punished people who behaved improperly in it – for example slept, or played games, argued, were generally noisy or behaved otherwise "immorally" there.
Sauna bathing and heavy drinking of alcoholic beverages, and also sauna bathing during alcohol withdrawal (hangover) phase can undoubtedly create real health risks.
Heating from the air will be lower on the lower benches as the heat rises.
The stones are usually durable heat proof and heat-retaining peridotite.
These are uncommon, however, as most saunas are either small private rooms or in the changing rooms of health clubs or gyms.
The Finnish sauna culture is well established; there is a built-in sauna in almost every house in Finland.
File:Highgrove Sauna.jpg|Modern sauna
Sauna use has been associated with loss of fertility in men, lasting up to two months.
File:06 TWE Saunaparadies Stonehenge Keltenthron-Sauna Aufguss Fahne.jpg|Modern collective sauna
In Germany, Austria, Luxembourg and South Tyrol (but rarely in the remainder of Italy), most public swimming pool complexes have sauna areas; in these locales, nudity is the generally accepted rule, and benches are expected to be covered by patrons' towels.
Heat-storing stoves are also found with electric heating, with similar service but no need to maintain a fire.
This is popular in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Russia as well.
Most adjustment of temperature in a sauna comes from,
In Europe we find the Russian ''banya'', Estonian ''saun'', the Jewish ''shvitz'', and the Swedish ''bastu''.
Combustibles on or near the heater have been known to result in fire.
Originally borrowed from the early Proto-Germanic ''*stakna-'' whose descendants include English ''stack'', the word ''sauna'' is an ancient Finnish word referring to the traditional Finnish bath and to the bathhouse itself.
Doors need to be kept closed and used quickly to maintain the temperature inside.
In many countries sauna going is a recent fashion and attitudes towards saunas are changing, while in others traditions have survived over generations.
Sauna societies are beginning to emerge in colleges across America, with the first one being formed at Gustavus Adolphus College.
Although the culture of sauna nowadays is more or less related to Finnish culture, the evolution of sauna happened around the same time both in Finland and the Baltic countries sharing the same meaning and importance of sauna in daily life, shared still to this day.
The Turkish or Arab ''hammam''.
Most were also intoxicated.
Water was thrown on the hot stones to produce steam and to give a sensation of increased heat.
It can also mean a small cabin or cottage, such as a cabin for a fisherman.
When in the sauna users often sit on a towel for hygiene and put a towel over the head if the face feels too hot but the body feels comfortable.
Various names are used to describe them, such as the smaller mogyoktang, outdoor oncheon, and the elaborate jjimjilbang.
Among users it is considered good practice to take a few moments after exiting a sauna before entering a cold plunge, and to enter a plunge pool by stepping into it gradually, rather than immediately immersing fully.
Sauna traditions in Estonia are almost identical to Finland as saunas have traditionally held a central role in the life of an individual.
The risk of dehydration leading to heat stroke may be reduced by regular sipping of water or isotonic drinks, but not alcohol, during the sauna.
Many of the sauna therapeutic trials used a regular schedule of at least 5 days a week and often daily for one to three months, then several times a week for extended periods.
As an additional facility a sauna may have one or more jacuzzis.
Aufguss sessions are usually announced by a schedule on the sauna door.
