He assigned these specimens to the new genus ''Pelorosaurus'', and grouped it together with the dinosaurs.
Also in 1877, Richard Lydekker named another relative of ''Cetiosaurus'', ''Titanosaurus'', based on an isolated vertebra.
Along with other saurischian dinosaurs (such as birds and other theropods), sauropods had a system of air sacs, evidenced by indentations and hollow cavities in most of their vertebrae that had been invaded by them.
Cladogram after an analysis presented by Sander and colleagues in 2011.
Although in general, sauropods were large, a gigantic size ( or more) was reached independently at multiple times in their evolution.
Most exceptions are hypothesized to be caused by island dwarfism, although there is a trend in Titanosauria towards a smaller body size.
Most studies in the 19th and early 20th centuries concluded that sauropods were too large to have supported their weight on land, and therefore that they must have been mainly aquatic.
However, it was not until the description of new, nearly complete sauropod skeletons from the United States (representing ''Apatosaurus'' and ''Camarasaurus'') later that year that a complete picture of sauropods emerged.
Their even larger size probably resulted because of an increased growth rate, which appears to have been linked with tachymetabolic endothermy, a condition that evolved in sauropodomorphs.
Generally, sauropod trackways are divided into three categories based on the distance between opposite limbs: narrow gauge, medium gauge, and wide gauge.
Primitive true titanosaurs also retained their forefoot claw but had evolved fully wide gauge limbs.
Sauropod necks have been found at over 50 feet in length, a full six times longer than the world record giraffe.
The hind feet were broad, and retained three claws in most species.
However, research on living animals has suggested that sauropod heads were held in an upright S-shaped curve.
The only previous musculoskeletal analysises were conducted on homonoids, terror birds, and other dinosaurs.
Since the segregation of juveniles and adults must have taken place soon after hatching, and combined with the fact that sauropod hatchlings were most likely precocial, Myers and Fiorillo concluded that species with age-segregated herds would not have exhibited much parental care.
Diplodocids, on the other hand, appear to have been well adapted for rearing up into a tripodal stance.
Another proposed function of the sauropods’ long necks was essentially a radiator to deal with the extreme amount of heat produced from their large body mass.
As one possible explanation for the increased body size is less risk of predation, the size evolution of both sauropods and theropods are probably linked.
A 2004 study by Day and colleagues found that a general pattern could be found among groups of advanced sauropods, with each sauropod family being characterised by certain trackway gauges.
Their body structure did not vary as much as other dinosaurs, perhaps due to size constraints, but they displayed ample variety.
Fossilised remains of sauropods have been found on every continent, including Antarctica.
Once branched into sauropods, sauropodomorphs continued steadily to grow larger, with smaller sauropods, like the Early Jurassic ''Barapasaurus'' and ''Kotasaurus'', evolving into even larger forms like the Middle Jurassic ''Mamenchisaurus'' and ''Patagosaurus''.
In 1878, the most complete sauropod yet was found and described by Othniel Charles Marsh, who named it ''Diplodocus''.
fragillimus'' may have been highly exaggerated.
Even the dwarf sauropods (perhaps 5 to 6&nbsp;metres, or 20&nbsp;feet long) were counted among the largest animals in their ecosystem.
With this find, Marsh also created a new group to contain ''Diplodocus'', ''Cetiosaurus'', and their increasing roster of relatives to differentiate them from the other major groups of dinosaurs.
This mode of aquatic locomotion, combined with its instability, led Henderson to refer to sauropods in water as "tipsy punters".
In a review of the evidence for various herd types, Myers and Fiorillo attempted to explain why sauropods appear to have often formed segregated herds.
No sauropods were very small, however, for even "dwarf" sauropods are larger than , a size reached by only about 10% of all mammalian species.
Considering that the metabolism would have been doing an immense amount of work, it would certainly have generated a large amount of heat as well, and elimination of this excess heat would have been essential for survival.
''Cetiosaurus'' was known from slightly better, but still scrappy remains.
Research published in 2013 would, however, take the flexibility of sauropod necks into doubt.
''Camarasaurus''s teeth took longer to grow than those for ''Diplodocus'' because they were larger.
Most life restorations of sauropods in art through the first three quarters of the 20th century depicted them fully or partially immersed in water.
However, as with all other non-avian dinosaurs alive at the time, the titanosaurs died out in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event.
Basal dinosauriformes, such as ''Pseudolagosuchus'' and ''Marasuchus'' from the Middle Triassic of Argentina, weighed approximately  or, in most cases, less.
Many gigantic forms existed in the Late Jurassic (specifically Kimmeridgian and Turonian), such as the turiasaur ''Turiasaurus'' and the diplodocoids ''Amphicoelias'', ''Diplodocus'' and ''Supersaurus''.
When sauropods were first discovered, their immense size led many scientists to compare them with modern-day whales.
Print evidence from Portugal shows that, in at least some sauropods (probably brachiosaurids), the bottom and sides of the forefoot column was likely covered in small, spiny scales, which left score marks in the prints.
By the Late Jurassic (150 million years ago), sauropods had become widespread (especially the diplodocids and brachiosaurids).
An air-sac system connected to the spaces not only lightened the long necks, but effectively increased the airflow through the trachea, helping the creatures to breathe in enough air.
Sauropod footprints are commonly found following coastlines or crossing floodplains, and sauropod fossils are often found in wet environments or intermingled with fossils of marine organisms.
The longest dinosaur known from reasonable fossils material is probably ''Argentinosaurus huinculensis'' with length estimates of  to .
Additionally, each vertebra was extremely long and had a number of empty spaces in them which would have been filled only with air.
However, the makeup of the herds varied between species.
Sauropod trackways and other fossil footprints (known as "ichnites") are known from abundant evidence present on most continents.
Inference from bones about "neutral head postures", which suggest a horizontal position, may be unreliable according to this research.
Some, like the diplodocids, possessed tremendously long tails, which they may have been able to crack like a whip as a signal or to deter or injure predators, or to make sonic booms.
However, the study did not involve other long necked animals, such as giraffes, and cannot be completely proven without further evidence.
Mallison concluded that diplodocids were better adapted to rearing than elephants, which do so occasionally in the wild.
The tracks are possibly more similar to ''Sauropodichnus giganteus'' than any other ichnogenera, although they have been suggested to be from a basal titanosauriform.
The claim that the long necks of sauropods were used for browsing high trees has been questioned on the basis of calculations of the energy needed to create the arterial blood pressure for the head if it was held upright.
When more complete specimens of ''Cetiosaurus'' were described by Phillips in 1871, he finally recognized the animal as a dinosaur related to ''Pelorosaurus''.
On the other hand, scientists who have studied age-mixed sauropod herds suggested that these species may have cared for their young for an extended period of time before the young reached adulthood.
Almost all sauropods had such a claw, though what purpose it served is unknown.
However, this and other early studies of sauropod ecology were flawed in that they ignored a substantial body of evidence that the skeletons of sauropods were heavily permeated with air sacs.
When studying ichnology to calculate sauropod speed, there are a few problems, such as only providing estimates for certain gaits because of preservation bias, and being subject to many more accuracy problems.
The titanosaurs, however, have also been some of the largest sauropods ever.
Diplodocids had a center of mass directly over the hips, giving them greater balance on two legs.
By reducing their heads to simple harvesting tools that got the plants into the body, the sauropods needed less power to lift their heads, and thus were able to develop necks with less dense muscle and connective tissue.
Sauropods also had a great number of adaptations in their skeletal structure.
Matthew Bonnan has shown that sauropod dinosaur long bones grew isometrically: that is, there was little to no change in shape as juvenile sauropods became gigantic adults.
They had very long necks, long tails, small heads (relative to the rest of their body), and four thick, pillar-like legs.
A skeletal mount depicting the diplodocid ''Barosaurus lentus'' rearing up on its hind legs at the American Museum of Natural History is one illustration of this hypothesis.
Falkingham ''et al.''
Particularly unusual compared with other animals were the highly modified front feet (''manus'').
''Cardiodon'' was known only from a two unusual, heart-shaped teeth (from which it got its name), which could not be identified beyond the fact that they came from a previously unknown large reptile.
Sauropod tracks from the Villar del Arzobispo Formation of early Berriasian age in Spain support the gregarious behaviour of the group.
Two other possible dwarfs are ''Rapetosaurus'', which existed on the island of Madagascar, an isolated island in the Cretaceous, and ''Ampelosaurus'', a titanosaur that lived on the Iberian peninsula of southern Spain and France.
The longest terrestrial animal alive today, the reticulated python, only reaches lengths of .
The tracks are wide-gauge, and the grouping as close to ''Sauropodichnus'' is also supported by the manus-to-pes distance, the morphology of the manus being kidney bean-shaped, and the morphology of the pes being subtriangular.
The claw was largest (as well as tall and laterally flattened) in diplodocids, and very small in brachiosaurids, some of which seem to have lost the claw entirely based on trackway evidence.
Its small stature was probably the result of insular dwarfism occurring in a population of sauropods isolated on an island of the late Jurassic in what is now the Langenberg area of northern Germany.
They had tiny heads, massive bodies, and most had long tails.
Enabling this were a number of essential physiological features.
By comparison, the giraffe, the tallest of all living land animals, is only 4.8 to 5.5&nbsp;metres (16 to 18&nbsp;ft) tall.
Some bone beds, for example a site from the Middle Jurassic of Argentina, appear to show herds made up of individuals of various age groups, mixing juveniles and adults.
Richard Owen published the first modern scientific description of sauropods in 1841, in his paper naming ''Cetiosaurus'' and ''Cardiodon''.
The gauge of the trackway can help determine how wide-set the limbs of various sauropods were and how this may have impacted the way they walked.
It has also been proposed that the long necks would have cooled the veins and arteries going to the brain, avoiding excessively heated blood from reaching the head.
Sauropods are gigantic, and descendants of surprisingly small ancestors.
They are notable for the enormous sizes attained by some species, and the group includes the largest animals to have ever lived on land.
To estimate the gait and speed of ''Argentinosaurus'', the study performed a musculoskeletal analysis.
But, unlike whales, sauropods were primarily land-based animals.
Others, like the brachiosaurids, were extremely tall, with high shoulders and extremely long necks.
Pneumatic, hollow bones are a characteristic feature of all sauropods.
The cause of the size reduction found by the authors was a reduced growth rate, which is now considered to be why all dwarfs are so small.
This fossil was described by Edward Lhuyd in 1699, but was not recognized as a giant prehistoric reptile at the time.
Since early in the history of their study, scientists, such as Osborn, have speculated that sauropods could rear up on their hind legs, using the tail as the third 'leg' of a tripod.
Commonly, studies about sauropod bone histology and speed focus on the postcranial skeleton, which holds many unique features, such as an enlarged process on the ulna, a wide llobe on the ilia, an inward-slanting top third of the femur, and an extremely ovoid femur shaft.
Through the Early to Late Cretaceous, the giants ''Sauroposeidon'', ''Paralititan'', ''Argentinosaurus'', ''Puertasaurus'', ''Antarctosaurus giganteus'', ''Dreadnoughtus schrani'', ''Notocolossus'' and ''Futalognkosaurus'' lived, the earliest being a brachiosaurid, with all latter being titanosaurs.
The holotype (and now lost) vertebra of ''Amphicoelias fragillimus'' may have come from an animal  long; its vertebral column would have been substantially longer than that of the blue whale.
This would have needed hearts 15 times the size of the hearts of whales of similar size.
Their forelimbs were rather more slender and ended in pillar-like hands built for supporting weight; only the thumb bore a claw.
Unlike elephants, print evidence shows that sauropods lacked any fleshy padding to back the front feet, making them concave.
Marsh named this group Sauropoda, or "lizard feet".
If applied to living animals it would imply that they also held their heads in this position, even though they in fact do not.
In support of this, reconstructions of the necks of ''Diplodocus'' and ''Apatosaurus'' show that they are basically straight with a gentle decline orientating their heads in a "neutral, undeflected posture" when close to ground.
According to the scientists, the specializing of their diets helped the different herbivorous dinosaurs to coexist.
Before the study, the most common way of estimating speed was through studying bone histology and ichnology.
However, none were found after they examined a large number of sauropod skeletons.
An approximate reconstruction of a complete sauropod skeleton was produced by artist John A. Ryder, hired by paleontologist E.D.
It cannot be identified whether the footprints of the herd were caused by juveniles or adults, because of the lack of previous trackway individual age identification.
The first sauropod fossil to be scientifically described was a single tooth known by the non-Linnaean descriptor ''Rutellum implicatum''.
Occasionally, only trackways from the forefeet are found.
The sauropods' most defining characteristic was their size.
These calculations suggest this would have taken up roughly half of its energy intake.
The bird-like hollowing of sauropod bones was recognized early in the study of these animals, and, in fact, at least one sauropod specimen found in the 19th century (''Ornithopsis'') was originally misidentified as a pterosaur (a flying reptile) because of this.
Medium gauge trackways with claw impressions on the forefeet probably belong to brachiosaurids and other primitive titanosauriformes, which were evolving wider-set limbs but retained their claws.
Diplodocids also had the most mobile necks of sauropods, a well-muscled pelvic girdle, and tail vertebrae with a specialised shape that would allow the tail to bear weight at the point it touched the ground.
The best evidence indicates that the most massive were ''Argentinosaurus'' (73 metric tons), ''Puertasaurus'' (80 to 100&nbsp;metric tons ), ''Alamosaurus'', ''Paralititan'', ''Antarctosaurus'' (69 metric tons).
''Diplodocus'' ate plants low to the ground and ''Camarasaurus'' browsed leaves from top and middle branches.
Rather than splaying out to the sides to create a wide foot as in elephants, the manus bones of sauropods were arranged in fully vertical columns, with extremely reduced finger bones (though it is not clear if the most primitive sauropods, such as ''Vulcanodon'' and ''Barapasaurus'', had such forefeet).
This drastically reduced the overall mass of the neck, enabling further elongation.
Wide gauge limbs were retained by advanced titanosaurs, trackways from which show a wide gauge and lack of any claws or digits on the forefeet.
At the evolutionary point named Saurischia, a rapid increase of bauplan size appeared, although more primitive members like ''Eoraptor'', ''Panphagia'', ''Pantydraco'', ''Saturnalia'' and ''Guaibasaurus'' still retain a moderate size, possibly even less than .
used computer modelling to show that this could be due to the properties of the substrate.
Before they could conduct the analysis, the team had to create a digital skeleton of the animal in question, show where there would be muscle layering, locate the muscles and joints, and finally find the muscle properties before finding the gait and speed.
And ''Diplodocus'' replaced each tooth once every 35 days.
Those features are useful when attempting to explain trackway patterns of graviportal animals.
This discovery also reveals that sauropods may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could graze and browse on vegetation.
Complete sauropod fossil finds are rare.
Exactly how segregated versus age-mixed herding varied across different groups of sauropods is unknown.
The dinosaurs’ overall large body size and quadrupedal stance provided a stable base to support the neck, and the head was evolved to be very small and light, losing the ability to orally process food.
Owen thought at the time that ''Cetiosaurus'' was a giant marine reptile related to modern crocodiles, hence its name, which means "whale lizard".
There is controversy over whether sauropods held their heads near vertically or horizontally.
'', ''Argentinosaurus'' was digitally reconstructed to test its locomotion for the first time.
Sauropods first appeared in the late Triassic Period, where they somewhat resembled the closely related (and possibly ancestral) group "Prosauropoda".
He named the new genus ''Ornithopsis'', or "bird face" because of this.
Many lines of fossil evidence, from both bone beds and trackways, indicate that sauropods were gregarious animals that formed herds.
These need to be just right to preserve tracks.
''Sauroposeidon'' was probably the tallest, reaching about 18&nbsp;metres (60&nbsp;ft) high, with the previous record for longest neck being held by ''Mamenchisaurus''.
Many species, especially the largest, are known only from isolated and disarticulated bones.
Studies by Matthew Cobley et al revealed, using computer modeling, that muscle attachments and cartilage present in the neck would likely have limited the flexibility to a considerable degree.
Many near-complete specimens lack heads, tail tips and limbs.
One sparsely known possible giant is ''Huanghetitan ruyangensis'', only known from  long ribs.
Differences in hind limb and fore limb surface area, and therefore contact pressure with the substrate, may sometimes lead to only the forefeet trackways being preserved.
The proximal caudal vertebrae are extremely diagnostic for sauropods.
In 1878, paleontologist E.D.
There is one definite example of a derived sauropodomorph being small however, and that is ''Anchisaurus'', which reached under , even though it is closer to the sauropods than ''Plateosaurus'' and ''Riojasaurus'', which were upwards of  in weight.
Seeley found that the vertebrae were very lightly constructed for their size and contained openings for air sacs (''pneumatization'').
Sauropods were herbivorous (plant-eating), usually quite long-necked quadrupeds (four-legged), often with spatulate (spatula-shaped: broad at the tip, narrow at the neck) teeth.
A 2014 study suggested that the time from laying the egg to the time of the hatching was likely to have been between 65 and 82 days.
These air spaces reduced the overall weight of the massive necks that the sauropods had, and the air-sac system in general, allowing for a single-direction airflow through stiff lungs, made it possible for the sauropods to get enough oxygen.
Titanosaurs were most unusual among sauropods, as in addition to the external claw, they completely lost the digits of the front foot.
According to Kent Stevens, computer-modeled reconstructions of the skeletons made from the vertebrae indicate that sauropod necks were capable of sweeping out large feeding areas without needing to move their bodies, but were unable to be retracted to a position much above the shoulders for exploring the area or reaching higher.
In a 2005 paper, Rothschild and Molnar reasoned that if sauropods had adopted a bipedal posture at times, there would be evidence of stress fractures in the forelimb 'hands'.
However, due to their body proportions, floating sauropods would also have been very unstable and maladapted for extended periods in the water.
Two well-known island dwarfs are the Cretaceous ''Magyarosaurus'' (at one point its identity as a dwarf was challenged) and the Jurassic ''Europasaurus'', both from Europe.
Other than titanosaurs, a clade of diplodocoids, a group of giants, called Dicraeosauridae, is diagnosed by a small body size.
By evolving vertebrae consisting of 60% air, the sauropods were able to minimize the amount of dense, heavy bone without sacrificing the ability to take sufficiently large breaths to fuel the entire body with oxygen.
Their hind legs were thick, straight, and powerful, ending in club-like feet with five toes, though only the inner three (or in some cases four) bore claws.
The scientists found qualities of the tooth affected how long it took for a new tooth to grow.
'''Sauropoda''' ( or ), or the '''sauropods''' (; ''sauro-'' + ''-pod'', "lizard-footed"), are an infraorder of saurischian ("lizard-hipped") dinosaurs.
Among the smallest sauropods were the primitive ''Ohmdenosaurus'' (4&nbsp;m, or 13&nbsp;ft long), the dwarf titanosaur ''Magyarosaurus'' (6&nbsp;m or 20&nbsp;ft long), and the dwarf brachiosaurid ''Europasaurus'', which was 6.2&nbsp;meters long as a fully-grown adult.
By the Late Cretaceous, those groups had mainly been replaced by the titanosaurs, which had a near-global distribution.
A good example of this would be the massive Jurassic sauropod trackways found in lagoon deposits on Scotland's Isle of Skye.
Their only real competitors in terms of size are the rorquals, such as the blue whale.
Evidence for swimming in sauropods comes from fossil trackways that have occasionally been found to preserve only the forefeet (manus) impressions.
Many illustrations of sauropods in the flesh miss these facts, inaccurately depicting sauropods with hooves capping the claw-less digits of the feet, or multiple claws or hooves on the hands.
The weight of ''Amphicoelias fragillimus'' was estimated at 122 metric tons but 2015 research argued that these estimates may have been highly exaggerated.
Unlike other sauropods, whose necks could grow to up to four times the length of their backs, the neck of ''Brachytrachelopan'' was shorter than its backbone.
Following the size change of sauropods, theropods continued to grow even larger, shown by an ''Allosaurus''-sized coelophysoid from Germany.
Neosauropoda is quite plausibly the largest clade of dinosaurs ever to have existed, with a few exceptions.
Beginning in the 1970s, the effects of sauropod air sacs on their supposed aquatic lifestyle began to be explored.
There was poor (and now missing) evidence that so-called ''Bruhathkayosaurus'', might have weighed over 175 metric tons but this has been questioned.
Studies of microscopic tooth wear show that juvenile sauropods had diets that differed from their adult counterparts, so herding together would not have been as productive as herding separately, where individual herd members could forage in a coordinated way.
One of the most extreme cases of island dwarfism is found in ''Europasaurus'', a relative of the much larger ''Camarasaurus'' and ''Brachiosaurus'', was about  long, and so the diminutive size of ''Europasaurus'' is considered to be diagnostic of the genus.
Insular dwarfism is caused by a reduced growth rate in sauropods, the opposite of which led to the evolution of sauropods.
As massive quadrupeds, sauropods developed specialized ''graviportal'' (weight-bearing) limbs.
Titanosaurs may have lost the thumb claw completely (with the exception of early forms, such as ''Janenschia'').
Henderson noted that, due to their extensive system of air sacs, sauropods would have been buoyant and would not have been able to submerge their torsos completely below the surface of the water; in other words, they would float, and would not have been in danger of lung collapse due to water pressure when swimming.
''Camarasaurus'' replaced each tooth every 62 days.
Mallison found that some characters previously linked to rearing adaptations were actually unrelated (such as the wide-set hip bones of titanosaurs) or would have hindered rearing.
In 1850, Gideon Mantell recognized the dinosaurian nature of several bones assigned to ''Cetiosaurus'' by Owen.
The front feet of sauropods were very dissimilar from those of modern large quadrupeds, such as elephants.
Some sauropods had as many as 19 cervical vertebrae, whereas almost all mammals are limited to only seven.
Even though these sauropods are small, the only way to prove they are true dwarfs is through a study of their bone histology.
It was in fact found that the increase in metabolic rate resulting from the sauropods’ necks was slightly more than compensated for by the extra surface area from which heat could dissipate.
The only claw visible in most sauropods was the distinctive thumb claw (associated with digit I).
The possible ''Cetiosauriscus'' from Switzerland might also be a dwarf, but it has yet to be proven.
Advanced titanosaurs had no digits or digit bones, and walked only on horseshoe-shaped "stumps" made up of the columnar metacarpal bones.
Cope had even referred to these structures as "floats".
A year later, when Owen coined the name Dinosauria, he did not include ''Cetiosaurus'' and ''Cardiodon'' in that group.
They found that most sauropods other than titanosaurs had narrow-gauge limbs, with strong impressions of the large thumb claw on the forefeet.
Mantell noticed that the leg bones contained a medullary cavity, a characteristic of land animals.
Bonnan suggested that this odd scaling pattern (most vertebrates show significant shape changes in long bones associated with increasing weight support) might be related to a stilt-walker principle (suggested by amateur scientist Jim Schmidt) in which the long legs of adult sauropods allowed them to easily cover great distances without changing their overall mechanics.
Such air sacs were at the time known only in birds and pterosaurs, and Seeley considered the vertebrae to come from a pterosaur.
Dinosaurs would not be recognized as a group until over a century later.
Ichnites have helped support other biological hypotheses about sauropods, including general fore and hind foot anatomy (see ''Limbs and feet'' above).
Sauropods are one of the most recognizable groups of dinosaurs, and have become a fixture in popular culture due to their large sizes.
Marsh in 1878, and is derived from Greek, meaning "lizard foot".
Henderson showed that such trackways can be explained by sauropods with long forelimbs (such as macronarians) floating in relatively shallow water deep enough to keep the shorter hind legs free of the bottom, and using the front limbs to punt forward.
For example, titanosaurs had an unusually flexible backbone, which would have decreased stability in a tripodal posture and would have put more strain on the muscles.
Likewise, it is unlikely that brachiosaurids could rear up onto the hind legs, as their center of gravity was much farther forward than other sauropods, which would cause such a stance to be unstable.
However, Mantell still did not recognize the relationship to ''Cetiosaurus''.
''Supersaurus'', at  long, was the longest sauropod known from reasonably complete remains, but others, like the old record holder, ''Diplodocus'', were also extremely long.
Even with these small, primitive forms, there is a notable size growth in sauropodomorphs, although scanty remains of this period of sauropod evolution make assumptions necessary as the size is difficult to interpret.
However, a number of other fossil sites and trackways indicate that many sauropod species travelled in herds segregated by age, with juveniles forming herds separate from adults.
