Makkara is usually grilled, roasted over coals or open fire, steamed (called ''höyrymakkara'') or cooked on sauna heating stones.
Examples include kielbasa and mortadella.
They are either eaten immediately after cooking or must be refrigerated.
There is a huge range of national and regional varieties of sausages, which differ by their flavouring or spicing ingredients, the meat(s) used in them and their manner of preparation.
* '''Cooked sausage''' (''wuerstel'')
It can be flavored with a wide range of spices, such as sumac for tartness, and paprika, Cayenne pepper, or harissa, a hot chili paste that gives it a red color.
* France: Montbéliard, Morteau, Strasbourg, Toulouse,..
It is seasoned mainly with pepper.
Certain sausages also contain ingredients such as cheese and apple, or types of vegetable.
There are regional varieties such as Vigan (with lots of garlic and not sweet) and Lucban (lots of oregano and pork fat is chunky).
This sausage is most similar to English-style sausages and has been made in the United States since colonial days.
The taste is spicy, salty and a little raw, similar to pepperoni.
Battered sausage, consisting of a sausage dipped in batter, and fried, is sold throughout Britain from Fish and Chip shops.
When a steak made out of thick (diameter about ) ''makkara'' is prepared inside a sliced, fried bun with cucumber salad and other fillings, it becomes a ''porilainen'' after the town of Pori.
Most ''makkara'' has very little spice and is therefore frequently eaten with mustard, ketchup, or other table condiments without a bun.
The variety from Louisiana is known as Tasso ham and is often a staple in Cajun and Creole cooking.
This kind of sausage was first produced in a Russian-capitalized factory named Churin sausage factory in 1909.
Sausages in Poland are generally made of pork, rarely beef.
There are many varieties of sausages known to Thai cuisine, some of which are specialities of a specific region of Thailand.
The sausage is produced in a rectangular block and individual portions are sliced off.
There are various laws concerning the meat content of sausages in the UK.
For example, in the United States The Department of Agriculture specifies that the fat content of different defined types of sausage may not exceed 30%, 35% or 50% by weight; some sausages may contain binders or extenders.
Some chorizo is so loose that it spills out of its casing as soon as it is cut; this crumbled ''chorizo'' is a popular filling for torta sandwiches, eggs, breakfast burritos and tacos.
It is somewhat similar in taste and texture to liverwurst and, served with a ''nam chim'' (Thai dipping sauce), a popular snack in Thailand.
Various metrics such as types of ingredients, consistency, and preparation are used.
A '''sausage''' is a food usually made from ground meat, often pork, beef or veal, along with salt, spices and breadcrumbs, with a skin around it.
''gyulai'' and ''csabai'' sausage.
Unlike ordinary sausages it is a typical home dish, not sold at hot dog stands.
Early humans made the first sausages by stuffing roasted intestines into stomachs.
Another Finnish speciality is ''ryynimakkara'', a low-fat sausage which contains groats.
Kulen is a type of flavored sausage made of minced pork that is traditionally produced in Croatia (Slavonia) and Serbia (Vojvodina), and its designation of origin has been protected.
Boerewors is traditionally cooked on a ''braai'' (barbecue).
As no collective word for "sausage" in the English sense exists in Hungarian, local salamis (see e.g.
Examples include cervelat, Jagdwurst, and Weißwurst.
Beef tends to be more predominant than in the pork-heavy Spanish equivalents.
In Louisiana, there is a variety of sausage that is unique to its heritage, a variant of andouille.
Evidence suggests that sausages were already popular both among the ancient Greeks and Romans, and most likely with the various tribes occupying the larger part of Europe.
There are many types of sucuk, but it is mostly made from beef.
* '''Liver sausage''' (''salsiccia di fegato'')
From northern Thailand comes ''sai ua'', a grilled minced pork sausage flavored with curry paste and fresh herbs.
Some vegetarian sausages are not necessarily vegan, and may contain ingredients such as eggs.
Examples include Mettwurst and Teewurst which are meat preparations packed in sausage casing but squeezed out of it (just like any other spread from a tube).
Polish sausages, kiełbasa, come in a wide range of styles such as swojska, krajańska, szynkowa, biała, śląska, krakowska, podhalańska, kishka and others.
The most noticeable aspect of Danish boiled sausages (never the fried ones) is that the cover often contains a traditional bright-red dye.
German sausages include Frankfurters/Wieners, Bratwürste, Rindswürste, Knackwürste, and Bockwürste.
* skinless, sans the usual natural casing and rolled in plastic sheets
The lean meat-to-fat ratio is dependent upon the style and producer.
Other French sausages include the diot and various types of boudin.
* '''Cooked sausages''' are made with fresh meats, and then fully cooked.
A thin variety of sausage, known as the chipolata is often wrapped in bacon and served alongside roast turkey at Christmas time and are known as Pigs in a Blanket or "Pigs in Blankets".
Due to their habit of often exploding due to shrinkage of the tight skin during cooking, they are often referred to as ''bangers'', particularly when served with the most common accompaniment of mashed potatoes to form a bi-national dish known as bangers and mash.
These sausages, like most meat-replacement products, generally fall into two camps: some are shaped, colored, flavored, etc.
Sun-dried merguez is used to add flavor to tagines.
* Hungary: kolbász gyulai (after the town of Gyula), csabai (after the city of Békéscsaba), Debrecener (after the city of Debrecen).
It can be served on a stick (like the corn dog) or on a bone as well.
Many nations and regions have their own characteristic sausages, using meats and other ingredients native to the region and employed in traditional dishes.
An intestinal loop is one sucuk.
They might also be served together with a refreshing Thai salad such as ''som tum'' (green papaya salad).
The cities of Chillán and San Carlos are known among Chileans for having the best ''longanizas''.
The most common variation is composed of pork blood, cellophane noodle, sliced carrot and barley stuffed into pig intestines, but other regional variations include squid or Alaska pollock casings.
It is also eaten in sandwiches.
The meat content as labelled may exceed 100%; this happens when the weight of meat used exceeds the total weight of the sausage after it has been made, sometimes including a drying process which reduces water content.
In the United Kingdom and other countries with English cuisine traditions, many sausages contain a significant proportion of bread and starch-based fillers, which may comprise 30% of ingredients.
The distinct flavor of some sausages is due to fermentation by ''Lactobacillus'', ''Pediococcus'', or ''Micrococcus'' (added as starter cultures) or natural flora during curing.
Hence, sausages, puddings, and salami are among the oldest of prepared foods, whether cooked and eaten immediately or dried to varying degrees.
However, the saucisse is only popular near the Germanic border (Belgium, Switzerland, regions near Germany, ...), and won't be found often in the centre of France.
White sausages do not contain paprika and can be fried, boiled in wine, or, more rarely, in water.
Sausage without casing is called ''sausage meat'' and can be fried or used as stuffing for poultry, or for wrapping foods like Scotch eggs.
Macedonian sausages (''kolbas, lukanec'') are made from fried pork, onions, and leeks, with herbs and spices.
One Finnish variety is ''mustamakkara'', lit.
* Serbia: Sremska kobasica, Sremska salama, Sremski kulen (after the region of Srem/Sirmium), Požarevačka kobasica (after the city of Požarevac)
In most areas, "sausage meat" for frying and stuffing into poultry or other meats is sold as ground, spiced meat without casing.
Blood sausage, morcilla, is found in both cured and fresh varieties.
In the English-speaking world, the following distinction between ''fresh'', ''cooked'', and ''dry'' sausages seems to be more or less accepted:
Other types of sausages in Serbia include Sremska, Požarevačka, and Sudžuk.
The filler used in many sausages helps them to keep their shape as they are cooked.
Sausage making is a traditional food preservation technique.
Eaten as part of the traditional ''asado'', ''chorizo'' (beef and/or pork, flavored with spices) and ''morcilla'' (blood sausage or black pudding) are the most popular.
Very popular is the ''salame tandilero'', from the city of Tandil.
They must be refrigerated and thoroughly cooked before eating.
They are usually packaged in single blister packs or jars.
In addition to the standard Latin American sausages, dried pork sausages are served cold as a snack, often to accompany beer drinking.
They are eaten hot or cold, but need to be refrigerated.
The best and most popular brand is ''Marca el Rey''; contrary to popular belief that it comes from Bilbao, this is manufactured in the United States.
Seshebo can include chilli, atchaar or curries, depending on the area within the country.
It is similar to the Scottish black pudding.
Italian sausages (''salsiccia'' – pl.
As the meat contracts in the heat, the filler expands and absorbs moisture and fat from the meat.
It is usually served in chip shops, deep fried in batter and with chips as a red pudding supper.
The coarsely-ground nature of the meat as well as the long continuous spiral of sausage are two of its recognisable qualities.
The meat may be from any animal, but is often pork, beef, or veal.
A great number of regional sausage specialties exist as well.
Another grilled sausage is called ''sai krok Isan'', a fermented sausage with a distinctive slightly sour taste from northeastern Thailand (the region also known as Isan).
Finnish ''makkara'' is typically similar in appearance to Polish sausages or bratwursts, but have a very different taste and texture.
Examples include hot dogs, Braunschweiger, and liver sausage.
Kamaboko is made with cured ground fish paste called surimi.
Weisswurst is also a common dish in some regions, eaten usually with mashed potatoes or ''chucrut'' (sauerkraut).
Today, however, natural casings are often replaced by collagen, cellulose, or even plastic casings, especially in the case of industrially manufactured sausages.
Isterband is made of pork, barley groats and potato and is lightly smoked.
Unlike the original variety native to Northern France, Louisiana andouille has evolved to be made mainly of pork butt, not tripe, and tends to be spicy with a flavor far too strong for the mustard sauce that traditionally accompanies French andouille: prior to casing, the meat is heavily spiced with cayenne and black pepper.
In some jurisdictions foods described as sausages must meet regulations governing their content.
Another traditional sausage is the ''prieta'', the Chilean version of blood sausage, generally known elsewhere in Latin America as ''morcilla''.
Sometimes they may contain beef.
A sausage consists of meat, cut into pieces or ground, and filled into a casing, with other ingredients.
Leberwurst is usually found in every market.
Adopted from Vietnam comes ''mu yo''.
The most famous sausage in ancient Italy was from Lucania (modern Basilicata) and was called ''lucanica'', a name which lives on in a variety of modern sausages in the Mediterranean.
Harbin-style sausage has become popular in China, especially in northern regions.
Other uncooked sausages are available in certain regions in link form, including Italian, bratwurst, chorizo, and linguica.
The original kulen recipe does not contain black pepper because its hot flavor comes from hot red paprika.
Germany, for instance, which produces more than 1200 types of sausage, distinguishes ''raw'', ''cooked'' and ''precooked'' sausages.
There are hundreds of salami-style sausages.
Most ''longganisa''s contain Prague powder and are hardly smoked and usually sold fresh.
Merguez is made with lamb, beef, or a mixture of both.
The word derives from the Italian "cipolatta", "onioned" or made with onion, although its meaning has been forgotten and it need not contain onion.
* '''Blood sausage''' (''sanguinaccio'' or ''boudin'')
In the latter, the blood is mixed with rice, or pieces of bread rolls.
They are also called ''wienerpølser'' and legend has it they originate from Vienna where it was once ordered that day-old sausages be dyed as a means of warning.
They are also served cold at children's parties throughout the year.
Smoked sucuk is usually straight.
Like most chorizos in Latin America, they are sold raw, and must be cooked.
Horse sausage and mutton sausage are also traditional foods in Iceland, although their popularity is waning.
On the other hand, the finest quality contain only  choice cuts of meat and seasoning.
Sundae, a form of blood sausage, is a traditional Korean sausage.
While not vegetarian, the soya sausage was invented 1916 in Germany.
''Kun chiang'' is a dry and sweet Chinese sausage which has also been incorporated into the Thai culinary culture.
Both sausages are commonly eaten with sticky rice, fresh vegetables, and a fresh ''nam phrik'' (Thai chilli paste) or some raw bird's eye chilies.
Fennel seeds and chilli are generally used as the primary spices in the South of Italy, in Apulia they are called "Zampina", while in the center and North of the country black pepper and garlic are more often used.
Other popular ready-to-eat sausages, often eaten in sandwiches, include salami, American-style bologna, Lebanon bologna, prasky, liverwurst, and head cheese.
Some are smoked as well at the beginning of the drying process.
They are preserved by lactic acid fermentation, and they may be dried, brined or smoked.
The Dutch braadworst's name might suggest it being a variant of the bratwurst, but this is not the case and it is closely related to the well known Afrikaner Boerewors.
In recent years, kamaboko has also entered the market as a snack food.
winter salami) and boiled sausages "hurka" are often not considered when listing regional sausage varieties.
The links, especially of those from Cojutepeque, are separated with corn husks tied in knots (see photo).
The most popular type of red sausage is perhaps ''txistorra'', a thin and long paprika sausage originating in Navarre.
* '''Dry sausages''' are cured sausages that are fermented and dried.
In recent years, many international and exotic sausages have also become widely available in NZ.
* Italy: Merano (Meraner Wurst)
These typically contain MRM which was previously included in meat content, but under later EU law cannot be so described.
Known as ''lap cheong'' by Cantonese, in Thailand it is most often used, again, as an ingredient for a Thai salad, ''yam kun chiang'', one that is normally only eaten together with ''khao tom kui'', a plain rice congee.
Some varieties are extremely hot and/or greasy.
It is often cut into thin slices and added to soups, salads, bento, and many other dishes as a garnish.
Sausages are almost always fried in oil, served for any meal, particularly breakfast or lunch and often "sweet sausages" have been created which are made with any of the above: dried fruit, nuts, caramel and chocolate, bound with butter and sugar.
Certain countries classify sausage types according to the region in which the sausage was traditionally produced:
Speciality sausages with other ingredients such as apple and leek are also made.
In Chile, it contains onions, spices and sometimes walnut or rice and is usually eaten at ''asados'' or accompanied by simple boiled potatoes.
''Chorizo de Bilbao'' seems to be a purely Filipino term as the variant does not exist in Spain.
It is short and thick in shape and can be eaten grilled, fried, stewed, steamed or even raw when freshly made.
Traditionally it is smoked over pecan wood or sugar cane as a final step before being ready to eat.
Liver sausage, which has been compared to haggis, and blood sausage are also a common foodstuff in Iceland.
* '''Cooked sausages'''  (''Brühwurst'') may include water and emulsifiers and are always cooked.
Maltese sausage (''Maltese'': ''Zalzett tal-Malti'') is made of pork, sea salt, black peppercorns, coriander seeds and parsley.
Pepperoni and Italian crumbles are popular pizza toppings.
It is widely sold in grocery stores in a large synthetic plastic casing, or in links which may have a protein casing.
Embutidos (or enchidos) and linguiça generally contain hashed meat, particularly pork, seasoned with aromatic herbs or spices (pepper, red pepper, paprika, garlic, rosemary, thyme, cloves, ginger, nutmeg, etc.
Examples include ''Boerewors'', Italian pork sausage, siskonmakkara, and breakfast sausage.
Other countries use different systems of classification.
* ''Chorizo de Bilbao'', with lots of paprika and usually kept in a can with lard.
''Nakki'' is a tinier edition of ''makkara''.
Traditional sausages similar to English bangers are eaten throughout the country; these are usually made of finely ground beef or mutton with breadcrumbs, very mildly spiced, stuffed into an edible collagen casing which crisps and splits when fried.
The Greek poet Homer mentioned a kind of blood sausage in the ''Odyssey'', Epicharmus wrote a comedy titled ''The Sausage'', and Aristophanes' play ''The Knights'' is about a sausage vendor who is elected leader.
* UK: Cumberland, Chiltern, Lincolnshire, Glamorgan,&nbsp;..
There are many dishes made with sucuk, but grilled sucuk remains the most popular.
A popular breakfast food is the square sausage.
Additionally, luncheon meat and sausage meat are now available without casings in tin cans and jars.
It is fermented, spiced (with garlic and pepper) and filled in an inedible casing that needs to be peeled off before consuming.
Merguez is a red, spicy sausage from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, North Africa.
Typically, a sausage is formed in a casing traditionally made from intestine, but sometimes synthetic.
People often cure sausages by smoking and air drying.
In the first case, the main ingredient is liver, mixed with rice stuffing.
Traditionally, sausage makers would salt various tissues and organs such as scraps, organ meats, blood, and fat to help preserve them.
In Finland there are b- and a-classes of BBQ Sausages like Kabanossi, Camping and HK Sininen Lenkki, Blue Loop.
* '''Raw sausage''' (''salsiccia'') with a thin casing
Mexican styles add oregano and the ''guajillo'' red pepper to the Spanish chorizo to give it an even hotter spicy touch.
Some are "adulterated" with turkey, water buffalo meat, sheep fat or chicken.
Usually saucisson contains pork, cured with a mixture of salt, wine and/or spirits.
* ''jamonado'' or ''hamonado'', with lots of garlic, black pepper and other spices
Fresh sausage may be red or white.
Stornoway black pudding is held in high regard and measures are currently being taken to bring it under EU geographical protection.
The extended list of beneficiaries of such diplomatic generosity included city magistrates, academy professors, voivodes, szlachta and kapituła.
It is rarely seen outside Scotland and in fact is still fairly uncommon in the Highlands.
During the reign of the Roman emperor Nero, sausages were associated with the Lupercalia festival.
It is fresh and usually deep red in color (in most of the rest of Latin America, chorizo is uncolored and coarsely chopped).
In general there are several common variants:
Vegetarian sausages are also now very widely available, although traditional meatless recipes such as  the Welsh ''Selsig Morgannwg'' also exist.
Pickled makkara intended to be consumed as slices is called ''kestomakkara''.
Sundae is eaten plain with salt, in stews, or as part of a stir-fry.
Sausages may be preserved by curing, drying (often in association with fermentation or culturing, which can contribute to preservation), smoking or freezing.
It can often be found on a smaller scale in rural regions, especially in southern states, where it is either in fresh patties or in links with either natural or synthetic casings as well as smoked.
In El Salvador, chorizos are quite common, and the ones from the city of Cojutepeque are particularly well known there.
Another popular variation is the corn dog, which is a hot dog that is deep fried in cornmeal batter and served on a stick.
This is normally eaten as part of a full Scottish Breakfast or on a Scottish morning roll.
A host of modern, factory-made, sausages have become popular as snacks in recent years.
The French language makes a difference between "saucisse" and "saucisson", where the former is usually meant to bake, and the latter is a dried sausage.
The closest relative to ''nakki'' is the thin knackwurst.
Sausages may be served as hors d'œuvres, in a sandwich, in a bread roll as a hot dog, wrapped in a tortilla, or as an ingredient in dishes such as stews and casseroles.
Saucisson is perhaps one of the most popularized forms of dried sausage in France, with many different variations from region to region.
However, many cheaper sausages contain mechanically recovered meat or meat slurry, which must be so listed on packaging.
* '''Fresh smoked sausages''' are fresh sausages that are smoked and cured.
