Less common materials that have been used include wood, glass, crystal, porcelain, and even bone.
Eppelsheim has also produced subcontrabass tubaxes in C and B, the latter being the lowest saxophone ever made.
By contrast, tenors and even baritones have occasionally been made in the straight style.
According to Larry Teal, the mouthpiece material has little, if any, effect on the sound, and the physical dimensions give a mouthpiece its tone colour.
There is also the wooden Sawat saxophone created in Thailand on a small scale.
Sax's original keywork, which was based on the Triebert system 3 oboe for the left hand and the Boehm clarinet for the right, was simplistic and made playing some legato passages and wide intervals extremely difficult to finger, so numerous developers added extra keys and alternate fingerings to make chromatic playing less difficult.
A number of saxes and saxophone-related instruments have appeared since Sax's original work, most with no significant success.
The keys are activated by keytouches pressed by the fingers, either directly on the pad cup or connected to it with levers, either directly or with joints called "linkages."
Recently, the World Saxophone Quartet has become known as the preeminent jazz saxophone quartet.
However, this keywork never gained much popularity, and is no longer in use.
The tubax, developed in 1999 by the German instrument maker Benedikt Eppelsheim, plays the same range, and with the same fingering, as the E contrabass saxophone; its bore, however, is narrower than that of a contrabass saxophone, making for a more compact instrument with a "reedier" tone (akin to the double-reed contrabass sarrusophone).
The swing bands of the 1930s utilized arrangements of saxophone and brass sections playing off each other in call-response patterns.
Modern saxophone players have extended this range to over 4 octaves on tenor and alto.
The standard written range extends from a B below the staff to an F or F three ledger lines above the staff.
A jazz saxophone quartet is usually made up of one B soprano, one E alto, one B tenor and one E baritone (SATB).
Many musical theatre scores include parts for a saxophone, sometimes doubling another woodwind or brass instrument.
For a short time Selmer Paris produced mark VI alto saxophones with the low A key.
Saxophonists such as John Coltrane, Ornette Coleman, Sam Rivers and Pharoah Sanders again defined the forefront of creative exploration with the avant-garde movement of the 1960s.
In the Minahasa region of the Indonesian island of Sulawesi, there exist entire bands made up of bamboo "saxophones" and "brass" instruments of various sizes.
This can be useful if a band or orchestra lacks one of those instruments.
At the opposite extreme from the classical mouthpieces are those with a small chamber and a low clearance above the reed between the tip and the chamber, called high baffle.
The saxophone consists of an approximately conical tube, usually of thin brass, flared at the tip to form a bell.
Yanagisawa's 902 and 992 series saxophones are made with phosphor bronze, which is claimed to offer slightly different, more "vintage" tonal qualities from the brass 901 and 991 models of identical design.
The saxophone first gained popularity in one of the uses it was designed for: military bands.
The Mule quartet is often considered the prototype for future quartets, due the level of virtuosity demonstrated by its members and its central role in the development of the quartet repertoire.
He wanted it to overblow at the octave, unlike the clarinet, which rises in pitch by a twelfth when overblown.
Instruments from the so-called "orchestral" series, pitched in C and F, never gained a foothold, and the B and E instruments have now replaced the C and F instruments when the saxophone is used in an orchestra.
A number of companies, including Keilwerth, Rampone & Cazzani (''altello'' model), L.A. Sax and Sax Dakota USA, are marketing straight-bore, tipped-bell soprano saxophones as saxellos (or "saxello sopranos").
The "long tones" exercise is used to develop embouchure, along with airstream and breath control.
The fingering scheme of the saxophone, which has had only minor changes since the instrument's original invention, has presented inherent acoustic problems related to closed keys below the first open tonehole that affect response of, and slightly muffle, some notes.
Sax himself had mastered these techniques; he demonstrated the instrument as having a range of just beyond three octaves up to a (written) high B4.
He patented the saxophone on June 28, 1846, in two groups of seven instruments each.
Another new arrival to the sax scene is the soprillo sax, a piccolo-sized straight instrument with the upper speaker hole built into the mouthpiece.
Mouthpieces come in a wide variety of materials, including vulcanized rubber (sometimes called hard rubber or ebonite), plastic, and metals such as bronze or surgical steel.
Prior to final assembly, the manufacturers usually apply a thin coating of clear or colored acrylic lacquer, or silver plate, over the bare brass.
Saxophonists who follow the French school of classical saxophone playing, influenced by Marcel Mule, generally use mouthpieces with smaller chambers than Rascher style mouthpieces.
It can be played with the smaller (and more commonly available) baritone saxophone mouthpiece and reeds.
One of the most radical, however temporary, revisions of saxophone keywork was made in the 1950s by M. Houvenaghel of Paris, who completely redeveloped the mechanics of the system to allow a number of notes (C, B, A, G, F and E) to be flattened by a semitone simply by pressing the right middle finger.
In one or another size, the instrument has also been found as a useful accompaniment to genres such as opera and choral music.
However, as the lower-pitched instruments would be unacceptably long if straight, for ergonomic reasons, the larger instruments usually incorporate a U-bend ("bow") at, or slightly above, the third-lowest tone hole.
Low A keys however were not limited to just the baritone saxophone.
These include the ''saxello'', essentially a straight B soprano, but with a slightly curved neck and tipped bell; the straight alto; and the straight B tenor.
Prior to his work on the saxophone, he had made several improvements to the bass clarinet by improving its keywork and acoustics and extending its lower range.
Yanagisawa and other manufacturers, starting with the King Super 20 around 1950, have made saxophone necks, bells, or entire instruments from sterling silver.
A reed quintet consists of an oboe, a clarinet, a saxophone, a bass clarinet, and a bassoon.
As only three percent of Sax's surviving production were pitched in F and C, and as contemporary composers used the E alto and B bass saxophone freely in orchestral music, it is almost certain that Sax experimented to find the most suitable keys for these instruments, settling upon instruments alternating between E and B rather than those pitched in F or C, for reasons of tone and economy (the saxophones were the most expensive wind instruments of their day).
Since 1920, most saxophones have "key touches" (smooth replaceable pieces placed where the fingers touch the instrument) made from either plastic or mother of pearl.
The series pitched in B and E, designed for military bands, have proved extremely popular and most saxophones encountered today are from this series.
Using alternate fingerings allows a player to play faster and more easily.
The saxophone was developed in 1846 by Adolphe Sax, a Belgian instrument maker, flautist, and clarinetist.
The saxophone mouthpiece is larger than that of the clarinet, has a wider inner chamber, and lacks the cork-covered tenon of a clarinet mouthpiece because the saxophone neck inserts into the mouthpiece whereas the clarinet mouthpiece piece is inserted into the barrel.
This extension is now commonplace in almost all modern designs, along with other minor changes such as added keys for alternate fingerings.
In any case, what constitutes a pleasing tone is a matter of personal preference.
Production of this original and expensive saxophone is on an individual order basis.
Sax was also a maker of the then-popular ophicleide, a large conical brass instrument in the bass register with keys similar to a woodwind instrument.
The ''contralto'' saxophone, similar in size to the orchestral soprano, was developed in the late 20th century by Californian instrument maker Jim Schmidt.
It is suspected that Sax himself may have attempted this modification.
There is a repertoire of classical compositions and arrangements for the SATB instrumentation dating back to the nineteenth century, particularly by French composers who knew Sax.
Most, if not all, intermediate and professional saxophones made today are built with F keys, with F included on even student instruments.
The baritone sax, featured more in big bands (notably by Harry Carney in the Duke Ellington Orchestra) and larger ensembles than as a solo instrument, was popularized in jazz as a solo instrument within small groups by musicians such as Serge Chaloff, Gerry Mulligan, Pepper Adams and Leo Parker.
But the greatest influence of the saxophone on jazz was to occur a few years later, as alto saxophonist Charlie Parker became an icon of the bebop revolution that influenced generations of jazz musicians.
A B soprano saxophone is also occasionally used, in which case it is normally played by the first alto saxophonist.
Saxophone reeds are proportioned slightly differently from clarinet reeds, being wider for the same length, although some soprano saxophonists use clarinet reeds on the soprano saxophone.
Jamaica's best known exponent of a similar type of homemade bamboo "saxophone" was the mento musician and instrument maker 'Sugar Belly' (William Walker).
The influence of tenor saxophonist Lester Young with the Count Basie Orchestra in the late 1930s and the tremendous popularity of Coleman Hawkins' 1939 recording of "Body and Soul" marked the saxophone as an influence on jazz equal to that of the trumpet, which had been the defining instrument of jazz since its beginnings in New Orleans.
These instruments are imitations of European instruments, made using local materials.
These holes are covered by keys (also known as pad cups), containing soft leather pads, which are closed to produce an airtight seal.
In addition to the brilliance and virtuosity of Parker, the alto sax was also popularized in the 1950s by top saxophonists such as Sonny Stitt, Cannonball Adderley, Sonny Criss and Paul Desmond (of the Dave Brubeck Quartet).
These produce a bright sound with maximum projection, suitable for having a sound stand out among amplified instruments and typical of modern pop and smooth jazz.
Since the baritone and alto are pitched in E, players can read concert pitch music notated in the bass clef by reading it as if it were treble clef and adding three sharps to the key signature.
Players experiment with reeds of different strength (hardnesses) and material to find which strength and cut suits their mouthpiece, embouchure, physiology, and playing style.
With the exception of the identical brass and phosphor bronze Yanagisawa models, opportunities to isolate body materials from other variables in design and construction are lacking.
On occasion, the soprano is replaced with a second alto sax (AATB); a few professional saxophone quartets have featured non-standard instrumentation, such as James Fei's Alto Quartet (four altos) and Hamiet Bluiett's Bluiett Baritone Nation (four baritones).
These four instruments have proved the most popular of all of Sax's creations, with the E contrabass and B bass usually considered impractically large and the E sopranino insufficiently powerful.
The Hawaiian instrument, called a xaphoon, was invented during the 1970s and is also marketed as a "bamboo sax," although its cylindrical bore more closely resembles that of a clarinet, and its lack of any keywork makes it more akin to a recorder.
File:Mouthpiece tenor saxophone.jpg|Two mouthpieces for tenor saxophone: the one on the left is ebonite; the one on the right is metal.
The baritone, bass, and contrabass saxophones accommodate the length of the bore with extra bows and right angle bends between the main body and the mouthpiece.
The tenor sax, a popular form of saxophone as a solo instrument in jazz, was popularized by jazz greats such as Lester Young, Coleman Hawkins, Dexter Gordon, John Coltrane, Sonny Rollins, Stan Getz and Zoot Sims.
Popular smooth jazz and contemporary pop musician Kenny G also uses the soprano sax as his principal instrument.
The saxophone is  used in classical music (such as concert bands, chamber music, and solo repertoires), military bands, marching bands, and jazz (such as big bands and jazz combos).
Other ensembles most likely existed at this time as part of the saxophone sections of the many touring professional bands that existed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
A typical high-level concert band includes two altos, one tenor, and one baritone.
Because all saxophones use the same key arrangement and fingering to produce a given notated pitch, it is not difficult for a competent player to switch among the various sizes when the music has been suitably transposed, and many do so.
As an outgrowth of his work improving the bass clarinet,  Sax began developing an instrument with the projection of a brass instrument and the agility of a woodwind.
Some Leblanc System features were built into the Vito Model 35 saxophones of the 1950s and 1960s.
1922 (catalog NMM 5385).
File:BauhausWalsteinTenorSax1.JPG|Bauhaus Walstein tenor saxophone manufactured in 2008 from phosphor bronze
The possible effects of different finishes on tone are difficult to isolate from the other variables that affect an instrument's tone colors.
Sheets of sound, tonal exploration, upper harmonics, and multiphonics were hallmarks of the creative possibilities that saxophones offered in the new realm.
Classical saxophone quartets include Quatuor Habanera, the h2 quartet, the Raschèr Saxophone Quartet, the Aurelia Saxophone Quartet, the New Century Saxophone Quartet.
Keilwerth and P. Mauriat have made saxes with a nickel silver body.
The instrument has a key range from low A to high G. Fewer than 100 Conn-O-Saxes are in existence, and they are highly sought by collectors.
The chromatic or linear fingering, saxophone is a project of instrument designer and builder Jim Schmidt, developing a horn maximizing tactile and logical consistency between every interval regardless of the key, and avoiding the acoustic problems associated closed keys below the first open tone hole.
Saxophones are also commonly used in jazz music, where it is one of the signature sounds.
Extra effort is required from the player to adjust modes of muscle memory when moving between key centers.
Saxophones are usually made of brass and played with a single-reed mouthpiece similar to that of the clarinet.
Plating saxophones with gold is an expensive process because gold does not adhere directly to brass.
Manufactured in 2008
The saxophone family was invented by the Belgian instrument maker Adolphe Sax in 1840.
The patent encompassed 14 versions of the fundamental design, split into two categories of seven instruments each, and ranging from sopranino to contrabass.
Although the instrument was mostly ignored in Germany at first, French and Belgian military bands took full advantage of the instrument that Sax had designed.
The saxophone uses a single-reed mouthpiece similar to that of the clarinet.
Recent years have seen use higher copper alloys substituted for the "yellow brass" or "cartridge brass" that are most common, for visual and tonal effect.
It is also possible to plate the instrument with nickel or gold, and a number of gold-plated saxophones have been produced.
Beginning in the early 20th century,  saxophones became popular in dance orchestras, which were not jazz ensembles but influenced the format of the big swing era bands that were soon to follow.
The first substantial modification was by a French manufacturer who extended the bell slightly and added an extra key to extend the range downwards by one semitone to B.
While early saxophones had two separate octave vents to assist in the playing of the upper registers just as modern instruments do, players of Sax's original design had to operate these via two separate octave keys operated by the left thumb.
One lasting influence of the avant-garde movement is the exploration of non-Western ethnic sounds on the saxophone, for example, the African-influenced sounds used by Pharoah Sanders.
Each size of saxophone (alto, tenor, etc.)
A player may also use alternate fingerings to bend the pitch.
Among the most recent developments is the aulochrome, a double soprano saxophone invented by Belgian instrument maker François Louis in 2001.
Very similar instruments are produced in Thailand.
The lacquer or plating serves to protect the brass from oxidation, and maintains its shiny appearance.
They also enable players to make half-step shifts of scales by depressing one key while keeping the rest of the fingering consistent with that of the fingering a half step away (which can also trip up players used to certain alternate fingerings on a regular saxophone).
Several different types and colors of surface finish have been used over the years.
Other saxophones made of high copper alloys are sold under the brands Chateau, Kessler, Saxgourmet, and Bauhaus Walstein.
The arrival of the saxophone as a jazz instrument is attributed to tenor saxophonist Coleman Hawkins' stint with the Fletcher Henderson Orchestra starting in 1923.
There are examples of "dark" sounding metal pieces and "bright" sounding hard rubber pieces – Marcel Mule, for example, used a metal mouthpiece to perform classical music.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, the saxophone found increased popularity in symphony orchestras.
A bass saxophone in B is called for in some concert band music (especially music by Percy Grainger).
Today, the saxophone is used in military bands all around the world.
File:Barisax.jpg|A Yamaha baritone saxophone
Most saxophones, both past and present, are made from brass.
Early mouthpieces were designed to produce a warm and round sound for classical playing.
British military bands tend to include at minimum two saxophonists, on the alto and tenor.
The quartets led by Marcel Mule and Daniel Deffayet, saxophone professors at the Conservatoire de Paris, were started in 1928 and 1953, respectively, and were highly regarded.
Most saxophonists use reeds made from ''Arundo donax'' cane, but since the 20th century some have also been made of fiberglass and other composite materials.
Saxophone and clarinet embouchures differ from each other in firmness, position of the lower lip, and range of entry angles.
The saxophone is a member of the reed quintet.
The saxophone was subsequently introduced into the concert bands, which generally call for an E alto saxophone, a B tenor saxophone, and an E baritone saxophone.
Sax created an instrument with a single-reed mouthpiece like a clarinet, conical brass body like an ophicleide, and some acoustic properties of both the horn and the clarinet.
The screw pins that connect the rods to the posts, as well as the needle and leaf springs that cause the keys to return to their rest position after being released, are generally made of blued or stainless steel.
uses a different size of reed.
Despite this, they are categorized as woodwind instruments rather than brass, as the sound waves are produced by an oscillating wood reed, not the player's lips against a mouthpiece as in a brass instrument, and because different pitches are produced by breath wind passing opening and closing keys.
Saxophone players are called ''saxophonists''.
Adolphe Sax wanted to create a group or series of instruments that would be the most powerful and vocal of the woodwinds, and the most adaptive of the brass instruments, that would fill the vacant middle ground between the two sections.
Most saxophonists who play different styles have a mouthpiece suited for each style.
There is also a lack of tactile consistency moving between key centers.
File:Ochres N5.jpg|Ochres Music "No.5" hand-made professional alto saxophone with 24 carat gold seal on bell.
Several working prototypes have been built and presented at trade shows.
Opinions vary on the significance of body materials to sound.
This instrument has a larger bore and a new fingering system, and does not resemble the C melody instrument except for its key and register.
However, organised quartets did exist before Mule's ensemble, the prime example being the quartet headed by Eduard Lefebre (1834–1911), former soloist with the Sousa band, in the United States ''c.''
Some contend that instability at the mouthpiece/neck connection moves harmonic frequencies off series with the fundamental frequency and each other, resulting in a "spread" sound, and that the weight of a metal mouthpiece counteracts that instability, increasing tonal "focus."
Although the instruments transposed at either F or C have been considered "orchestral", there is no evidence that Sax intended this.
Two of these variants were championed by jazz musician Rahsaan Roland Kirk, who called his straight Buescher alto a "stritch" and his modified saxello a "manzello"; the latter featured a larger-than-usual bell and modified key work.
The saxophone was soon embraced by Chicago-style musicians who added it, along with chordal instruments such as pianos, banjos, and guitars, to the trumpet-clarinet-trombone-bass-drums ensemble format inherited from New Orleans jazz.
Since a straight-bore tenor is approximately five feet long, the cumbersome size of such a design makes it almost impossible to either play or transport.
This instrument, which combines a saxophone bore and keys with a bell shaped similar to that of a heckelphone, was intended to imitate the timbre of the English horn and was produced only in 1929 and 1930.
Among classical mouthpieces, those with a concave ("excavated") chamber are more true to Adolphe Sax's original design; these provide a softer or less piercing tone favored by some saxophonists, including students of Sigurd Raschèr, for classical playing.
Most French and Belgian military bands incorporate at least a quartet of saxophones, comprising an E baritone, B tenor, E alto and B soprano.
The saxophone, as a solo instrument or as part of a horn section, can also be heard in blues, soul music, rhythm and blues, reggae, ska, funk, rock and roll, and other forms of popular music.
In this way, the saxophone serves as a middle point between other woodwinds and the brass section, helping to blend them.
Notes above F are considered part of the altissimo register of any sax, and can be produced using advanced embouchure techniques and fingering combinations.
The fingering for the saxophone is a combination of that of the oboe with the Boehm system, and is very similar to the flute or the upper register of the clarinet.
Having constructed saxophones in several sizes in the early 1840s,  Sax applied for, and received, a 15-year patent for the instrument on June 28, 1846.
Saxophones are used in chamber music, such as saxophone quartets, reed quintets, and other chamber combinations of instruments.
This enables a chromatic scale to be played over two octaves simply by playing the diatonic scale combined with alternately raising and lowering this one digit.
More recently a mezzo-soprano in the key of G has been produced by Danish woodwind technician Peter Jessen, most notably played by Joe Lovano.
The '''saxophone''' (also referred to as the '''sax''') is a family of woodwind instruments.
Two efforts to remedy the acoustic problems and awkward aspects of the original fingering system are noteworthy.
The use of the saxophone in dance orchestras and jazz ensembles put a premium on dynamic range, projection, and tonal richness, leading to rapid innovation in chamber shape and tip design, and metal construction.
The Duke Ellington Orchestra of the late 1920s featured saxophone-based ensemble sounds and solos by saxophonists Otto Hardwick, Johnny Hodges, and Harry Carney.
Modal, harmolodic, and free jazz further removed boundaries and the new space was explored with every device that saxophonists could conceive of.
This process, referred to as ''clef substitution'', makes it possible for the Eb instruments to play from parts written for baritone horn, bassoon, euphonium, string bass, trombone, or tuba.
His experience with these two instruments allowed him to develop the skills and technologies needed to make the first saxophones.
There are many models of soprano saxophone that have a key for high G, and most modern models of baritone saxophone have an extended bore and key to produce low A; it is also possible to play a low A on any saxophone by blocking the end of the bell, usually with the foot or inside of the left thigh.
The small-group format of bebop and post-bebop jazz ensembles, typically with one to three lead instruments, usually including a saxophone, a chordal instrument, bass, and drums, gained ascendancy in the 1940s as musicians emphasized extended exploration utilizing the new harmonic and melodic freedoms that Charlie Parker and a few others, such as Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonious Monk, and Bud Powell pioneered.
File:PMSA-300.jpg|The lower portion of a P. Mauriat alto saxophone, showing the mother of pearl key touches and engraved brass pad cups
Most commonly, however, the alto and tenor saxophones incorporate a detachable, curved "neck" above the highest tone hole, directing the mouthpiece to the player's mouth while the instrument is held in a playing stance.
Other materials have been tried with varying degrees of success, such as the 1950s Grafton plastic alto saxophone and its recent successor, the polycarbonate saxophone,  VibratoSax.
Further developments were made by Selmer in the 1930s and '40s, including offsetting tone holes and a revamping of the octave key mechanism, beginning with balanced action instruments and continuing through their celebrated Mark VI line.
The soprano saxophone was popularized by Sidney Bechet in early jazz, but then largely fell out of favor on the jazz scene until John Coltrane began to feature the instrument.
Each series consisted of instruments of various sizes in alternating transposition.
A substantial advancement in saxophone keywork was the development of a method by which the left thumb operates both tone holes with a single octave key, which is now universal on modern saxophones.
The instrument, which extends Sax's original family, as it is pitched a full octave higher than the B soprano sax, is manufactured by Benedikt Eppelsheim, of Munich, Germany.
In Argentina, Ángel Sampedro del Río and Mariana García have produced bamboo saxophones of various sizes since 1985, the larger of which have bamboo keys to allow for the playing of lower notes.
At rest some of the holes stand open and others are closed.
All the instruments were given an initial written range from the B below the treble staff to the F, one space above the three ledger lines above staff, giving each saxophone a range of two and a half octaves.
File:YanagisawaA9932J.JPG|Yanagisawa A9932J alto saxophone: has a solid silver bell and neck with solid phosphor bronze body.
Recently, some saxophones are offered with abalone or stone keytouches.
As a result, the brass is first plated with silver, then gold.
The acceptance of what was arguably a superior system was impaired by the adjustment required of players switching between System and non-System horns, and the added costs associated with the compounded complexity of certain key mechanisms.
Although not true saxophones, inexpensive keyless folk versions of the saxophone made of bamboo (recalling a chalumeau) were developed in the 20th century by instrument makers in Hawaii, Jamaica, Thailand, Indonesia, Ethiopia, and Argentina.
Among some saxophonists, Kirk's terms have taken on a life of their own in that it is believed that these were "special" or "new" saxophones that might still be available.
The C soprano saxophone was the only instrument to sound at concert pitch.
Reeds are commercially available in a vast array of brands, styles, and strengths.
Music for most saxophones is usually notated using treble clef.
The Leblanc Rationale and System saxophones have key mechanics designed to remedy the acoustic problems associated with closed keys below the first open tonehole.
The classical saxophone quartet consists of a soprano saxophone, alto saxophone, tenor saxophone, and baritone saxophone.
Another unusual variant of the saxophone is the ''Conn-O-Sax'', a straight-conical bore instrument in F (one step above the E alto) with a slightly curved neck and spherical bell.
As this would cause the bell of the instrument to point almost directly upward, the end of the instrument is either beveled or tilted slightly forward.
The devices of the avant-garde movement have continued to be influential in music that challenges the boundaries between avant-garde and other categories of jazz, such as that of alto-saxophonists Steve Coleman and Greg Osby.
The simplest design of saxophone is a straight conical tube, and the sopranino and soprano saxophones are usually of this straight design.
Born in Dinant and originally based in Brussels, he moved to Paris in 1842 to establish his musical instrument business.
Some players, sellers, and repair technicians argue that the type of lacquer or plating, or absence thereof, may enhance an instrument's tone quality.
This instrument is more in the timbral quality of Bb soprano saxophone.
Sax's patent expired in 1866; thereafter, numerous saxophonists and instrument manufacturers implemented their own improvements to the design and keywork.
At intervals along the tube are between 20 and 23 tone holes of varying size and two very small vent holes to assist the playing of the upper register.
Instruments that play to low A have a left thumb key for that note.
