* Special treatment of Schneider's first-rank symptoms is no longer recommended.
Individuals with severe mental illness, including schizophrenia, are at a significantly greater risk of being ''victims'' of both violent and non-violent crime.
There are a variety of risk factors, including male gender, depression, and a high intelligence quotient.
Schizophrenia has great human and economic costs.
Interest has also focused on the neurotransmitter glutamate and the reduced function of the NMDA glutamate receptor in schizophrenia, largely because of the abnormally low levels of glutamate receptors found in the postmortem brains of those diagnosed with schizophrenia, and the discovery that glutamate-blocking drugs such as phencyclidine and ketamine can mimic the symptoms and cognitive problems associated with the condition.
The increased risk is about five to eight percent.
This is the result of increased physical health problems and a higher suicide rate (about 5%).
Hospitalization may occur for severe episodes either voluntarily or (if mental health legislation allows it) involuntarily.
For people who are unwilling or unable to take medication regularly, long-acting depot preparations of antipsychotics may be used to achieve control.
In 1893 Emil Kraepelin borrowed the term from Schule and Pick and in 1899 introduced a broad new distinction in the classification of mental disorders between ''dementia praecox'' and mood disorder (termed manic depression and including both unipolar and bipolar depression).
To be diagnosed with schizophrenia, two diagnostic criteria have to be met over much of the time of a period of at least one month, with a significant impact on social or occupational functioning for at least six months.
Investigations are not generally repeated for relapse unless there is a specific ''medical'' indication or possible adverse effects from antipsychotic medication.
A similar change was made in South Korea in 2012.
Several times more (20 to 40%) attempt suicide at least once.
It is unclear if typical or atypical antipsychotics are better.
A second symptom could be negative symptoms, or severely disorganized or catatonic behaviour.
People with greater negative symptoms often have a history of poor adjustment before the onset of illness, and response to medication is often limited.
This has been cited at 10%, but a more recent analysis revises the estimate to 4.9%, most often occurring in the period following onset or first hospital admission.
Social withdrawal, sloppiness of dress and hygiene, and loss of motivation and judgment are all common in schizophrenia.
It can resemble schizophrenia and be misdiagnosed as such.
They include delusions of being controlled by an external force, the belief that thoughts are being inserted into or withdrawn from one's conscious mind, the belief that one's thoughts are being broadcast to other people, and hearing hallucinatory voices that comment on one's thoughts or actions or that have a conversation with other hallucinated voices.
Schizophrenia has been associated with a higher rate of violent acts, although this is primarily due to higher rates of drug use.
Verbal memory impairment has been linked to a decreased ability in individuals with schizophrenia to semantically encode (process information relating to meaning), which is cited as a cause for another known deficit in long-term memory.
The use of "safety behaviors" (acts such as gestures or the use of words in specific contexts) to avoid or neutralize imagined threats may actually contribute to the chronicity of delusions.
The ICD-10 criteria put more emphasis on Schneiderian first-rank symptoms.
Some cognitive features may reflect global neurocognitive deficits such as memory loss, while others may be related to particular issues and experiences.
Distortions of self-experience such as feeling as if one's thoughts or feelings are not really one's own to believing thoughts are being inserted into one's mind, sometimes termed passivity phenomena, are also common.
Impairment in social cognition is associated with schizophrenia, as are symptoms of paranoia.
Positive symptoms generally respond well to medication.
A combination of genetic and environmental factors play a role in the development of schizophrenia.
The causes of schizophrenia include environmental and genetic factors.
The current proposal for the ICD-11 criteria for schizophrenia recommends adding self-disorder as a symptom.
Difficulties in working and long-term memory, attention, executive functioning, and speed of processing also commonly occur.
Art or drama therapy have not been well-researched.
The new name was inspired by the biopsychosocial model; it increased the percentage of people who were informed of the diagnosis from 37 to 70% over three years.
The American Psychiatric Association suggests considering stopping antipsychotics in some people if there are no symptoms for more than a year.
Living in an urban environment during childhood or as an adult has consistently been found to increase the risk of schizophrenia by a factor of two, even after taking into account drug use, ethnic group, and size of social group.
Clozapine is an effective treatment for those who respond poorly to other drugs ("treatment-resistant" or "refractory" schizophrenia), but it has the potentially serious side effect of agranulocytosis (lowered white blood cell count) in less than 4% of people.
They can include delusions, disordered thoughts and speech, and tactile, auditory, visual, olfactory and gustatory hallucinations, typically regarded as manifestations of psychosis.
It is debatable whether, as a class, typical or atypical antipsychotics are better.
Some people do recover completely and others function well in society.
The absence of first-rank symptoms should raise suspicion of a medical disorder, however.
If the psychotic symptoms are the direct physiological result of a general medical condition or a substance, then the diagnosis is one of a psychosis secondary to that condition.
Typical antipsychotics have equal drop-out and symptom relapse rates to atypicals when used at low to moderate dosages.
Although postulated for about 20&nbsp;years based on the D2 blockade effect common to all antipsychotics, it was not until the mid-1990s that PET and SPET imaging studies provided supporting evidence.
A review of the diagnostic studies conducted between 1970 and 2005 found that they allow neither a reconfirmation nor a rejection of Schneider's claims, and suggested that first-rank symptoms should be de-emphasized in future revisions of diagnostic systems.
The person had to be suffering from delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech.
* Subtype classifications&nbsp;– such as catatonic and paranoid schizophrenia &nbsp;– are removed.
* Catatonia is no longer so strongly associated with schizophrenia.
These deficits have been found in individuals before the onset of the illness to some extent.
The choice of which antipsychotic to use is based on benefits, risks, and costs.
Symptoms typically come on gradually, begin in young adulthood, and last a long time.
Dissociative identity disorder (having a "split personality") was also often misdiagnosed as schizophrenia based on the loose criteria in the DSM-II.
Outcomes for schizophrenia appear better in the developing than the developed world.
About 0.3–0.7% of people are affected by schizophrenia during their lifetime.
A number of genome-wide associations such as zinc finger protein 804A have also been linked.
Social problems, such as long-term unemployment, poverty, and homelessness are common.
In the United States, the cost of schizophrenia—including direct costs (outpatient, inpatient, drugs, and long-term care) and non-health care costs (law enforcement, reduced workplace productivity, and unemployment)—was estimated to be $62.7 billion in 2002.
The mainstay of treatment is antipsychotic medication along with counselling, job training, and social rehabilitation.
This type of training, known as self-instructional (SI) training, produced benefits such as lower number of nonsense verbalizations and improved recall while distracted.
During diagnosis a person's culture must also be taken into account.
David Rosenhan's 1972 study, published in the journal ''Science'' under the title "On being sane in insane places", concluded that the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the US was often subjective and unreliable.
''Negative symptoms'' are deficits of normal emotional responses or of other thought processes, and are less responsive to medication.
A more general medical and neurological examination may be needed to rule out medical illnesses which may rarely produce psychotic schizophrenia-like symptoms, such as metabolic disturbance, systemic infection, syphilis, HIV infection, epilepsy, limbic encephalitis, and brain lesions.
Most people on antipsychotics have side effects.
A few people withdrawing from benzodiazepines experience a severe withdrawal syndrome which may last a long time.
When used in combination with psychosocial interventions they may improve long-term adherence to treatment.
Antipsychotics, however, fail to significantly improve the negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction.
Some evidence indicates that regular exercise has a positive effect on the physical and mental health of those with schizophrenia.
These were some of the factors leading to the revision not only of the diagnosis of schizophrenia, but the revision of the whole DSM manual, resulting in the publication of the DSM-III in 1980.
Individuals with schizophrenia may experience hallucinations (most reported are hearing voices), delusions (often bizarre or persecutory in nature), and disorganized thinking and speech.
In 40% of men and 23% of women diagnosed with schizophrenia, the condition manifested itself before the age of 19.
A professor of psychiatry, Jim van Os, has proposed changing the English term to "psychosis spectrum syndrome".
Another preventative measure is to avoid drugs that have been associated with development of the disorder, including cannabis, cocaine, and amphetamines.
They commonly include flat expressions or little emotion, poverty of speech, inability to experience pleasure, lack of desire to form relationships, and lack of motivation.
There is a higher than average suicide rate associated with schizophrenia.
* In describing a person's schizophrenia, it is recommended that a better distinction be made between the current state of the condition and its historical progress, to achieve a clearer overall characterization.
The dopamine hypothesis is now thought to be simplistic, partly because newer antipsychotic medication (atypical antipsychotic medication) can be just as effective as older medication (typical antipsychotic medication), but also affects serotonin function and may have slightly less of a dopamine blocking effect.
Cannabis can be a contributory factor in schizophrenia, potentially causing the disease in those who are already at risk.
There have been trials on drugs with anti-inflammatory activity, based on the premise that inflammation might play a role in the pathology of schizophrenia.
''Positive symptoms'' are those that most individuals do not normally experience, but are present in people with schizophrenia.
To minimize the developmental disruption associated with schizophrenia, much work has recently been done to identify and treat the prodromal (pre-onset) phase of the illness, which has been detected up to 30&nbsp;months before the onset of symptoms.
These differences have been linked to the neurocognitive deficits often associated with schizophrenia.
The last may range from loss of train of thought, to sentences only loosely connected in meaning, to speech that is not understandable known as word salad.
It became clear after the 1971 US–UK Diagnostic Study that schizophrenia was diagnosed to a far greater extent in America than in Europe.
There is often an observable pattern of emotional difficulty, for example lack of responsiveness.
Rates of homicide linked to psychosis are similar to those linked to substance misuse, and parallel the overall rate in a region.
The Latinized term ''dementia praecox'' was first used by German alienist Heinrich Schule in 1886 and then in 1891 by Arnold Pick in a case report of a psychotic disorder (hebephrenia).
When given a list of words, healthy individuals remember positive words more frequently (known as the Pollyanna principle); however, individuals with schizophrenia tend to remember all words equally regardless of their connotations, suggesting that the experience of anhedonia impairs the semantic encoding of the words.
Family therapy or education, which addresses the whole family system of an individual, may reduce relapses and hospitalizations.
Social isolation commonly occurs.
Studies using neuropsychological tests and brain imaging technologies such as fMRI and PET to examine functional differences in brain activity have shown that differences seem to occur most commonly in the frontal lobes, hippocampus and temporal lobes.
Approximately three-fourths of people with schizophrenia have ongoing disability with relapses and 16.7&nbsp;million people globally are deemed to have moderate or severe disability from the condition.
Diagnosis is based on observed behavior and the person's reported experiences.
Many genes are believed to be involved in schizophrenia, each of small effect and unknown transmission and expression.
Schizophrenia is diagnosed based on criteria in either the American Psychiatric Association's fifth edition of the ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders'' (DSM 5), or the World Health Organization's International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10).
There is a good response in 40–50%, a partial response in 30–40%, and treatment resistance (failure of symptoms to respond satisfactorily after six weeks to two or three different antipsychotics) in 20% of people.
In practice, agreement between the two systems is high.
Long-term hospitalization is uncommon since deinstitutionalization beginning in the 1950s, although it still occurs.
The book and film ''A Beautiful Mind'' chronicles the life of John Forbes Nash, a Nobel Prize–winning mathematician who was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Factors such as hypoxia and infection, or stress and malnutrition in the mother during fetal development, may result in a slight increase in the risk of schizophrenia later in life.
Schizophrenia does not imply a "split personality" or "multiple personality disorder"—conditions it is often confused with in public perception.
Common symptoms include false beliefs, unclear or confused thinking, hearing voices, reduced social engagement and emotional expression, and a lack of motivation.
Treatment may have some effect on insight.
Cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce the risk of psychosis in those at high risk after a year and is recommended in this group, by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE).
Symptoms associated with schizophrenia occur along a continuum in the population and must reach a certain severity before a diagnosis is made.
Schizophrenia is not diagnosed if symptoms of pervasive developmental disorder are present unless prominent delusions or hallucinations are also present.
What role schizophrenia has on violence independent of drug misuse is controversial, but certain aspects of individual histories or mental states may be factors.
Childhood trauma, death of a parent, and being bullied or abused increase the risk of psychosis.
These were retained in previous revisions largely for reasons of tradition, but had subsequently proved to be of little worth.
Higher dosage and greater frequency of use are indicators of increased risk of chronic psychoses.
Community support services including drop-in centers, visits by members of a community mental health team, supported employment and support groups are common.
Parenting style seems to have no major effect, although people with supportive parents do better than those with critical or hostile parents.
Media coverage relating to violent acts by individuals with schizophrenia reinforces public perception of an association between schizophrenia and violence.
In those who do not improve with other antipsychotics, clozapine may be used.
Although some people diagnosed with schizophrenia may hear voices and may experience the voices as distinct personalities, schizophrenia does not involve a person changing among distinct, multiple personalities; the confusion arises in part due to the literal interpretation of Bleuler's term "schizophrenia" (Bleuler originally associated schizophrenia with dissociation, and included split personality in his category of schizophrenia).
People diagnosed with schizophrenia are more likely to have been born in winter or spring (at least in the northern hemisphere), which may be a result of increased rates of viral exposures in utero.
Many psychological mechanisms have been implicated in the development and maintenance of schizophrenia.
The influential dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia proposed that excessive activation of D2 receptors was the cause of (the positive symptoms of) schizophrenia.
Some evidence suggests that the content of delusional beliefs and psychotic experiences can reflect emotional causes of the disorder, and that how a person interprets such experiences can influence symptomatology.
The first-line psychiatric treatment for schizophrenia is antipsychotic medication, which can reduce the positive symptoms of psychosis in about 7 to 14 days.
American and British interpretations of Bleuler led to the claim that he described its main symptoms as four ''A'''s: flattened ''affect'', ''autism'', impaired ''association'' of ideas, and ''ambivalence''.
Some evidence suggests that paranoid schizophrenia may have a better prospect than other types of schizophrenia for independent living and occupational functioning.
Other scholars have traced earlier roots.
Onset in childhood is much rarer, as is onset in middle or old age.
In 2013, the American Psychiatric Association released the fifth edition of the DSM (DSM-5).
Antipsychotic medications may also increase the risk.
While there is some evidence that early intervention in those with a psychotic episode may improve short-term outcomes, there is little benefit from these measures after five years.
Psychotic symptoms may be present in several other mental disorders, including bipolar disorder, borderline personality disorder, drug intoxication and drug-induced psychosis.
Schizophrenia is often described in terms of positive and negative (or deficit) symptoms.
Psychotic symptoms lasting less than a month may be diagnosed as brief psychotic disorder, and various conditions may be classed as psychotic disorder not otherwise specified, while schizoaffective disorder is diagnosed if symptoms of mood disorder are substantially present alongside psychotic symptoms.
If signs of disturbance are present for more than a month but less than six months, the diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is applied.
One idea is that genes are involved in the evolution of language and human nature, but to date such ideas remain little more than hypothetical in nature.
Amisulpride, olanzapine, risperidone and clozapine may be more effective but are associated with greater side effects.
Further evidence for the role of psychological mechanisms comes from the effects of psychotherapies on symptoms of schizophrenia.
Various agents have been explored for possible benefits in this area.
Over 74% said that people with schizophrenia were either "not very able" or "not able at all" to make decisions concerning their treatment, and 70.2% said the same of money-management decisions.
His use of the term "praecox" distinguished it from other forms of dementia such as Alzheimer's disease which typically occur later in life.
The perception of individuals with psychosis as violent has more than doubled in prevalence since the 1950s, according to one meta-analysis.
Despite a demonstrated appearance of blunted affect, recent findings indicate that many individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia are emotionally responsive, particularly to stressful or negative stimuli, and that such sensitivity may cause vulnerability to symptoms or to the disorder.
Schizophrenia and smoking have shown a strong association in studies world-wide.
The history of schizophrenia is complex and does not lend itself easily to a linear narrative.
Deficits in cognitive abilities are widely recognized as a core feature of schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia occurs along with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) considerably more often than could be explained by chance, although it can be difficult to distinguish obsessions that occur in OCD from the delusions of schizophrenia.
About 20% of people do well and a few recover completely.
Schizophrenia is a major cause of disability, with active psychosis ranked as the third-most-disabling condition after quadriplegia and dementia and ahead of paraplegia and blindness.
About 85% are unemployed.
As of 2013 there is no objective test.
Possible environmental factors include being raised in a city, cannabis use, certain infections, parental age, and poor nutrition during pregnancy.
A detailed case report in 1797 concerning James Tilly Matthews, and accounts by Philippe Pinel published in 1809, are often regarded as the earliest cases of the illness in the medical and psychiatric literature.
Males are more often affected than females.
Research has found a tentative benefit in using minocycline to treat schizophrenia.
There appears to be overlap in the genetics of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
It occurs 1.4&nbsp;times more frequently in males than females and typically appears earlier in men—the peak ages of onset are 25 years for males and 27 years for females.
In the early 1970s, the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia were the subject of a number of controversies which eventually led to the operational criteria used today.
Efforts to improve learning ability in individuals with schizophrenia using a high- versus low-reward condition and an instruction-absent or instruction-present condition revealed that increasing reward leads to poorer performance while providing instruction leads to improved performance, highlighting that some treatments may exist to increase cognitive performance.
These differences in life expectancy increased between the 1970s and 1990s.
It results in a decreased life expectancy by 10–25&nbsp;years.
Attempting to prevent schizophrenia in the prodrome phase is of uncertain benefit and therefore as of 2009 is not recommended.
Particular attention has been paid to the function of dopamine in the mesolimbic pathway of the brain.
There has been debate on whether treatment with antipsychotics can itself cause reduction of brain volume.
The extent of the cognitive deficits an individual experiences is a predictor of how functional an individual will be, the quality of occupational performance, and how successful the individual will be in maintaining treatment.
Treatment was revolutionized in the mid-1950s with the development and introduction of chlorpromazine.
Nidotherapy or efforts to change the environment of people with schizophrenia to improve their ability to function, is also being studied; however, there is not enough evidence yet to make conclusions about its effectiveness.
Schizophrenia is associated with subtle differences in brain structures, found in forty to fifty percent of cases, and in brain chemistry during acute psychotic states.
Among people with schizophrenia use of cannabis is also common.
Although they have significantly contributed to the current diagnostic criteria, the specificity of first-rank symptoms has been questioned.
It causes approximately one percent of worldwide disability adjusted life years and resulted in 20,000 deaths in 2010.
The rate of schizophrenia varies up to threefold depending on how it is defined.
In children hallucinations must be separated from typical childhood fantasies.
Other infections during pregnancy or around the time of birth that may increase the risk include ''Toxoplasma gondi'' and ''Chlamydia''.
People on typical antipsychotics tend to have a higher rate of extrapyramidal side effects while some atypicals are associated with considerable weight gain, diabetes and risk of metabolic syndrome; this is most pronounced with olanzapine, while risperidone and quetiapine are also associated with weight gain.
Accounts of a schizophrenia-like syndrome are thought to be rare in historical records before the 19th century, although reports of irrational, unintelligible, or uncontrolled behavior were common.
This was partly due to looser diagnostic criteria in the US, which used the DSM-II manual, contrasting with Europe and its ICD-9.
This focus largely resulted from the accidental finding that phenothiazine drugs, which block dopamine function, could reduce psychotic symptoms.
One of the most common is the dopamine hypothesis, which attributes psychosis to the mind's faulty interpretation of the misfiring of dopaminergic neurons.
Negative symptoms have proven a challenge to treat, as they are generally not made better by medication.
Negative symptoms appear to contribute more to poor quality of life, functional ability, and the burden on others than do positive symptoms.
In more serious cases—where there is risk to self or others—involuntary hospitalization may be necessary, although hospital stays are now shorter and less frequent than they once were.
It is uncertain whether these volumetric changes are progressive or exist prior to the onset of the disease.
Schizotypal personality disorder has symptoms that are similar but less severe than those of schizophrenia.
It remains unclear whether the newer antipsychotics reduce the chances of developing neuroleptic malignant syndrome or tardive dyskinesia, a rare but serious neurological disorder.
Prevention of schizophrenia is difficult as there are no reliable markers for the later development of the disorder.
If one parent is affected the risk is about 13% and if both are affected the risk is nearly 50%.
Delusions ("non-bizarre") are also present in delusional disorder, and social withdrawal in social anxiety disorder, avoidant personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder.
This variation has been estimated to be fivefold.
The ICD-10 criteria are typically used in European countries, while the DSM criteria are used in the United States and to varying degrees around the world, and are prevailing in research studies.
A number of psychosocial interventions may be useful in the treatment of schizophrenia including: family therapy, assertive community treatment, supported employment, cognitive remediation, skills training, token economic interventions, and psychosocial interventions for substance use and weight management.
* An assessment covering eight domains of psychopathology&nbsp;– such as whether hallucination or mania is experienced&nbsp;– is recommended to help clinical decision-making.
These criteria use the self-reported experiences of the person and reported abnormalities in behavior, followed by a clinical assessment by a mental health professional.
Risperidone has a similar rate of extrapyramidal symptoms to haloperidol.
About 1.1% of adults have schizophrenia in the United States.
The deficits which an individual with schizophrenia presents tend to remain the same over time in most patients, or follow an identifiable course based upon environmental variables.
The greatest single risk factor for developing schizophrenia is having a first-degree relative with the disease (risk is 6.5%); more than 40% of monozygotic twins of those with schizophrenia are also affected.
In 2013 an estimated 16,000 people died from behavior related to, or caused by, schizophrenia.
Assuming a hereditary basis, one question from evolutionary psychology is why genes that ''increase'' the likelihood of psychosis evolved, assuming the condition would have been maladaptive from an evolutionary point of view.
This is primarily because of its association with obesity, poor diet, sedentary lifestyles, and smoking, with an increased rate of suicide playing a lesser role.
The average life expectancy of people with the disorder is ten to twenty-five years less than the average.
However, this account ignores the fact that there is little to connect Morel's descriptive use of the term and the independent development of the ''dementia praecox'' disease concept at the end of the nineteenth century.
There is little evidence regarding effects from their use beyond two or three years.
