Primarily for research purposes, they were conversions of existing school buses.
Outside of North America, the yellow school bus is not as common; buses used for the purpose of student transport are typically closer in design to mass-transit buses.
Along with the changes in configuration, the body design of school buses underwent major revisions as well.
Private and public schools often have 'activity' style buses, sometimes in a colour matching the 'school colours' although more commonly with just the name and logo of the school on the side and/or front of the bus to save the cost of custom painting.
Many farms also use unconverted school buses (with usually just the name of the school district it once served and the "School Bus" lettering on the front and back blacked out) to transport their migrant workforce.
An "activity bus" is a school bus used for providing transportation for students.
The same applied to transit-style school buses, as the first diesel-powered school bus was introduced in 1954 and the first tandem axle school bus in 1955 (a Crown Supercoach, with a 91-passenger seating capacity).
In francophone Quebec, the signage on the outside of the bus is in French; the front and rear legends read "—French for "Schoolchildren" ("School Bus" translated into French is the much longer "").
In the United States, school buses are currently produced by six different manufacturers.
However, due to budget cuts, only 36% of the planned funding was allocated for the extra costs
In Australia, school buses vary in colour with yellow buses being rare and are distinguishable from other buses by a yellow school zone sign or a sign that reads "School Bus" on the top rear end of the bus.
In the United States, school buses are restricted to a maximum width of  and a maximum length of .
Most school routes do not allow the general adult public to ride along with the children, although this does vary by location according to practicality (i.e.
Since 2006, the 66-passenger Wright Eclipse SchoolRun purpose-built school bus body has been produced by Wrightbus of Northern Ireland on a Volvo B7R chassis.
In 1996, AmTran introduced the AmTran RE, the first low-cost rear-engine school bus.
As Canada does not use the customary system, instrument panel gauges are calibrated in metric units.
As the school bus evolved as a specialized vehicle in the United States and Canada, concerns arose for the protection of passengers in major traffic collisions.
In its conclusion, the UCLA researchers found that the safest design was a 28-inch high padded seatback spaced a maximum of 24 inches apart, using the concept of compartmentalization as a passive restraint.
To allow for large-scale production of school buses among body manufacturers, adoption of theses standards allowed for greater consistency among body manufacturers.
These conversions fell out of favor due to stability of gasoline prices and the increasing usage of diesel engines.
Since most school buses use diesel fuel, people standing or walking near the bus are exposed to exhaust fumes, which are believed to lead to health problems.
In total, it is estimated that the approximately 480,000 school buses in the United States do the job of 17.3 million cars when it comes to transporting students.
FMVSS 131 stipulates that the stop signal arm be installed on the left side of the bus, and placed so that when it is extended, the arm is perpendicular to the side of the bus, with the top edge of the sign parallel to and within  of a horizontal plane tangent to the bottom edge of the first passenger window frame behind the driver's window, and that the vertical center of the stop signal arm must be no more than  from the side of the bus.
Around 1946, the first system of traffic warning signal lights on school buses was used in Virginia.
Intended to signal an upcoming stop to drivers, as the entry door was opened at the stop, they were wired to be overridden by the red lights and the stop sign.
In some states, the bus is required to change its color from School Bus Yellow.
Although school bus design had moved away from the wagon-style kid hacks of the generation before, there was not yet an agreed on set of industry-wide standards for school buses.
Thomas Built Buses introduced the Thomas Saf-T-Liner C2; although the chassis was derived from the Freightliner Business Class M2, the chassis and the body of the C2 were designed together as a unique vehicle.
Additionally, of the three regionally focused brands sold by Collins Industries, only Corbeil is sold in Canada, due to its previous manufacturing base in Quebec.
In 1967 and 1972, as part of an effort to improve crash protection in school buses, researchers at UCLA would play a role in the development of the interior design for school buses that was phased in by the end of the 1970s.
Other uses by law enforcement often involve prisoner transport vehicles.
In Mexico, in addition to yellow school buses seen from the United States, various other types of buses are used in the role of student transport.
In most cases, school bus body companies function as second stage manufacturers.
While the bus was constructed with a roof, its only weather protection was afforded by roll-up canvas side curtains.
Navistar International became the owner of AmTran (formerly Ward), Spartan Motors purchased Carpenter, and Thomas Built Buses was acquired by Freightliner.
Today, in the interest of safety, nanny vans are government-regulated vehicles that run on fixed routes.
Blue Bird Corporation produces only full-size buses; its small buses are produced by Canadian manufacturer Girardin.
In Ukrainian school buses are called "шкільний автобус".
As a consequence of their size, school buses have a number of blind spots, which endanger passengers disembarking the bus and pedestrians standing or walking nearby.
The Canadian standard defined in Canada Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No.
Some retired school buses are converted into recreational vehicles (RVs); enthusiasts of this type of vehicle conversion, as well as the vehicles themselves, are sometimes called skoolies (or schoolies).
While technically named '''National School Bus Glossy Yellow''', school bus yellow was adopted for use since it was considered easiest to see in dawn and dusk, and it contrasted well with black lettering.
Throughout the United States and Canada, school buses that are retired from front-line service have seen a second life as church buses; some churches purchase their buses new.
The vast majority of schools in Australia (both government and private) do not have their own buses for transporting children between the school and their home and thus most school children in Australia that do travel by bus travel on public transport buses, either on standard scheduled public transport routes, or on specific 'school travel' routes.
Other manufacturers followed suit, and diesel engines replaced gasoline engines in virtually all full-size school buses by the mid-1990s.
One stop signal arm is required; a second may also be installed.
The stop signal arm legend may read , French for "Stop", or may have both "" and "".
In addition, all emergency exit designations and instructions are required to be bilingual.
Canadian school buses are similar to their U.S. counterparts both in terms of overall design and their usage by school systems.
The revised standard also introduces standards for testing lap/shoulder belt-equipped bus seats and the anchor points for the optional installation of these seat-belt systems in large school buses.
The maximum speed for German school buses varies.
In 2015, the first full-size fully electric school bus entered production as Lion Bus introduced the eLion, powered by a TM4 electric motor.
These new federal standards brought significant change to the design, engineering, and construction of school buses and a substantial improvement in safety performance.
However, budget concerns of publicly funded school districts have necessitated that school buses be kept in use longer.
In the 1980s, manufacturers began to include diesel engines as options in conventional and small school buses; previously, diesel engines were considered a premium option only used on transit-style school buses.
As these were horse-drawn vehicles, the entrance door was rear-mounted (in order to avoid startling the horses when loading or unloading passengers).
Although 8-light systems were adopted by many states and provinces during the 1970s and 1980s, the all-red systems remain in use by some locales such as Saskatchewan and Ontario, Canada, as well as on buses built in Wisconsin before 2005   and older buses in California.
This established requirements for the strength of the body panel joints in school bus bodies, to reduce deaths and injuries resulting from structural collapse of school bus bodies during crashes.
As school route buses are almost universally run by direct government contract, the livery of the bus is generally that of the contractor, with the bus commonly also being used for normal scheduled routes as required.
The North American school bus industry produces buses in four different body configurations, listed alphabetically (along with trade name).
In terms of design, little changed, as many early school bus bodies essentially remained wagons mounted to truck frames; the rear entry door and perimeter seating remained.
In partnership with Spartan Motors, Lion was the first all-new manufacturer of full-size school buses in 19 years.
To increase loading-zone visibility, the design of bus bodies began to move the driver upward, outboard, and forward; windshields grew larger in size.
Where in the past, FMVSS 222 seat belt equipped seats could reduce passenger capacity by up to one third, NHTSA is recognizing new technology that allows using seatbelts for either three small (elementary-age) children or two larger children (high-school age) per seat.
Ever since the adoption of yellow as a standard color, school buses deliberately integrate the concept of conspicuity into their design.
Underneath the guardrails, bus manufacturers combined numerous steel panels to form the body of the bus; the panels were usually attached to the internal body structure by rivets or similar fasteners such as huckbolts.
In October 2013, the National Association of State Directors of Pupil Transportation Services (NASDPTS) most recently stated at their annual transportation conference (NAPT) that they now fully support three-point lap-shoulder seat belts on school buses.
With their large interior size, the body shells of school buses are among one of the most common type of buses for bookmobiles and mobile blood donation centers (bloodmobiles).
Instead of colorless glass lenses, the warning lights utilized red lenses.
While the UCLA researchers found the compartmentalized seats to be the safest design, they found active restraints (such as seatbelts) to be next in terms of importance of passenger safety.
131, is substantially identical to the U.S. standard.
This specified requirements for the integrity of motor vehicle fuel systems, to reduce the likelihood of fuel spillage and resultant fires during and after crashes.
Outside North America, purpose-built vehicles for student transport are not as common.
Along with their counterparts in North America, school buses in Poland have several design features to differentiate them from standard buses.
Along with the United States, Canada has its own history of school bus production.
NHTSA regulations require that the stop arms and warning signals of a school bus be removed or disabled.
As a result of the 1970s energy crisis, propane conversions of gasoline engines were made available in the late 1970s and 1980s (most commonly those used in the General Motors B-Series).
In 2006, IC Bus introduced the BE200, the first Type B bus with a fully cowled chassis (a scaled-down Type C body).
In addition, to keep drivers from passing a stopped school bus in low visibility, the stop arm on the side of the bus was given a set of flashing lights.
In a major change from manufacturing precedent, the C2 was the first use of adhesive bonding to join body panels and minimizing the need for rivets in a school bus.
The 1930s marked a major transition in school bus design, with the vehicle gaining a distinct, dedicated form in place of the adaptation of wagons and trucks to accommodate student passengers.
During the 1990s, in a move to replace outdated Leyland double-decker buses and to establish dedicated school bus service to encourage students to travel to school by bus, several local governments purchased right-hand drive Blue Bird buses produced in the United States; West Sussex was the first in 1997 and Cheshire did so in 1999.
It must be retroreflective and/or equipped with alternately flashing red lights.
Some of the environmental drawbacks of school busing stem from engine idling while waiting for students to be unloaded and loaded at bus stops and schools.
For 2004, two manufacturers introduced conventional-body school buses that integrated both body and chassis within a single manufacturer.
In the mid-1970s, the Wayne Busette and Blue Bird Micro Bird were introduced.
When nanny vans originated, they were regulated primarily by the schools and the van drivers.
In the past decade, onboard GPS tracking devices have taken on a dual role of fleet management and location tracking.
These are devices which extend from the front bumper while the bus is stopped for loading or unloading.
In Hong Kong, younger students are transported between their homes and schools by "nanny vans".
Many Australian school children travel 'free' on non fare paying bus services to their local school or using a bus pass that they get issued at the beginning of the school year that covers transport with the relevant bus (and often other public transport such as train or ferry) network/s for travel to and from school only, for which the contractor in turn receives a government subsidy amount for each trip, although specifics of the schemes vary from state to state, some only providing subsidy to remote or low income families.
Weather protection was nearly non-existent; if provided, it consisted of a tarpaulin stretched above the passenger area.
By design, these force passengers to walk forward several feet forward of the bus (into the view of the driver) before they can walk across the road.
Among retired American school buses, some newer ones are imported into Mexico and put back into school service.
(See Christopher McCandless#Legacy.)
In 1986, Navistar International became the first chassis manufacturer to phase out gasoline engines entirely.
Luce produced a bus body for a 1927 Ford Model T. Unlike previous wood-bodied motorized buses, Luce used primarily steel panels with a wood frame; this would be the first bus produced by what would later become bus manufacturer Blue Bird.
In an effort to gain extra seating capacity and visibility, Crown Coach built its own cabover school bus design from the ground up.
To combat this problem, school buses are specified with sophisticated and comprehensive mirror systems.
To reduce the complexity of school bus production and increase safety, a set of 44 standards were agreed upon and adopted by the attendees (such as interior and exterior dimensions and the forward-facing seating configuration).
Initially, this was led by the 1986 Wayne Lifestar; however, the AmTran Genesis, Blue Bird TC/2000, and Thomas Saf-T-Liner MVP would prove far more successful.
As a source of fuel, compressed natural gas was first introduced in school buses by Blue Bird in 1991, using a variant of the Cummins C8.3 inline-6 diesel engine.
Yellow was adopted as a standard color for North American school buses beginning in 1939.
Some uses for retired school buses are listed below:
A '''school bus''' is a type of bus used for student transport: carrying students to and from school, home, and school events.
According to the NTSB, the main disadvantage of the design is its lack of protection in side-impact collisions (with larger vehicles) and rollover situations.
Every year in the United States and Canada, school buses provide an estimated 10 billion student trips from home and school.
remote areas) and local regulation.
School buses outside of North America typically do not have traffic priority while loading or unloading students; school bus traffic stop laws differ from North American counterparts (if they exist at all).
In Germany, students travel to school on scheduled public train and bus routes.
However, as nearly all are powered by internal-combustion engines, school buses are not a completely pollution-free method of transportation such as biking or walking.
Additionally, restored school buses appear alongside other period vehicles in television or film.
As an alternative, the  legend itself may also flash; this is commonly achieved with red LEDs.
Officially, it is designated "''National School Bus Chrome''" (later renamed "National School Bus Glossy Yellow" as the lead was removed from the pigment).
Some Chinese bus manufacturers, such as Zhengzhou Yutong Group Co., Ltd., developed a school bus model, the ZK6100DA, to be purchased by schools in China.
During the 1990s, an emerging trend among body manufacturers was mergers, joint ventures, and acquisitions among major chassis suppliers.
In 2014, a battery-operated version of the Lion made its debut with a CNG-fueled version debuting in 2015.
The color which became known as "school bus yellow" was selected because black lettering on that specific hue was easiest to see in the semi-darkness of early morning and late afternoon.
As a result of the 1970s fuel shortages, steps were also taken to improve the fuel economy of school buses.
In April of that year, Dr. Frank W. Cyr, a professor at Teachers College at Columbia University in New York organized a meeting to establish national school bus construction standards, including the adoption of a standard shade of paint.
Gone were the days of customers picking and choosing school bus body and chassis separately; the acquisition of AmTran and Thomas along with the General Motors supply arrangement with Blue Bird had reduced the separate combinations available to build.
Some states (for example, Illinois) require strobe lights as part of their local specifications.
This safety challenge is addressed by improving the design and configuration of the bus windows, windshield, body panels, and mirrors in order to maximize visibility.
The rear door gained a new function, repurposed as an emergency exit.
Children with more complex needs or disabilities are often transported to special schools in purpose-built minibuses.
Retired school buses from Canada and the United States are sometimes exported to Africa, Central America, South America, or elsewhere.
This established requirements for bus window retention and release to reduce the likelihood of passenger ejection in crashes, and for emergency exits to facilitate passenger exit in emergencies.
The highest-capacity school bus of the time, the 76-passenger Crown Supercoach was aptly named, as many California school districts operated in terrain requiring heavy-duty vehicles.
Consequently, accidents happen frequently.
For educational use, MFSABs are primarily used for extracurricular activities requiring transportation; in the private sector, they are typically purchased by child-care centers.
To minimize this risk, school bus manufacturers have redesigned handrails and equipment in the stepwell area.
In February 2012, the potential of American-imported school buses was explored as American manufacturers Blue Bird and IC Bus (Navistar) displayed buses at a bus industry trade show in Beijing.
These signs all indicate that a motorist should slow to  when passing a stationary bus in either direction
In order to attract passengers and fares, bus owners often redecorate the yellow school bus with flamboyant color schemes and body trim.
In 2007, Collins Bus Corporation, the largest independent manufacturer of Type A buses, acquired Canadian manufacturer Corbeil out of bankruptcy.
The equivalent in Canada is almost identical; the only difference is that red cannot be used as a retroreflective color.
In 1977, FMVSS 222 mandated a change to compartmentalized seats, though the height requirement was lowered to 24 inches.
Dedicated bus lanes are common in larger cities, where buses are also allowed to move off first from traffic lights before other traffic is shown a green light.
Later, one of the longest-running school bus manufacturers, Wayne Works (later Wayne Corporation), started producing its first school wagons in Indiana in 1886.
Trans Tech Bus would produce two designs, the eTrans (based on the Smith Electric Newton cabover truck), and the SST-e, a conversion of the Ford E-Series.
In the private sector, FirstGroup launched First Student UK in 2000.
To accommodate the larger student populations, school buses began to grow in size, adding extra rows of seats for the bus body.
Along with the Thomas Saf-T-Liner HDX, the current version of the rear-engine Blue Bird All American today uses a variant of the Cummins ISL-G as a CNG option.
The number of emergency exits in a school bus depends on the size of the bus (its seating capacity) along with individual state regulations; Kentucky requires the most, with each full-size school bus having a total of eight emergency exits in addition to the entry door.
221 – School Bus Body Joint Strength'''''
Although the aspect of choice was disappearing, the decreased complexity paved the way for new product innovations previously thought impossible.
In the past, groups transporting children and adults that did not need (or afford) a large bus commonly used 15-passenger vans to handle their transportation.
In addition to their distinctive paint color, school buses are required to be fitted with warning lights and multiple safety devices.
School buses can be retired from service due to a number of factors, including vehicle age or mileage, mechanical condition, emissions compliance, or any combination of these factors.
To inhibit pedestrians from walking close enough to the front of the bus that the hood obscures them from the driver's view, North Carolina and Connecticut are examples of states that requiring school buses to be equipped with crossing arms.
After the sale of the General Motors P-chassis to Navistar subsidiary Workhorse in 1998, the Type B bus configuration largely began to disappear.
Both school buses hold approximately 35 student passengers.
These are called '''M'''ulti-'''F'''unction '''S'''chool '''A'''ctivity '''B'''uses (MFSABs).
While only a legal requirement for bus transporting Materne (preschool) students, school bus drivers are provided with an aide to manage the students on the bus.
Due to lack of buses and absence of regulation, overloading of buses with children in China for school routes is commonplace.
In July 2004, California became the first state to require three-point lap/shoulder seat belts on all new Type A small school buses.
However, on some buses (such as Gillig's Transit Coach models and the Kenworth-Pacific School Coach) activation of the roof warning lamp system was through the use of a pressure-sensitive switch on a manually controlled stop paddle lever located to the left of the driver's seat below the window.
While these buses are used to transport both adults and children, their use as church buses varies from state to state.
A year later, this requirement was extended to large Type C and Type D school buses.
In 2009, Blue Bird and Girardin entered into a joint venture; Girardin now produces the entire small-bus product line for Blue Bird.
Marking the length, width, height, and in some cases, identifying the bus as a school bus, reflective tape makes the vehicle easier to see for other drivers by the light of their headlamps and correctly perceive its size and position.
MyBus is a group of bus contractors that use school buses solely for school transport.
In the second half of the 19th century, many rural areas of the United States and Canada were served by one-room schools.
To improve their visibility, many state and provincial governments (for example, Colorado) require the use of retroflective tape on school buses.
Not only does GPS tracking allow for internal management of costs, but it can be used to alert waiting parents and students of the real-time location of their bus.
Although it is not a government specification outside of the United States and Canada, school buses outside North America sometimes feature some shade of yellow in part or in whole, and while some areas without school services have conducted evaluations of American yellow style school buses, other governments require their own distinctive paint schemes, often favouring other high visibility colours such as white or orange that may better suit their own climate or conditions.
At the end of the 1950s, a new option was developed, which is specified in many school buses today: a curbside wheelchair lift to transport wheelchair-bound passengers.
Since the 1930s, longitudinal steel guardrails were a feature protecting the sides of buses.
While single-piece stampings seen in the Lifeguard had their own manufacturing challenges, today's school buses use relatively few side panels to minimize body joints.
As in many other countries, in Ukraine, school buses are painted yellow or orange.
In 2011, Lion Bus of Saint-Jérôme, Quebec marked the return of full-size bus production to Canada.
In NSW, however, the State Government has begun a program to bring all public transport in the state under one livery including strict livery regulations for new vehicles purchased for government contract use.
While carrying students, buses are marked by either "SCHOOL", "SCHOOL BUS", "KURA" (Maori for "school"), or pictograms of children in black on a fluorescent chartreuse background, and a limited on the open road to  .
As of 2015, they are a requirement in at least five states: California, Florida, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.
In contrast, in its own research, Wayne Corporation found that the body joints themselves as the weak points (regardless of the number of fasteners used).
School buses are generally considered Class C vehicles with passenger and namesake endorsements, but the highest-capacity versions require a Class B license (based on their higher GVWR).
To avoid stalling in stop-and-go driving (and in potentially dangerous places, such as intersections or railroad crossings), automatic transmissions had begun to replace manual transmissions during the 1980s.
Again based on existing vehicles, their high price and complexity would lead against widespread acceptance.
In the 1970s, school busing expanded further, under controversial reasons; a number of larger cities began to bus students in an effort to racially integrate schools, which forced them to expand their bus usage.
Both types of vehicles spend long periods of time in the same place; to reduce fuel consumption, they often have on-board electrical generators to power their interior equipment and climate control.
For many operators, the routes of a school bus prove advantageous for the use of an electric bus; charging can be achieved before and after the bus is transporting students (when the bus is parked).
As these often offer higher capacity seating than other buses, the vehicles employed are based on school buses.
Whether seat belts should be a requirement has been a topic of controversy.
After subjecting a bus to a rollover test in 1967, Ward Body Works discovered that bus construction of the time resulted in panel separation in body joints during a rollover crash; the company pointed out that many of their competitors were using relatively few rivets and fasteners.
Prior to 1999, buses intended for transporting school children differed only in their route identification; no government regulations were required.
The more primitively equipped 1946 International Harvester school bus abandoned on the Stampede Trail in which Christopher McCandless lived and died, in 1992 (often referred to as the "Magic School Bus"), is used as lodging for hikers and hunters in Alaska.
To increase safety around school bus stops and decrease confusion over traffic priority, several states started to use amber warning lamps inboard of the traditional red ones.
The custom-built nature of school buses created an inherent obstacle to their profitable mass production on a large scale.
These vehicles are typically van-based and are smaller than a minibus.
Improving the ergonomics of the drivers' compartment was intended to decrease driver distraction, which led to improved layouts of controls and switches.
Bookmobiles feature interior shelving for books and library equipment; bloodmobiles feature mobile phlebotomy stations and blood storage.
Larger police agencies may own their own buses for transporting large numbers of officers for a number of reasons.
Coinciding with the larger bodies, truck manufacturers began to offer heavier-duty bus chassis.
In mainland China, purpose-built vehicles for transporting schoolchildren are not commonly used.
Examples of school buses used in Singapore include:
When making student dropoffs or pickups, traffic law gives school buses priority over other vehicles; in order to stop traffic, they are equipped with flashing lights and a stop sign.
In Europe, the Ford Transit and the Mercedes-Benz Vario are popular donor chassis for such vehicles.
Unlike the United States and Canada, school-owned buses are not primarily used for route service (due to high cost); instead, they are often used for field trips and other related excursions.
The style is typically the same as public buses in other countries, as demonstrated in the picture from Wagga Wagga, NSW (which is in the livery of the local operator).
While many are scrapped for parts and recycling, better-running examples are sold to such entities as churches, resorts or camps; others see use as chicken buses in Central America.
