The Panzer Corps conducted a successful defensive operation on 17–24 February at the Hron River, stalling the Allied advance towards Vienna.
He was particularly interested in locating sets of twins.
The SS was also involved in commercial enterprises and exploited concentration camp inmates as slave labor.
According to historian Charles Sydnor, the "fanatical recklessness in the assault, suicidal defense against enemy attacks, and savage atrocities committed in the face of frustrated objectives" exhibited by the ''SS-Totenkopf'' division during the invasion were typical of the SS troops as a whole.
This was primarily done to emphasize the SS as being independent from the Wehrmacht.
In response to the army's difficulties in dealing with Soviet partisans, Hitler decided in July 1942 to transfer anti-partisan operations to the police.
The Allied forces were prepared for this offensive, and an air assault on the combined German units proved devastating.
Six concentration camps housing 21,400 inmates (mostly political prisoners) existed at the start of the war in September 1939.
In 1935, the SS combat formations adopted a service uniform in field grey for everyday wear.
Although SS ranks generally had equivalents in the other services, the SS rank system did not copy the terms and ranks used by the Wehrmacht's branches.
He wished it to be separate from the "suspect mass" of the party, including the paramilitary ''Sturmabteilung'' ("Storm Battalion"; SA), which he did not trust.
Any Jews in the area were rounded up and killed.
By the end of the month, the Red Army had made bridgeheads across the Oder, the last geographic obstacle before Berlin.
On 11 November, Heydrich reported a death toll of 36 people, but later assessments put the number of deaths at up to two thousand.
Alarmed by the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe in 1942, Hitler had ordered the construction of fortifications he called the Atlantic Wall all along the Atlantic coast, from Spain to Norway, to protect against an expected Allied invasion.
In 1929, the ''SS-Hauptamt'' (main SS office) was expanded and reorganized into five main offices dealing with general administration, personnel, finance, security, and race matters.
Hitler then authorized the enlistment of "people perceived to be of related stock", as Himmler put it, to expand the ranks.
Before the invasion there were five million registered Jews throughout the Soviet Union, with three million of those residing in the territories occupied by the Germans; by the time the war ended, over two million of these had been murdered.
Although officially still considered a sub-organization of the SA and answerable to the ''Stabschef'' (SA Chief of Staff), it was also during this time that Himmler began to establish the independence of the SS from the SA.
German forces attacked near Lake Balaton, with 6th SS Panzer Army advancing north towards Budapest and 2nd Panzer Army moving east and south.
The SS was regarded as the NSDAP's elite unit.
The SS stressed total loyalty and obedience to orders unto death.
The SS owned experimental farms, bakeries, meat packing plants, leather works, clothing and uniform factories, and small arms factories.
Four of these formations were Waffen-SS divisions.
On 26 June 1933, Himmler appointed SS-''Oberführer'' Theodor Eicke as commandant of Dachau concentration camp, one of the first Nazi concentration camps.
Members received combat training to serve in the ''Reiter-SS'' (SS Cavalry Corps).
Of Greece's 80,000 Jews, only 20 percent survived the war.
According to former ''SS Sturmbannführer'' Wilhelm Höttl, not even the SS leadership knew how many ''SS-Sonderkommandos'' were constantly being formed, disbanded, and reformed for various tasks, especially on the Eastern Front.
The BEF evacuated by sea to Crete, but had to flee again in late May when the Germans arrived.
With Hitler's approval, Himmler assumed the position of ''Reichsführer-SS'' in January 1929.
SS troops did not take part in the thrust through the Ardennes and the river Meuse.
Two other SS units composed the inner ring of Hitler's personal protection.
An estimated 50,000 people were interrogated or tortured there.
Among the many elements defending Berlin were French, Latvian, and Scandinavian Waffen-SS troops.
They soon encountered strong resistance from the US 2nd and 99th Infantry Divisions.
These pseudo-religious rites and ceremonies often took place near SS-dedicated monuments or in special SS-designated places.
The exiled Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Amin al-Husseini was made an SS-''Gruppenführer'' by Himmler in May 1943.
Commitment to SS ideology was emphasized throughout the recruitment, membership process, and training.
It had under its command the SD, Kripo, and Gestapo, as well as several offices to handle finance, administration, and supply.
As Heiden attempted to keep the SS from dissolving, Heinrich Himmler became his deputy in September 1927.
Hitler, now living in the ''Führerbunker'' under the Reich Chancellery, still hoped that his remaining SS soldiers could rescue the capital.
Volunteers from Scandinavian countries filled the ranks of two divisions, the ''SS-Wiking'' and ''SS-Nordland''.
In April 1934, Himmler modified the name to ''Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler'' (LSSAH).
The 9th and 10th Panzers were among the units that repulsed the attack.
It is similar to the ancient Sowilō rune, which symbolizes the sun, but was renamed as "Sig" (victory) in List's iconography.
Berchtold changed the title of the office to ''Reichsführer-SS'' (Reich Leader-SS).
The Ukrainians and Tatars, who had suffered persecution under Stalin, were likely motivated primarily by opposition to the Soviet government rather than ideological agreement with the SS.
The first systematic mass shooting of Jews by the ''Einsatzgruppen'' took place on 6 September 1939 during the attack on Kraków.
Fegelein was appointed as commander of the 8th SS Cavalry Division ''Florian Geyer'' on 20 April 1943.
The training stressed ruthlessness and toughness as part of the SS value system, which helped foster a sense of superiority among the men and taught them self-confidence.
Also on that date, in a departure from long-standing German practice that law enforcement was a state and local matter, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia.
The SS was involved in killing people viewed as threats to race hygiene or NSDAP ideology, including the mentally or physically handicapped, homosexuals, and political dissidents.
On 31 July 1941, Göring gave Heydrich written authorization to ensure the cooperation of administrative leaders of various government departments to undertake genocide of the Jews in territories under German control.
The fighting was intensified by the mountainous terrain, with its heavily defended narrow passes.
As Himmler's position and authority grew, so did his de facto rank.
On 27 May, 4 Company, ''SS-Totenkopf'' perpetrated the Le Paradis massacre, where 97 men of the 2nd Battalion, Royal Norfolk Regiment were machine gunned after surrendering, with survivors finished off with bayonets.
The ''SS-Frauenkops'' was an auxiliary reporting and clerical unit, which included the ''SS-Helferinnenkorps'' (Women Helper Corps), made up of female volunteers.
Assisted by a network of former SS members, he traveled to Genoa, where he obtained a passport under the alias "Helmut Gregor" from the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The two regiments were amalgamated into the SS Cavalry Brigade on 31 July, twelve days after the operation started.
Rapid acquisition of vast territories in the East placed considerable strain on the SS police organizations as they struggled to adjust to the changing security challenges.
This further increased the collective authority of the SS.
Like their male equivalents in the SS, females participated in atrocities against Jews, Poles, and others.
Victims at these new extermination camps were killed with the use of carbon monoxide gas from automobile engines.
SS police units immediately began taking hostages and carrying out reprisals, a practice that became common.
With a staff of 900 (80 percent of whom were recruited from the Austrian police), it was the largest Gestapo office outside Berlin.
Inducements such as higher salaries and larger homes were provided to members of the SS, since they were expected to produce more children than the average German family as part of their commitment to NSDAP doctrine.
He considered the SS an elite, ideologically driven National Socialist organization, a "conflation of Teutonic knights, the Jesuits, and Japanese Samurai".
Johann Rattenhuber, chief of the RSD, for the most part took his orders directly from Hitler.
By March 1941 their strength was 3,500 men.
Additional subdivisions of the SS included the Gestapo and the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD) organizations.
Some members of the US Army Counter Intelligence Corps delivered captured SS camp guards to displaced persons camps, where they knew they would be subject to summary execution.
At 02:00, ''Generalleutnant'' Wilhelm Richter, commander of the 716th Static Infantry Division, ordered 21st Panzer Division into position to counter-attack.
In the 1950s, former Dachau inmate Lothar Hermann discovered that Buenos Aires resident Ricardo Klement was in fact Adolf Eichmann, who had in 1948 obtained false identification and a landing permit for Argentina through an organization directed by Bishop Alois Hudal, an Austrian cleric with Nazi sympathies then residing in Italy.
The current FBK chief acted as his deputy.
Exploitation and extermination became a balancing act as the military situation deteriorated.
In September 1939, the security and police agencies, including the ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (SiPo; security police) and SD (but not the Orpo), were consolidated into the Reich Main Security Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich.
The SS became an independent elite corps of the NSDAP, answerable only to Hitler.
In his role as Minister President of Prussia, Hermann Göring had in 1933 created a Prussian secret police force, the ''Geheime Staatspolizei'' or Gestapo, and appointed Rudolf Diels as its head.
There was also a French volunteer division, ''SS-Charlemagne'', which was formed in 1944 mainly from the remnants of the Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism and French ''Sturmbrigade''.
Officially, the SS marked its foundation on 9 November 1925 (the second anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch).
During ''Kristallnacht'' (9–10 November 1938), SS security services clandestinely coordinated violence against Jews as the SS, Gestapo, SD, Kripo, SiPo and regular police did what they could to ensure that while Jewish synagogues and community centers were destroyed, Jewish-owned businesses and housing remained intact so that they could later be seized.
A few days later Yugoslavia surrendered.
Initially the victims were shot, but this method proved impracticable for an operation of this scale.
In November 1933, the name was changed to ''Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler''.
He was among the 24 defendants put on trial at the International Military Tribunal in 1945–46.
After the start of the war, Himmler intensified the activity of the SS within Germany and in Nazi occupied Europe.
After the ''Anschluss'', the Austrian SS was folded into ''SS-Oberabschnitt Donau''.
In its defence, the SS insisted that its armed formations had been hampered by having to fight piecemeal and were improperly equipped by the army.
He decided that alternate methods of killing should be found, which led to introduction of gas vans.
The historian Karl Dietrich Bracher describes this court system as one factor in the creation of the Nazi totalitarian police state, as it removed objective legal procedures, rendering citizens defenseless against the "summary justice of the SS terror."
Under Himmler, the SS expanded and gained a larger foothold.
Thereafter, he purchased Allach Porcelain, which then began to produce SS memorabilia.
Once the war started and it became more difficult to confirm ancestry, the regulation was amended to just proving the candidate's grandparents were Aryan, as spelled out in the Nuremberg Laws.
They were tasked with the detection of actual or potential enemies of the Nazi state, the neutralization of any opposition, policing the German people for their commitment to Nazi ideology, and providing domestic and foreign intelligence.
The expanding war and the need to control occupied territories provided the conditions for Himmler to further consolidate the police and military organs of the SS.
Himmler once wrote that an SS man "hesitates not for a single instant, but executes unquestioningly&nbsp;..." any ''Führer-Befehl'' (Führer order).
Members of the SS were indoctrinated in the racial policy of Nazi Germany, and were taught that it was necessary to remove from Germany people deemed by that policy as inferior.
Due to stiff Soviet resistance, Hitler halted the attack by the evening of 12 July.
At Auschwitz, the actual delivery of gas to the victims was always handled by the SS, on the order of the supervising SS doctor.
The entire concentration camp system was placed under the authority of the WVHA.
Intensification of the killing operations took place in late 1941 when the SS began construction of stationary gassing facilities to replace the use of ''Einsatzgruppen'' for mass killings.
Under Himmler's leadership the SS continued to gather greater power as more and more state and party functions were assigned to its jurisdiction.
Himmler displayed good organizational abilities compared to Heiden.
Captured SS soldiers who were part of ''Kampfgruppe Peiper'' were tried during the Malmedy massacre trial following the war for this massacre and several others in the area.
Historian Raul Hilberg estimates that between 1941 and 1945 the ''Einsatzgruppen'' and related agencies killed more than two million people, including 1.3 million Jews.
Simultaneously, airborne troops were dropped to capture key Dutch airfields, bridges, and railways.
In early 1944, Himmler even contacted Pohl to suggest releasing Muslim prisoners from concentration camps to supplement his SS troops.
Those too ill or injured to recover in that time frame were killed.
He subsequently used antisemitism and anti-Serb racism to recruit a Waffen-SS division of Bosnian Muslims, the ''SS-Handschar''.
Former ''Einsatzgruppen'' members were either assigned duties in the Waffen-SS or concentration camps.
By this time, on both the Eastern and Western Front, the activities of the SS were becoming clear to the Allies, as the concentration and extermination camps were being overrun.
The LSSAH and elements of the SS-VT participated in the ground invasion of the Battle of the Netherlands.
The FSK was renamed the ''Reichssicherheitsdienst'' (Reich Security Service; RSD) in August 1935.
In the latter half of 1934, Himmler oversaw the creation of ''SS-Junkerschule'' (Junker schools), institutions where SS officer candidates received leadership training, political and ideological indoctrination, and military instruction.
After the war, many SS doctors were charged with war crimes for their inhumane medical experiments and for their role in gas chamber selections.
Men for the ''Einsatzgruppen'' units were drawn from the SS, the SD, and the police.
It was created to consolidate the many small camps that had been set up by various police agencies and the NSDAP to house political prisoners.
Other SS men, such as Soobzokov, SD officer Wilhelm Höttl, Eichmann aide Otto von Bolschwing, and accused war criminal Theodor Saevecke, were employed by American intelligence agencies against the Soviets.
In 1941 the ''Einsatzgruppen'' were sent into the Soviet Union to begin large-scale genocide of Jews, Romani people, and communists.
Many of the perpetrators were sentenced to hang, but the sentences were commuted.
Himmler subsequently established four major new concentration camps in 1941: Auschwitz, Gross-Rosen, Natzweiler-Struthof, and Neuengamme.
Thereafter, they secured rural communities and economic installations such as factories and administrative buildings.
In some cases, they were joined by the Wehrmacht.
Church weddings were replaced with SS ''Ehewein'', a pagan ceremony invented by Himmler.
The lower levels of the SS remained largely unchanged.
The losses incurred by the Waffen-SS and the Wehrmacht during the Battle of Kursk occurred nearly simultaneously with the Allied assault into Italy, opening a two-front war for Germany.
However, as the division was part of the armoured reserve, Feuchtinger was obliged to seek clearance from OKW before he could commit his formation.
The historian Henning Pieper estimates the actual number of Jews killed was closer to 23,700.
While assisting the ''Einsatzgruppen'', they formed firing parties that participated in the liquidation of the Jewish population of the Soviet Union.
Later the ''SS-Begleitkommando'' was expanded and became known as the ''Führerbegleitkommando'' (Führer Escort Command; FBK).
The SS Cavalry Brigade took serious losses in November 1941 in the Battle of Moscow, with casualties of up to 60 per cent in some squadrons.
Within the week, fighting was taking place inside the city.
Waffen-SS units which had survived the summer campaigns were withdrawn from the front line to refit.
They also gained a reputation for ruthlessness and unwavering commitment to Nazi ideology.
At first they fought Soviet partisans, but by the autumn of 1941, they left the anti-partisan role to other units and actively took part in the Holocaust.
Items seized included 2,909.68 kilograms of gold worth 843,802.75 RM, as well as 18,733.69&nbsp;kg of silver, 1,514&nbsp;kg of platinum, 249,771.50 American dollars, 130 diamond solitaires, 2,511.87 carats of brilliants, 13,458.62 carats of diamonds, and 114&nbsp;kg of pearls.
They placed the SS guards on starvation rations, made them work without breaks, forced them to deal with the remaining corpses, and stabbed them with bayonets or struck them with their rifle butts if they slowed their pace.
Members of trade unions and those perceived to be affiliated with groups that opposed the regime (religious, political, social, and otherwise), or those whose views were contradictory to the goals of the NSDAP government, were rounded up in large numbers; these included clergy of all faiths, Jehovah's Witnesses, Freemasons, Communists, and Rotary Club members.
The most infamous SS doctor, Josef Mengele, served as a medical officer at Auschwitz under the command of Eduard Wirths of the camp's medical corps.
He died from his injuries a week later.
Prisoners or auxiliaries were often assigned to do this task so as to spare the SS men the trauma.
Hitler used this as a powerful tool to further his aims and those of the NSDAP.
Another mass shooting early in 1942 claimed the lives of over 10,000 Jews in Kharkov.
Between 1925 and 1929, the SS was considered to be a small ''Gruppe'' (battalion) of the SA.
Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the highest-ranking surviving SS officer, was found guilty of crimes against humanity at the Nuremberg trials and hanged in 1946.
Many of the SS doctors also conducted inhumane medical experiments on camp prisoners.
Further planned expeditions were postponed indefinitely at the start of the war.
Fritz Klingenberg, a company commander in the ''Das Reich'', led his men across Yugoslavia to the capital, Belgrade, where a small group in the vanguard accepted the surrender of the city on 13 April.
The Waffen-SS by this time had been expanded to 12 divisions, and most took part in the battle.
Thereafter, the Germans were forced onto the defensive as the Red Army began the liberation of Western Russia.
The school was closed on 22 November 1944 due to the Allied advance.
Heydrich was attacked in Prague on 27 May 1942 by a British-trained team of Czech and Slovak soldiers who had been sent by the Czechoslovak government-in-exile to kill him in Operation Anthropoid.
For administrative reasons, all concentration camp guards and administrative staff became full members of the Waffen-SS in 1942.
The unit was split into two regiments in December 1939, with Fegelein in charge of both.
The Berlin garrison surrendered on 2 May, two days after Hitler committed suicide.
There, soldiers of the 2nd Battalion were responsible for the Wormhoudt massacre, where 80 British and French soldiers were murdered after they surrendered.
Heydrich also continued as head of the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD; security service).
As the Nazi regime became more oppressive, the concentration camp system grew in size and lethal operation, and grew in scope as the economic ambitions of the SS intensified.
The SS-Panzer Corps returned to the Soviet Union in 1943 and participated in the Third Battle of Kharkov in February and March.
It is likely that as many as 2,500 of these people died in the following months.
Before 1929, the SS wore the same brown uniform as the SA, with the addition of a black tie and a black cap with a ''Totenkopf'' (death's head) skull and bones symbol, moving to an all-black uniform in 1932.
During the battle, SS-''Obersturmbannführer'' Joachim Peiper left a path of destruction, which included Waffen-SS soldiers under his command murdering American POWs and unarmed Belgian civilians in the Malmedy massacre.
The SS was the organization most responsible for the genocidal killing of an estimated 5.5 to 6 million Jews in the Holocaust.
Originally it was charged with protecting Hitler only while he was inside the borders of Bavaria.
By declaring an emergency, they could bypass the district administrative offices for the SS, SD, SiPo, ''SS-Totenkopfverbände'' (SS-TV; concentration camp guards), and Orpo, thereby gaining direct operational control of these groups.
The RSD and FBK worked together for security and personal protection during Hitler's trips and public events, but they operated as two groups and used separate vehicles.
In early 1942, ''SS-Leibstandarte'', ''SS-Totenkopf'', and ''SS-Das Reich'' were withdrawn to the West to refit and were converted to ''Panzergrenadier'' divisions.
Some SS members were subject to summary execution, torture, and beatings at the hands of freed prisoners, displaced persons, or Allied soldiers.
The SS, Gestapo, and SD were in charge of the provisional military administration in Poland until the appointment of Hans Frank as Governor-General on 26 October 1939.
Its creation placed the SS beyond the reach of civilian legal authority.
In both instances he was assisted by former Luftwaffe pilot Hans-Ulrich Rudel.
Hitler felt that the planned extermination of the Jews was too difficult and important to be entrusted to the military.
On 9 April 1945 Königsberg fell to the Red Army, and on 13 April Dietrich's SS unit was forced out of Vienna.
By 16 March the battle was lost.
The concentration camp population rose in tandem with the defeats suffered by the Nazi regime; the worse the catastrophe seemed, the greater the fear of subversion, prompting the SS to intensify their repression and terror.
When the army leadership registered complaints about the brutality being meted out by the ''Einsatzgruppen'', Heydrich informed them that he was acting "in accordance with the special order of the Führer."
Their role was to police the population and oversee the activities of the SS men within their district.
Eichmann was quoted as having stated, "I will jump into my grave laughing, because the fact that I have the death of five million Jews or Reich enemies, as he later claimed to have said on my conscience gives me extraordinary satisfaction."
In Greece, the Wehrmacht and Waffen-SS encountered resistance from the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) and Greek Army.
Members were assigned as administrative staff and supply personnel, and served in command positions and as guards at women's concentration camps.
Communists and people of Asiatic descent were killed presumptively under the assumption that they were Soviet agents.
Twelve received the death penalty, including Kaltenbrunner, who was convicted of crimes against humanity and executed on 16 October 1946.
The ''Stoßtrupp'' was abolished after the failed 1923 Beer Hall Putsch, an attempt by the NSDAP to seize power in Munich.
As the SS grew in size and importance, so too did Hitler's personal protection units.
Instead, the ''SS-Totenkopf'' was summoned from the army reserve to fight in support of ''Generalmajor'' Erwin Rommel's 7th Panzer Division as they advanced toward to the English Channel.
Spearheading the attack were two panzer armies composed largely of Waffen-SS divisions.
Political scientist David Art of Tufts University notes that Austrians constituted 8 percent of the Third Reich's population and 13 percent of the SS; he states that 40 percent of the staff and 75 percent of commanders at death camps were Austrian.
By 23 December, the weather improved enough that the Allied air forces could attack the German forces and their supply columns, causing fuel shortages.
Heinrich Müller, who had been chief of operations for the Gestapo, was appointed Gestapo chief at this time.
The SS supplied two of the 89 divisions employed.
It continued under separate command and remained responsible for Hitler's personal protection.
Even then, most of the enterprises were poorly run and did not fare well, as SS men were not selected for their business experience, and the workers were starving.
A trial of 40 SS officers and guards from Auschwitz took place in Kraków in November 1947.
Serbia became the second country (after Estonia) declared ''Judenfrei'' (free of Jews).
Hitler thought the criticism was typical of the army's "outmoded conception of chivalry."
The greatest extent of ''Einsatzgruppen'' action occurred in 1941 and 1942 in Ukraine and Russia.
Budapest fell on 13 February.
Thousands of Nazis, including former SS members such as Trawniki guard Jakob Reimer and Circassian collaborator Tscherim Soobzokov, fled to the United States under the guise of refugees, sometimes using forged documents.
Several other leading members of the SS fled, but some were quickly captured.
In May 1941 the VuWHA founded the ''Deutsche Ausrüstungswerke'' GmbH (German Equipment Works; DAW), which was created to integrate the SS business enterprises with the burgeoning concentration camp system.
