David G. Bromley comments that Scientology “could gain strength by adding to the new perspective on existence, the hope and human meaning that only a transcendent creed can give.”
Scientology maintains strict control over the use of its symbols, icons, and names.
In December 1953, Hubbard incorporated three churches&nbsp;– a "Church of American Science", a "Church of Scientology" and a "Church of Spiritual Engineering"&nbsp;– in Camden, New Jersey.
Journalists, politicians, former Scientologists and various anti-cult groups have made accusations of wrongdoing against Scientology since the 1960s, and Scientology has targeted these critics – almost without exception – for retaliation, in the form of lawsuits and public counter-accusations of personal wrongdoing.
They really would have preferred the rest of us not to know about Xenu and the galactic federation.
The IRS cited a statement frequently attributed to Hubbard that the way to get rich was to found a religion.
They also conducted private investigations, character assassination and legal action against the Church's critics in the media.
The sequence of study ("training") and auditing ("processing") levels is termed the "Bridge to Total Freedom", or simply "the Bridge".
The Church of Scientology admits to Hubbard’s involvement with Parsons while claiming that it was for the purpose of naval intelligence.
According to this story, 75 million years ago Xenu brought billions of people to Earth in spacecraft resembling Douglas DC-8 airliners, stacked them around volcanoes and detonated hydrogen bombs in the volcanoes.
A former high-ranking source reports that "some 1,500 abortions" have been "carried out by women in the Sea Organization since the implementation of a rule in the late '80s that members could not remain in the organization if they decided to have children."
Scientology can be seen as a UFO religion in which the existence of extraterrestrial entities operating unidentified flying objects (UFOs) are an element of belief.
That night, Hubbard ordered his crew to fire 35 depth charges and a number of gun rounds at what he believed were Japanese submarines.
Joseph Cheesman Thompson, a U.S. Navy officer who had studied with Freud and when writing to the American Psychological Association in 1949, he stated that he was conducting research based on the "early work of Freud".
The publication of that book is considered by Scientologists to be the seminal event of the century.
The church denies that a disconnection policy exists, and quotes Hubbard's definition of disconnection as "a self-determined decision made by an individual that he is not going to be connected to another."
The head of the French Church of Scientology was convicted at the same trial and given a suspended one-year prison sentence.
In 1959, Hubbard moved to England, remaining there until the mid-1960s.
The universe has no independent reality, but derives its apparent reality from the fact that thetans agree it exists.
In plain English, the purpose of Scientology ethics is to eliminate opponents, then eliminate people's interests in things other than Scientology.
During his lifetime, Hubbard was accused of using religion as a façade for Scientology to maintain tax-exempt status and avoid prosecution for false medical claims.
The Church also began filing lawsuits against those who posted copyrighted texts on the newsgroup and the World Wide Web, and lobbied for tighter restrictions on copyrights in general.
Hubbard would later cite ''Excalibur'' as an early version of Dianetics.
Hubbard apparently did not realize that the islands belonged to US-allied Mexico, nor that he had taken his vessel into Mexican territorial waters.
An FBI raid on the Church's headquarters revealed documentation that detailed Scientology's criminal actions against various critics of the organization.
In December 2013, the United Kingdom’s highest court officially recognized Scien
The global spread of Scientology at the latter half of the 1950s was culminated with the opening of churches in Johannesburg and Paris, while world headquarters transferred to England in Saint Hill, a rural estate.
This was an important factor in the transition from secular Dianetics to the religion of Scientology.
More recently, high-profile defectors Mark Rathbun and Mike Rinder have championed the cause of Independent Scientologists wishing to practice Scientology outside of the Church.
Dianetics appealed to a broad range of people who used instructions from the book and applied the method to each other, becoming practitioners themselves.
Hubbard variously defined Dianetics as a spiritual healing technology and an organized science of thought.
Scientology has historically engaged in hostile action toward its critics; executives within the organization have proclaimed that Scientology is "not a turn-the-other-cheek religion".
After he developed Dianetics, the Dianetics Foundation entered bankruptcy and Hubbard lost the rights to his seminal publication ''Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health'' in 1952.
The sentence was confirmed by appeal court in February 2012.
On October 15, 1947, Hubbard wrote a letter to the Veteran Administration formally requesting psychiatric treatment.
L. Ron Hubbard (1911-1986) was the only child of Harry Ross Hubbard, a United States Navy officer, and his wife  Ledora.
Many scientology techniques are in fact hypnotic techniques, and Hubbard has not changed their nature by changing their names.
Germany classifies Scientology groups as an "anti-constitutional sect" (''verfassungsfeindliche Sekte'').
Hubbard taught that thetans brought the material universe into being largely for their own pleasure.
In 1950, founding member Joseph Winter cut ties with Hubbard and set up a private Dianetics practice in New York.
Passas and Castillo write that the appeal of Dianetics was based on its consistency with prevailing values.
On this point the report stated, It is the firm conclusion of this Board that most scientology and dianetic techniques are those of authoritative hypnosis and as such are dangerous ... the scientific evidence which the Board heard from several expert witnesses of the highest repute ... leads to the inescapable conclusion that it is only in name that there is any difference between authoritative hypnosis and most of the techniques of scientology.
Hubbard-inspired organizations and their classification are often a point of contention.
The upper triangle is the KRC triangle, the letters KRC positing a similar relationship between '''''K'''nowledge'', '''''R'''esponsibility'' and '''''C'''ontrol''.
Subsequently, the group Anonymous voiced its criticism of Scientology and began attacking the Church.
Hubbard lived there for the next seven years.
It is seen as an anticonstitutional sect and a new version of political extremism and because there is "evidence for intentions against the free democratic basic order" it is observed by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution.
''Scientology'', as coined by L. Ron Hubbard, comes from the Latin ''scio'', which means "knowing, in the fullest meaning of the word" and the Greek word logos, which means "study of".
The Introspection Rundown came under public scrutiny after the death of Lisa McPherson in 1995.
The Church experienced further challenges.
In 1952, Hubbard published a book (''What to Audit / A History of Man'') on space opera and other material that may be encountered when auditing preclears.
A 2001 survey found only 55,000 people in the United States who claimed to be Scientologists.
Individuals or groups who are "Fair Game" are judged to be a threat to the Church and, according to the policy, can be punished and harassed using any and all means possible.
Scientology began to focus on these issues in the early 1970s, lead by Hubbard.
In "Operation Freakout", agents of the church attempted to destroy Paulette Cooper, author of ''The Scandal of Scientology'', an early book that had been critical of the movement.
The letter was signed by Dustin Hoffman, Goldie Hawn and a number of other Hollywood celebrities and executives.
Based on a design by Volney Mathison, the device is held by Scientologists to be a useful tool in detecting changes in a person's state of mind.
Hubbard outlined plans for setting up a chain of "Spiritual Guidance Centers" charging customers $500 for twenty-four hours of auditing ("That is real money&nbsp;...
On January 21, 2008, Anonymous announced its intentions via a video posted to YouTube entitled "Message to Scientology", and a press release declaring a "war" against both the Church of Scientology and the Religious Technology Center.
On January 4, 1963, FDA agents raided offices of the Church of Scientology, seizing hundreds of E-meters as illegal medical devices and tons of literature that they accused of making false medical claims.
The internal structure of Scientology organizations is strongly bureaucratic with a focus on statistics-based management.
The ban was based on the Anderson Report, which found that the auditing process involved "command" hypnosis, in which the hypnotist assumes "positive authoritative control" over the patient.
The results of this investigation indicated that at the time of publication, Scientology's main sources of revenue ("Haupteinnahmequellen der SO") were from course offerings and sales of their various publications.
In the late 1940s, Hubbard practiced as a hypnotist.
Reports and allegations have been made, by journalists, courts, and governmental bodies of several countries, that the Church of Scientology is an unscrupulous commercial enterprise that harasses its critics and brutally exploits its members.
The Association for Better Living and Education (ABLE) acts as an umbrella organization for these efforts.
Eventually they lost their memory of their true nature, along with the associated spiritual and creative powers.
Rather, people are expected to discover the truth through their own observations as their awareness advances.... the Church of Scientology has no set dogma concerning God that it imposes on its members.
The Church supported the controversial Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act as well as the even more controversial Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).
121669) by Mary Sue Hubbard explicitly authorized the use of auditing records for purposes of "internal security."
Scientology is not recognized as a religion in Canada.
When faced with possible indictment in the United States, Hubbard went into hiding in April 1979.
Allegedly inspired by this experience, Hubbard composed a manuscript, which was never published, with working titles of "The One Command" or ''Excalibur''.
Scientology is also difficult to categorize.
According to the ''Encyclopedia of Community'', Scientology "shows affinities with Buddhism and a remarkable similarity to first-century Gnosticism."
A few studies that address the topic of the origins of the work and its significance to Scientology as a whole include Peter Rowley's ''New Gods in America'', Omar V. Garrison's ''The Hidden Story of Scientology'', and Albert I. Berger's ''Towards a Science of the Nuclear Mind: Science-fiction Origins of Dianetics''.
Publisher's Weekly gave a posthumous plaque to Hubbard to commemorate Dianetics' appearance on its list of bestsellers for one hundred weeks.
These materials were first disseminated on the ships, and then propagated by Sea Org members reassigned to staff Advanced Organizations on land.
According to Hubbard himself, Scientology is "the Western anglicized continuance of many early forms of wisdom."
Reporting stomach pains in April 1945, Hubbard  spent the remainder of the war as a patient in Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland, California.
The term ''Fair Game'' is used to describe policies and practices carried out against people the Church perceives as its enemies.
Hubbard was friends with fellow science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt, who explored the implications of Korzybski's non-Aristotelian logic in works such as ''The World of Null-A'', and Hubbard's view of the ''reactive mind'' has clear and acknowledged parallels with Korzybski's thought; in fact, Korzybski's "anthropometer" may have been what inspired Hubbard's invention of the E-meter.
In March 2010, former Scientologist Janette Lang stated that at age 20 she became pregnant by her boyfriend while in the organization, and her boyfriend's Scientology supervisors "coerced them into terminating the pregnancy".
The 2008 American Religious Identification Survey found that the number of American Scientologists had dropped to 25,000.
In April 1938, Hubbard reportedly underwent a dental procedure and reacted to the drug used in the procedure.
As noted, elements of the Eastern religions are evident in Scientology, in particular the concept of karma found in Hinduism and Jainism.
In 1958 however, the IRS started a review of the appropriateness of this status.
Scientology claims it the only effective way to deal with the long-term effects of drug abuse or toxic exposure.
While acknowledging that a number of his colleagues accept Scientology as a religion, sociologist Stephen A. Kent writes: "Rather than struggling over whether or not to label Scientology as a religion, I find it far more helpful to view it as a multifaceted transnational corporation, only ''one'' element of which is religious" emphasis in the original.
After reassignment to a naval facility in Monterey, California, Hubbard became depressed and fell ill.
Hubbard's followers engaged in a program of covert and illegal infiltration of the U.S. government.
Engrams are painful and debilitating; as they accumulate, people move further away from their true identity.
According to Gallagher and Ashcraft, in contrast to psychotherapy, Hubbard stated that Dianetics "was more accessible to the average person, promised practitioners more immediate progress, and placed them in control of the therapy process."
This resulted in a battle between the Church of Scientology and its online critics over the right to disclose this material, or safeguard its confidentiality.
On February 18, 1954, with Hubbard's blessing, some of his followers set up the first local Church of Scientology, the Church of Scientology of California, adopting the "aims, purposes, principles and creed of the Church of American Science, as founded by L. Ron Hubbard."
Participation in higher-level courses on the Bridge may cost several thousand dollars, and Scientologists usually move up the Bridge at a rate governed by their income.
Many protesters wore masks based on the character V from ''V for Vendetta'' (who was influenced by Guy Fawkes) or otherwise disguised their identities, in part to protect themselves from reprisals from the Church of Scientology.
It was Young who by a stroke of luck came up with the "Orwell quote": "but I have always thought there might be a lot of cash in starting a new religion, and we'll talk it over some time" It appears in a letter by Eric Blair (known the world as George Orwell) to his friend, Jack Common, dated 16-February-38 (February 16, 1938), and was published in ''Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell'', vol.
These two triangles are present in the Scientology symbol.
More complex studies include Roy Wallis's ''The Road to Total Freedom''.
Many of Scientology's critics have also reported they were subject to threats and harassment in their private lives.
Describing the available scholarship on Scientology, David G. Bromley and Douglas E. Cowan stated in 2006 that "most scholars have concluded that Scientology falls within the category of religion for the purposes of academic study, and a number have defended the Church in judicial and political proceedings on this basis."
Regis Dericquesbourg writes about the efficacy of Scientology in imparting knowledge: “Scientology indeed not only brings knowledge, it also brings personal introspection through auditing, and transmission in upper levels is not merely reading texts: what is transmitted is experienced through a solo or duo auditing experience.” He compared it to psychoanalysis.
When Sea Org members are found guilty of a violation, is assigned to the RPF.
In 1952, Scientology was organized to put this intended science into practice, and in the same year, Hubbard published a new set of teachings as ''Scientology, a religious philosophy.''
In Greece, Scientology is not recognized as a religion by the Greek government, and multiple applications for religious status have been denied, notably in 2000 and 2003.
In January 1995, church lawyer Helena Kobrin attempted to shut down the newsgroup alt.religion.scientology by sending a control message instructing Usenet servers to delete the group.
Scientology goes beyond this and refers to their religio-therapeutic practices as religious technology.
Revenue from monthly, bi-monthly, and other membership offerings could not be estimated in the report, but was nevertheless placed in the millions.
Most auditing requires an E-meter, a device that measures minute changes in electrical resistance through the body when a person holds electrodes (metal "cans"), and a small current is passed through them.
"Aaron says women who fell pregnant were taken to offices and bullied to have an abortion.
Hubbard grew up in a climate that was very critical of organized religion, and frequently quoted anti-religious sentiments in his early lectures.
Charge enough and we'd be swamped.").
Frenschkowski observes that the text is partly biblical in structure and that this development is a component of Scientology’s metamorphosis into a religion, written at a point when the nature of the new movement was unclear.
The practice of shunning in Scientology is termed "Disconnection".
25' does not stand for ''Anno Domini'', but 'After Dianetics.'"
Hubbard asserted that Dianetics is “an organized science of thought built on definite axioms: statements of natural laws on the order of those of the physical sciences.”
Based on letters from former followers of the religion, he said that there were "allegations of forced imprisonment, coerced abortions, and embezzlement of church funds, of physical violence and intimidation, blackmail and the widespread and deliberate abuse of information obtained by the organization"
These engrams are named Implants in the doctrine of Scientology.
France and Belgium have not recognized Scientology as a religion, and Stephen A. Kent, writing in 2001, noted that recognition had not been obtained in Ireland, Luxembourg, Israel or Mexico either.
In the 1940s, Hubbard was in contact with Jack Parsons, a rocket scientist and member of the Ordo Templi Orientis then led by Aleister Crowley, and there have been suggestions that this connection influenced some of the ideas and symbols of Scientology.
Donna Batten in the Gale Encyclopedia of American Law writes, "A belief does not need to be stated in traditional terms to fall within First Amendment protection.
An article in Newsweek stated that "the Dianetics concept is unscientific and unworthy of discussion or review".
As membership declined and finances grew tighter, Hubbard had reversed the hostility to religion he voiced in ''Dianetics''.
In 1934, philosopher Anastasius Nordenholz published ''Scientology: Science of the Constitution and Usefulness of Knowledge'', which used the term to mean the science of science.
Laura Ann DeCrescenzo reported that while a minor, she was  "coerced to have an abortion".
Carmel Underwood, another former Scientologist, said she had been put under "extreme pressure" to have an abortion, and that she was placed into a "disappearing programme", after refusing.
In addition to the links to Hindu texts, Scientology draws from Taoism and Buddhism.
Scientology disconnection policy prohibits most contact with Suppressive Persons.
The rumor that the U.S. Supreme Court removed tax-exempt status in 2016, effective April 6, 2016 was a fictional report.
In November 2009, Australian Senator Nick Xenophon used a speech in Federal Parliament to allege that the Church of Scientology is a criminal organization.
The navy report concludes that "there was no submarine in the area."
The original suit by the FDA to condemn the literature and E-meters did not succeed, but the Court ordered the Church to label every meter with a disclaimer that it is purely religious artifact, to post a $20,000 bond of compliance, and to pay the FDA's legal expenses.
The Office of Special Affairs or ''OSA'' (formerly the ''Guardian's Office'') is a department of the Church of Scientology which has been characterized as a non-state intelligence agency.
He notes that Hubbard discussed religion and the concept of God even in the years leading up to the emergence of Scientology, and that he did not “rush into religion” but rather, “discovered it through the development of his work with pre-clears.”
Longtime member Astra Woodcraft reportedly "left Scientology for good when the church tried to pressure her to have an abortion".
It was my baby, my body and my choice, and all of that was taken away from me by Scientology," said Lang.
Parsons and Hubbard collaborated on the "Babalon Working", a sex magic ritual intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon, the supreme Thelemite Goddess.
Hubbard was  reprimanded and removed from command on July 7.
The highest level, OT VIII, is disclosed only at sea on the Scientology cruise ship ''Freewinds''.
''Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health'' spent six months on the ''New York Times'' best-seller list   Religious Studies Professor Paul Gutjahr called Dianetics the bestselling non-Christian religious book of the century.
The Church of Scientology and its many related organizations have amassed considerable real estate holdings worldwide, likely in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
Hubbard and his followers targeted many individuals as well as government officials and agencies, including a program of covert and illegal infiltration of the IRS and other U.S. government agencies during the 1970s.
Worldwide estimates of Scientology's core practicing membership ranges between 100,000 and 200,000, mostly in the U.S., Europe, South Africa and Australia.
Gregory Reece, in his book ''UFO Religion: Inside flying saucer cults and culture'', writes: Scientology is unique within the UFO culture because of this secretiveness, as well as because of the capitalist format under which they operate.
Flinn further states that religion requires "beliefs in something transcendental or ultimate, practices (rites and codes of behavior) that re-inforce those beliefs and, a community that is sustained by both the beliefs and practices", all of which are present within Scientology.
Narconon is a "drug education and rehabilitation program" founded on Hubbard's beliefs about "toxins" and "purification".
Instead, the auditor's task is to help a person discover and understand the universal principles of affinity, reality, and communication (ARC).
The Introspection Rundown is a controversial Church of Scientology auditing process that is intended to handle a psychotic episode or complete mental breakdown.
Underwood was the executive director of Scientology's branch in Sydney, Australia.
The following year, he formed the ship-based Sea Organization or Sea Org which operated three ships:  the ''Diana'', the ''Athena'', and the flagship the ''Apollo''.
Among these advanced teachings is the story of Xenu (sometimes Xemu), introduced as the tyrant ruler of the "Galactic Confederacy".
Social problems are ascribed to breakdowns in ARC&nbsp;– in other words, a lack of agreement on reality, a failure to communicate effectively, or a failure to develop affinity.
Scientology presents two major divisions of the mind.
Because of this, it is very difficult for individual groups to attempt to publicly practice Scientology on their own, independent of the official Church of Scientology.
The decision resulted in a process of litigation that was settled in the Church's favor a quarter of a century later, the longest case of litigation in IRS history.
Scientology posits a causal relationship between the experiences of earlier incarnations and one's present life, and with each rebirth, the effects of the ''MEST'' universe (MEST here stands for matter, energy, space, and time) on the thetan become stronger.
The Church of Scientology issued a copyright violation claim against YouTube requesting the removal of the video.
In 1997, an open letter to then-German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, published as a newspaper advertisement in the ''International Herald Tribune'', drew parallels between the "organized oppression" of Scientologists in Germany and the treatment of Jews in 1930s' Nazi Germany.
The church was required only to resubmit new applications for exemption to the IRS Exempt Organizations (EO) division, which was told "not to consider any substantive matters" because those issues had been resolved by the committee.
Frank K. Flinn, adjunct professor of religious studies at Washington University in St. Louis wrote, "it is abundantly clear that Scientology has both the typical forms of ceremonial and celebratory worship and its own unique form of spiritual life."
As a rule, the great majority of members proceeds up the bridge in a steady rate commensurate with their income.
Scientology operates eight churches that are designated ''Celebrity Centres'', designed to minister to celebrity Scientologists.
Dianetics is different from Scientology in that Scientology is a religion while Dianetics is not.
Ankerberg and Weldon mention the sources of Scientology to include "the Vedas, Buddhism, Judaism, Gnosticism, Taoism, early Greek civilization and the teachings of Jesus, Nietzsche and Freud."
These teachings are kept secret from members who have not reached these levels.
Training concerns primarily the principles and techniques of auditing.
Accordingly, those who study Scientology materials and receive auditing sessions advance from a status of ''Preclear'' to ''Clear'' and ''Operating Thetan''.
One month after the establishment of the Sea Org, Hubbard announced that he had made a breakthrough discovery, the result of which were the "OT III" materials purporting to provide a method for overcoming factors inhibiting spiritual progress.
Narconon is offered in the United States, Canada and a number of European countries; its ''Purification Program'' also uses high-dose vitamins and extended sauna sessions, combined with auditing and study.
Hubbard defined Scientology’s aims as: “A civilization without insanity, without criminals and without war; where the world can prosper and honest beings can have rights, and where man is free to rise to greater heights, are the aims of Scientology."
In May 1950, Hubbard's ''Dianetics: The Evolution of a Science'' was published by pulp magazine ''Astounding Science Fiction''.
On January 24, 1986, L. Ron Hubbard died at his ranch in Creston, California.
According to a letter Anonymous e-mailed to the press, about 7,000 people protested in more than 90 cities worldwide.
Scientology literature states that L. Ron Hubbard expertise in hypnosis led to the discovery of the Dianetic engram.
Germany will continue to monitor Scientology's activities in the country, despite continued objection from Scientology which cites such monitoring as abuse of freedom of religion.
The Advanced Ability Center was established by Hubbard's personal auditor David Mayo after February 1983 – a time when some of Scientology's upper and middle management split with Miscavige's organization.
This mainly happened when he had to deal with apparent memories from former lives.
However, the issuance of the message led to a great deal of public criticism by free-speech advocates.
Sea Org members were reportedly shown secret writings by L. Ron Hubbard to convince them that having an abortion was not against Scientology practices.
Delphi Schools operates numerous private schools throughout the United States, including the flagship academy The Delphian School in Yamhill County, Oregon.
Elsewhere, Scientology is recognized as a religion in Australia, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia, Sweden, Croatia, Hungary and Kyrgyzstan.
It has gained judicial recognition in Italy, and Scientology officials have won the right to perform marriages in South Africa.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began an investigation concerning the claims the Church of Scientology made in connection with its E-meters.
Hubbard's view of a mechanically functioning mind in particular finds close parallels in Durant's work on Spinoza.
In 2003, ''The Times of India'' reported that "Forced abortions, beatings, starvation are considered tools of discipline in this church."
He failed to return for the fall 1932 semester.
Australian Senator Nick Xenophon gave a speech to the Australian Parliament in November 2009, about statements he had received from former Scientologists.
The scholar Marco Frenschkowski (University of Mainz) has stated that it was not easy for Hubbard "to come to terms with the spiritual side of his own movement.
Stephen A. Kent, a professor of sociology, has said that "Scientologists see themselves as possessors of doctrines and skills that can save the world, if not the galaxy."
Similarly, ''World Religions in America'' states that "Scientology contains the same elements of most other religions, including myths, scriptures, doctrines, worship, sacred practices and rituals, moral and ethical expectations, a community of believers, clergy, and ecclesiastic organizations."
The Church of Scientology was forced to issue a press release acknowledging the existence of this cosmogony, rather than allow its critics "to distort and misuse this information for their own purposes."
Several Scientology organizations promote the use of Scientology technology as a means to solve social problems.
Miscavige claims that the IRS’s examination of Scientology was the most exhaustive review of any non-profit organization in history.
It was originally intended to be a new psychotherapy and was not expected to become the foundation for a new religion.
He then recharacterized the subject as a religion and renamed it Scientology, retaining the terminology, doctrines, the E-meter, and the practice of auditing.
In October 2009, the Church of Scientology was found guilty of organized fraud in France.
Hubbard put it this way: "For a Scientologist, the final test of any knowledge he has gained is, 'did the data and the use of it in life actually improve conditions or didn't it?
In the mid-sixties, the Church of Scientology was banned in several Australian states, starting with Victoria in 1965.
According to Melton, the statement is unsubstantiated, although several of Hubbard's science fiction colleagues do recall Hubbard raising the topic in conversation.
