For example, the nation’s great patriotic literature including John Barbour’s ''The Brus'' (1375) and Blind Harry’s ''The Wallace'' (before 1488) was written in Scots, not Gaelic.
Whilst the Church of Scotland is supportive today, there is, however, an increasing difficulty in being able to find Gaelic-speaking ministers.
Aside from "Scottish Gaelic", the language may also be referred to simply as "Gaelic".
In either 1068 or 1070, the king married the exiled Princess Margaret of Wessex.
Lews Castle College's Benbecula campus offers an independent 1 year course in Gaelic and Traditional Music (FE, SQF level 5/6).
Very few European languages have made the transition to a modern literary language without an early modern translation of the Bible.
Many historians mark the reign of King Malcom Canmore (Malcolm III) as the beginning of Gaelic’s eclipse in Scotland.
Although some vowels are strongly nasal, instances of distinctive nasality are rare.
The 2011 Gaelic speakers figures come from table KS206SC of the 2011 Census.
There is, however, no evidence of a linguistic border following the topographical north-south differences.
Gaelic in Scotland was mostly confined to  until the 8th century, when it began expanding into Pictish areas north of the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde.
In the committee stages in the Scottish Parliament, there was much debate over whether Gaelic should be given 'equal validity' with English.
Most consonants have both palatal and non-palatal counterparts, including a very rich system of liquids, nasals and trills (i.e.
The Ordnance Survey has acted in recent years to correct many of the mistakes that appear on maps.
The ITV franchise in the north of Scotland, STV North (formerly ''Grampian Television'') produces some non-news programming in Scottish Gaelic.
After the Lothians were conquered by Malcolm II at the Battle of Carham in 1018, elites spoke Gaelic and continued to do so down to .
The isles of South Uist and Barra have a Catholic majority.
Gaelic in Eastern and Southern Scotland is now largely defunct, although the dialects which were spoken in the east tended to preserve a more archaic tone, which had been lost further west.
They are also normally either classed as masculine or feminine.
Unstressed vowels omitted in speech can be omitted in informal writing.
Donald was overthrown, blinded, and imprisoned for the remaining two years of his life.
The semi-independent Lordship of the Isles in the Hebrides and western coastal mainland remained thoroughly Gaelic since the language’s recovery there in the 12th century, providing a political foundation for cultural prestige down to the end of the 15th century.
For example, plurals in Gaelic are often formed with the suffix '''', for example, ''''  (shoe) / ''''  (shoes).
The locality with the largest absolute number is Glasgow with 5,878 such persons who make up over 10% of all of Scotland's Gaelic speakers.
Launched on 19 September 2008, BBC Alba is widely available in the UK (on Freeview, Freesat, Sky and Virgin Media).
This is the first recorded time that Gaelic has ever been taught as an official course on Prince Edward Island.
In Prince Edward Island, Canada, the Colonel Gray High School is now offering two courses in Gaelic, an introductory and an advanced course; both language and history are taught in these classes.
In changes promoted by the Scottish Examination Board from 1976 onwards, certain modifications were made to this rule.
Scottish Gaelic is not an official language of the European Union nor the United Kingdom.
Outside Ireland and Great Britain, "Gaelic" may refer to the Irish language.
Gaelic has long suffered from its lack of use in educational and administrative contexts and was long suppressed.
Only a restricted set of preverb particles may occur before the verb.
This future Saint Margaret of Scotland was a member of the royal House of Wessex which had occupied the English throne from its founding until the Norman Conquest.
"Passport" is rendered '''' (in Irish, ''''); "The European Union", '''' (in Irish, ''''),  while "Northern Ireland" is '''' in Gaelic (the Irish equivalent is '''').
Further reform in 1957 eliminated some of the silent letters that are still used in Scottish Gaelic.
By the 18th century Lowland Gaelic had been largely replaced by Lowland Scots across much of Lowland Scotland.
Despite this decline, revival efforts exist and the number of speakers of the language under age 20 has increased.
However, given there are no longer any monolingual Gaelic speakers, following an appeal in the court case of ''Taylor v Haughney'' (1982), involving the status of Gaelic in judicial proceedings, the High Court ruled against a general right to use Gaelic in court proceedings.
A certain number of these dialects, which are now defunct in Scotland, have been preserved and, indeed, re-established within the Nova Scotia Gaelic community.
– a shorter Gaelic version of the English-language Book of Common Order – was published in 1996 by the Church of Scotland.
There are about nine diphthongs and a few triphthongs.
Maxville Public School in Maxville, Glengarry, Ontario, Canada offers Scottish Gaelic lessons weekly.
However, it is classed as an indigenous language under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which the British government has ratified, and the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 established a language development body, '''', "with a view to securing the status of the Gaelic language as an official language of Scotland".
The country experienced significant population growth in the 12th and 13th centuries in the expanding burghs and their nearby agricultural districts.
The 1981 Scottish Examination Board recommendations for Scottish Gaelic, the Gaelic Orthographic Conventions, were adopted by most publishers and agencies, although they remain controversial among some academics, most notably Ronald Black.
The Atlantic Canadian province of Nova Scotia is home to 1,275 Gaelic speakers as of 2011, of whom 300 claim to have Gaelic as their "mother tongue".
The rule has no effect on the pronunciation of vowels.
The language preserves knowledge of and adherence to pre-feudal 'tribal' laws and customs (as represented, for example, by the expressions '''' and '''').
In south-eastern Scotland, there is no evidence that Gaelic was ever widely spoken.
Today, Scottish Gaelic is recognised as a separate language from Irish, so the word ''Erse'' in reference to Scottish Gaelic is no longer used.
Some commentators, such as  (2006) argue that the Gaelic Act falls so far short of the status accorded Welsh that one would be foolish or naïve to believe that any substantial change will occur in the fortunes of the language as a result of 's efforts.
However, he was the last Scottish monarch to do so.
Traditional spelling systems also use the acute accent on the letters '''', '''' and '''' to denote a change in vowel quality rather than length, but reform from within the Scottish schools system has abandoned these in parts of Gaelic speaking society.
All these churches have Gaelic-speaking congregations throughout the Western Isles.
The area shifted from Cumbric to Old English during its long incorporation into the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Northumbria.
Such dialects also retain the Classical Gaelic values of the stops, as do Manx and Irish Gaelic.
Most varieties of Gaelic have between 8 and 9 vowel phonemes () that can be either long or short.
Upon Donald’s ascension to the throne, in the words of the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', “the Scots drove out all the English who had been with King Malcolm”.
Gaelic still retained some of its old prestige in medieval Scotland.
A small number of words that used to belong to the neuter class show some degree of gender confusion.
Outside the Outer Hebrides the only areas with significant percentages of Gaelic speakers are the Inner Hebridean islands of Tiree (38.3%), Raasay (30.4%), Skye (29.4%), Lismore (26.9%), Colonsay (20.2%), and Islay (19.0%).
The main stronghold of the language continues to be the Outer Hebrides (''''), where the overall proportion of speakers is at 52.2%.
According to a reference in ''The Carrick Covenanters '' by James Crichton, the last place in the Lowlands where Scottish Gaelic was still spoken was the village of Barr in Carrick (only a few miles inland to the east of Girvan, but at one time very isolated).
The Goidelic languages have historically been part of a dialect continuum stretching from the south of Ireland, the Isle of Man, to the north of Scotland.
In 2014, the census of pupils in Scotland showed 497 pupils in publicly funded schools had Gaelic as the main language at home, a drop of 18% from 606 students in 2010.
There are Gaelic-speaking congregations in the Church of Scotland, mainly in the Highlands and Islands, but also in Edinburgh and Glasgow.
The only parish outside the Western Isles over 40% Gaelic-speaking is Kilmuir in Northern Skye at 46%.
The modern Scottish Gaelic alphabet has 18 letters:
Notable examples of Gaelic verse composed in this manner are the Book of the Dean of Lismore and the  manuscript.
The lack of a well-known translation until the late 18th century may have contributed to the decline of Scottish Gaelic.
From a total of 871 civil parishes in Scotland, 7 have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 50%, 14 have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 25%, and 35 have a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 10%.
Pre-feudal attitudes antedating the Jacobite Rebellions and Highland Clearances were still evident in the complaints and claims of the Highland Land League of the late 19th century.
So-called "slender" consonants are palatalised while "broad" consonants are neutral or velarised.
That being said, it seems clear that Gaelic had ceased to be the language of all of Scotland by 1400 at the latest.
is ) or conditioned by certain consonant environments (e.g.
King James IV (d. 1513) thought Gaelic important enough to learn and speak.
Ogham consisted of marks made above or below a horizontal line.
Records of their speech show that Irish and Scottish Gaelic existed in a dialect chain with no clear language boundary.
In the 21st century, Scottish Gaelic literature has seen development within the area of prose fiction publication, as well as challenges due to the continuing decline of the language
The 2011 UK Census showed a total of 57,375 Gaelic speakers in Scotland (1.1% of population over three years old).
The entire country was for the first time being referred to in Latin as '''' and Gaelic was recognized as the '''' .
This political movement was successful in getting members elected to the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
* Requiring BnG to produce guidance on Gaelic Education for education authorities.
The Land League was dissipated as a parliamentary force by the 1886 Crofters' Act and by the way the Liberal Party was seen to become supportive of Land League objectives.
It was around this time that the very name of Gaelic began to change.
The BBC operates a Gaelic-language radio station '''' as well as a television channel, .
The Act was passed by the Scottish Parliament unanimously, with support from all sectors of the Scottish political spectrum on 21 April 2005.
Margaret was thoroughly Anglo-Saxon and is often credited (or blamed) for taking the first significant steps in anglicizing the Scottish court.
The majority of these courses are available as residential courses at .
This is the smallest drop between censuses since the Gaelic language question was first asked in 1881, which the Scottish Government's language minister and Bord na Gaidhlig took as evidence that Gaelic's long decline has slowed.
Note: Items in brackets denote archaic or dialectal forms
performs assessment of spoken Gaelic, resulting in the issue of a Bronze Card, Silver Card or Gold Card.
Note that the numbers of Gaelic speakers relate to the numbers aged 3 and over, and the percentages are calculated using those and the number of the total population aged 3 and over.
Some sports coverage, albeit at a small level, takes place in Scottish Gaelic broadcasting.
When both Malcolm and Margaret died just days apart in 1093, the Gaelic aristocracy rejected their anglicized sons and instead backed Malcolm’s brother Donald as the next King of Scots.
Word order is strictly verb–subject–object, including questions, negative questions and negatives.
This was spurred by the intermarriage of Gaelic and Pictish aristocratic families, the political merger of the two kingdoms in the early 9th century, and the common threat of attack by Norse invaders.
The province of British Columbia is host to the '''' (The Gaelic Society of Vancouver), the Vancouver Gaelic Choir, the Victoria Gaelic Choir, as well as the annual Gaelic festival '' Vancouver''.
Nouns are marked for case in a number of ways, most commonly by involving various combinations of lenition, palatalization and suffixation.
However, though the Pictish language did not disappear suddenly, a process of Gaelicisation (which may have begun generations earlier) was clearly underway during the reigns of  and his successors.
In Nova Scotia, Canada, there are somewhere between 1,000 and 2,000 native speakers, most of whom are now elderly.
There are also two reduced vowels () which only occur short.
Written Ulster Irish as well as common grammatical and vocabulary traits reflects more archaic Classical Gaelic still providing more of a solid link between the two languages than with Official Standard Irish, based on the dialects of southern provinces.
He said that "Allowing Gaelic speakers to communicate with European institutions in their mother tongue is a progressive step forward and one which should be welcomed".
the language of the Scots.
Since 2005, the SFA have supported the use of Scottish Gaelic on their teams' strip in recognition of the language's revival in Scotland.
Less dense usage is suggested for north Ayrshire, Renfrewshire, the Clyde Valley and eastern Dumfriesshire.
The spelling rule known as '''' ("slender to slender and broad to broad") requires that a word-medial consonant or consonant group followed by a written '''' or '''' be also preceded by an '''' or ''''; and similarly if followed by '''', '''' or '''' be also preceded by an '''', '''', or ''''.
The largest relative gains were in Aberdeenshire (+0.19%), East Ayrshire (+0.18%), Moray (+0.16%), and Orkney (+0.13%).
In Prince Edward Island, the Colonel Gray High School now offers both an introductory and an advanced course in Gaelic; both language and history are taught in these classes.
The UK government has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in respect of Gaelic.
Long vowels are marked with a grave accent (''''), indicated through digraphs (e.g. ''''
On 10 December 2008 to celebrate the 60th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Scottish Human Rights Commission had the UDHR translated into Gaelic for the first time.
The language in Scotland had been developing features independently of the language in Ireland at least as early as its crossing the  into Pictland.
The largest absolute gains were in Aberdeenshire (+526), North Lanarkshire (+305), Aberdeen City (+216), and East Ayrshire (+208).
The 1767 New Testament historically set the standard for Scottish Gaelic.
The language suffered particularly as Highlanders and their traditions were persecuted after the Battle of Culloden in 1746, and during the Highland Clearances.
Her family also served as a conduit for the entry of English nobles into Scotland.
Consonant quality (palatalised or non-palatalised) is then indicated by the vowels written adjacent to a consonant, and the spelling rule gives the benefit of removing possible uncertainty about consonant quality at the expense of adding additional purely graphic vowels that may not be pronounced.
Between the 2001 and 2011 censuses, the number of Gaelic speakers rose in nineteen of the country's 32 council areas.
In May 2004, the provincial government announced the funding of an initiative to support the language and its culture within the province.
They announced in 2004 that they intended to correct them and set up a committee to determine the correct forms of Gaelic place names for their maps.
At the coronation of King Alexander III in 1249, a traditional '''' or story-teller recited the king’s full genealogy in Gaelic all the way back to , the mythical progenitor of the Scots in , “in accordance with the custom which had grown up in the kingdom from antiquity right up to that time”.
However, commoners retained Old English.
The widespread use of English in worship has often been suggested as one of the historic reasons for the decline of Gaelic.
Because of the continued decline of Gaelic in its traditional heartland, today no civil parish in Scotland has a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 65% (the highest value corresponds to Barvas, Lewis, with 64.1%).
However, to claim that Ulster Irish is a perfect intermediate between the Irish and Scottish forms of Gaelic still remains perhaps an exaggerated statement.
Gaelic personal names such as ''''  are especially likely to be mispronounced by English speakers.
However learners must be careful not to try to apply English sound-to-letter correspondences to written Gaelic, otherwise mispronunciations will result.
From the late 15th century, however, it became increasingly common for such speakers to refer to Scottish Gaelic as ''Erse'' ("Irish") and the Lowland vernacular as ''Scottis''.
An exception might be made for the Northern Isles, however, where Pictish was more likely supplanted by Norse rather than by Gaelic.
Generally speaking, the Gaelic spoken across The Western Isles (with perhaps exception to that of Arran and Kintyre) is similar enough to be classed as one major dialect group, although there is still regional variation, for example the pronunciation of the slender 'r' as  in Lewis, where the Gaelic is thought to have a unique Nordic accent, and is described as being tonal.
Notable city congregations with regular services in Gaelic are St Columba's Church, Glasgow and Greyfriars Tolbooth & Highland Kirk, Edinburgh. ''''
The Gaelic phrase '''' ('Scotland forever', literally 'until the Judgement Day') is still used today as a catch-phrase or rallying cry.
During the reign of  (900–943), outsiders began to refer to the region as the kingdom of Alba rather than the kingdom of the Picts, but we do not know whether this was because a new kingdom was established or Alba was simply a closer approximation of the Pictish name for the Picts.
Scots English orthographic rules have also been used at various times in Gaelic writing.
Clan chiefs in the northern and western parts of Scotland continued to support Gaelic bards who remained a central feature of court life there.
Along with Irish and Welsh, Gaelic is designated under Part III of the Charter, which requires the UK Government to take a range of concrete measures in the fields of education, justice, public administration, broadcasting and culture.
For example, compare the '''' in ''''  with the '''' in '''' .
For example, in some dialects '''' "the sea" behaves as a masculine noun in the nominative case, but as a feminine noun in the genitive ('''').
Scottish Gaelic is an Indo-European language with an inflecting morphology, a verb–subject–object word order and two grammatical genders.
The Scottish government will have to pay for the translation from Gaelic to other European languages.
Important pockets of the language also exist in the Highlands (5.4%) and in Argyll and Bute (4.0%).
The historically voiced stops  have lost their voicing, so the phonemic contrast today is between unaspirated  and aspirated .
She spoke no Gaelic, gave her children Anglo-Saxon rather than Gaelic names, and brought many English bishops, priests, and monastics to Scotland.
During the reigns of the sons of Malcolm Canmore (1097–1153), Anglo-Norman names and practices spread throughout Scotland south of the Forth–Clyde line and along the northeastern coastal plain as far north as Moray.
Malcolm’s sons fled to the English court, but in 1097 returned with an Anglo-Norman army backing them.
Linguistic division in early 12th century Scotland.
In addition, no civil parish on Mainland Scotland has a proportion of Gaelic speakers greater than 20% (the highest value corresponds to Ardnamurchan, Highland, with 19.3%).
The ITV franchise in central Scotland, STV Central, produces a number of Scottish Gaelic programmes for both BBC Alba and its own main channel.
Those of particular note are the Morar and Lochaber dialects, the latter of which pronounces the broad or velarised l () as a w (similar to  or ).
By a certain point, probably during the 11th century, all the inhabitants of Alba had become fully Gaelicised Scots, and Pictish identity was forgotten.
Prehistoric (or Ogham) Irish, the precursor to Old Irish, in turn the precursor to Modern Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Manx, was written in a carved writing called Ogham.
This was the beginning of Gaelic’s status as a predominantly rural language in Scotland.
The 1755–2001 figures are census data quoted by MacAulay.
By the mid-14th century what eventually came to be called Scots (at that time termed Inglis) emerged as the official language of government and law.
It also broadcasts across Europe on the Astra 2 satellites.
By 900 Pictish appears to have become extinct, completely replaced by Gaelic.
What is known as Scottish Gaelic is essentially that of the Gaelic spoken in The Outer Hebrides and on Skye.
The Nova Scotia government maintains an Office of Gaelic Affairs which works to promote the Gaelic language, culture, and tourism.
* Establishing the Gaelic development body, , (BnG), on a statutory basis with a view to securing the status of the Gaelic language as an official language of Scotland commanding equal respect to the English language and to promote the use and understanding of Gaelic.
The channel is being operated in partnership between BBC Scotland and  – an organisation funded by the Scottish Government, which works to promote the Gaelic language in broadcasting.
Seeing Gaelic spoken in such a forum raises the profile of the language as we drive forward our commitment to creating a new generation of Gaelic speakers in Scotland."
All surviving dialects are Highland and/or Hebridean dialects.
Scottish Gaelic has a rich oral and written tradition, referred to as '''' in Scottish Gaelic, having been the language of the bardic culture of the Highland clans for many years.
Number of Gaelic Speakers
In some fixed phrases, these changes are shown permanently, as the link with the base words has been lost, as in '''' "now", from '''' "this time/period".
The deal was signed by Britain's representative to the EU, Sir Kim Darroch, and the Scottish government.
Because of the strong English ties of Malcolm’s sons Edgar, Alexander, and David – each of whom became king in turn – Donald  is sometimes called the ‘last Celtic King of Scotland’.
The Free Church also recently announced plans to reduce their Gaelic provision by abolishing Gaelic-language communion services, citing both a lack of ministers and a desire to have their congregations united at communion time.
Place name analysis suggests dense usage of Gaelic in Galloway and adjoining areas to the north and west as well as in West Lothian and parts of western Midlothian.
Prior to the 15th century, these dialects were known as ''Inglis'' ("English") by its own speakers, with Gaelic being called ''Scottis'' ("Scottish").
There are also television programmes in the language on other BBC channels and on the independent commercial channels, usually subtitled in English.
The first well-known translation of the Bible into Scottish Gaelic was made in 1767 when Dr James Stuart of Killin and Dugald Buchanan of Rannoch produced a translation of the New Testament.
a '''' preceding a non-intervocalic '''' is ).
English/Scots speakers referred to Gaelic instead as 'Yrisch' or 'Erse', i.e.
With the advent of Christianity in the 5th century the Latin alphabet was introduced to Ireland.
He was the last Scottish monarch to be buried on Iona, the one-time center of the Scottish Gaelic Church and the traditional burial place of the Gaelic Kings of  and the Kingdom of Alba.
Gaelic continues to decline in its traditional heartland.
However, the SRU is still being lobbied to have "Alba" on the national rugby strip.
Scotland’s emergent nationalism in the era following the conclusion of the Wars of Scottish Independence was organized using Scots as well.
In October 2009, a new agreement was made which allows Scottish Gaelic to be used formally between Scottish Government ministers and European Union officials.
Nova Scotia also has the '''' (The Gaelic Council of Nova Scotia), a non-profit society dedicated to the maintenance and promotion of the Gaelic language and culture in Maritime Canada.
The relationship between the Church and Gaelic has not always been an easy one.
Down through the 14th century, Gaelic was referred to in English as 'Scottis', i.e.
Norman French became dominant among the new feudal aristocracy, especially in southern Scotland, and completely displaced Gaelic at court.
About 2,320 Canadians in 2011 also claimed Gaelic languages as their mother tongue, with over 300 in Nova Scotia (mostly in Cape Breton, Antigonish and Pictou) and Prince Edward Island.
Crichton gives neither date nor details.
: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, U.
The 2011 census of Scotland showed that a total of 57,375 people (1.1% of the Scottish population aged over three years old) in Scotland could speak Gaelic at that time, with the Outer Hebrides being the main stronghold of the language.
In the mid-1990s, the Celtic League started a campaign to have the word "" on the Scottish football and rugby union tops.
For example, Gaelic speakers in East Sutherland prefer to say '''' (where were you about last night), rather than the more common ''''.
With the incorporation of Strathclyde and the Lothians, Gaelic reached its social, cultural, political, and geographic zenith in Scotland.
In Scotland, the word "Gaelic" in reference to Scottish Gaelic specifically is pronounced , while outside Scotland it is often pronounced .
Scottish Gaelic should not be confused with Scots, the Middle English-derived language varieties which had come to be spoken in most of the Lowlands of Scotland by the early modern era.
It disappeared from the central lowlands by  and from the eastern coastal lowlands north of the Mounth not long afterwards.
The vowels '''' and '''' are classified as slender, and '''', '''', and '''' as broad.
Around the time of World War II, Irish spelling was reformed and the Official Standard or '''' introduced.
Following a consultation period, in which the government received many submissions, the majority of which asked that the bill be strengthened, a revised bill was published with the main improvement that the guidance of the  is now statutory (rather than advisory).
The Columba Initiative, also known as '''' (formerly ), is a body that seeks to promote links between speakers of Scottish Gaelic and Irish.
