Additional routes are operated by local authorities.
Community councils are informal organisations that represent specific sub-divisions of a council area.
If Scotland became independent, it would hold 95% of the UK's current oil and gas reserves if they were split geographically using a median line from the English-Scottish border.
An all-party commission chaired by Lord Smith of Kelvin was formed, which led to a further devolution of powers through the Scotland Act 2016.
Service abroad on behalf of the Empire lost its allure to ambitious young people, who left Scotland permanently.
The "Curriculum for Excellence" provides the curricular framework for children and young people from age 3 to 18.
This is the lowest of any of the four countries of the UK.
The Court of Session is housed at Parliament House, in Edinburgh, which was the home of the pre-Union Parliament of Scotland with the High Court of Justiciary and the Supreme Court of Appeal currently located at the Lawnmarket.
Other routes, served by multiple companies, connect southwest Scotland to Northern Ireland.
By the 12th century, the kings of Alba had added to their territories the English-speaking land in the south-east and attained overlordship of Gaelic-speaking Galloway and Norse-speaking Caithness; by the end of the 13th century, the kingdom had assumed approximately its modern borders.
Islam is the largest non-Christian religion (estimated at around 75,000, which is about 1.4% of the population), and there are also significant Jewish, Hindu and Sikh communities, especially in Glasgow.
The Crown won the case.
It runs three national television stations, and the national radio stations, ''BBC Radio Scotland'' and ''BBC Radio nan Gaidheal'', amongst others.
The Church operates a territorial parish structure, with every community in Scotland having a local congregation.
Victory at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 proved the Scots had regained control of their kingdom.
In 1764, the standard 18-hole golf course was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes.
This defeat paved the way for large-scale removals of the indigenous populations of the Highlands and Islands, known as the Highland Clearances.
As late as the 1690s, Scotland experienced famine, which reduced the population of parts of the country by at least 20 per cent.
The first surviving major text in Early Scots is the 14th-century poet John Barbour's epic ''Brus'', focusing on the life of Robert I, and was soon followed by a series of vernacular romances and prose works.
Scotland and France sealed a treaty on 23 October 1295, known as the Auld Alliance (1295–1560).
The mainland of Scotland comprises the northern third of the land mass of the island of Great Britain, which lies off the north-west coast of Continental Europe.
Andrew Moray and William Wallace initially emerged as the principal leaders of the resistance to English rule in what became known as the Wars of Scottish Independence (1296–1328).
However, the "Reds" operated within the Labour Party and had little influence in Parliament and the mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s.
All 3- and 4-year-old children in Scotland are entitled to a free nursery place.
Dundee United have also made it to a European final, reaching the UEFA Cup Final in 1987, but losing 2&ndash;1 on aggregate to IFK Göteborg.
From the mid-century there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and the post of Secretary of State for Scotland was revived.
Scotland's Universities are complemented in the provision of Further and Higher Education by 43 Colleges.
Interest in Scots literature was revived in the 18th century by figures including James Macpherson, whose Ossian Cycle made him the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation and was a major influence on the European Enlightenment.
The programmes of legislation enacted by the Scottish Parliament have seen a divergence in the provision of public services compared to the rest of the UK.
The match took place at Hamilton Crescent, Glasgow, home of the West of Scotland Cricket Club.
The push for this change was the reign of David I and the Davidian Revolution.
For healthcare and postal districts, and a number of other governmental and non-governmental organisations such as the churches, there are other long-standing methods of subdividing Scotland for the purposes of administration.
In the 20th century the Scottish Renaissance saw a surge of literary activity and attempts to reclaim the Scots language as a medium for serious literature.
The desire to improve agriculture and profits led to the Highland Clearances, in which much of the population of the Highlands suffered forced displacement as lands were enclosed, principally so that they could be used for sheep farming.
The Scottish National Party, (SNP), which supports Scottish independence, won an overall majority in the 2011 Scottish Parliament general election and legislated for an independence referendum which was held on 18 September 2014; a majority of 55% to 45% rejected independence on an 85% voter turnout.
The high point of the Southern Uplands is Merrick with an elevation of .
The Scots soldiers of the Garde Écossaise fought alongside Joan of Arc against England during the Hundred Years War.
Edinburgh is the financial services centre of Scotland, with many large finance firms based there, including: Lloyds Banking Group (owners of HBOS); the Government owned Royal Bank of Scotland and Standard Life.
A civil war between the Bruce dynasty and their long-term Comyn-Balliol rivals lasted until the middle of the 14th century.
Some parts of the network are electrified, but there are no electrified lines in the Highlands, Angus, Aberdeenshire, the cities of Dundee or Aberdeen, or Perth & Kinross, and none of the islands has a rail link (although the railheads at Kyle of Lochalsh and Mallaig principally serve the islands).
According to writings from the 9th and 10th centuries, the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata was founded in the 6th century in western Scotland.
Members of the movement were followed by a new generation of post-war poets including Edwin Morgan, who would be appointed the first Scots Makar by the inaugural Scottish government in 2004.
GIP operates Edinburgh airport and BAA operates (Aberdeen and Glasgow International), while Highland and Islands Airports operates 11 regional airports, including Inverness, which serve the more remote locations.
Healthcare policy and funding is the responsibility of the Scottish Government's Health Directorates.
Scotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture.
The current Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is Alex Neil and the Director-General (DG) Health and chief executive, NHS Scotland is Paul Gray.
In local government, there have been 32 single-tier council areas since 1996, whose councils are responsible for the provision of all local government services.
This ended with the advent of the Scottish Parliament, which legislates for Scotland.
The Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes.
With a population of 4.8 million in 1911, Scotland sent over half a million men to the war, of whom over a quarter died in combat or from disease, and 150,000 were seriously wounded.
Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War.
Many laws differ between Scotland and the other parts of the United Kingdom, and many terms differ for certain legal concepts.
Following the referendum on the UK's membership of the European Union on 23 June 2016, where a UK-wide majority voted to withdraw from the EU whilst a majority within Scotland voted to remain, Scotland's First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, announced that as a result a new independence referendum was "highly likely".
There are 49 sheriff courts throughout the country.
Although Scotland has a long military tradition predating the Treaty of Union with England, its armed forces now form part of the British Armed Forces, with the notable exception of the Atholl Highlanders, Europe's only legal private army.
The despair reflected what Finlay (1994) describes as a widespread sense of hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during the Second World War.
However, temperatures are generally lower than in the rest of the UK, with the coldest ever UK temperature of  recorded at Braemar in the Grampian Mountains, on 11 February 1895.
Scottish entrants have won many awards since the festival began in 1980.
After prolonged years of struggle in the Kirk, in 1834 the Evangelicals gained control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act, which allowed congregations to reject unwanted "intrusive" presentations to livings by patrons.
Television in Scotland is largely the same as UK-wide broadcasts, however the national broadcaster is BBC Scotland, a constituent part of the British Broadcasting Corporation, the publicly funded broadcaster of the United Kingdom.
Gaelic is mostly spoken in the Western Isles, where a large proportion of people still speak it; however, nationally its use is confined to just 1% of the population.
After 1945, Scotland's economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes.
Procedure also differs.
Tiree, in the Inner Hebrides, is one of the sunniest places in the country: it had more than 300 hours of sunshine in May 1975.
The Scottish Parliament has legislative authority for all other areas relating to Scotland, as well as a limited power to vary income tax.
He was the last British monarch to die in battle, at the Battle of Flodden.
The Scottish motorways and major trunk roads are managed by Transport Scotland.
In the 15th century, the Humanist emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496, which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn "perfyct Latyne", resulting in an increase in literacy among a male and wealthy elite.
The industrial developments, while they brought work and wealth, were so rapid that housing, town-planning, and provision for public health did not keep pace with them, and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad, with overcrowding, high infant mortality, and growing rates of tuberculosis.
Although the Bruce dynasty was successful, David II's lack of an heir allowed his half-nephew Robert II to come to the throne and establish the Stewart Dynasty.
Scapa Flow was the major Fleet base for the Royal Navy until 1956.
Scottish clubs have been successful in European competitions with Celtic winning the European Cup in 1967, Rangers and Aberdeen winning the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1972 and 1983 respectively, and Aberdeen also winning the UEFA Super Cup in 1983.
The earliest extant literature composed in what is now Scotland was in Brythonic speech in the 6th century, but is preserved as part of Welsh literature.
Scotland hosts several music festivals including Celtic Connections (Glasgow), and the Hebridean Celtic Festival (Stornoway).
There are numerous bodies of freshwater including Loch Lomond and Loch Ness.
Rainfall varies widely across Scotland.
The UK's tallest tree is a grand fir planted beside Loch Fyne, Argyll in the 1870s, and the Fortingall Yew may be 5,000 years old and is probably the oldest living thing in Europe.
The war saw the emergence of a radical movement called "Red Clydeside" led by militant trades unionists.
Catholic Emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish immigrants, particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s, mainly to the growing lowland centres like Glasgow, led to a transformation in the fortunes of Catholicism.
Because of their topography and perceived remoteness, parts of Scotland have housed many sensitive defence establishments.
Scotland's rail network has around 340 railway stations and  of track.
Tacitus wrote that, before the battle, the Caledonian leader, Calgacus, gave a rousing speech in which he called his people the "last of the free" and accused the Romans of "making the world a desert and calling it peace" (freely translated).
Towards the end of the Victorian era a number of Scottish-born authors achieved international reputations as writers in English, including Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle, J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald.
Over the past thirty years, Scotland contributed a relative budget surplus of almost £20billion to the UK economy.
Scotland also has some programming in the Gaelic language.
After 1860 the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron (after 1870, made of steel), which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world.
Various other systems derived from common Celtic or Brehon laws survived in the Highlands until the 1800s.
In the late 19th century growing divisions between fundamentalist Calvinists and theological liberals resulted in a further split in the Free Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church in 1893.
The 'traditional' view is that settlers from Ireland founded the kingdom, bringing Gaelic language and culture with them.
Bagpipe bands, featuring bagpipes and various types of drums, and showcasing Scottish music styles while creating new ones, have spread throughout the world.
Heavy snowfall is not common in the lowlands, but becomes more common with altitude.
Today, there are many successful Scottish bands and individual artists in varying styles including Annie Lennox, Amy Macdonald, Runrig, Boards of Canada, Cocteau Twins, Deacon Blue, Franz Ferdinand, Susan Boyle, Emeli Sandé, Texas, The View, The Fratellis, Twin Atlantic and Biffy Clyro.
In the Reformation the 1560 ''First Book of Discipline'' set out a plan for a school in every parish, but this proved financially impossible.
In February 2012, the Centre for Economics and Business Research concluded that "Scotland receives no net subsidy" from the UK, as greater per capita tax generation in Scotland balanced out greater per capita public spending.
The Late Latin word ''Scotia'' ("land of the Gaels") was initially used to refer to Ireland.
The Scottish National Party (SNP), which supports Scottish independence, was first elected to form the Scottish Government in 2007.
The highest temperature recorded was  at Greycrook, Scottish Borders on 9 August 2003.
Its failure bankrupted these landowners, but not the burghs.
It was also a major influence on Robert Burns, whom many consider the national poet, and Walter Scott, whose Waverley Novels did much to define Scottish identity in the 19th century.
In the later 19th century the growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie's success in the Mid Lanarkshire by-election, 1888, leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party, which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895, with Hardie as its first leader.
Scotland is represented in the UK Parliament by 59 MPs and in the European Parliament by 6 MEPs.
There are also twelve other ministers, who work alongside the cabinet secretaries in their appointed areas.
The introduction in 1989 by Margaret Thatcher's government of the Community Charge (widely known as the Poll Tax) one year before the rest of the United Kingdom, contributed to a growing movement for a return to direct Scottish control over domestic affairs.
Ulster's Protestant population is mainly of lowland Scottish descent, and it is estimated that there are more than 27&nbsp;million descendants of the Scots-Irish migration now living in the US.
"Scotland" comes from ''Scoti'', the Latin name for the Gaels.
France agreed to withdraw all land and naval forces.
The Kingdom of the Picts (based in Fortriu by the 6th century) was the state that eventually became known as "Alba" or "Scotland".
More recent data, from 2012–13, show that Scotland generated 9.1% (£53.1bn; this included a geographical share of North Sea oil revenue – without it, the figures were 8.2% and £47.6bn) of the UK's tax revenues and received 9.3% (£65.2bn) of spending.
Within criminal law, the Scots legal system is unique in having three possible verdicts: "guilty", "not guilty" and "''not proven''".
Between 1960 and 1991, the Holy Loch was a base for the US fleet of Polaris ballistic missile submarines.
Until 2013, the Scottish fire brigades and police forces were based on a system of regions introduced in 1975.
Following a referendum on devolution proposals in 1997, the Scotland Act 1998 was passed by the United Kingdom Parliament to establish a devolved Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government with responsibility for most laws specific to Scotland.
The threat of the Jacobite movement to the United Kingdom and its monarchs effectively ended at the Battle of Culloden, Great Britain's last pitched battle.
Although the Bank of England is the central bank for the UK, three Scottish clearing banks issue Sterling banknotes: the Bank of Scotland; the Royal Bank of Scotland; and the Clydesdale Bank.
The total area is , comparable to the size of the Czech Republic.
He also married Henry's daughter, Margaret Tudor, setting the stage for the Union of the Crowns.
In 1698, the Scots attempted an ambitious project to secure a trading colony on the Isthmus of Panama.
In 1320 the world's first documented declaration of independence, the Declaration of Arbroath, won the support of Pope John XXII, leading to the legal recognition of Scottish sovereignty by the English Crown.
Whisky is one of Scotland's more known goods of economic activity.
Indeed, some acts considered crimes in England and Wales, such as forgery, are not so in Scotland.
Although the number of native vascular plants is low by world standards, Scotland's substantial bryophyte flora is of global importance.
Scotland is also a member nation of the British–Irish Council, and the British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly.
Scotland's legal system has also remained separate from those of England and Wales and Northern Ireland, and Scotland constitutes a distinct jurisdiction in public and private law.
Its membership is 398,389, about 7.5% of the total population, though according to the 2014 Scottish Annual Household Survey, 27.8%, or 1.5 million adherents, identified Church of Scotland as their religion.
These institutions and the immigration of French and Anglo-French knights and churchmen facilitated cultural osmosis, whereby the culture and language of the low-lying and coastal parts of the kingdom's original territory in the east became, like the newly acquired south-east, English-speaking, while the rest of the country retained the Gaelic language, apart from the Northern Isles of Orkney and Shetland, which remained under Norse rule until 1468.
However, war with England continued for several decades after the death of Bruce.
Completed in 1890, this cantilever bridge has been described as "the one internationally recognised Scottish landmark".
To many golfers the Old Course in the Fife town of St. Andrews, an ancient links course dating to before 1574, is considered a site of pilgrimage.
Today, much of the remaining native Caledonian Forest lies within the Cairngorms National Park and remnants of the forest remain at 84 locations across Scotland.
Scotland was the first country in the UK to ban smoking in enclosed public places.
)while the next King Henry would be King Henry IX throughout the UK even though there have been no Scottish kings of that name.
For instance, university education and care services for the elderly are free at point of use in Scotland, while fees are paid in the rest of the UK.
Many features within the system have been preserved.
In 1603, James VI, King of Scots inherited the thrones of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Ireland, and became King James I of England and Ireland, and left Edinburgh for London.
Scotland has three officially recognised languages: English, Scots, and Scottish Gaelic.
Scotland hosts its own national sporting competitions and has independent representation at several international sporting events, including the FIFA World Cup, the Rugby Union World Cup, the Rugby League World Cup, the Cricket World Cup, the Netball World Cup and the Commonwealth Games.
It may contribute £400–682 million to Scotland, rather than several billion pounds, as more than 80% of whisky produced is owned by non-Scottish companies.
Davidson also states "far from being 'peripheral' to the British economy, Scotland – or more precisely, the Lowlands – lay at its core."
In the Scottish Parliament, there are 73 constituencies and eight regions.
This area has also experienced intense volcanism, Arthur's Seat in Edinburgh being the remnant of a once much larger volcano.
Domestic rail services within Scotland are operated by ScotRail.
Executive and legislative powers respectively have been devolved to the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood in Edinburgh since 1999.
In the third quarter of 2015, the Scottish economy grew by 0.1%, below the 0.4% recorded for the UK.
There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and unofficial, including the thistle, the nation's floral emblem (celebrated in the song, The Thistle o' Scotland), the Declaration of Arbroath, incorporating a statement of political independence made on 6 April 1320, the textile pattern tartan that often signifies a particular Scottish clan and the royal Lion Rampant flag.
A small number of students at certain private, independent schools may follow the English system and study towards GCSEs and A and AS-Levels instead.
Other currently less popular candidates for the National Anthem of Scotland include ''Scotland the Brave'', ''Highland Cathedral'', ''Scots Wha Hae'' and ''A Man's A Man for A' That''.
The remainder of the road network is managed by the Scottish local authorities in each of their areas.
This period saw a process of rehabilitation for Highland culture.
This part of Scotland largely comprises ancient rocks from the Cambrian and Precambrian, which were uplifted during the later Caledonian Orogeny.
The UK Conservative Party won an overall majority in the 2015 UK general election and legislated for a referendum on the UK's membership of the European Union which was held on 23 June 2016; within Scotland, a majority of 62% to 38% rejected withdrawal from the EU on a 67% voter turnout.
In August 2012, the Scottish population reached an all-time high of 5.25 million people.
Some parts of the coastline consist of machair, a low lying dune pasture land.
Almost every Scottish landowner who had money to spare is said to have invested in the Darien scheme.
In 2014, research reported by the Office for National Statistics found that Scotland was the most highly educated country in Europe and among the most well-educated in the world in terms of tertiary education attainment, with roughly 40% of people in Scotland aged 16–64 educated to NVQ level 4 and above.
Braemar has an average of 59 snow days per year, while many coastal areas average fewer than 10 days of lying snow per year.
The majority of births today are to unmarried women (51.3% of births were outside of marriage in 2012).
In the 2000 Census, 9.2&nbsp;million Americans self-reported some degree of Scottish descent.
Scotland's University Courts are the only bodies in Scotland authorised to award degrees.
The continued existence of legal, educational, religious and other institutions distinct from those in the remainder of the UK have all contributed to the continuation of Scottish culture and national identity since the 1707 union.
A single front-line Royal Air Force base is located in Scotland.
The geological foundations largely comprise Silurian deposits laid down some 4–500&nbsp;million years ago.
It was decided that future British monarchs would be numbered according to either their English or their Scottish predecessors, whichever number is higher.
Exports increased by 87% in the decade to 2012 and were valued at £4.3 billion in 2013, which was 85% of Scotland's food and drink exports.
In addition, there are also more than 12,000 doctors, family practitioners and allied health professionals, including dentists, opticians and community pharmacists, who operate as independent contractors providing a range of services within the NHS in return for fees and allowances.
There are many other famous golf courses in Scotland, including Carnoustie, Gleneagles, Muirfield, and Royal Troon.
From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival, particularly associated with a group of writers including Irvine Welsh.
Important regional dailies include the Evening News in Edinburgh ''The Courier'' in Dundee in the east, and ''The Press and Journal'' serving Aberdeen and the north.
It especially provided manpower, ships, machinery, fish and money.
Scotland is represented in the British House of Commons by 59 MPs elected from territory-based Scottish constituencies.
By the 11th century at the latest, ''Scotia'' was being used to refer to (Gaelic-speaking) Scotland north of the river Forth, alongside ''Albania'' or ''Albany'', both derived from the Gaelic ''Alba''.
The devolved Scottish Parliament was created after a referendum in 1997 found majority support for both creating the Parliament and granting it limited powers to vary income tax.
The island of Ireland lies only  from the south-western peninsula of Kintyre; Norway is  to the east and the Faroes,  to the north.
The union also created a new Parliament of Great Britain, which succeeded both the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England.
On the west coast, remnants of ancient Celtic Rainforest still remain, particularly on the Taynish peninsula in Argyll, these forests are particularly rare due to high rates of deforestation throughout Scottish history.
With trade tariffs with England now abolished, trade blossomed, especially with Colonial America.
Other major urban areas are Aberdeen and Dundee.
Colleges offer National Certificates, Higher National Certificates and Higher National Diplomas.
Other Scottish musicians include Shirley Manson, Paolo Nutini and Calvin Harris.
On the high mountain tops, species including ptarmigan, mountain hare and stoat can be seen in their white colour phase during winter months.
The population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901.
In 1924, another storm swept away part of one of the houses and it was determined the site should be made secure and more seriously investigated.
The Roman military occupation of a significant part of what is now northern Scotland lasted only about 40 years; although their influence on the southern section of the country, occupied by Brythonic tribes such as the Votadini and Damnonii, would still have been considerable between the first and fifth centuries.
With the exception of a short period under the Protectorate, Scotland remained a separate state, but there was considerable conflict between the crown and the Covenanters over the form of church government.
The western highlands of Scotland are the wettest, with annual rainfall in a few places exceeding .
The Welsh term Hen Ogledd ("Old North") is used by scholars to describe what is now the North of England and the South of Scotland during its habitation by Brittonic-speaking people around AD 500 to 800.
City status in the United Kingdom is conferred by letters patent.
Scottish Standard English, a variety of English as spoken in Scotland, is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with broad Scots at the other.
In 1616 an act in Privy council commanded every parish to establish a school.
Only in recent decades has the country enjoyed something of a cultural and economic renaissance.
War ensued and King John was deposed by Edward who took personal control of Scotland.
Since the Scottish Reformation of 1560, the national church (the Church of Scotland, also known as The Kirk) has been Protestant in classification and Reformed in theology.
The image of St. Andrew, martyred while bound to an X-shaped cross, first appeared in the Kingdom of Scotland during the reign of William I.
One result was a continuous exodus from the land—to the cities, or further afield to England, Canada, America or Australia.
Formal primary education begins at approximately 5 years old and lasts for 7 years (P1–P7); today, children in Scotland study Standard Grades, or Intermediate qualifications between the ages of 14 and 16.
A famous traditional Scottish instrument is the Great Highland Bagpipe, a wind instrument consisting of three drones and a melody pipe (called the chanter), which are fed continuously by a reservoir of air in a bag.
Opposition from all other major parties led to an expected defeat.
The geographical centre of Scotland lies a few miles from the village of Newtonmore in Badenoch.
However, large scale commercial tree planting and the management of upland moorland habitat for the grazing of sheep and commercial field sport activities impacts upon the distribution of indigenous plants and animals.
The terms of the Treaty of Union with England in 1707 guaranteed the continued existence of a separate legal system in Scotland from that of England and Wales.
Roughly a third of the clergy, mainly from the North and Highlands, formed the separate Free Church of Scotland.
