The official ''Scrabble'' board designKey:2×LS = Double letter score &nbsp; 3×LS= Triple letter score
On September 17, 2011, a new game show based on ''Scrabble'', called ''Scrabble Showdown'', debuted on The Hub with Justin "Kredible" Willman as the host of the program.
The colours on the board are more contrasting and the font size is increased from 16 to 24 point.
In 1952, unable to meet demand himself, Brunot sold manufacturing rights to Long Island-based Selchow and Righter, one of the manufacturers who, like Parker Brothers and Milton Bradley Company, had previously rejected the game.
''Scarabeo'' is a variant that is much more popular in Italy than the original game.
Cresta defeated Wayne Yorra 830-490.
), at the Lexington (Mass.)
In 1986, Selchow and Righter was sold to Coleco, which soon after went bankrupt.
J is also difficult to play due to its low frequency and a scarcity of words having it at the end.
The game was called Alfapet when it was introduced in Sweden in 1954.
Either on the first turn or on subsequent turns, words may read either left-to-right or top-to-bottom.
Penalties for unsuccessfully challenging an acceptable play vary in club and tournament play, and are described in greater detail below.
*"Hooking" a word and playing perpendicular to that word, e.g.
The show's tagline promotional broadcasts was, "Every man dies; not every man truly Scrabbles."
* High game score of 1,049 by Phil Appleby of Lymington, Hampshire, UK, on June 25, 1989 in Wormley, Hertfordshire, UK.
Other records are available for viewing at , an unofficial record book which includes the above as sources and expands on other topics.
Consequently, such tournaments encourage a greater willingness to challenge and a lower willingness to play dubious words.
A junior version, called ''Junior Scrabble'', has been marketed.
There are a number of internationally rated SOWPODS-tournaments.
Player 1 now has a 117-51 lead.
H8 is a premium square; the first player to play a word receives a double word score.
JW Spears began selling the game in Australia and the UK on January 19, 1955.
There is risk of players' trays being mixed and upset, and the box lid, held on by friction, is subject to upset.
* ''High game (OSPD)'' – 830 by Michael Cresta (Mass.
Other language sets use different letter set distributions with different point values.
Parentheses are sometimes also used to designate a blank, although this may create confusion with a second (optional) function of parentheses, namely indication of an existing letter or word that has been "played through" by the main word.
A play is usually identified in the format ''xy WORD score'' or ''WORD xy score'', where ''x'' denotes the column or row on which the play's main word extends, ''y'' denotes the second coordinate of the main word's first letter, and ''WORD'' is the main word.
Sherman played a record-tying seven bingoes in that game and stuck Robbins with the Q.
and verb that are acceptable.
An edition has been released (in association with the RNIB) with larger board and letters for players with impaired vision.
Diagonal plays are not allowed.
Versions have been prepared for Dakotah, Haitian Creole, Dakelh (Carrier language), and Tuvan.
The number of points of each lettered tile is based on the letter's frequency in standard English writing; commonly used letters such as vowels are worth one point, while less common letters score higher, with Q and Z each worth 10 points.
After a player plays a word, his or her opponent may choose to challenge any or all the words formed by the play.
In 2008, Hasbro changed the colors of the premium squares to orange for TW, red for DW, blue for DL, and green for TL.
When annotating, the play would be written A(D)DITiON(AL).
* ''Highest opening move score (OSPD)'' – ''MuZJIKS'' (with a blank for the U) 126 by Jesse Inman (S.C.) at the National Scrabble Championship, 2008.
According to legend, ''Scrabble''s big break came in 1952 when Jack Straus, president of Macy's, played the game on vacation.
The letter tiles are either put in an opaque bag or placed face down on a flat surface.
By December 20, Hasbro had withdrawn its lawsuit.
Nowadays, there are many scrabble games on Facebook such as Words of Gold.
Duplicate Scrabble is a popular variant in French speaking countries.
Players are allowed "tracking sheets", pre-printed with the letters in the initial pool, from which tiles can be crossed off as they are played.
In case of a tie, the player with the highest score before adjusting for unplayed tiles wins the game.
In an English-language set, the game contains 100 tiles, 98 of which are marked with a letter and a point value ranging from 1 to 10.
484 by Doug Brockmeier (Calif.) over 12 rounds at Elmhurst, Ill., 2011.
Other important tournaments include:
Though he left most of the game (including the distribution of letters) unchanged, Brunot slightly rearranged the "premium" squares of the board and simplified the rules; he also changed the name of the game to "Scrabble", a real word which means "to scratch frantically".
The penalty for a successfully challenged play is nearly universal: the offending player removes the tiles played and forfeits his or her turn.
playing IONIZES with the S hooked on (JACK) to make (JACK)S.
Acceptable words are the primary entries in some chosen dictionary, and all of their inflected forms.
The blank tiles can be used as substitutes for any letter; once laid on the board, however, the choice is fixed.
The official ''Scrabble'' computer game in North America uses a version of Maven as its artificial intelligence and is published by Atari.
The tiles are in bold 48 point.
In the notation system common in tournament play, columns are labeled with the letters "A-O" and rows with the numbers "1-15".
The Tile Lock Super Scrabble features the same 200 tiles that are in Super Scrabble.
Each week, teams play various activities based on the board game in order to win big prizes including a trip to anywhere from around the world.
More serious players often favor custom ''Scrabble'' boards, often made of acrylic glass or hardwood, that have superior rotating mechanisms and personalized graphics.
The player is then required to make another play, with no penalty applied.)
CON played under (JACK) that to make (J)O and (A)N.
Thereafter, any move is made by using one or more tiles to place a word on the board.
But its placement on a double-word or triple-word square does cause the corresponding premium to be scored for the word in which it is used.
* ''Highest tie game (SOWPODS)'' – 532-532 by Sinatarn Pattanasuwanna (Thailand) and Tawan Paepolsiri (Thailand) at the 2012 World Youth Scrabble Championship.
Quackle is an open-source alternative to Maven of comparable strength, created by a five-person team led by Jason Katz-Brown.
While the "high score" rule has led to impressively high records, it is currently out of favor.
If player A successfully challenges after player B drew provisional replacement tiles, player B must show the drawn tiles before returning them to the bag.
Travelling versions of the game often have smaller tiles (e.g.
* Production and Marketing Company, 1954 – metal hinged box, Bakelite tiles inlaid with round magnets, chrome tile racks, silver colored plastic bag and cardboard box covered with decorative paper.
The memorization of two-letter words is considered an essential skill in this game.
Editions are available for travelers who may wish to play in a conveyance such as a train or plane, or who may wish to pause a game in progress and resume later.
#Play at least one tile on the board, adding the value of all words formed to the player's cumulative score
#Exchange one or more tiles for an equal number from the bag, scoring nothing, an option available only if at least seven tiles remain in the bag
Player 2 extends the play to ALI(QUANT) 8A with the A on the TWS at 8A.
Names of recognized computer programs are permitted as an acceptable proper noun (For example, WinZIP).
over 18 rounds at the Bayou Bash in Houston, Tex., 2007.
Prior to 1999, it was sold as a Milton Bradley game.
The board, when opened up, measures 24.5 × 21.0&nbsp;cm, and the tiles are 12.3 × 12.3 × 6.7&nbsp;mm in size.
#''The World Youth Scrabble Championships'': entry by country qualification, restricted to under 18 years old.
Acronyms or abbreviations, other than those that have acceptable entries (such as ''AWOL'', ''RADAR'', ''LASER'', and ''SCUBA'') are not allowed.
Play in this system "encourages elaborate setups often independently mined by the two players", and is significantly different from the standard game in which defensive considerations play a major role.
and Stefan Rau (Conn.), Round 12 of the 2008 Dallas Open.
* ''High combined score (OSPD) in a tournament game with no phony words played'' – 1127 (725-402) by Laurie Cohen (Ariz.) and Nigel Peltier (Wash.), in a tournament in Ahwatukee, Arizona, February 16, 2009.
(JACK)S, HI(JACK), HI(JACK)ING.
*"Single Challenge"/"Free Challenge", in which no penalty whatsoever is applied to a player who unsuccessfully challenges.
The most common penalty is five points.
* Spear's Games, 1980s – boxed edition with pegboard, plastic tiles with small feet to fit snugly in the pegboard.
S is the most valuable letter in English-language Scrabble because it easily goes on the ends of words; Alfred Butts included only four instances to avoid a game that was "too easy".
Every player has the same letters on the same board and the players must submit a paper slip at the end of the allotted time (usually 3 minutes) with the highest scoring word they have found.
This word may or may not use one or more tiles already on the board, but must join with the cluster of tiles already on the board.
The score for the word OIDIOID would be (2 × 1 + 1 + 2 × 2 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 2 × 2) = 14.
* Hasbro Games, 2001 – hinged plastic board with clear tile-shaped depressions to hold tiles in play.
*Adding one or more letters to an existing word, e.g.
The game is sold in 121 countries and is available in 29 languages; approximately 150 million sets have been sold worldwide and roughly one-third of American and half of British homes have a Scrabble set.
This penalty governs North American (NASPA-sanctioned) OWL tournament play, and is the standard for North American, Israeli, and Thai clubs.
Only the rosewood tiles of the deluxe edition varies the width up to  for different letters.
In 1938, American architect Alfred Mosher Butts created the game as a variation on an earlier word game he invented called ''Lexiko''.
* High single-turn score of 392, by Dr. Saladin Karl Khoshnaw in Manchester, UK, in April 1982.
During a turn, a player will have seven tiles on his or her rack (with the exception of the endgame).
*Playing parallel to a word(s) forming several short words, e.g.
Ownership of the rights to ''Scrabble'' by multiple companies is limiting the introduction of the game to Facebook and, between its launch date and April 6, 2008, fewer than 2000 users had registered, compared with 600,000 registered ''Scrabulous'' users.
A new licensed product, ''Super Scrabble'', was launched in North America by Winning Moves Games in 2004 under license from Hasbro, with the deluxe version (with turntable and lock-in grid) released in February 2007.
While these games are similar to the original ''Scrabble'' game, they include minor variations.
There is no limit to the number of players that can be involved in one game, and at Vichy in 1998 there were 1485 players, a record for French ''Scrabble'' tournaments.
This is the format used for the French World Scrabble Championships but it is also used in Romanian and Dutch.
All tournament (and most club) games are played with a game clock and a set time control.
* ''Highest average score, multi-day tournament (OSPD)'' – 503 by James Leong (Sask.)
There are numerous variations of the game.
The words must be defined in a standard dictionary, or present in specified reference works (e.g., the Official Tournament and Club Word List, the ''Official Scrabble Players Dictionary''), which provide a list of officially permissible words.
2×WS / ★ = Double word score &nbsp; 3×WS = Triple word score
The new game, which he called "Criss-Crosswords," added the 15×15 gameboard and the crossword-style game play.
The first word played must cover H8, the center square.
means a word judged to be offensive, and thus valid in tournament games only.
Word games similar to or influenced by ''Scrabble'' include Bananagrams, Boggle, Bonza (Word Game), Dabble, Nab-It!, Perquackey, Puzzlage, Quiddler, Scribbage, Tapple, Upwords, and WordSpot and also Words of Gold.
Any combination of these is allowed in a play, as long as all the letters placed on the board in one play lie in one row or column and are connected by a main word, and any run of tiles on two or more consecutive squares along a row or column constitutes a valid word.
Outside the United States and Canada, ''Scrabble'' is a trademark of Mattel.
The name ''Scrabble'' is a trademark of Hasbro, Inc. in the United States and Canada and has been sold by Hasbro's Parker Brothers division since 1999.
The highest possible legal score on a first turn is ''MUZJIKS'' 128, using an actual U rather than a blank.
This book is used to adjudicate at the World Scrabble Championship and all other major international competitions outside of North America.
This can be achieved in a number of ways (in what follows, it is assumed that the word JACK has been played on a previous turn; letters in parentheses represent tiles already on the board):
On July 24, 2008, Hasbro filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against the creators of Scrabulous.
All elements fit in a plastic envelope for travel and to permit a pause in the game.
Note that the Q is not doubled for this play.
The standard version features exactly the same 100 tiles as regular ''Scrabble''.
The latter rule varies slightly in international tournaments.
The tiles must form words which, in crossword fashion, flow left to right in rows or downwards in columns.
Vulgar and offensive words are generally excluded from the OSPD4, but are allowed in club and tournament play.
#''The UK Open'': the largest Scrabble tournament in Europe, held annually in Coventry, United Kingdom since 2008.
As well, a number of symbols have been employed to indicate the validity of words:
However, this is a seven-letter play, so 50 points are added, resulting in a total score of 69.
For each minute by which a player oversteps the time control, a penalty of 10 points is assessed.
If a word appears, at least historically, in any one of the dictionaries, it will be included in the OWL2 and the OSPD5.
(JACK), then YEU(K)Y through the K.
Many versions thus include methods to keep letters from moving, such as pegboards, recessed tile holders and magnetic tiles.
471 by Chris Cree (Tex.)
The number of minutes is rounded up, so, for example, if a player oversteps time control by two minutes and five seconds, the penalty is 30 points.
The OSPD5, released in 2014, is available in bookstores, whereas the OWL2 is only available through NASPA).
In all other countries, the competition word list is ''Collins Scrabble Words'' 2015 edition, known as ''CSW15''.
The key difference between the OSPD5 and the OWL2 is that the OSPD5 is marketed for "home and school" use, with expurgated words which their source dictionaries judged offensive, rendering the ''Official Scrabble Players Dictionary'' less fit for official ''Scrabble'' play.
A longer record was never recorded by ''Guinness Book of Records'', as the publishers decided that duration records of this nature were becoming too dangerous, and stopped accepting them.
(For several years, a game could not end with a cumulative score of 0-0, but that is no longer the case, and such games have since occurred a number of times in tournament play, the winner being the player with the lower total point value on his or her rack.)
Maven is a computer opponent for the game, created by Brian Sheppard.
#''The National School Scrabble Championship'': entry open to North American school students.
He placed a large order and within a year, "everyone had to have one."
Hasbro purchased the company's assets, including ''Scrabble'' and ''Parcheesi''.
The Nintendo DS version of ''Scrabble 2007 Edition'' made news when parents became angry over the game's AI using potentially offensive language during gameplay.
The player challenged must then look up the words in question, and if any one of them is found to be unacceptable, the play is removed from the board, the player returns the newly played tiles to his or her rack and the turn is forfeited.
Although unnecessary, additional words formed by the play are occasionally listed after the main word and a slash.
However, since Hasbro controls the copyright for North America with the copyright for the rest of the world belonging Mattel, the Facebook application is available only to players outside the United States and Canada.
Under North American tournament rules, the game ends when either (1) one player plays every tile on his or her rack, and there are no tiles remaining in the bag (regardless of the tiles on his or her opponent's rack); (2) at least six successive scoreless turns have occurred and either player decides to end the game; or (3) either player uses more than 10 minutes of overtime.
#''The North American Scrabble Championship'': an open event attracting several hundred players, held around July/August every year or two in the United States.
* ''High combined score (OSPD) in a tournament game'' – 1134 (582-552) by Keith Smith (Tex.)
*'''''' means an illegal, or phony, word.
''Scrabble'' ran from July 1984 to March 1990, with a second run from January to June 1993.
The game has been released in numerous gameboard formats appealing to various user groups.
Or a player can put down a legal word that appears to be a phony hoping the other player will incorrectly challenge it and lose their turn.
In 1984, ''Scrabble'' was turned into a daytime game show on NBC.
In 1949, Brunot and his family made sets in a converted former schoolhouse in Dodgingtown, a section of Newtown.
The lexicon includes all allowed words of length 2 to 15 letters.
* ''Highest opening move score (SOWPODS)'' – ''BEZIQUE'' 124 by Sam Kantimathi (1993), Joan Rosenthal and Sally Martin.
There are around 4,000 Scrabble clubs around the world.
The rule has been adopted in Singapore (since 2000), Malaysia (since 2002), South Africa (since 2003), New Zealand (since 2004), and Kenya, as well as in contemporary World Scrabble Championships (since 2001) and North American (NASPA-sanctioned) Collins tournaments.
Words that are hyphenated, capitalized (such as proper nouns), or apostrophized are not allowed, unless they also appear as acceptable entries; JACK is a proper noun, but the word ''JACK'' is acceptable because it has other usages as a common noun (automotive, vexillological, etc.)
This has slightly different distributions of frequencies of letter tiles to the standard ''Scrabble'' game.
); sometimes they are magnetic to keep them in place.
Scoreless turns can occur when a player passes, when a player exchanges tiles, or when a player loses a challenge.
Almost all tournament games involve only two players; typically, each has 25 minutes in which to make all of his or her plays.
Under NASPA tournament rules, a player may request to "hold" the opponent's play in order to consider whether to challenge it, provided that the opponent has not yet drawn replacement tiles.
#''The National Scrabble Championship'' of the United Kingdom, held every year.
During off hours at tournaments, many players socialize by playing consultation (team) ''Scrabble'', Clabbers, Anagrams, Boggle, Words with Friends, Scramble with Friends and other games.
However, since the mid-1990s, the game has also been known as Scrabble in Sweden.
#''The Singapore Open Scrabble Championship'': international Singapore championship held annually since 1997.
For example, Literati draws random tiles instead of providing a finite number of tiles for the game, assigns different point levels to each letter and has a slightly different board layout whereas Lexulous assigns eight letters to each player instead of the customary seven.
The original ''Scrabble'', developed by Electronic Arts and released by Gamehouse Inc. in 2012,  was withdrawn from Facebook in May 2013.
C and V may be troublesome in the endgame, since no two-letter words with them exist, save for CH in SOWPODS.
Opaque cloth bags and customized tiles are staples of clubs and tournaments, where games are rarely played without both.
These include editions on a rotating turntable so players can always face the board with the letters upright and a raised grid that holds the tiles in place.
Tens of thousands play club and tournament ''Scrabble'' worldwide.
The player can change his play anytime his or her clock is running, but commits to the play when he or she starts his or her opponent's clock.
In 1948, James Brunot, a resident of Newtown, Connecticut – and one of the few owners of the original Criss-Crosswords game – bought the rights to manufacture the game in exchange for granting Butts a royalty on every unit sold.
In 2011, a new TV variation of ''Scrabble'', called ''Scrabble Showdown'', aired on The Hub cable channel, which is a joint venture of Discovery Communications, Inc. and Hasbro.
The application was developed by Gamehouse, a division of RealNetworks who has been licensed by Mattel.
his opponent scored just 253 points, giving Appleby a record victory margin of 796 points.
* Selchow & Righter, 1980s – pocket edition with plastic "magnetic" board and tiles.
If there is still a tie, tiles are drawn as in the standard rules.
Versions of this lexicon prior to 2007 were known as SOWPODS.
* ''Highest average score, multi-day tournament (SOWPODS)'' – 499.94 by Nigel Richards (MY) over 16 rounds at the 7th Lim Boon Heng Cup, Singapore, 2009.
Although casual games are often played with unlimited time, this is problematic in competitive play among players for whom the number of evident legal plays is immense.
Also, most players use molded plastic tiles, not engraved like the original wooden tiles, eliminating the potential for a cheating player to "braille" (feel for particular tiles, especially blanks, in the bag).
Held annually since 2003.
*'''$''' means a word valid in games using the American-originated word list (TWL2) only.
It features a 17×17 grid of cells and peculiar rules.
The show was hosted by Chuck Woolery.
On each turn, the player has three options:
If player A holds, player A's clock still runs, and player B may not draw provisional replacement tiles until 15 seconds after the hold was announced (which tiles must then be kept separate).
* ''Highest single play (SOWPODS)'' – ''CAZIQUES'' 392 by Karl Khoshnaw.
Held annually since 2006.
Hypothetical scores in possible and legal but highly unlikely plays and games are far higher, primarily through the use of words that cover three triple-word-score squares.
The word he used was ''CAZIQUES'', meaning "native chiefs of West Indian aborigines".
They made 2,400 sets that year, but lost money.
The word must consist of at least two letters, extending horizontally or vertically.
