Often the drowning obscures the real cause of death.
Where the diver requires mobility and a large range of movement, scuba is usually the choice if safety and legal constraints allow.
About a quarter of diving fatalities are associated with cardiac events, mostly in older divers.
Streamlining dive gear will reduce drag and improve mobility.
Inhaling from a regulator's mouthpiece becomes second nature very quickly.
Depth limits depend on the jurisdiction, and maximum depths allowed range from  to more than , depending on the breathing gas used and the availability of a decompression chamber nearby or on site.
Decompression stops that are not computed as strictly necessary are called safety stops, and reduce the risk of bubble formation further.
Should the buddy of an underwater photographer consider themselves as effectively diving alone since their buddy (the photographer) is giving most or all of their attention to the subject of the photograph?
For dives requiring long decompression stops, divers may carry cylinders containing different gas mixtures for the various phases of the dive, typically designated as Travel, Bottom, and Decompression gases.
After that, the world's armed forces had less reason to requisition civilian rebreather patents, and automatic and semi-automatic recreational diving rebreathers started to appear.
This ''residual nitrogen time'' is subtracted from the time limit indicated by the tables for a dive that carried no penalty.
Underwater inspections and surveys
Boat and ship inspection, cleaning and maintenance
For divers, they add some degree of complexity as the suit must be inflated and deflated with changes in depth in order to avoid "squeeze" on descent or uncontrolled rapid ascent due to over-buoyancy.
A scuba diver primarily moves underwater by using fins attached to the feet, but external propulsion can be provided by a diver propulsion vehicle, or a sled pulled from the surface.
This debate has motivated some prominent scuba agencies such as Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) to stress that its members only dive in teams and "remain aware of team member location and safety at all time."
If the dive site and dive plan require the diver to navigate, a compass may be carried, and where retracing a route is critical, as in cave or wreck penetrations, a guide line is laid from a dive reel.
The depth is usually controlled by the diver by using diving planes or by tilting the whole sled.
Stevens used a standard regulator and mask and wore only a T-shirt and swim shorts and an 8-pound weight belt, he had no surface breaks during the 212.5 hours.
and according to a 2000 Japanese study, 36 to 62 times riskier than driving.
Colour vision is also affected by turbidity of the water which tends to reduce contrast.
This generally allows better insulation making them more suitable for use in cold water.
Two basic types of entrapment are significant hazards for scuba divers: Inability to navigate out of an enclosed space, and physical entrapment which prevents the diver from leaving a location.
Scuba divers are trained in the procedures and skills appropriate to their level of certification by instructors affiliated to the diver certification organisations which issue these certifications.
A common misconception is that nitrox can reduce narcosis, but research has shown that oxygen is also narcotic.
A "double-dome-ported mask" has curved viewports in an attempt to cure these faults, but this causes a refraction problem of its own.
Diving masks and helmets solve this problem by providing an air space in front of the diver's eyes.
Protection from heat loss in cold water is usually provided by wet suits or dry suits.
The most common injuries and causes of death were drowning or asphyxia due to inhalation of water, air embolism and cardiac events.
In a closed-circuit rebreather the oxygen partial pressure in the rebreather is controlled, so it can be maintained at a safe continuous maximum, which reduces the inert gas (nitrogen and/or helium) partial pressure in the breathing loop.
Nitrox and drysuit use, greater frequency of diving in the past year, increasing age, and years since certification were associated with lower risk, possibly as indicators of more extensive training and experience.
Special purpose undergarments are usually worn under a dry suit to keep a layer of air between the diver and the suit for thermal insulation.
Where thermal insulation is not important, lycra suits/diving skins may be sufficient.
The underwater environment presents a constant hazard of asphyxiation due to drowning.
Air embolism is also frequently cited as a cause of death, and it, too is the consequence of other factors leading to an uncontrolled and badly managed ascent, possibly aggravated by medical conditions.
to the wearer while immersed in water, and normally protects the whole body except the head, hands, and sometimes the feet.
Technical diving may involve exploring the logistical and physiological limits of scuba diving, and in these cases a higher risk is accepted by the diver, and considerable effort may be made to reduce this risk by careful planning and contingency procedures.
The most urgent emergencies specific to scuba diving generally involve loss of breathing gas: Gas supply failures, situations where breathing air is likely to run out before the diver can surface, or inability to ascend, and uncontrolled ascents.
The closed-circuit rebreathers were first developed for escape and rescue purposes, and were modified for military use, due to their stealth advantages, as they produce very few bubbles.
This debate is complicated by the fact that the line which separates a solo diver from a buddy/team diver is not always clear.
The first commercially successful closed-circuit scuba was designed and built by English diving engineer, Henry Fleuss in 1878, while working for Siebe Gorman in London.
For open circuit divers, changes in the diver's average lung volume during a breathing cycle can be used to make fine adjustments of buoyancy.
Policing/security: diving to investigate or arrest unauthorised divers
The purpose of dive planning is to ensure that divers do not exceed their comfort zone or skill level, or the safe capacity of their equipment, and includes scuba gas planning to ensure that the amount of breathing gas to be carried is sufficient to allow for any reasonably foreseeable contingencies.
The effect of swimming with a head up angle, of about 15° as is quite common in poorly trimmed divers, can be an increase in drag in the order of 50%.
This may be an inflatable marker deployed by the diver at the end of the dive, or a sealed float, towed for the whole dive.
*Diving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or with a hangover may result in inappropriate or delayed response to contingencies, reduced ability to deal timeously with problems, leading to greater risk of developing into an accident, increased risk of hypothermia and increased risk of decompression sickness.
Many repetitive dive tables, such as those based on the Bühlmann decompression algorithm and similar, use a ''Letter Group'' designation to model the amount of residual nitrogen in the diver's body after a dive.
The most commonly used scuba set uses a "single-hose" open circuit 2-stage demand regulator, connected to a single back-mounted high-pressure gas cylinder, with the first stage connected to the cylinder valve and the second stage at the mouthpiece.
Artificial light is useful to provide light in the darkness, and to restore natural colour lost to absorption.
Aquarium maintenance in large public aquariums
Type of diving activity
A helmet or full face mask will automatically equalise as any pressure differential will either vent through the exhaust valve or open the demand valve and release air into the low-pressure space.
This effect is called decompression sickness or 'the bends', and must be avoided by reducing the pressure on the body slowly while ascending and allowing the inert gases dissolved in the tissues to be eliminated while still in solution.
Underwater archaeology (shipwrecks, harbours, buildings, artefacts and remains)
Buoyancy and trim can significantly affect drag of a diver.
Dry suits are designed to prevent water entering.
commercial, recreational
Decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism in recreational diving are associated with certain demographic, environmental, and dive style factors.
The reduced gas concentration in the blood has a similar effect when it passes through tissues carrying a higher concentration, and that gas will diffuse back into the bloodsteam, reducing the loading of the tissues.
Mine clearance and bomb disposal, disposing of unexploded ordnance
A certain minimum level of attention to detail and acceptance of responsibility for one's own safety and survival are required.
The poor thermal conductivity of this expanded cell neoprene means that wetsuits reduce loss of body heat by conduction to the surrounding water.
The equivalent effect applies to a small ascent, which will trigger an increased buoyancy and will result in accelerated ascent unless counteracted.
Suits range from a thin (2&nbsp;mm or less) "shortie", covering just the torso, to a full 8&nbsp;mm semi-dry, usually complemented by neoprene boots, gloves and hood.
The weight of the water column above the diver causes an increase in pressure in proportion to depth, in the same way that the weight of the column of atmospheric air above the surface causes a pressure of 101.3 kPa (14.7 pounds-force per square inch) at sea level.
The second stage demand valve regulator, supplied by a low-pressure hose from the first stage, delivers the breathing gas at ambient pressure to the diver's mouth.
Breathing apparatus used for diving is life-support equipment, and failure can have fatal consequences - reliability of the equipment and the ability of the diver to deal with a single point of failure are essential for diver safety.
People with severe myopia, therefore, can see better underwater without a mask than normal-sighted people.
A semi-closed circuit rebreather injects a constant mass flow of a fixed breathing gas mixture into the breathing loop, or replaces a specific percentage of the respired volume, so the partial pressure of oxygen at any time during the dive depends on the diver's oxygen consumption and/or breathing rate.
There remains a statistical possibility of decompression bubbles forming even when the guidance from tables or computer has been followed exactly.
By the mid twentieth century, two basic systems for scuba (self-contained underwater breathing apparatus) had emerged: open-circuit scuba where the diver's exhaled breath is vented directly into the water, and closed-circuit scuba where the carbon dioxide is removed from the diver's exhaled breath which has oxygen added and is recirculated.
Most of the procedures are simple and straightforward, and become second nature to the experienced diver, but must be learned, and take some practice to become automatic and faultless, just like the ability to walk or talk.
Ignoring other forces such as water currents and swimming, the diver's overall buoyancy determines whether they ascend or descend.
Divers who need corrective lenses to see clearly outside the water would normally need the same prescription while wearing a mask.
Traditionally this was done by using a depth gauge and a diving watch, but electronic dive computers are now in general use, as they are programmed to do real-time modelling of decompression requirements for the dive, and automatically allow for surface interval.
*Inadequate learning or practice of critical safety skills may result in the inability to deal with minor incidents, which consequently may develop into major incidents.
Therefore, total field-of-view is significantly reduced and eye–hand coordination must be adjusted.
A surface marker also allows easy and accurate control of ascent rate and stop depth for safer decompression.
Recreational certification agencies generally recommend limiting recreational diving to no-stop dives or relatively short planned decompression stops to minimise risk of decompression sickness.
In some applications getting lost is a serious hazard, and specific procedures to minimise the risk are followed.
Nitrogen narcosis occurs quickly and the symptoms typically disappear during the ascent, so that divers often fail to realise they were ever affected.
In all but the warmest waters, divers need the thermal insulation provided by wetsuits or drysuits.
Combat diver, Stealthy infiltration
Scuba divers should not drown unless there are  other contributory factors as they carry a supply of breathing gas and equipment designed to provide the gas on demand.
for abalones, crabs, lobsters, scallops, sea crayfish
According to death certificates, over 80% of the deaths were ultimately attributed to drowning, but other factors usually combined to incapacitate the diver in a sequence of events culminating in drowning, which is more a consequence of the medium in which the accidents occurred than the actual accident.
"SCUBA" was originally an acronym, but is now generally used as a common noun or adjective, "scuba".
To dive safely, divers must control their rate of descent and ascent in the water and be able to maintain a constant depth in midwater.
commercial, military
Other factors cited include buoyancy control, entanglement or entrapment, rough water, equipment misuse or problems and emergency ascent.
Divemasters may provide useful information and suggestions to assist the divers, but are generally not responsible for the details unless specifically employed to do so.
Minimising the inert gas loading of the diver's tissues for a given dive profile reduces the decompression obligation.
The consequences of these errors are varied and depend on many factors.
Nitrogen narcosis or inert gas narcosis is a reversible alteration in consciousness producing a state similar to alcohol intoxication in divers who breathe high-pressure gas at depth.
a fresh water lake) will predictably be positively or negatively buoyant when using the same equipment at destinations with different water densities (e.g.
These include standard operating procedures for using the equipment and dealing with the general hazards of the underwater environment, and emergency procedures for self-help and assistance of a similarly equipped diver experiencing problems.
Swimming goggles are not suitable for diving because they only cover the eyes and thus do not allow for equalisation.
The depth range applicable to scuba diving depends on the application and training, but most recreational dives are  deep or less.
If a drysuit is worn, it must be equalised by inflation and deflation, much like a buoyancy compensator.
Their roles include direct combat, infiltration behind enemy lines, placing mines or using a manned torpedo, bomb disposal or engineering operations.
Neutral buoyancy in a diver is an unstable state.
While the exact limit is idiomatic, it is generally recognised that Oxygen toxicity is preventable if one never exceeds an oxygen partial pressure of 1.4 bar.
*Overweighting can cause difficulty in neutralising and controlling buoyancy, and this can lead to uncontrolled descent, inability to establish neutral buoyancy, inefficient swimming, high gas consumption, poor trim, kicking up silt, difficulty in ascent and inability to control depth accurately for decompression.
Surveys and mapping
Most recreational scuba diving is done using a half mask which covers the diver's eyes and nose, and a mouthpiece to supply the breathing gas from the demand valve or rebreather.
This hinders research which could improve diver safety.
Balanced trim which allows the diver to align in any desired direction also improves streamlining by presenting the smallest section area to the direction of movement and allows propulsion thrust to be used more efficiently.
These include debriefing where appropriate, and equipment maintenance, to ensure that the equipment is kept in good condition for later use.
Dissolved materials may also selectively absorb colour in addition to the absorption by the water itself.
Underwater tour guiding
Dry suits are usually used where the water temperature is below 15&nbsp;°C (60&nbsp;°F) or for extended immersion in water above 15&nbsp;°C (60&nbsp;°F), where a wet suit user would get cold, and with an integral helmet, boots, and gloves for personal protection when diving in contaminated water.
A scuba diver should always be aware of the remaining breathing gas supply, and the duration of diving time that this will safely support, taking into account the time required to surface safely and an allowance for foreseeable contingencies.
police diving, military, naval
Human error is inevitable and everyone makes mistakes at some time.
Divers may carry underwater photographic or video equipment, or tools for a specific application in addition to diving equipment.
Generic and custom corrective lenses are available for some two-window masks.
It has become acceptable to refer to "scuba equipment" or "scuba apparatus"—examples of the linguistic RAS syndrome.
Divers cannot talk underwater unless they are wearing a full-face mask and electronic communications equipment, but they can communicate basic and emergency information using hand signals, light signals, and rope signals, and more complex messages can be written on waterproof slates.
For deep dives—generally past 180 feet (55 m), divers use "hypoxic blends" containing a lower percentage of oxygen than atmospheric air.
Most dive computers provide a fairly conservative decompression model, and the level of conservatism may be selected by the user within limits.
Human error can be defined as an individual's deviation from acceptable or desirable practice which culminates in undesirable or unexpected results.
The density of fresh water is about 3% less than that of ocean water.
Being "narced" can impair judgement and make diving very dangerous.
Jacques Cousteau famously described it as the "rapture of the deep".
Agencies that certify for solo diving require candidates to have a high level of dive experience - usually about 100 dives or more.
To take advantage of the freedom of movement afforded by scuba equipment, the diver needs to be mobile underwater.
Buddy and team diving procedures are intended to ensure that a recreational scuba diver who gets into difficulty underwater is in the presence of a similarly equipped person who understands and can render assistance.
public safety, police, scientific, commercial
These also provide protection from sunburn, abrasion and stings from some marine organisms.
The problem arises when the pressure is reduced more quickly than the gas can be removed by this mechanism, and the level of supersaturation rises sufficiently to become unstable.
Other forms of entrapment such as getting wedged into tight spaces can often be avoided, but must otherwise be dealt with as they happen.
*''Neoprene'' drysuits have a similar construction to wetsuits; these are often considerably thicker (7–8&nbsp;mm) and have sufficient inherent insulation to allow a lighter-weight undersuit (or none at all); however on deeper dives the neoprene can compress to as little as 2&nbsp;mm, losing some of its insulation.
The assistance of a buddy may be helpful where possible.
*Use of inappropriate equipment and/or configuration can lead to a whole range of complications, depending on the details.
A minimum level of fitness and health is required by most training organisations, but a higher level of fitness may be appropriate for some applications.
In professional diving teams all team members are usually expected to contribute to planning and to check the equipment they will use, but the overall responsibility for the safety of the team lies with the supervisor.
This arrangement differs from Emile Gagnan's and Jacques Cousteau's original 1942 "twin-hose" design, known as the Aqua-lung, in which the cylinder pressure was reduced to ambient pressure in one or two stages which were all in the housing mounted to the cylinder valve or manifold.
A statistical study published in 2005 tested potential risk factors: age, gender, body mass index, smoking, asthma, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, previous decompression illness, years since certification, dives in last year, number of diving days, number of dives in a repetitive series, last dive depth, nitrox use, and drysuit use.
Most decompression computers can also be set for altitude compensation to some degree.
Professional divers may be required by legislation or code of practice to have a standby diver at any diving operation, who is both competent and available to attempt rescue of a distressed diver.
His SCBA (self-contained breathing apparatus) consisted of a rubber mask connected to a breathing bag, with (estimated) 50-60% O2 supplied from a copper tank and CO2 scrubbed by rope yarn soaked in a solution of caustic potash; the system giving a duration of about three hours.
The most urgent underwater emergencies usually involve a compromised breathing gas supply.
Pure water preferentially absorbs red light, and to a lesser extent, yellow and green, so the colour that is least absorbed is blue light.
A difference between the risks of driving and diving is that the diver is less at risk from fellow divers than the driver is from other drivers.
In some configurations, these are also covered.
The middle ear and sinus are equalised using one or more of several techniques, which is referred to as clearing the ears.
Although there are many dangers involved in scuba diving, divers can decrease the risks through proper procedures and appropriate equipment.
A small descent will increase the pressure, which will compress the gas filled spaces and reduce the total volume of diver and equipment.
Divers are trained in procedures for donating and receiving breathing gas from each other in an emergency, and may carry an alternative air source if they do not choose to rely on a buddy.
These different gas mixtures may be used to extend bottom time, reduce inert gas narcotic effects, and reduce decompression times.
This is only relevant for manual focusing.
In other words, as a diver goes deeper on a dive, more colour is absorbed by the water, and in clean water the colour becomes blue with depth.
For example, should a scuba instructor (who supports the buddy system) be considered a solo diver if their students do not have the knowledge or experience to assist the instructor through an unforeseen scuba emergency?
As long as this process is gradual, all will go well and the diver will reduce the gas loading by diffusion and perfusion until it eventually re-stabilises at the current saturation pressure.
Dry suits should not be inflated with gases containing helium as it is a good thermal conductor.
Failure to equalise the pressure inside the mask may lead to a form of barotrauma known as mask squeeze.
The procedure of making stops is called staged decompression, and the stops are called decompression stops.
Water attenuates light by selective absorption.
Mike Stevens was continuously submerged for 212.5 hours beating his own previous record of 121.5 hours.
When divers want to remain at constant depth, they try to achieve neutral buoyancy.
The buoyancy of any object immersed in water is also affected by the density of the water.
This leads to very severe hypermetropia.
Lastly, there are professional divers involved with underwater environment, such as underwater photographers or underwater videographers, who document the underwater world, or scientific diving, including marine biology, geology, hydrology, oceanography and underwater archaeology.
Symptoms of hypothermia include impaired judgment and dexterity, which can quickly become deadly in an aquatic environment.
The most commonly used mixture is nitrox, also referred to as Enriched Air Nitrox (EAN), which is air with extra oxygen, often with 32% or 36% oxygen, and thus less nitrogen, reducing the risk of decompression sickness or allowing longer exposure to the same pressure for equal risk.
This principle is applied in the "Semi-Dry" wetsuit.
*Overconfidence can result in diving in conditions beyond the diver's competence, with high risk of accident due to inability to deal with known environmental hazards.
Rebreathers have been increasingly used by civilians for recreation, especially since the end of the Cold War.
In the case of a wetsuit, the suit is designed to minimise heat loss.
The diver can inject air into dry suits to counteract the compression effect and squeeze.
However, diving with trimix or heliox dramatically reduces the effects of inert gas narcosis.
At this point, bubbles may form and grow in the tissues, and may cause damage either by distending the tissue locally, or blocking small blood vessels, shutting off blood supply to the downstream side, and resulting in hypoxia of those tissues.
professional, recreational
In less critical conditions, many divers simply navigate by landmarks and memory, a procedure also known as pilotage or natural navigation.
Equipment such as diving weighting systems, diving suits (wet, dry or semi-dry suits are used depending on the water temperature) and buoyancy compensators can be used to adjust the overall buoyancy.
Many can be set for the gas mixture to be used on the dive, and some can accept changes in the gas mix during the dive.
Diving suits also help prevent the diver's skin being damaged by rough or sharp underwater objects, marine animals, coral, or metal debris commonly found on shipwrecks.
Like buddy or team divers, properly equipped solo divers rely on the redundancy of critical articles of dive gear which may include at least two independent supplies of breathing gas and ensuring that there is always enough available to safely terminate the dive if any one supply fails.
A dry suit functions by keeping the diver dry.
The effectiveness of the insulation is reduced when the suit is compressed due to depth, as the nitrogen filled bubbles are then smaller and the compressed gas conducts heat better.
Diving suits made of compressible materials decrease in volume as the diver descends, and expand again as the diver ascends, causing buoyancy changes.
Scuba diving in relatively hazardous environments such as caves and wrecks, areas of strong water movement, relatively great depths, with decompression obligations, with equipment that has more complex failure modes, and with gases that are not safe to breathe at all depths of the dive require specialised safety and emergency procedures tailored to the specific hazards.
Wetsuits are usually made of foamed neoprene that has small closed bubbles, generally containing nitrogen, trapped in it during the manufacturing process.
To displace nitrogen without the increased oxygen concentration, other diluent gases can be used, usually helium, when the resultant three gas mixture is called trimix, and when the nitrogen is fully substituted by helium, heliox.
The scuba mask (half-mask) is equalised during descent by periodically exhaling through the nose.
Pleasure, leisure, sport
The reduced nitrogen may also allow for no stops or shorter decompression stop times or a shorter surface interval between dives.
*''Membrane'' or ''Shell'' dry suits are usually a trilaminate or coated textile construction.
Drowning occurs as a consequence of preceding problems, such as cardiac disease, pulmonary barotrauma, unmanageable stress, unconsciousness from any cause, water aspiration, trauma, equipment difficulties, environmental hazards, inappropriate response to an emergency or failure to manage the gas supply.
It affects individual divers at varying depths and conditions, and can even vary from dive to dive under identical conditions.
The neoprene, and to a larger extent the nitrogen gas, function as an insulator.
A surface marker buoy on a line held by the diver indicates the position of the diver to the surface personnel.
Controlled emergency ascents are almost always a consequence of loss of breathing gas, while uncontrolled ascents are usually the result of a buoyancy control failure.
At these depths divers may feel euphoria, anxiety, loss of coordination and lack of concentration.
In extreme cases it affects the central nervous system and causes a seizure, which can result in the diver spitting out their regulator and drowning.
The most common form of physical entrapment is getting snagged on ropes, lines or nets, and use of a cutting implement is the standard method of dealing with the problem.
*Diving with an incompetent buddy can result in injury or death while attempting to deal with a problem caused by the buddy.
Recreational divers are responsible for planning their own dives, unless in training, when the instructor is responsible.
For more information, see oxygen toxicity.
