Painted wood is often technically described as "wood and polychrome".
Some aspects of Greek art were adopted while others did not spread beyond the Greco-Buddhist area; in particular the standing figure, often with a relaxed pose and one leg flexed, and the flying cupids or victories, who became popular across Asia as apsaras.
Pointing involved setting up a grid of string squares on a wooden frame surrounding the original, and then measuring the position on the grid and the distance between grid and statue of a series of individual points, and then using this information to carve into the block from which the copy is made.
Ice sculptures feature decoratively in some cuisines, especially in Asia.
Animals are, with the human figure, the earliest subject for sculpture, and have always been popular, sometimes realistic, but often imaginary monsters; in China animals and monsters are almost the only traditional subjects for stone sculpture outside tombs and temples.
They seem to have served a number of functions, perhaps sometimes representing deities and sometimes the person buried in a grave, as with the Kroisos Kouros.
File:Nike of Samothrake Louvre Ma2369 n4.jpg|''The Winged Victory of Samothrace'', c. 190 BC, Louvre
File:Song-Bodhisattva1.jpg|A wooden Bodhisattva from the Song dynasty (960–1279)
Casting is a group of manufacturing processes by which a liquid material (bronze, copper, glass, aluminum, iron) is (usually) poured into a mold, which contains a hollow cavity of the desired shape, and then allowed to solidify.
In the Middle Ages artists such as the 12th century Gislebertus sometimes signed their work, and were sought after by different cities, especially from the Trecento onwards in Italy, with figures such as Arnolfo di Cambio, and Nicola Pisano and his son Giovanni.
The High Classical style continued to develop realism and sophistication in the human figure, and improved the depiction of drapery (clothes), using it to add to the impact of active poses.
File:Dagger horse head Louvre OA7891.jpg|Mughal dagger with hilt in jade, gold, rubies and emeralds.
Stone sculpture is an ancient activity where pieces of rough natural stone are shaped by the controlled removal of stone.
Image:Laussel.jpg|Venus of Laussel c.27,000BP, an Upper Palaeolithic carving, Bordeaux museum, France
Image:Mountrushmore.jpg|Gutzon Borglum and his son, Lincoln Borglum, ''Mount Rushmore'', 1927–1941.
It comes from the 18th or 19th centuries BCE, and may also be moulded.
File:Michelangelos David.jpg|Michelangelo, ''David'', c. 1504, Galleria dell'Accademia, Florence
This gradually spread; by the late 10th and 11th century there are records of several apparently life-size sculptures in Anglo-Saxon churches, probably of precious metal around a wooden frame, like the Golden Madonna of Essen.
The formality of the pose is reduced by the queen's arm round her husband.
From the Ming dynasty onwards, statuettes of religious and secular figures were produced in Chinese porcelain and other media, which became an important export.
The degree of acceptability of such relaxations of strict Islamic rules varies between periods and regions, with Islamic Spain, Persia and India often leading relaxation, and is typically highest in courtly contexts.
Image:Ka Statue of horawibra.jpg|The ka statue provided a physical place for the ka to manifest.
Hellenistic sculpture greatly expanded the range of subjects represented, partly as a result of greater general prosperity, and the emergence of a very wealthy class who had large houses decorated with sculpture, although we know that some examples of subjects that seem best suited to the home, such as children with animals, were in fact placed in temples or other public places.
In the 18th century much sculpture continued on Baroque lines – the Trevi Fountain was only completed in 1762.
Historically, with the exception of some monumental Egyptian sculpture, most African sculpture was created in wood and other organic materials that have not survived from earlier than a few centuries ago; older pottery figures are found from a number of areas.
It is popular in China, Japan, Canada, Sweden, and Russia.
In the Andean region, sculptures were typically small, but often show superb skill.
The advent of Surrealism led to things occasionally being described as "sculpture" that would not have been so previously, such as "involuntary sculpture" in several senses, including coulage.
File:COLLECTIE TROPENMUSEUM Reliëf op de Borobudur TMnr 20025652.jpg|Relief sculpture from Borobudur temple, Indonesia, c. 760–830
Two of the largest prehistoric sculptures can be found at the Tuc d'Audobert caves in France, where around 12-17,000 years ago a masterful sculptor used a spatula-like stone tool and fingers to model a pair of large bison in clay against a limestone rock.
From the many subsequent periods before the ascendency of the Neo-Assyrian Empire in the 10th century BCE Mesopotamian art survives in a number of forms: cylinder seals, relatively small figures in the round, and reliefs of various sizes, including cheap plaques of moulded pottery for the home, some religious and some apparently not.
It is one of the plastic arts.
Public buildings during the last quarter of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century often provided an architectural setting for sculpture, especially in relief.
Image:Reggio calabria museo nazionale bronzi di riace.jpg|The Riace Bronzes, very rare bronze figures recovered from the sea, c. 460–430
Romanesque art was characterised by a very vigorous style in both sculpture and painting.
The monumental sculpture of ancient Egypt is world-famous, but refined and delicate small works exist in much greater numbers.
File:Apóstoles del Pórtico de la Gloria.jpg|''Pórtico da Gloria'', Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain, c. 12th–13th centuries
Artists such as Isamu Noguchi, David Smith, Alexander Calder, Jean Tinguely, Richard Lippold, George Rickey, Louise Bourgeois, and Louise Nevelson came to characterize the look of modern sculpture.
File:Man blowing conch (Wanli Reign Period).JPG|Blue underglaze statue of a man with his pipe, from Jingdezhen, Ming Wanli period (1573-1620)
As elsewhere in the region, most of the wood sculptures of the Bagan and Ava periods have been lost.
African masks were an influence on European Modernist art, which was inspired by their lack of concern for naturalistic depiction.
Objects in precious materials such as ivory and metal had a very high status in the period, much more so than monumental sculpture — we know the names of more makers of these than painters, illuminators or architect-masons.
File:Decorate palace.jpg|Dragon head palace decoration from the Lý dynasty, Vietnam, c. 1009–1225
The history of sculpture in the United States after Europeans' arrival reflects the country's 18th-century foundation in Roman republican civic values and Protestant Christianity.
Small Buddhist figures and groups were produced to a very high quality in a range of media, as was relief decoration of all sorts of objects, especially in metalwork and jade.
Some sculptors maintained large workshops.
Sound sculpture is often site-specific.
The very wealthy collected extravagantly elaborate jewelled and enamelled metalwork, both secular and religious, like the Duc de Berry's Holy Thorn Reliquary, until they ran short of money, when they were melted down again for cash.
The subsequent Minoan and Mycenaean cultures developed sculpture further, under influence from Syria and elsewhere, but it is in the later Archaic period from around 650 BCE that the kouros developed.
Early Roman art was influenced by the art of Greece and that of the neighbouring Etruscans, themselves greatly influenced by their Greek trading partners.
Many forms of Protestantism also do not approve of religious sculpture.
File:Venus of Willendorf frontview retouched 2.jpg|Venus of Willendorf, c.24,000−26,000BP
Picasso was commissioned to make a maquette for a huge -high public sculpture, the so-called ''Chicago Picasso'' (1967).
It is thus much longer than the previous periods, and includes at least two major phases: a "Pergamene" style of experimentation, exuberance and some sentimentality and vulgarity, and in the 2nd century BC a classicising return to a more austere simplicity and elegance; beyond such generalizations dating is typically very uncertain, especially when only later copies are known, as is usually the case.
In Thailand and Laos, sculpture was mainly of Buddha images, often gilded, both large for temples and monasteries, and small figurines for private homes.
These land art or 'earth art' environmental scale sculpture works exemplified by artists such as Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer, James Turrell (Roden Crater).
Relief is often classified by the degree of projection from the wall into low or bas-relief, high relief, and sometimes an intermediate mid-relief.
The massive so-called Alexander Sarcophagus found in Sidon in modern Lebanon, was probably made there at the start of the period by expatriate Greek artists for a Hellenized Persian governor.
Casting may be used to form hot liquid metals or various materials that ''cold set'' after mixing of components (such as epoxies, concrete, plaster and clay).
Ice sculpture is a form of ephemeral sculpture that uses ice as the raw material.
L-R, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln.
In the 19th century there were export industries of small bronze sculptures of extreme virtuosity, ivory and porcelain figurines, and other types of small sculpture, increasingly emphasizing technical accomplishment.
Small figures of deities, or their animal personifications, are very common, and found in popular materials such as pottery.
In later periods Chinese influence predominated in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, and more wooden sculpture survives from across the region.
File:Nswag, dinastia han,figurina dipinta di danzatrice.JPG|Tomb figure of dancing girl, Han Dynasty (202 BC-220 AD)
In revolt against the naturalism of Rodin and his late-19th-century contemporaries, Brâncuși distilled subjects down to their essences as illustrated by the elegantly refined forms of his ''Bird in Space'' series (1924).
Stamps and moulds were used by most ancient civilizations, from ancient Rome and Mesopotamia to China.
File:Byzantine ivory 801.jpg|''Archangel Ivory'', 525–550, Constantinople
Image:ApolloAndDaphne.JPG|Gian Lorenzo Bernini, ''Apollo and Daphne'' in the Galleria Borghese, 1622–1625
These came to replace earlier equivalents in wood.
The copying of an original statue in stone, which was very important for ancient Greek statues, which are nearly all known from copies, was traditionally achieved by "pointing", along with more freehand methods.
The contrast is famously illustrated in the Arch of Constantine of 315 in Rome, which combines sections in the new style with roundels in the earlier full Greco-Roman style taken from elsewhere, and the ''Four Tetrarchs'' (c. 305) from the new capital of Constantinople, now in Venice.
Following the continuing Byzantine tradition, Carolingian art revived ivory carving, often in panels for the treasure bindings of grand illuminated manuscripts, as well as crozier heads and other small fittings.
Some of the modern classical became either more decorative/art deco (Paul Manship, Jose de Creeft, Carl Milles) or more abstractly stylized or more expressive (and Gothic) (Anton Hanak, Wilhelm Lehmbruck, Ernst Barlach, Arturo Martini)—or turned more to the Renaissance (Giacomo Manzù, Venanzo Crocetti) or stayed the same (Charles Despiau, Marcel Gimond).
Much surviving prehistoric art is small portable sculptures, with a small group of female Venus figurines such as the Venus of Willendorf (24-26,000BP) found across central Europe.
A little later there are a number of figures of large-eyed priests and worshippers, mostly in alabaster and up to a foot high, who attended temple cult images of the deity, but very few of these have survived.
Many of the most important sculptures of China and Japan in particular are in wood, and the great majority of African sculpture and that of Oceania and other regions.
Blade of damascened steel inlaid with gold.
Large amounts of figurative sculpture, mostly in relief, survive from Early Buddhist pilgrimage stupas, above all Sanchi; these probably developed out of a tradition using wood that also embraced Hinduism.
During the 1960s and 1970s figurative sculpture by modernist artists in stylized forms was made by artists such as Leonard Baskin, Ernest Trova, George Segal, Marisol Escobar, Paul Thek, Robert Graham in a classic articulated style, and Fernando Botero bringing his painting's 'oversized figures' into monumental sculptures.
In West Africa, the earliest known sculptures are from the Nok culture which thrived between 500 BC and 500 AD in modern Nigeria, with clay figures typically with elongated bodies and angular shapes.
Originally a goldsmith, his famous gold and enamel Salt Cellar (1543) was his first sculpture, and shows his talent at its best.
File:Pietà Naumburg Cathedral 01a.jpg|Central German Pietà, 1330–40
Among other major examples are the earlier re-used reliefs on the Arch of Constantine and the base of the Column of Antoninus Pius (161), Campana reliefs were cheaper pottery versions of marble reliefs and the taste for relief was from the imperial period expanded to the sarcophagus.
Small sculptures as personal possessions go back to the earliest prehistoric art, and the use of very large sculpture as public art, especially to impress the viewer with the power of a ruler, goes back at least to the Great Sphinx of some 4,500 years ago.
File:Demetrius I MET coin.jpg|Coin of Demetrius I of Bactria, who reigned circa 200–180 BC and invaded Northern India
For a much more popular home decoration market there were Tanagra figurines, and those from other centres where small pottery figures were produced on an industrial scale, some religious but others showing animals and elegantly dressed ladies.
File:BroncoBusterRemingtonSculpture.gif|Frederic Remington, ''The Bronco Buster'', limited edition #17 of 20, 1909.
Other significant remains of architectural sculpture come from Paestum in Italy, Corfu, Delphi and the Temple of Aphaea in Aegina (much now in Munich).
The snow is densely packed into a form after having been produced by artificial means or collected from the ground after a snowfall.
File:Persee-florence.jpg|Benvenuto Cellini, ''Perseus with the head of Medusa'', 1545–1554
File:Badger church - Jane and Henrietta Browne.jpg|John Flaxman, Memorial in the church at Badger, Shropshire, c. 1780s
Site specific and environmental art works are represented by artists: Andy Goldsworthy, Walter De Maria, Richard Long, Richard Serra, Robert Irwin, George Rickey and Christo and Jeanne-Claude led contemporary abstract sculpture in new directions.
File:Firenze.PalVecchio.Donatello.JPG|Donatello, ''Judith and Holofernes'', c. 1460, Palazzo Vecchio, Florence
The group called the Farnese Bull, possibly a 2nd-century marble original, is still larger and more complex,
The capitals of columns were never more exciting than in this period, when they were often carved with complete scenes with several figures.
Compared to areas colonized by the Spanish, sculpture got off to an extremely slow start in the British colonies, with next to no place in churches, and was only given impetus by the need to assert nationality after independence.
02.JPG|Vishnu from Prasat Rup Arak, Kulen, Khmer art, Cambodia, c. 800-875
Ghiberti's doors are still in place, but were undoubtedly eclipsed by his second pair for the other entrance, the so-called "Gates of Paradise", which took him from 1425 to 1452, and are dazzlingly confident classicizing compositions with varied depths of relief allowing extensive backgrounds.
Sculptured pediments were added to temples, including the Parthenon in Athens, where the remains of the pediment of around 520 using figures in the round were fortunately used as infill for new buildings after the Persian sack in 480 BCE, and recovered from the 1880s on in fresh unweathered condition.
Victoria and Albert Museum
In addition to the famous totem poles, painted and carved house fronts were complemented by carved posts inside and out, as well as mortuary figures and other items.
ca.JPG|Two elegant ladies, pottery figurines, 350–300
It therefore forms an important hidden element in the art history of many cultures.
Some modern sculpture forms are now practiced outdoors, as environmental art and environmental sculpture, often in full view of spectators.
Jean-Antoine Houdon exemplifies the penetrating portrait sculpture the style could produce, and Antonio Canova's nudes the idealist aspect of the movement.
East Asian portrait sculpture was entirely religious, with leading clergy being commemorated with statues, especially the founders of monasteries, but not rulers, or ancestors.
By the 2nd century BCE, "most of the sculptors working at Rome" were Greek, often enslaved in conquests such as that of Corinth (146 BCE), and sculptors continued to be mostly Greeks, often slaves, whose names are very rarely recorded.
Gold is the softest and most precious metal, and very important in jewellery; with silver it is soft enough to be worked with hammers and other tools as well as cast; repoussé and chasing are among the techniques used in gold and silversmithing.
For a much wider section of the population, moulded relief decoration of pottery vessels and small figurines were produced in great quantity and often considerable quality.
The Egyptians used the distinctive technique of sunk relief, which is well suited to very bright sunlight.
File:Giambologna raptodasabina.jpg|Giambologna, ''The Rape of the Sabine Women'', 1583, Florence, Italy, 13' 6" (4.1&nbsp;m) high, marble
File:The Spire-doyler79.jpg|The Spire of Dublin officially titled the ''Monument of Light'', stainless steel, , the world's tallest sculpture
The 7th century Hōryū-ji and its contents have survived more intact than any East Asian Buddhist temple of its date, with works including a ''Shaka Trinity'' of 623 in bronze, showing the historical Buddha flanked by two bodhisattvas and also the Guardian Kings of the Four Directions.
File:Jasão e o Velo de ouro - Bertel Thorvaldsen - 1803.jpg|Bertel Thorvaldsen: ''Jason and the Golden Fleece'' (1803)
Figures of animals in the round were often acceptable for works used in private contexts if the object was clearly practical, so medieval Islamic art contains many metal animals that are aquamaniles, incense burners or supporters for fountains, as in the stone lions supporting the famous one in the Alhambra, culminating in the largest medieval Islamic animal figure known, the Pisa Griffin.
File:Francesco Laurana pushkin.jpg|Francesco Laurana, female bust (cast)
Wood is light, so suitable for masks and other sculpture intended to be carried, and can take very fine detail.
File:The 5th century BC Amathus sarcophagus.jpg|The Amathus sarcophagus, from Amathus, Cyprus, 2nd quarter of the 5th century BC Archaic period,  Metropolitan Museum of Art
File:Robert Gould Shaw Memorial - detail.jpg|Robert Gould Shaw Memorial by Augustus Saint-Gaudens, 1884–1897, plaster version
Most larger sculpture survives from Egyptian temples or tombs; by Dynasty IV (2680–2565 BCE) at the latest the idea of the Ka statue was firmly established.
File:Pisa-Opera del Duomo-Grifone islamico000.jpg|The Pisa Griffin, 107&nbsp;cm high, probably 11th century
By the 15th century there was an industry exporting Nottingham alabaster altar reliefs in groups of panels over much of Europe for economical parishes who could not afford stone retables.
Minimalist sculpture replaced the figure in public settings and architects almost completely stopped using sculpture in or on their designs.
File:Izumiya Tomotada - Netsuke in the Form of a Dog - Walters 711020 - Three Quarter.jpg|Izumiya Tomotada, netsuke in the form of a dog, late 18th century
File:Lion man photo.jpg| Löwenmensch, from Hohlenstein-Stadel, now in Ulmer Museum, Ulm, Germany, the oldest known anthropomorphic animal-human statuette, Aurignacian era, c.35-40,000BP
In Baroque sculpture, groups of figures assumed new importance, and there was a dynamic movement and energy of human forms— they spiralled around an empty central vortex, or reached outwards into the surrounding space.
File:Asokanpillar-crop.jpg|Ashoka Pillar, Vaishali, Bihar, c. 250 BCE
Marcel Duchamp originated the use of the "found object" (French: objet trouvé) or ''readymade'' with pieces such as Fountain (1917).
Outstanding abbey churches with sculpture include in France Vézelay and Moissac and in Spain Silos.
From the 18th century or earlier sculpture also attracted middle-class students, although it was slower to do so than painting.
Image:Lincoln statue.jpg|Daniel Chester French, ''Abraham Lincoln'' (1920) in the Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C.
The ability to summon the resources to create monumental sculpture, by transporting usually very heavy materials and arranging for the payment of what are usually regarded as full-time sculptors, is considered a mark of a relatively advanced culture in terms of social organization.
Like other works of his and other Mannerists it removes far more of the original block than Michelangelo would have done.
File:Masque probablement Bobo-Burkina Faso (2).jpg|Mask from Burkina Faso, 19th century
Many sculptors also practised in other arts; Andrea del Verrocchio also painted, and Giovanni Pisano, Michelangelo, and Jacopo Sansovino were architects.
Portrait sculpture, usually in busts, became popular in Italy around 1450, with the Neapolitan Francesco Laurana specializing in young women in meditative poses, while Antonio Rossellino and others more often depicted knobbly-faced men of affairs, but also young children.
Collaborative projects with landscape designers, architects, and landscape architects expanded the outdoor site and contextual integration.
File:Soldier Horse.JPG|Lifesize calvalryman from the Terracotta Army, Qin dynasty, ca.
Excavations at the Temple of Zeus, Olympia since 1829 have revealed the largest group of remains, from about 460, of which many are in the Louvre.
In other cultures such as Egypt and the Near East public statues were almost exclusively the preserve of the ruler, with other wealthy people only being portrayed in their tombs.
Populations in the African Great Lakes are not known for their sculpture.
Petroglyphs (also called rock engravings) are perhaps the earliest form: images created by removing part of a rock surface which remains ''in situ'', by incising, pecking, carving, and abrading.
The rune stones of the Nordic world, the Pictish stones of Scotland and possibly the  high cross reliefs of Christian Great Britain, were northern sculptural traditions that bridged the period of Christianization.
File:Capitoline Brutus Musei Capitolini MC1183 02.jpg|The "Capitoline Brutus", dated to the 3rd or 1st century BCE
File:King Menkaura (Mycerinus) and queen.jpg|Menkaura (Mycerinus) and queen, Old Kingdom, Dynasty 4, 2490–2472 BC.
Image:ACMA 679 Kore 1.JPG|''Peplos Kore'', c. 530 BC, Athens, Acropolis Museum
Native Chinese religions do not usually use cult images of deities, or even represent them, and large religious sculpture is nearly all Buddhist, dating mostly from the 4th to the 14th century, and initially using Greco-Buddhist models arriving via the Silk Road.
File:Exhibit Archaeologycal Museum Athens.JPG|Mycenae, 1600−1500 BC.
Small carvings, for a mainly lay and often female market, became a considerable industry in Paris and some other centres.
Instead of being shown victorious, as Donatello and Verocchio had done, David looks tense and battle ready.
Kinetic sculptures are sculptures that are designed to move, which include mobiles.
File:Tlingit K'alyaan Totem Pole August 2005.jpg|The ''K'alyaan'' Totem Pole of the Tlingit Kiks.ádi Clan, erected at Sitka National Historical Park to commemorate the lives lost in the 1804 Battle of Sitka
File:ജലഗന്ധേശ്വരർ ക്ഷേത്രത്തിലെ ദ്വാരപാലകശില്പം.JPG|Sculpture of Guardian at the entrance of the Mandapam of Sri Jalagandeeswarar Temple, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
During the Kofun period of the 3rd to 6th century CE, haniwa terracotta figures of humans and animals in a simplistic style were erected outside important tombs.
The Swimming Reindeer of about 13,000 years ago is one of the finest of a number of Magdalenian carvings in bone or antler of animals in the art of the Upper Paleolithic, although they are outnumbered by engraved pieces, which are sometimes classified as sculpture.
File:Yamada Chözaburö - Wind God - Walters 52158.jpg|Yamada Chōzaburō, ''Wind God'' in repoussé iron, c. 1915
File:Mahayanabuddha.jpg|Seated Buddha, Tang dynasty ca.
Works include One and Three Chairs, 1965, is by Joseph Kosuth, and An Oak Tree by Michael Craig-Martin, and those of Joseph Beuys, James Turrell and Jacek Tylicki.
File:Cathedral of Ourense (Spain).jpg|''Facade,'' Cathedral of Ourense 1160, Spain
Relief could be very high indeed, as in the Parthenon illustration below, where most of the leg of the warrior is completely detached from the background, as were the missing parts; relief this high made sculptures more subject to damage.
He and his followers devised elegant elongated examples of the ''figura serpentinata'', often of two intertwined figures, that were interesting from all angles.
Small forms of sculpture include the figurine, normally a statue that is no more than  tall, and for reliefs the plaquette, medal or coin.
File:NatarajaMET.JPG|Hindu, Chola period, 1000
But the term properly covers many types of small works in three dimensions using the same techniques, including coins and medals, hardstone carvings, a term for small carvings in stone that can take detailed work.
Snow sculptures are usually carved out of a single block of snow about  on each side and weighing about 20–30 tons.
File:Natarajartemple1.jpg|Gopuram of the Thillai Nataraja Temple, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu, densely packed with rows of painted statues
File:GandharaDonorFrieze2.JPG|Gandhara frieze with devotees, holding plantain leaves, in purely Hellenistic style, inside Corinthian columns, 1st–2nd century CE.
Direct images of deities are relatively infrequent, but masks in particular are or were often made for religious ceremonies; today many are made for tourists as "airport art".
No Anglo-Saxon example has survived, and survivals of large non-architectural sculpture from before 1,000 are exceptionally rare.
Image:Dancer and Gazelles.JPG|Paul Manship, ''Dancer and Gazelles'', 1916, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C.
In archaeology and art history the appearance, and sometimes disappearance, of large or monumental sculpture in a culture is regarded as of great significance, though tracing the emergence is often complicated by the presumed existence of sculpture in wood and other perishable materials of which no record remains; the totem pole is an example of a tradition of monumental sculpture in wood that would leave no traces for archaeology.
There are no survivals from the tradition of masks of ancestors that were worn in processions at the funerals of the great families and otherwise displayed in the home, but many of the busts that survive must represent ancestral figures, perhaps from the large family tombs like the Tomb of the Scipios or the later mausolea outside the city.
Life-size tomb effigies in stone or alabaster became popular for the wealthy, and grand multi-level tombs evolved, with the Scaliger Tombs of Verona so large they had to be moved outside the church.
File:Chinese tomb guardian 300 BC.jpg|A tomb guardian usually placed inside the doors of the tomb to protect or guide the soul, Warring States period, ca.
The solid casting is then ejected or broken out to complete the process, although a final stage of "cold work" may follow on the finished cast.
The Cloisters Cross is an unusually large ivory crucifix, with complex carving including many figures of prophets and others, which has been attributed to one of the relatively few artists whose name is known, Master Hugo, who also illuminated manuscripts.
The kingdom of plants is important only in jewellery and decorative reliefs, but these form almost all the large sculpture of Byzantine art and Islamic art, and are very important in most Eurasian traditions, where motifs such as the palmette and vine scroll have passed east and west for over two millennia.
Later, artists trained in the Western academic tradition followed European styles until in the late 19th century they began to draw again on indigenous influences, notably in the Mexican baroque grotesque style known as Churrigueresque.
There are fewer original remains from the first phase of the Classical period, often called the Severe style; free-standing statues were now mostly made in bronze, which always had value as scrap.
By the 1950s, traditional sculpture education would almost be completely replaced by a Bauhaus-influenced concern for abstract design.
The first known sculpture in the Indian subcontinent is from the Indus Valley civilization (3300–1700 BC), found in sites at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa in modern-day Pakistan.
Such objects, often in valuable materials, were also the main sculptural traditions (as far as is known) of the barbaric civilizations of the Migration period, as seen in the objects found in the 6th-century burial treasure at Sutton Hoo, and the jewellery of Scythian art and the hybrid Christian and animal style productions of Insular art.
File:Claudius Pio-Clementino Inv243.jpg|Bust of Emperor Claudius, c. 50 CE, (reworked from a bust of emperor Caligula), It was found in the so-called Otricoli basilica in Lanuvium, Italy, Vatican Museums
A collection of sculpture in a garden setting can be called a sculpture garden.
With the beginning of the Mesolithic in Europe figurative sculpture greatly reduced, and remained a less common element in art than relief decoration of practical objects until the Roman period, despite some works such as the Gundestrup cauldron from the European Iron Age and the Bronze Age Trundholm sun chariot.
It differs from previous representations of the subject in that David is depicted before his battle with Goliath and not after the giant's defeat.
Imperial tombs have spectacular avenues of approach lined with real and mythological animals on a scale matching Egypt, and smaller versions decorate temples and palaces.
File:Venice – The Tetrarchs 03.jpg|''The Four Tetrarchs'', c. 305, showing the new anti-classical style, in porphyry, now San Marco, Venice
The relatively rigid poses of figures relaxed, and asymmetrical turning positions and oblique views became common, and deliberately sought.
Almost all subsequent significant large sculpture in Japan was Buddhist, with some Shinto equivalents, and after Buddhism declined in Japan in the 15th century, monumental sculpture became largely architectural decoration and less significant.
One of the most common purposes of sculpture is in some form of association with religion.
File:Lilith Periodo de Isin Larsa y Babilonia.JPG|The Burney Relief, Old Babylonian, around 1800 BCE
File:Wat Si Chum in Sukhothai.jpg|Phra Achana, Wat Si Chum, Big Buddha image in Sukhothai, Thailand, c. 14th century
In later years Picasso became a prolific potter, leading, with interest in historic pottery from around the world, to a revival of  ceramic art, with figures such as George E. Ohr and subsequently Peter Voulkos, Kenneth Price, and Robert Arneson.
In the early days of the 20th century, Pablo Picasso revolutionized the art of sculpture when he began creating his ''constructions'' fashioned by combining disparate objects and materials into one constructed piece of sculpture; the sculptural equivalent of the collage in two-dimensional art.
The Barberini Faun, showing a satyr sprawled asleep, presumably after drink, is an example of the moral relaxation of the period, and the readiness to create large and expensive sculptures of subjects that fall short of the heroic.
Much Baroque sculpture added extra-sculptural elements, for example, concealed lighting, or water fountains, or fused sculpture and architecture to create a transformative experience for the viewer.
Owing to the permanence of the material, evidence can be found that even the earliest societies indulged in some form of stone work, though not all areas of the world have such abundance of good stone for carving as Egypt, Greece, India and most of Europe.
From about 1000 there was a general rebirth of artistic production in all Europe, led by general economic growth in production and commerce, and the new style of Romanesque art was the first medieval style to be used in the whole of Western Europe.
