On the other hand, the HV1 sequence of the female suggested a greater likelihood of Asian origins.
There is a city in their territory, called Gelonus, which is surrounded with a lofty wall, thirty furlongs ( = c. 5.5 km) each way, built entirely of wood.
Archaeologists can distinguish three periods of ancient Scythian archaeological remains:
The exact date of their arrival in this region of Central Asia is unclear, perhaps it was just before the reign of Darius I.
Only the youngest son succeeded in touching the golden implements without them bursting with fire, and this son's descendants, called by Herodotus the "Royal Scythians", continued to guard them.
In the Persian language of contemporary Iran the territory of Drangiana was called Sakastāna, in Armenian as Sakastan, with similar equivalents in Pahlavi, Greek, Sogdian, Syriac, Arabic, and the Middle Persian tongue used in Turfan, Xinjiang, China.
Saka) southwest into Sogdiana, where in the mid 2nd century BC the latter crossed the Syr Darya into Hellenistic Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, but also into the Fergana Valley where they settled in Dayuan.
A partial list of these tribes includes the Agathyrsi, Geloni, Budini, and Neuri.
An inscription dated to the reign of Xerxes I (r. 486-465 BC) has them coupled with the Dahae people of Central Asia.
In the 7th century BC the Scythians crossed the Caucasus and frequently raided the Middle East along with the Cimmerians, playing an important role in the political developments of the region.
The Bible includes a single reference to Scythians in Colossians 3:11, immediately after mentioning barbarians, possibly as an extreme example of a barbarian.
Some Pazyryk culture Saka wore short belted tunic with a lapel on a right side, upright collar, 'puffed' sleeves narrowing at a wrist and bound in narrow cuffs of a color different from the rest of the tunic.
Men and women wore belts.
They still speak a language half Greek, half Scythian.
Modern scholarly consensus is that the Saka language, ancestor to the Pamir languages in northern India and Khotanese in Xinjiang, China belongs to the Scythian languages.
The 1st millennium BC ushered a period of unprecedented cultural and economic connectivity amongst disparate and wide-ranging communities.
The Scythian languages may have formed a dialect continuum: "Scytho-Sarmatian" in the west and "Scytho-Khotanese" or Saka in the east.
Herodotus presented four different versions of Scythian origins:
Women wore a variety of different headdresses, some conical in shape others more like flattened cylinders, also adorned with metal (golden) plaques.
Sharon Turner in his ''History of the Anglo-Saxons'', made them the ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons.
Around 30 Saka tombs in the form of kurgans (burial mounds) have also been found in the Tian Shan area dated to between 550–250 BC.
The territories of Saka were absorbed into the Achaemenid Empire as part of Chorasmia that included much of Amu Darya (Oxus) and Syr Darya (Jaxartes), and the Saka then supplied the Persian army with large number of mounted bowmen in the Achaemenid wars.
The Scythian languages belonged to the Eastern branch of the Iranian languages.
Nearly all subjects belong to haplogroup R-M17.
give visual representations of these garments.
One silver dish from this find bears some inscriptions, as yet undeciphered and so possibly representing a form of Scythian writing.
In the 8th century BC they possibly raided Zhou China.
The ancient Greco-Roman geographer Strabo claims that the four tribes of the Asii, who took down the Bactrians in the Greek and Roman account, came from land north of Syr Darya where the Ili and Chu valleys are located.
Ancient influences from Central Asia became identifiable in China following contacts of metropolitan China with nomadic western and northwestern border territories from the 8th century BC.
The "classical Scythians" known to ancient Greek historians were located in the northern Black Sea and fore-Caucasus region.
Two Saka tribes, ''Sakā tigraxaudā'' ("Saka with pointy hats/caps") and the ''Sakā haumavargā'' ("haoma-drinking saka"), may be located to the east of the Caspian Sea.
The 2nd century Greek philosopher Polemon includes the Scythians among the northern peoples characterized by red hair and blue-grey eyes.
According to Herodotus, Darius in this manner came as far as the Volga River.
Following their expulsion by the Yuezhi, some Scythians may also have migrated to the area of Yunnan in southern China.
In Natural History, the 1st century AD Roman author Pliny the Elder characterizes the Seres, sometimes identified as Iranians (Scythians) or Tocharians, as red-haired and blue-eyed.
Geneticist Eran Elhaik believes the word Ashkenaz (i.e.
Herodotus' European "classical' Scythians, the Central Asian ''Sakae'' or un-named nomadic groups in the far east (Altai region) who also bore a 'Scythian" cultural tradition.
This policy was successful, and the Scythians no longer harassed Alexander's empire.
from the area of Turkestan and western Siberia.
Archaeological remains of the Scythians include kurgan tombs (ranging from simple exemplars to elaborate "Royal kurgans" containing the "Scythian triad" of weapons, horse-harness, and Scythian-style wild-animal art), gold, silk, and animal sacrifices, in places also with suspected human sacrifices.
Herodotus mentioned that Sakas had "high caps and&nbsp;... wore trousers."
Based on the Pazyryk findings (can be seen also in the south Siberian, Uralic and Kazakhstan rock drawings) some caps were topped with zoomorphic wooden sculptures firmly attached to a cap and forming an integral part of the headgear, similar to the surviving nomad helmets from northern China.
Conclusions which might be drawn thus far, from an mtDNA perspective, are (i) an early, Bronze Age mixture of both west and east Eurasian lineages, with western lineages being found far to the East, but not vice versa; (ii) an apparent reversal by Iron Age times, with increasing presence of East Eurasian lineages in the western steppe; (iii) the possible role of migrations from the sedentary south: the Balkano-Danubian and Iranian regions toward the steppe.
The fourth-century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus wrote that the Alans, a people closely related to the Scythians, were tall, blond and light-eyed.
The earliest studies could only analyze segments of mtDNA, thus providing only broad correlations of affinity to modern 'West Eurasian' or 'East Eurasian' populations.
This origins of this style remain debated, but it probably both received and gave influences in the art of the neighbouring settled peoples, and acted as a fast route for transmission of motifs across the width of  Eurasia.
The religious beliefs of the Scythians was a type of Pre-Zoroastrian Iranian religion and differed from the post-Zoroastrian Iranian thoughts.
The Eastern Scythians of the Asian Steppe (Saka) were attacked by the Yuezhi, Wusun and Xiongnu in the 2nd century BC, prompting many of them to migrate into South Asia, where they became known as Indo-Scythians.
There is even a festival, held every third year in honour of Bacchus, at which the natives fall into the Bacchic fury.
These large burial mounds (some over 20 metres high) provide the most valuable archaeological remains associated with the Scythians.
In Histories, the 5th-century Greek historian Herodotus describes the Budini of Scythia as red-haired and grey-eyed.
Soon after they expanded westwards and dislodged the Cimmerians from power on the Pontic Steppe.
For more information on Indo-Scythians and other central and southern Asian nomadic groups, see Indo-Scythians.
According to Szemerényi, Sogdiana was named from the Skuda form.
Their westernmost territories during the Iron Age were known to classical Greek sources as Scythia.
"They were not a specific people", but rather variety of peoples "referred to at variety of times in history, and in several places, none of which was their original homeland."
Some modern scholars thought that the sack of the Western Zhou capital Haojing in 770 BC might have been connected to a Scythian raid from the Altai before their westward expansion.
In the Chinese ''Book of Han'', the valleys of the Ili River and Chu River were called the "land of the Sai", i.e.
Herodotus relates that the nomadic Scythians frustrated the Persian army by letting it march through the entire country without an engagement.
Belts were fastened with metal or horn belt-hooks, leather thongs and metal (often golden) or horn belt-plates.
By the time of Strabo's account (the first decades AD), the Crimean Scythians had created a new kingdom extending from the lower Dnieper to the Crimea.
The term "Scythian" is used by modern scholars in an archaeological context for finds perceived to display attributes of the "Scytho-Siberian" culture, usually without implying an ethnic or linguistic connotation.
Similar crowns, brought through contacts with the continent, can also be found in Kofun era Japan.
Modern interpretation of historical, archaeological and anthropological evidence has proposed two broad hypotheses.
* 1st period – pre-Scythian and initial Scythian epoch: from the 9th to the middle of the 7th century BC
Although some scholars sought to connect the Pazyryk nomads with indigenous ethnic groups of the Altaic, Rudenko summed up the cultural context in the following observation:
At some point, perhaps as late as the 3rd century AD after the demise of the Han dynasty and the Xiongnu,  Eastern Scythians crossed the Pamir Mountains and settled in the western Tarim Basin, where the Scythian Khotanese and Tumshuqese languages are attested in Brahmi scripture from the 10th and 11th centuries AD.
After the Saka migrated into northwest area of the Indian subcontinent, the region became known as "land of the Saka" (i.e.
The modern region of Sistan in eastern Iran and southern Afghanistan takes its name from the classical Sakastan ("land of the Sakas").
Some remnants of the eastern groups have survived as modern Pashto and Pamiri languages in Central Asia.
Drangiana, of modern Afghanistan and Pakistan).
Graves of armed females have been found in southern Ukraine and Russia.
The Turkic migration assimilated the Saka linguistically in Central Asia.
The kings Skilurus and Palakus waged wars with Mithridates the Great (reigned 120–63 BC) for control of the Crimean littoral, including Chersonesos Taurica and the Cimmerian Bosporus.
Based on numerous archeological findings in Ukraine, southern Russian and Kazakhstan men and warrior women wore long sleeve tunics that were always belted, often with richly ornamented belts.
He could do so now without loss of face; and in order to make the outcome acceptable to the Saccae, he released the Scythian prisoners of war without ransom in order to broker a peace agreement.
According to Herodotus, Cyrus the Great also confronted the Massagetae, a people thought to be related to the Saka, while campaigning to the east of the Caspian Sea and was killed in the battle in 530 BC.
An alternative view explains the origin of the Scythian cultural complex to have emerged from local groups of the "Timber Grave" (or ''Srubna'') culture (although this is also associated with the Cimmerians).
Alexander did not intend to subdue the nomads: he wanted to go to the south, where a far more serious crisis demanded his attention.
When Herodotus wrote his ''Histories'' in the 5th century BC, Greeks distinguished Scythia Minor, in present-day Romania and Bulgaria, from a Greater Scythia that extended eastwards for a 20-day ride from the Danube River, across the steppes of today's East Ukraine to the lower Don basin.
Herodotus says Sakas had "high caps tapering to a point and stiffly upright."
The gold bowls depicted scenes showing clothing and weapons.
In 2000, the touring exhibition 'Scythian Gold' introduced the North American public to the objects made for Scythian nomads by Greek craftsmen north of the Black Sea, and buried with their Scythian owners under burial mounds on the flat plains of present-day Ukraine.
The Ukrainian term for such a burial mound, ''kurhán'' (Ukrainian: Курган) as well as the Russian term ''kurgán'', derives from a Turkic word for "castle".
4.73–75); archaeology has confirmed the use of cannabis in funeral rituals.
In Eastern Europe, by the early Medieval Ages, the Scythians and their closely related Sarmatians were eventually assimilated and absorbed (e.g.
* 2nd period – early Scythian epoch: from the 7th to the 6th centuries BC
Some Scythian tombs reveal traces of Greek, Chinese, and Indian craftsmanship, suggesting a process of Hellenization, Sinification, and other local influences among the Scythians.
In the 19th century, romantic revisionists in the West transformed the "barbarian" Scyths of literature into the wild and free, hardy and democratic ancestors of all blond Indo-Europeans.
A high degree of cultural syncretism pervades the findings, however.
According to this, the Scythians originally lived south of the Rhipaean mountains, until they got into a conflict with a tribe called the Issedones, pressed in their turn by the Cyclopes; and so the Scythians decided to migrate westwards.
"generalissimo"), an Iranian-based word equivalent to the Sanskrit title ''senapati'', yet nearly identical to the Khotanese Saka ''hīnāysa'' attested in later documents.
Burials at Pazyryk in the Altay Mountains have included some spectacularly preserved Scythians of the "Pazyryk culture" – including the Ice Maiden of the 5th century BC.
Men and warrior women wore tunics, often embroidered, adorned with felt applique work, or metal (golden) plaques.
The spectacular Scythian grave-goods from Arzhan, and others in Tuva have been dated from about 900 BC onward.
The two individuals were found to be not closely related.
It is possible that the later physical descriptions by Adamantius and Gregory of Scythians refer to East Germanic tribes, as the latter were frequently referred to as "Scythians" in Roman sources at that time.
For example, a 2002 study, the mitochondrial DNA of Saka period male and female skeletal remains from a double inhumation kurgan at the Beral site in Kazakhstan was analysed.
The name does appear somewhat further east than the Achaemenid Empire, as the Chinese knew the Asian Scythians as Sai (Chinese character: 塞, Old Sinitic ''*sək'').
Sakastan was not the only province of Scythian origin on the eastern margin of the Persian Empire.
They rode with no stirrups or saddles, just saddle-cloths.
Issyk Golden Man/Maiden) wore shorter tunics and more close fitting tunics than the Pontic steppe Scythians.
This, in turn, might also depend on which population is studied, i.e.
Other metalwork pieces from across the whole Eurasian steppe use an animal style, showing animals, often in combat and often with their legs folded beneath them.
They could have worn a riding coat that later was known as a Median robe or Kantus.
Scythian archaeology also examines the remains of North Pontic Scythian cities and fortifications.
Herodotus provides a depiction that can be related to the results of archaeological research, but apparently knew little of the eastern part of Scythia.
Materials used depended on the wealth, climate and necessity.
Patriarch Photius may have first applied the term to them during the Siege of Constantinople (860).
Starting from the names of the province given in Old Persian inscriptions, Sugda and Suguda, and the knowledge derived from Middle Sogdian that Old Persian -gd- applied to Sogdian was pronounced as voiced fricatives, -γδ-, Szemerényi arrives at *Suγδa as an Old Sogdian endonym.
The Ziwiye hoard, a treasure of gold and silver metalwork and ivory found near the town of Sakiz south of Lake Urmia and dated to between 680 and 625 BC, includes objects with Scythian "animal style" features.
However, as a consequence of the fight for supremacy between the Xiongnu and other groups, the Saka were pushed towards Bactria, and later on southward to northwest India and eastward to the oasis city-states of western Tarim Basin region of Xinjiang in Northwest China.
Women wore shawls, often richly decorated with metal (golden) plaques.
It has been tentatively identified by a team of archaeologists led by Boris Shramko as the site of Gelonus, the purported capital of Scythia.
But Eunapius, Claudius Cladianus and Olympiodorus usually mean "Goths" when they write "Scythians".
In artworks, the Scythians are portrayed exhibiting European traits.
Others have further stressed that "Scythian" was a very broad term used by both ancient and modern scholars to describe a whole host of otherwise unrelated peoples sharing only certain similarities in lifestyle (nomadism), cultural practices and language.
Ordinary Pazyryk graves contain only common utensils, but in one, among other treasures, archaeologists found the famous Pazyryk Carpet, the oldest surviving wool-pile oriental rug.
In the Achaemenid-era Old Persian inscriptions found at Persepolis, dated to the reign of Darius I (r. 522-486 BC), the Saka are said to have lived just beyond the borders of Sogdiana.
Similar documents in the Khotanese-Saka language were found in Dunhuang and date mostly from the 10th century.
The first, formerly more espoused by Soviet and then Russian researchers, roughly followed Herodotus' (third) account, holding that the Scythians were an Eastern Iranian group who arrived from Inner Asia, i.e.
Ruled by small numbers of closely allied élites, Scythians had a reputation for their archers, and many gained employment as mercenaries.
At their peak, Scythians came to dominate the entire steppe zone, stretching from the Carpathian Mountains in the west to central China (Ordos culture) and the south Siberia (Tagar culture) in the east, creating what has been referred to as the first Central Asian nomadic empire.
The kingdom existed until it was conquered by the Muslim Turkic peoples of the Kara-Khanid Khanate, which led to both the Turkification and Islamization of the region.
Moreover, the term Scythian, like Cimmerian, was used to refer to a variety of groups from the Black Sea to southern Siberia and central Asia.
Moreover, this study found that they were genetically more closely related to modern populations of eastern Europe than those of central and southern Asia.
Some argued for the Pamirs or Xinjiang as their location, although Jaxartes is considered to be their more likely location given that the name says "beyond Sogdiana" rather than Bactria.
In Late Antiquity, the notion of a Scythian ethnicity grew more vague and outsiders might dub any people inhabiting the Pontic-Caspian steppe as "Scythians", regardless of their language.
The Kazakhstan Saka (e.g.
According to the 11th-century Lebor Gabála Érenn (''The Book of the Taking of Ireland''), the 14th-century Auraicept na n-Éces and other Irish folklore, the Irish originated in Scythia and were descendants of Fénius Farsaid, a Scythian prince who created the Ogham alphabet and who was one of the principal architects of the Gaelic language.
All the houses in the place and all the temples are of the same material.
In the recent two years new aDNA tests were made on various ancient samples across Eurasia, among them two from Scythian burials.
Warrior belts were made of leather, often with gold or other metal adornments and had many attached leather thongs for fastening of the owner's gorytos, sword, whet stone, whip etc.
The western (Sarmatian) group of ancient Scythian survived as the medieval language of the Alans and eventually gave rise to the modern Ossetian language.
A warlike people, the Scythians were particularly known for their equestrian skills, and their early use of composite bows shot from horseback.
Ancient Y-DNA data was finally provided by Keyser ''et al'' in 2009.
Scythian women dressed in much the same fashion as men.
A number of groups have claimed possible descent from the Scythians, including the Ossetians, Pashtuns (in particular, the Sakzai tribe) and the Parthians (whose homelands lay to the east of the Caspian Sea and who were thought to have come there from north of the Caspian).
Men and women wore coats, e.g.
Based on the results on professional as well amateur aDNA calculators both samples appear similar like a link between the Iranic speaking people of South-Central Asia as well people of the northern regions of West Asia on one side and Eastern Europeans on the other.
For the fact is that the Geloni were anciently Greeks, who, being driven out of the factories along the coast, fled to the Budini and took up their abode with them.
A Scythian army sought to take revenge against the Macedonians for the death of Ateas, as they pushed the borders of their empire north and east, and to take advantage of a revolt by the local Sogdian satrap.
Accounts by Herodotus of Scythian origins has been discounted recently; although his accounts of Scythian raiding activities contemporary to his writings have been deemed more reliable.
Scythian warriors could also have served as mercenaries for the various kingdoms of ancient China.
It belonged to the N1a maternal lineage, a geographically "west Eurasian lineage."
The restored Scythian name is *Skuda (archer), which among the Pontic or Royal Scythians became *Skula, in which the d has been regularly replaced by an l.
"Greco-Scythian" works depicting Scythians within a much more Hellenic style date from a later period, when Scythians had already adopted elements of Greek culture, and the most elaborate royal pieces are assumed to have been made by Greek goldsmiths for this lucrative market.
Scythians kept herds of horses, cattle, and sheep, lived in tent-covered wagons, and fought with bows and arrows on horseback.
From the viewpoint of Greek and Persian ancient observers, they were all lumped together under the ''etic'' category "Scythians".
The Pazyryk felt tapestry shows a rider wearing a billowing cloak.
Long sleeved, and open, it seems that on the Persepolis Apadana Skudrian delegation is perhaps shown wearing such coat.
Here are temples built in honour of the Grecian gods, and adorned after the Greek fashion with images, altars, and shrines, all in wood.
Modern scholars however usually use the term Saka to refer to Iranian-speaking tribes who inhabited the Eastern Steppe and the Tarim Basin.
In 2015 the Institute of Archaeology in Moscow conducted researches on various Sarmatian-Alan and Saltovo-Mayaki culture Kurgan burials.
He did say that the ancient Persians called all the Scyths ''Σάκαι'' (Sacae, Herodotus 7.64).
In 329 BC Philip's son, Alexander the Great, came into conflict with the Scythians at the Battle of Jaxartes.
He contended that Khotanese-Saka-language royal rescripts of Khotan dated to the 10th century "makes it likely that the ruler of Khotan was a speaker of Iranian."
The Scythians subsequently engaged in frequent conflicts with the Achaemenid Empire.
Strabo (c. 63 BC – AD 24) reports that King Ateas united under his power the Scythian tribes living between the Maeotian marshes and the Danube.
And the three Saltovo-Mayaki samples from 8th to 9th century AD turned out with yDNAs G, J2a-M410 and R1a-z94 respectively.
Asian Saka headgear is clearly visible on the Persepolis Apadana staircase bas-relief – high pointed hat with flaps over ears and the nape of the neck.
The Scythians were among the earliest peoples to master mounted warfare.
Persians and other peoples in Asia referred to the Scythians living in Asia as Sakas.
# Firstly (4.7), the Scythians' legend about themselves, which portrays the first Scythian king, Targitaus, as the child of the sky-god and of a daughter of the Dnieper.
The Scythians were notoriously aggressive warriors.
The ubiquity and utter dominance of R1a Y-DNA lineage contrasts markedly with the diversity seen in the mtDNA profiles.
The relationships between the peoples living in these widely separated regions remains unclear.
Byzantine sources also refer to the Rus raiders who attacked Constantinople circa 860 in contemporary accounts as "Tauroscythians", because of their geographical origin, and despite their lack of any ethnic relation to Scythians.
Archaeologists have extrapolated the Pazyryk culture from these finds: five large burial mounds and several smaller ones between 1925 and 1949, one opened in 1947 by Russian archaeologist Sergei Rudenko.
The Saka then migrated down to the northwest area of the Indian subcontinent where they became known as Indo-Scythians, as well as eastward to the settlements of the Tarim Basin in present day China such as Khotan and Tumshaq.
The HV1 mitochondrial sequence of the male was similar to the Anderson sequence which is most frequent in European populations.
Evidence of the Middle Iranian "Scytho-Khotanese" language survives in Northwest China, where Khotanese-Saka-language documents, ranging from medical texts to Buddhist literature, have been found primarily in Khotan and Tumshuq (northeast of Kashgar).
were blue- (or green-) eyed, fair-skinned and light-haired people who might have played a role in the early development of the Tarim Basin civilization.
4 of them turned out as belonging to yDNA Haplogroup G2 and 6 of them had mtDNA I.
Such tactics wore down their enemies, making them easier to defeat.
Women wore also soft shoes with metal (gold) plaques.
:The Budini are a large and powerful nation: they have all deep blue eyes, and bright red hair.
In 512 BC, when King Darius the Great of Persia attacked the Scythians, he allegedly penetrated into their land after crossing the Danube.
Based on such accounts of Scythian founders of certain Germanic as well as Celtic tribes, British historiography in the British Empire period such as
In the 3rd century BC, the Greek poet Callimachus described the Arismapes (Arimaspi) of Scythia as fair-haired.
In a study conducted in 2014 by VV Ilyinskyon on bone fragments from 10 Alanic burials on the Don River, DNA could be abstracted from a total of 7.
The Scythian group of languages of the Old Iranian period are essentially unattested, and their internal divergence is difficult to judge.
Saka, on the other hand, Szemerényi relates to an Iranian verbal root, sak-, "go, roam", and hypothesizes that the Achaemenids used "nomad" to refer to the northern tribes, rather than their endonym.
Herodotus and other classical historians listed quite a number of tribes who lived near the Scythians, and presumably shared the same general milieu and nomadic steppe culture, often called "Scythian culture", even though scholars may have difficulties in determining their exact relationship to the "linguistic Scythians".
From them archaeologists have learned much about Scythian life and art.
Since the 2009 study by Keyser ''et al'', population and geographic specific SNPs have been discovered which can accurately distinguish between "European" R1a ('''M458, Z280''') and "South Asian" R1a ('''Z93''') Re-analyzing ancient Scytho-Siberian samples for these more specific subclades will further elucidate if the Eurasian steppe populations have an ultimate Eastern European or EurAsian origin, or perhaps, both.
Its location at the northern edge of the Ukrainian steppe would have allowed strategic control of the north-south trade-route.
During the 5th to 3rd centuries BC, the Scythians evidently prospered.
They appear to be a sewn, long sleeve garment that extended to the knees and belted with a belt while owner's weapons were fastened to the belt (sword or dagger, gorytos, battleax, whetstone etc.).
In the second paragraph of the 1320 Declaration of Arbroath, the élite of Scotland claim Scythia as a former homeland of the Scots.
Another study by the same team, again from two Scytho-Siberian skeletons found in the Altai Republic, were phenotypically males "of mixed Euro-Mongoloid origin".
* 3rd period – classical Scythian epoch: from the 5th to the 4th centuries BC
Pazyryk Saka had many varieties, from fur to felt.
Some writers claim that Scythians figured in the formation of the empire of the Medes and likewise of Caucasian Albania.
Scythian women wore long, loose robes, ornamented with metal plaques (gold).
This is attested in a contemporary Kharosthi inscription found on the Mathura lion capital belonging to the Saka kingdom of the Indo-Scythians (200 BC - 400 AD) in northern India, roughly the same time the Chinese record that the Saka had invaded and settled the country of ''Jibin'' 罽賓 (i.e.
Men and women wore long trousers, often adorned with metal plaques and often embroidered or adorned with felt appliqués; trousers could have been wider or tight fitting depending on the area.
Ateas died in battle, and his empire disintegrated.
They developed a rich culture characterized by opulent tombs, fine metalwork, and a brilliant art style.
His westward expansion brought him into conflict with Philip II of Macedon (reigned 359 to 336 BC), who took military action against the Scythians in 339 BC.
