Pearl divers have traditionally greased their skins, put cotton in their ears and clips on their noses, and dived to  with baskets in order to collect pearl oysters.
Both are informed by chemical oceanography, which studies the behavior of elements and molecules within the oceans: particularly, at the moment, the ocean's role in the carbon cycle and carbon dioxide's role in the increasing acidification of seawater.
From 1878 to 1880, the SS ''Vega'' successfully completed the Northeast Passage and went on to circumnavigate Eurasia for the first time.
Light is only able to penetrate the top  so this is the only part of the sea where plants can grow.
Portuguese and Spanish pursuit of similar rights over new seas and lands during the Age of Discovery and papal support of their claims was a factor in the Wars of Religion; in 1609, a jurist hired to defend a lucrative act of piracy by the Dutch East India Company penned ''Mare Liberum'', an argument in favor of freedom of the seas that ultimately produced the compromise that territory extended as far as land-based cannonshot could reach, standardized to 3 nautical miles (), and that everything beyond was international waters.
The great navies initially focused their efforts on constructing great dreadnoughts and battleships, but these fought inconclusively in the First World War.
In 2012, total global production of fish, crustaceans, molluscs, and other aquatic animals was a record 158 million metric tons (174 million tons), of which 91.3 million metric tons (100 million tons) were caught in the wild.
Disadvantages include problems caused by waves and tides, the tendency for excavations to silt up, and the washing away of spoil heaps.
Close to the seabed live demersal fish that largely feed on pelagic organisms or benthic invertebrates.
The marine nitrogen cycle consists of complex microbial transformations which include the fixation of nitrogen, its assimilation, nitrification, anammox, and denitrification.
Researchers make use of satellite-based remote sensing for surface waters, with research ships, moored observatories and autonomous underwater vehicles to study and monitor all parts of the sea.
During the Golden Age of the Netherlands, artists such as Jan Porcellis, Hendrick Dubbels, Willem van de Velde the Elder and his son, and Ludolf Bakhuizen celebrated the sea and the Dutch navy at the peak of its military prowess.
Spearfishing with barbed harpoons along the coast was widespread by the Palaeolithic.
The Hales Trophy was an award for the fastest commercial crossing of the Atlantic and was won by the SS ''United States'' in 1952 for a crossing that took three days, ten hours, and forty minutes.
They form when geothermally superheated water is emitted from deep sea hydrothermal vents known as "black smokers": in contact with the cold waters of the deep ocean, the minerals precipitate and settle around the vent.
After the catch from wild marine fisheries grew from 18 million metric tons (20 million tons) in 1950 to around 85 million metric tons ( million tons) by the late 1980s, it has remained essentially constant since.
In the Pacific these may cover up to 30 percent of the deep ocean floor.
The scientific study of water and Earth's water cycle is hydrology; hydrodynamics studies the physics of water in motion.
Shrimp farming has also caused the destruction of important mangrove forests throughout southeast Asia.
The two main processing methods, vacuum distillation and reverse osmosis, use large quantities of energy.
The results are sometimes dramatic—the lull in fishing over the course of the First World War saw the North Sea's 1919 catch double 1913's—and sometimes much less so: two decades on, the levels of cod in the Grand Banks remain only 10% of their peak.
MARPOL 73/78 is a convention to minimize pollution of the seas by ships.
As the term has been applied over time, there are no sharp distinctions between seas and oceans, although seas are smaller and are—with the notable exception of the Sargasso Sea created by the North Atlantic Gyre—usually bounded by land on a smaller scale than multiple continents.
Much larger algae, commonly known as seaweeds, are important locally; ''Sargassum'' forms floating drifts, while kelp form seabed forests.
President Woodrow Wilson argued this principle as part of United States's entrance into World War I and as one of his Fourteen Points afterwards; nonetheless, President Truman's unilateral claim of jurisdiction over the oil reserves of America's continental shelf in 1945 directly led to the end of the regime.
Foraging sea birds such as the albatross and petrel may mistake debris for food and accumulate indigestible plastic in their digestive systems.
The more recent study of the sea in particular is oceanography.
An "exclusive economic zone" or EEZ places all exploitation of marine life and minerals within 200 nmi () of the baseline under national supervision.
However, population growth, industrialization, and intensive farming have all contributed to present-day marine pollution.
The sea appears in human culture in contradictory ways, as both powerful but serene and as beautiful but dangerous.
Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf.
In the first centuries BC, steppe nomads' interruption of India's access to Siberian gold caused them to open up maritime routes to Malaysia and Indonesia, exposing them first to Hindu and then Muslim traders.
Over 3 million vessels are employed in sea fishing.
Nitrogen is often the limiting factor in marine systems and the addition of nitrogen sparks algal blooms and red tides, which then may lower the oxygen level of the water to the point where it kills marine animals.
This can either be exchanged throughout the food chain or precipitated into the deeper, more carbon-rich layers as dead soft tissue or in shells and bones as calcium carbonate.
Around the same time, Mesopotamians were using bitumen to caulk their reed boats and, a little later, masted sails.
This has advantages over land-based mining in that equipment can be built at specialized shipyards and infrastructure costs are lower.
Marine habitats can be divided horizontally into coastal and open ocean habitats.
Some marine creatures make large migrations, either to other regions of the ocean on a seasonal basis or up and down its vertical layers, often ascending to feed at night before descending to safety by day.
Although internal politics hampered Chinese modernization, American naval power produced a major reform in Japan which bore fruit during the 1905 Battle of Tsushima when the Japanese were able to decisively defeat Russia.
Run-off of fertilizers from agricultural land is a major source of pollution in some areas and the discharge of raw sewage has a similar effect.
The direction of all of these is governed by surface and submarine land masses and by the rotation of the Earth (the Coriolis effect).
More broadly, "'''the sea'''" is the interconnected system of Earth's salty, oceanic waters—considered as one global ocean or as several principal oceanic divisions.
Although accurate charting of the coasts of Russia only began in the 18th century and the archipelago of Severnaya Zemlya was not discovered until 1910, Novgorodians had been sailing the White Sea since at least the 13th century.
It was soon damaged by waves, then destroyed by a storm.
Their commercial extraction for nickel was investigated in the 1970s but abandoned in favour of more convenient sources.
They live a traditional life on the islands involving hunting, fishing, gardening, and trading with neighboring peoples in Papua New Guinea and Australia.
The use of containers has greatly increased the efficiency and decreased the cost of moving them with most freight now traveling in standard sized, lockable containers loaded on purpose-built container ships at dedicated terminals.
Earth is the only known planet with seas of liquid water on its surface, although Mars possesses ice caps and similar planets in other solar systems may have oceans.
Drilling for oil in the sea has environmental impacts.
The brine produced as a by-product contains some toxic materials and is returned to the sea.
Ships may cross numerous time zones on a voyage, so nautical time, introduced in the 1920s, is used in international waters.
In 1538, Gerardus Mercator devised a map projection conveniently making constant bearings (rhumb lines) straight.
The 480 BC Battle of Salamis largely determined the course of the Persian Wars not because of its inherent damage (however considerable) but because Themistocles's deception and superior strategy left the Athenians capable of disrupting sea-borne supplies at will and potentially striking at the pontoon bridges across the Hellespont, cutting off the Persians' line of retreat.
The first evidence of its use in Chinese maritime navigation, however, dates to Zhu Yu's c. 1115 ''Pingzhou Table Talks''.
Despite earlier theories, modern bathymetric soundings now suggest that even the earliest settlement of the Philippines required crossing deep water at the Mindoro Strait or the Sibutu Passage.
Unlike the usual English common law system, the courts of admiralty hewed closer to Continental practice, leaving it open for abuse that contributed to the American Revolution.
Marine biology (biological oceanography) studies the plants, animals, and other organisms inhabiting marine ecosystems.
The surface layers are often deficient in biologically-active nitrogen compounds.
Humans have travelled the sea since prehistoric times, originally on rafts and in dugout, reed, and bark canoes.
Coral reefs, the so-called "rainforests of the sea", occupy less than 0.1 percent of the world's ocean surface, yet their ecosystems include 25 percent of all marine species.
Here, sponges, echinoderms, polychaete worms, sea anemones, and other invertebrates live among algal-encrusted rocks.
As empires grew and their armies became too large to live off the lands through which they passed, disruption of their supply fleets also became a powerful tactic.
Marine life plays an important part in the carbon cycle as photosynthetic organisms convert dissolved carbon dioxide into organic carbon and it is economically important to humans for providing fish for use as food.
Also on the seabed are manganese nodules formed of layers of iron, manganese, and other hydroxides around a core.
Small scale mining of the deep sea floor is being developed off the coast of Papua New Guinea using robotic techniques, but the obstacles are formidable.
As well as the wild stock, about 79 million metric tons (87 million tons) of food and non-food products were produced by sea farming in 2010, an all-time high.
The resulting Columbian Exchange introduced potatoes, corn, and chili peppers to the Old World while smallpox epidemics devastated the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
A modified form was used by Columbus for his voyages.
However, the dwarf Flores man probably needed to cross a  wide strait from Sundaland to reach Komodo and, although the exact details remain uncertain, the ancestors of Australia's Aborigines must have crossed the broader deep-sea Wallace Line to Near Oceania tens of thousands of years ago.
In Namibia, more diamonds are now collected from marine sources than by conventional methods on land.
Nowadays, large quantities of goods are transported by sea, especially across the Atlantic and around the Pacific Rim.
In the Arctic, in 1594, the Dutch captain Willem Barentsz reached Svalbard and the Barents Sea while, in the south, Anthony de la Roché crossed the Antarctic Convergence in 1675 and three separate expeditions—one British, one American, and one Russian—all claimed to have discovered Antarctica in 1820.
This era waned as cheaper and faster intercontinental flights became available, most importantly the 1958 New York City–Paris route.
Not all voyages of discovery originated in Western Europe.
Ongoing oceanographic research includes marine lifeforms, conservation, the marine environment, the chemistry of the ocean, the studying and modelling of climate dynamics, the air-sea boundary, weather patterns, ocean resources, renewable energy, waves and currents, and the design and development of new tools and technologies for investigating the deep.
The infrastructure may cause damage and oil may be spilt.
The sea is an essential aspect of human trade, travel, mineral extraction, and power generation.
About six hundred species of plants and animals were cultured, some for use in seeding wild populations.
Shipping lanes are the routes on the open sea used by cargo vessels, traditionally making use of trade winds and currents.
The heavy metals of greatest concern are copper, lead, mercury, cadmium, and zinc which may be accumulated by marine invertebrates.
Recreational divers are advised to restrict themselves to depths of under  beyond which the danger of nitrogen narcosis increases.
Music too has been inspired by the ocean.
A "contiguous zone" of a further 12 nmi are permitted for hot pursuit of vessels charged with violating customs, taxation, immigration, or pollution laws in the territorial waters.
Oceanography has established that not all life is restricted to the sunlit surface waters: even under enormous depths and pressures, nutrients streaming from hydrothermal vents support their own unique ecosystem.
The equipment used to capture the fish may be purse seines, other seines, trawls, dredges, gillnets, and long-lines.
Shortly after, the fleets of the Sea Peoples disrupted the entire Eastern Mediterranean: over a period of about 50 years, raids and invasions violently destroyed nearly every coastal city between Pylos and Gaza.
In the center of the Pacific gyre, there is a permanent floating accumulation of mostly plastic waste and there is a similar garbage patch in the Atlantic.
Shrimps can be reared in shallow ponds connected to the open sea.
These become concentrated in the surface film and in marine sediment, especially estuarine mud.
In the Gulf of Mexico, where oil-eating bacteria are already present, they take only a few days to consume spilt oil.
Seas are generally larger than lakes and contain salt water, but the Sea of Galilee is a freshwater lake.
Marine primary producers—plants and microscopic organisms in the plankton—are widespread and very diverse.
Some vertebrates such as seabirds, seals, and sea turtles return to the land to breed but fish, cetaceans, and sea snakes have a completely aquatic lifestyle and many invertebrate phyla are entirely marine.
Lothal in India boasted the earliest known dock around 2400 BC.
Some Sea Gypsies are accomplished free-divers, able to descend to depths of , though many are adopting a more settled, land-based way of life.
Desalination is the technique of removing salts from seawater to leave fresh water suitable for drinking or irrigation.
The best-known are tropical coral reefs such as Australia's Great Barrier Reef, but cold water reefs harbor a wide array of species including corals (only six of which contribute to reef formation).
In the short term, oil spills result in wildlife populations being decreased and unbalanced, leisure activities being affected, and the livelihoods of people dependent on the sea being devastated.
Ropes can be hung in water to grow algae, oysters, and mussels.
Animals may be disorientated by seismic waves used to locate deposits, probably causing the beaching of whales.
From 1300 to 900 BC, the Austronesian "Lapita" peoples displayed great feats of navigation, reaching out from the Bismarck Archipelago to as far away as Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa.
The voyages of exploration and colonization were often provided for by the crown out of naval funds; where they were not, they were usually chartered or else purchased and then used for shipping supplies after the initial settlement.
The sea holds enormous quantities of valuable dissolved minerals.
The extra nutrients provided by these sources can cause excessive plant growth.
Exploration of the deep sea by submersibles revealed a new world of creatures living on the seabed that scientists had not previously expected.
In the 1990s, disease wiped out China's farmed Farrer's scallop and white shrimp and required their replacement by other species.
Marine mammals are less seriously affected but may be chilled through the removal of their insulation, blinded, dehydrated, or poisoned.
Each such zone is uniformly 15 degrees of longitude wide, the ship's clock going forward one hour per zone when travelling eastwards.
The exclusive economic zones around coastal countries under the UNCLOS regime have permitted states to institute quota and other management systems over the most productive regions of the sea, accounting for around 87% of the annual harvest.
The extensive calcareous skeletons they extrude build up into coral reefs which are an important feature of the seabed.
The tidal zone with its periodic exposure to dehydrating air is home to barnacles, molluscs, and crustaceans.
The completion of a submarine telegraphic cable across the English Channel in 1850 and subsequent links of the All Red Line led to greater interest in the deep sea.
These provide a diverse habitat for reef dwelling organisms.
Around 2000 BC, the Minoans of Crete established the earliest thalassocracy, a maritime empire heavily dependent upon its trade and naval power.
Offshore oil and gas production can be difficult due to the remote, harsh environment.
Around 500 BC, the Carthaginian navigator Hanno left a detailed periplus of an Atlantic journey that reached at least Senegal and possibly Mount Cameroon; and the Greek Pytheas left another exploring the seas around Great Britain around 325 BC.
About  were fishers and the remainder fish farmers.
Integrated mariculture has the advantage that there is a readily-available supply of planktonic food and waste is removed naturally; in cases where the waste would otherwise be harmful, multi-species techniques can used to, e.g., feed farmed shellfish from the waste being produced by farmed salmon.
In the 20th century, the ''Gjøa'' was the first vessel to accomplish the Northwest Passage in 1906.
A '''sea''' is a large body of salt water that is surrounded in whole or in part by land.
Earlier ideas that no life could exist below 300 fathoms () were disproved in 1860 when a Mediterranean line failed and was pulled up from depths four times lower, completely encrusted with marine life.
From 1921, the International Hydrographic Organization in Monaco has standardized surveying and charting of the sea and, from 1924, the Discovery Investigations studied whales and mapped the seas around Antarctica.
Such events have created dead zones in the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Mexico.
The peoples of East Asia were introduced to the true shape of the other continents from the maps of Matteo Ricci.
A surviving fragment of Isidore of Charax's 1st-century Parthian itinerary describes locals freediving for pearls in the Persian Gulf, and Oppian's 2nd-century ''Halieutics'' relates the four main Greek and Roman fishing methods as hook-and-line, netting, passive traps, and trident.
It can also enter as dissolved organic carbon through rivers and is converted by photosynthetic organisms into organic carbon.
Calcium carbonate also becomes more soluble at lower pH, so ocean acidification is likely to have profound effects on marine organisms with calcareous shells, such as oysters, clams, sea urchins, and corals, because their ability to form shells will be reduced, and the carbonate compensation depth will rise closer to the sea surface.
The result of all this contamination is largely unknown because of the large number of substances involved and the lack of information on their biological effects.
About 85% of the solids in the open sea are sodium chloride.
A dead whale sinking to the bottom of the ocean provides food for an assembly of organisms which similarly rely largely on the actions of sulphur-reducing bacteria.
The large and highly variable energy of waves gives them enormous destructive capability, making affordable and reliable wave machines problematic to develop.
This was not always the case, with sea bathing becoming the vogue in Europe in the 18th century after Dr. William Buchan advocated the practice for health reasons.
These and other voyages permitted European maps to attain a previously impossible degree of accuracy.
Latitude (the ship's position ranging from 0° at the equator to 90° north and south) could be determined by inclinometers—including the astrolabe, sextant, and Jacob's staff—measuring the angle between the horizon and heavenly bodies like the sun or moon.
Toxic substances such as mercury, lead, and arsenic may be released.
Despite a long-standing preference for autarky, China briefly opened up under the Song and Mongol Yuan dynasties.
This importance and duality has affected human culture, from early sea gods to the epic poetry of Homer to the changes induced by the Columbian Exchange, from burial at sea to Basho's haikus to hyperrealist marine art, and inspiring music ranging from the shanties in ''The Complaynt of Scotland'' to Rimsky-Korsakov's "The Sea and Sinbad's Ship" to A-mei's "Listen to the Sea".
Its objectives include developing and maintaining a regulatory framework for shipping, maritime safety, environmental concerns, legal matters, technical co-operation and maritime security.
Bromine, accumulated after being leached from the land, is economically recovered from the Dead Sea, where it occurs at 55,000 parts per million (ppm).
About 45 percent of the sea's primary production of living material is contributed by diatoms.
One important element for the formation of skeletal material in marine animals is calcium, but calcium carbonate becomes more soluble with pressure, so carbonate shells and skeletons dissolve below its compensation depth.
Scientific studies of population dynamics and nationalization of formerly shared waters are both helping to cope with overexploitation but the success of modern commercial fishing has required major corrective actions: the collapse of the Grand Banks cod fishery to less than 1% of its historic levels required a complete moratorium by Canada in 1992 and China has enforced a zero-growth policy in its wild catch since 2000, redirecting its industry towards aquaculture; its annual months-long bans on fishing in disputed areas of the South China Sea is enforced over the protest of neighboring states.
The minerals precipitate from seawater and grow very slowly.
Combustion products are transported in the air and deposited through precipitation.
It has its place in mythology and religion, literature, art, poetry, film, theater, and music.
A third division is by latitude: from tropical to temperate to polar waters.
Herodotus records Egyptian claims that he also commissioned a 3-year-long expedition which circumnavigated Africa from the Red Sea to the Nile delta.
Commodities in the form of liquids, powder or particles are carried loose in the holds of bulk carriers and include oil, grain, coal, ore, scrap metal, sand and gravel.
Of particular concern is the manner in which the combination of acidification with the expected additional stressors of higher temperatures and lower oxygen levels will impact the seas.
The present Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) was drafted in 1982 and came into force in 1994.
Sometimes, it is there just as a gentle background but often it introduces such themes as storm, shipwreck, battle, hardship, disaster, the dashing of hopes, or death.
The first offshore wind farm was installed in Denmark in 1991, and the installed capacity of European offshore wind farms reached 3 GW in 2010.
Dedicated and scheduled local passenger services came to be offered in the 16th and 17th centuries, but the 1817 Black Ball was the first trans-Atlantic passenger line.
The Bajau people are originally from the Sulu Archipelago, Mindanao, and northern Borneo.
This means that the most productive areas, rich in plankton and therefore also in fish, are mainly coastal.
The sea is a recurring theme in the Haiku poems of the Japanese poet Matsuo Bashō (1644–1694).
Ships can introduce or spread invasive species through the discharge of ballast water or through the transport of organisms that have accumulated as part of the fouling community on the hulls of vessels.
Chinese economic reform led to massive growth of its fishing production, from 7% of the world total in 1961 to 35% by 2010.
The psychiatrist Carl Jung argued that, in dream interpretation, the sea symbolizes the personal and the collective unconscious.
The sea still remains a venue for recreational boating and large cruise ships.
Desalination is normally only undertaken where fresh water from other sources is in short supply or energy is plentiful, as in the excess heat generated by power stations.
During the 19th century, steam-powered ocean liners connected the railroad networks of the world.
Alexander of Neckham's ''De naturis rerum'', the first European mention of a magnetized needle, dates to 1190 and immediately notes its use among sailors.
The subfield dealing with the sea's motion, its forces, and the forces acting upon it is known as physical oceanography.
Atmospheric carbon dioxide is being absorbed in increasing amounts, lowering its pH in a process known as ocean acidification.
The 18th-century coastal Margate hoys began the popularization of leisure travel in Britain and Ireland that later gathered steam with Thomas Cook's package tours in the next century.
The sea is conventionally divided into up to five large oceanic sections—including the International Hydrographic Organization's four named oceans (the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, and Arctic) and the Southern Ocean; smaller, second-order sections, such as the Mediterranean, are known as ''seas''.
Shipping is supplemented by air freight, a more expensive process mostly used for particularly valuable or perishable cargoes.
In 1519, Juan Sebastián Elcano completed Magellan's Spanish expedition to sail around the world.
Several nomadic indigenous groups in Maritime Southeast Asia live in boats and derive nearly all they need from the sea.
With the collapse of the Roman Empire, European trade dwindled but it continued to flourish elsewhere.
The oceans are home to a diverse collection of life forms that use it as a habitat.
Offshore platforms and drilling rigs extract the oil or gas and store it for transport to land.
Oil is dangerous for marine animals.
Alternatively, marine habitats can be divided vertically into pelagic (open water), demersal (just above the seabed), and benthic (sea bottom) habitats.
The Egyptian pharaoh Necho II initiated construction on a canal which eventually linked the Mediterranean and Red Seas around 600 BC.
For twenty years from 1909, the prize went to the RMS ''Mauretania'' for its average speed of 26.06 knots (48.26&nbsp;km/h).
The London Convention (1972) is a United Nations agreement to control ocean dumping which had been ratified by 89 countries by 8 June 2012.
Overfishing along the coasts of the North Sea spurred the development of deep-sea fishers such as the Brixham and otter trawlers, which might serve as motherships for longlining dories; in the 19th century, advances such as rail transport, canning, and refrigeration allowed fishing to become a full-fledged industry.
As a symbol, the sea has for centuries played a role in literature and poetry.
In principle, it could be harnessed by open-flow turbines; sea bed systems are available, but limited to a depth of about .
The sea's dominance of the planet is such that the British author Arthur C. Clarke once noted that "Earth" would have been better named "Ocean".
Since the development of coordinated fleets of ships capable of landing an invasion force, naval warfare has been an important aspect in the defense (or conquest) of maritime states.
(The "internal waters" landward of the baseline are solely under national control.)
Most of the early human migrations occurred over land: even areas now separated by open sea such as the Americas, Japan, and Britain were accessible by land bridges or fast ice during the last ice age.
In 1473, Lopes Gonçalves crossed the equator and disproved the Aristotelian notion that a ring of fire would bar exploration of the southern hemisphere.
The sea is especially common in Christian imagery, where several of Jesus's disciples were said to have been fishermen on the Sea of Galilee.
Modern fishing vessels include fishing trawlers with a small crew, stern trawlers, purse seiners, long-line factory vessels, and large factory ships which are designed to stay at sea for weeks, processing and freezing great quantities of fish.
Seaborne trade carries more than US $4 trillion worth of goods each year.
Captive breeding programmes have raised lobster larvae for release of juveniles into the wild resulting in an increased lobster harvest in Maine.
The spherical Bathysphere was able to descend to  in 1930 on a cable and, in the 1940s, Jacques Cousteau helped develop the first successful scuba gear and popularize underwater diving.
Sea cucumbers can be ranched on the seabed.
Electricity power stations are often located on the coast or beside an estuary so that the sea can be used as a heat sink.
Improvements in sonar during the world wars were adapted as fishfinders and, during the 1950s, great factory ships caught and processed as many fish in an hour as earlier trawlers had in a season.
Deeper dives can be made with specialized equipment and training.
One of these is the surface film which—despite being tossed about by the movement of waves—provides a rich environment and is home to bacteria, fungi, microalgae, protozoa, fish eggs, and various larvae.
A compass showing magnetic north is first attested—in the form of a "south-pointing spoon"—in the 1st-century Chinese ''Lunheng''.
Meanwhile, the battles of the Mediterranean and Pacific theaters of the war had shown that air power was capable of overcoming the strongest warships.
Accurately determining longitude (the ship's position east or west of some fixed point) proved much harder.
