Nests may be raided by raccoons and foxes.
Marine sea turtles are caught worldwide, although it is illegal to hunt most species in many countries.
Along a 20-mile stretch of beach on the east coast of Florida sea turtles lay over 150,000&nbsp;lbs of eggs in the sand.
Below is a cladogram showing the phylogenetic relationships of living and extinct sea turtles in the Chelonioidea based on Peer and Lee (2005)
The leatherback is the only sea turtle that does not have a hard shell.
Hawksbills principally eat sponges, which constitute 70–95% of their diets in the Caribbean.
To maintain hypotonicity they must excrete excess salt ions.
In the 1960s the cultural demand for sea turtle meat, shells, and eggs was quickly killing the once abundant sea turtle populations that nested on the beach.
Coastal peoples gather sea turtle eggs for consumption.
Jaguars have been reported to smash into the turtle's shell with its paw, and scoop out the flesh.
Depending on the species, a typical clutch may contain 50-350 eggs.
Having more room to live enables more room for growth.
Tortoiseshell, a traditional decorative ornamental material used in Japan and China, comes from the carapace scutes of the hawksbill sea turtle.
In 2007, Reich determined that green sea turtle hatchlings spend the first three to five years of their lives in pelagic waters.
File:Hawksbill Turtle.jpg|Hawksbill sea turtle (''Eretmochelys imbricata'')
In general, sea turtles have a more fusiform body plan than their terrestrial or freshwater counterparts.
A favorite settlement for barnacle larvae is the shell or skin around the neck of sea turtles.
Beach development is another area which threatens sea turtles.
Endangered: Pacific Coast of Mexico population
Endangered: populations in Florida and Pacific coast of Mexico populations
entangled in a trawl net) its diving endurance is substantially reduced, so it is more susceptible to drowning.
A constant output of concentrated salty tears may be required to balance the input of salts from regular feeding, even considering leatherback tears can have a salt ion concentration almost twice that of other species of marine turtle.
Using her hind flippers, she digs a circular hole  deep.
The ESA manages sea turtles by population not by species.
However, the law seems to have had little effect as sea turtle eggs are still in demand in Batangan markets.
Lighting restrictions can prevent lights from shining on the beach and confusing hatchlings.
Beaches and dunes are a fragile habitat that depend on vegetation to protect against erosion.
File:Natator depressus.jpg|Flatback sea turtle (''Natator depressus'')
In Africa, the first marine turtle is ''Angolachelys'', from the Turonian of Angola.
Another danger comes from marine debris, especially plastics which may be mistaken for jellyfish, and abandoned fishing nets in which they can become entangled.
Sea turtles are air breathing reptiles that have lungs, so they regularly surface to breathe.
** ''Natator depressus'', flatback sea turtle
These organisms include mollusks, whales, decapod crustaceans, manatees and several other groups related to these species.
Endangered: all populations
After laying, she re-fills the nest with sand, re-sculpting and smoothing the surface, and then camouflaging the nest with vegetation until it is relatively undetectable visually.
Hatchlings depend on drinking sea water immediately upon entering the ocean to replenish water lost during the hatching process.
Evaluating the progress of conservation programs is difficult, because many sea turtle populations have not been assessed adequately.
Wildlife officials released 10,594 Kemp's ridleys hatchlings along the Texas coast this year.
The whole process takes thirty to sixty minutes.
In 2007, the province of Batangas declared the catching and eating of sea turtles (locally referred to as Pawikans) illegal.
However, more research is needed to understand how climate change might affect sea turtle gender distribution and what other possible threats it may pose.
A great deal of intentional marine sea turtle harvests worldwide are for food.
File:Lepidochelys olivacea.jpg|Olive ridley sea turtle (''Lepidochelys olivacea'')
The reason that sea turtles are much bigger than land tortoises and freshwater turtles is directly correlated with the vastness of the ocean, and the fact that they travel such far distances.
Female sea turtles alternate between mating in the water and laying their eggs on land.
Sea grass beds provide breeding and developmental grounds for numerous marine animals.
A foraging turtle may typically spend 5–40 min under water while a sleeping sea turtle can remain under water for 4–7 hours.
A study conducted on this topic shows that body size is positively correlated with speed, so larger turtles are exposed to predators for a shorter amount of time.
These campaigns have involved figures such as Dorismar, Los Tigres del Norte and Maná.
The reduced volume of a fusiform body means sea turtles can not retract their head, legs, and arms into their shells, like other turtles can.
Critically Endangered
The reactions could result in many more marine species eventually becoming endangered or extinct.
The Philippines has had several initiatives dealing with the issue of sea turtle conservation.
'''Sea turtles''' (superfamily '''Chelonioidea'''), sometimes called '''marine turtles''', are reptiles of the order Testudines.
The diet of green turtles changes with age.
They discovered that clutches of this freshwater turtle that were transplanted to a new location had higher mortality rates and more morphological abnormalities compared to non transplanted clutches.
To a much lesser extent, specific species of marine sea turtles are targeted not for their flesh, but for their shells.
Many parts of the world have long considered sea turtles to be fine dining.
However it is not solely on sea turtles that barnacles can be found; other organisms also serve as barnacle’s settlements.
Salt gland functioning begins quickly after hatching, so that the young turtles can establish ion and water balance soon after entering the ocean.
Remarkably, sea turtle respiration remains aerobic for the vast majority of voluntary dive time.
Sea turtles use beaches and the lower dunes to nest and lay their eggs.
Turtles tend to live long lives, around 50 years, so barnacles do not have to worry about host death.
During the first three to five years of life, sea turtles spend most of their time in the pelagic zone floating in seaweed mats.
The results clearly demonstrate that humans should not manipulate or relocate clutches of that turtle, and impart strong evidence of the detrimental effects that human activity can cause.
Sea turtles are often consumed during the Catholic season of Lent, even though they are reptiles, not fish.
Many species of barnacles can settle on any substrate, however some species of barnacles have an obligatory commensal relationship with specific animals, which makes finding a suitable location harder.
Green sea turtles in particular are often found in ''Sargassum'' mats, in which they find shelter and food.
The eggs in one nest hatch together over a short period of time.
Endangered: all populations
describe sea turtles as exotic delicacies.
Beach towns, such as Tortuguero, Costa Rica, have transitioned from a tourism industry that made profits from selling sea turtle meat and shells to an ecotourism-based economy.
In the absence of sargassum, sea turtle young feed in the vicinity of upwelling "fronts".
A 2010 United States National Research Council report concluded that more detailed information on sea turtles’ life cycles, such as birth rates and mortality, is needed.
Around 29 species of "turtle barnacles" have been recorded.
Many coastal communities around the world depend on sea turtles as a source of protein, often harvesting several sea turtles at once and keeping them alive on their backs until needed.
Ancient Greeks and ancient Romans processed sea turtle scutes (primarily from the hawksbill) for various articles and ornaments used by their elites, such as combs and brushes.
Sea turtles have temperature-dependent sex determination, meaning the developing turtle's gender depends on the temperature it is exposed to.
Additionally, all populations of sea turtles that occur in United States waters are listed as threatened or endangered by the US Endangered Species Act (ESA).
The adult barnacle is a sessile organism, however in its larval stage it is planktonic and can move about the water column.
** ''Eretmochelys imbricata'', hawksbill sea turtle
They often depicted sea turtles in their art.
Sea turtles are very vulnerable to oil pollution, both because of their tendency to linger on the water's surface, and because oil can affect them at every stage of their life cycle.
The Caribbean Conservation Corporation began working with villagers to promote ecotourism as a permanent substitute to sea turtle hunting.
Sea turtle shells are an ideal habitat for adult barnacles for three reasons.
Reports of terrestrial predators attacking nesting females are not uncommon.
Within minutes of hatching, hatchlings may be eaten by raccoons, foxes, seabirds, as they make their initial run for the ocean.
This behavior has only been observed in a few locations including the Galapagos, Hawaii, Europa Island, and parts of Australia.
File:Green turtle swimming over coral reefs in Kona.jpg|Green sea turtle (''Chelonia mydas'')
She then returns to the ocean, leaving the eggs untended.
The eggs will incubate for 50–60 days.
Most sea turtle mortality happens early in life.
Green sea turtles in the relatively cooler Pacific are known haul themselves out of the water on remote islands to bask in the sun.
Sea turtles, along with other turtles and tortoises, are part of the order Testudines.
Critically Endangered
File:LeatherbackTurtle.jpg|Leatherback sea turtle (''Dermochelys coriacea'')
Once the sea turtle has reached adulthood it moves closer to the shore.
Predators can only functionally intake so much; larger individuals are not targeted as often.
Survival and physiological performance hinge on immediate and efficient hydration following emergence from the nest.
Sea turtle grazing helps maintain the health of the sea grass beds.
Sea turtles maintain an internal environment that is hypotonic to the ocean.
In one study on the freshwater Arrau turtle (''Podocnemis expansa'') researchers examined the effects of nest relocation.
Since the creation of a sea turtle, ecotourism-based economy, Tortugero annually houses thousands of tourists who visit the protected 22-mile beach that hosts sea turtle walks and nesting grounds.
* '''Family Cheloniidae'''
Barnacles are small, hard shelled crustaceans found attached to multiple different substrates below or just above the ocean.
Sea turtles spend most of their lives swimming and following ocean currents and as water runs along the back of the turtle’s shell it passes over the barnacles, providing an almost constant water flow and influx of food particles.
When surfacing to breathe, a sea turtle can quickly refill its lungs with a single explosive exhalation and rapid inhalation.
Sea turtles usually lay around one hundred eggs at a time, on average only one of the eggs from the nest will survive to adulthood.
This diet shift has an effect on the green turtle's morphology.
Sea turtle-safe lighting uses red or amber LED light, invisible to sea turtles, in place of white light.
Turtle Excluder Devices (TEDs) have reduced sea turtle bycatch in shrimp nets by 97 percent.
However, some relatively inexpensive changes to fishing techniques, such as slightly larger hooks and traps from which sea turtles can escape, can dramatically cut the mortality rate.
The flatback sea turtle is found solely on the northern coast of Australia.
The skin of the flippers is prized for use as shoes and assorted leather goods.
Sea turtles are generally found in the waters over continental shelves.
Green sea turtles have a serrated jaw that is used to eat sea grass and algae.
Secondly, barnacles are suspension feeders.
Sea turtle nesting grounds became sustainable.
Since hatchlings find their way to the ocean by crawling towards the brightest horizon, they can become disoriented on developed stretches of coastline.
Sea turtles spend a majority of their time underwater, so they must be able to hold their breath for long periods.
Ancient Chinese texts dating to the fifth century B.C.E.
The IUCN Red List classifies three species of sea turtle as either "Endangered" or "Critically Endangered".
With the Kemp's ridley sea turtles this occurs during the day.
Large aquatic carnivores such as sharks and crocodiles are the biggest threat.
Within these mats, they found ample shelter and food.
Consequently, conservation organizations have written letters to the Pope asking that he declare sea turtles meat.
The mature nesting female hauls herself onto the beach, nearly always at night, and finds suitable sand in which to create a nest.
When a sea turtle is forcibly submerged (e.g.
File:Padre Island National Seashore - Kemps Ridley Sea Turtle.jpg|Kemp's ridley sea turtle (''Lepidochelys kempii'')
Larger hatchlings have a higher probability of survival than smaller individuals, which can be explained by the fact that larger offspring are faster and thus less exposed to predation.
Conservationists in Mexico and the United States have launched "Don't Eat Sea Turtle" campaigns in order to reduce this trade in sea turtle products.
Turtle nests that hatch during the day are more vulnerable to predators, and may encounter more human activity on beach.
A lineage of unrelated marine testudines, the pleurodire bothremydids, also survived well into the Cenozoic.
Lastly, the long distances and inter ocean travel these sea turtles swim throughout their lifetime, offers the perfect mechanism for dispersal of barnacle larvae.
The seven extant species of sea turtles are: the green, loggerhead, Kemp's ridley, olive ridley, hawksbill, flatback, and leatherback.
All species except the leatherback are in the family Cheloniidae.
Sea turtles constitute a single radiation that became distinct from all other turtles at least 110 million years ago.
After the hole is dug, the female then starts filling the nest with her clutch of soft-shelled eggs.
In September 2007, Corpus Christi, Texas, wildlife officials found 128 Kemp's ridley sea turtle nests on Texas beaches, a record number, including 81 on North Padre Island (Padre Island National Seashore) and four on Mustang Island.
While many of the things that endanger these hatchlings are natural, such as predators including sharks, raccoons, foxes, and seagulls, many new threats to the sea turtle species have recently arrived and increased with the ever-growing presence of humans.
In September 2007, several Chinese poachers were apprehended off the Turtle Islands in the country's southernmost province of Tawi-Tawi.
** ''Dermochelys coriacea'', leatherback sea turtle
File:Loggerhead sea turtle.jpg|Loggerhead sea turtle (''Caretta caretta'')
Caught in a fisherman's net, they are unable to surface and thus drown.
The origin of sea turtles goes back to the Late Jurassic (150 million years ago) with genera such as ''Plesiochelys'', from Europe.
Some species travel between oceans.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped the sea and its animals.
The Kemp's ridley sea turtle is found solely in the Gulf of Mexico and along the East Coast of the United States.
Other species are smaller, being mostly  and proportionally narrower.
Threatened: NW Atlantic, S Atlantic, SE Indo-Pacific, SW Indian populations
Leatherback turtles feed almost exclusively on jellyfish and help control jellyfish populations.
However some species specialize on certain prey.
Nest relocation may not be a useful conservation technique for sea turtles.
In the Caribbean, researchers are having some success in assisting a comeback.
The larval stage chooses where to settle and ultimately the habitat for its full adult life, which is typically between 5 and 10 years.
The baby turtles break free of the egg shell, dig through the sand, and crawl into the sea.
The poachers had collected more than a hundred sea turtles, along with 10,000 sea turtle eggs.
The much larger lachrymal gland found in leatherbacks may have evolved to cope with the higher intake of salts from their prey.
The fact that there is size dependent predation on chelonians has led to the evolutionary development of large body sizes.
Females will come ashore to lay their eggs on sandy beaches during the nesting season.
The habitat of a sea turtle has a significant influence on its morphology.
Stronger vegetation and root systems help to hold the sand in the dunes and help protect the beach from erosion.
Sea Turtles are believed to have a commensal relationship with some barnacles, in which the barnacles benefit from growing on turtles without harming them.
Endangered: NE Atlantic, Mediterranean, N Indian, N Pacific, S Pacific populations
In some areas, such as the east coast of Florida, conservationists dig up sea turtle eggs and relocate them to fenced nurseries to protect them from beach traffic.
Dune vegetation is able to grow and become stronger with the nutrients from sea turtle nests.
Once in the water they are susceptible to seabirds, large fish and even other turtles.
Juveniles are omnivorous, but as they mature they become exclusively herbivorous.
It is the largest sea turtle, measuring  in length at maturity, and  in width, weighing up to .
Eggs, hatched or unhatched, and hatchlings that fail to make it into the ocean are nutrient sources for dune vegetation.
One such sea turtle, named Nickel for the coin that was found lodged in her throat, lives at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago.
Threatened: all other populations
Their large lungs permit rapid exchange of oxygen and avoid trapping gases during deep dives.
Climate change may also cause a threat to sea turtles.
There has been a movement to protect these areas, in some cases by special police.
'''Kemp's ridley'''
Oil can poison the sea turtles upon entering their digestive system.
Most species of sea turtles hatch at night.
** ''Lepidochelys kempii'', Kemp's ridley sea turtle
Sea turtles can be found in all oceans except for the polar regions.
Most information on sea turtle populations comes from counting nests on beaches, but this doesn’t provide an accurate picture of the whole sea turtle population.
This relationship however is not truly commensal.
Adult sea turtles have few predators.
'''United States ESA*'''
All species of sea turtle are listed in CITESAppendix I, restricting international trade of sea turtles and sea turtle products.
Estimates reach as high as 35,000 sea turtles killed a year in Mexico and the same number in Nicaragua.
Sea turtles must surface to breathe.
Leatherbacks face an increased osmotic challenge compared to other species of sea turtle, since their primary prey are jellyfish and other gelatinous plankton, whose fluids have the same concentration of salts as sea water.
But ridley sea turtles come ashore en masse, known as an ''arribada'' (arrival).
They mostly can be found in coral reefs.
Omnivorous turtles may eat a wide variety of plant and animal life including, decapods, seagrasses, seaweed, sponges, mollusks, cnidarians, echinoderms, worms and fish.
** ''Caretta caretta'', loggerhead sea turtle
Fibropapillomatosis disease causes tumors in sea turtles.
Most sea turtle species nest individually.
Another major threat to sea turtles is black-market trade in eggs and meat.
The US listing status of the loggerhead is under review as of 2012.
** ''Chelonia mydas'', green sea turtle
All species of sea turtles have a lachrymal gland in the orbital cavity, capable of producing tears with a higher salt concentration than sea water.
Threatened: all other populations
Like other marine reptiles, sea turtles rely on a specialized gland to rid the body of excess salt ions, because reptilian kidneys can not produce urine with a higher ion concentration than sea water.
