The sea otter displays numerous adaptations to its marine environment.
Sea otter habitat is preserved through several protected areas in the United States, Russia and Canada.
Unusually high mortality rates amongst adult and subadult otters, particularly females, have been reported.
Milo, the darker one, died of lymphoma in January, 2012
After the years of the Great Hunt, the population in these areas, currently part of Russia, was only 750.
The beginning of commercial exploitation had a great impact on the human, as well as animal, populations&nbsp; the Ainu and Aleuts have been displaced or their numbers are dwindling, while the coastal tribes of North America, where the otter is in any case greatly depleted, no longer rely as intimately on sea mammals for survival.
Unlike most marine mammals, the sea otter's primary form of insulation is an exceptionally thick coat of fur, the densest in the animal kingdom.
In the early 18th century, Russians began to hunt sea otters in the Kuril Islands and sold them to the Chinese at Kyakhta.
Releasing an abalone, which can cling to rock with a force equal to 4,000 times its own body weight, requires multiple dives.
In 1775 at Okhotsk, sea otter pelts were worth 50–80 rubles as opposed to 2.5 rubles for sable.
Originally named ''Lutra marina'', it underwent numerous name changes before being accepted as ''Enhydra lutris'' in 1922.
Only one more specimen, an extremely worn lower carnassial, is known.
Sea otters can thoroughly remove abalone from an area except for specimens in deep rock crevices, however, they never completely wipe out a prey species from an area.
With up to 150,000 strands of hair per square centimeter (nearly one million per sq&nbsp;in), its fur is the densest of any animal.
The coloration of the pelage is usually deep brown with silver-gray speckles, but it can range from yellowish or grayish brown to almost black.
They have now entered the Strait of Juan de Fuca and can be found almost as far east as Pillar Point.
The lone male sea otter could have traveled from either California or Washington.
A 2007 Californian study demonstrated, in areas where food was relatively scarce, a wider variety of prey was consumed.
Most of its need for water is met through food, although, in contrast to most other marine mammals, it also drinks seawater.
Mating takes place in the water and can be rough, the male biting the female on the muzzle&nbsp;– which often leaves scars on the nose&nbsp;– and sometimes holding her head under water.
When eating, sea otters roll in the water frequently, apparently to wash food scraps from their fur.
Mothers have been observed to lick and fluff a newborn for hours; after grooming, the pup's fur retains so much air, the pup floats like a cork and cannot dive.
For southern sea otters to be considered for removal from threatened species listing, the population would have to exceed 3,090 for three consecutive years.
It must eat an estimated 25 to 38% of its own body weight in food each day to burn the calories necessary to counteract the loss of heat due to the cold water environment.
Unlike most other marine mammals, the sea otter has no blubber and relies on its exceptionally thick fur to keep warm.
The founder of Fort Ross, Ivan Kuskov, finding otters scarce on his second voyage to Bodega Bay in 1812, sent a party of Aleuts to San Francisco Bay, where they met another Russian party and an American party, and caught 1,160 sea otters in three months.
The sea otter evolved initially in northern Hokkaidō and Russia, and then spread east to the Aleutian Islands, mainland Alaska, and down the North American coast.
To pry an abalone off its rock, it hammers the abalone shell using a large stone, with observed rates of 45 blows in 15 seconds.
Males that do not have territories tend to congregate in large, male-only groups, and swim through female areas when searching for a mate.
A pup, with guidance from its mother, practices swimming and diving for several weeks before it is able to reach the sea floor.
The lighter-colored otter in the video is Nyac, a survivor of the 1989 ''Exxon Valdez'' oil spill.
During the 20th century, sea otter numbers rebounded in about two-thirds of their historic range, a recovery that is considered one of the greatest successes in marine conservation.
In this pouch (preferentially the left one), the animal stores collected food to bring to the surface.
A sea otter has two types of fur, the underfur and the guard hair.
The most recent (spring 2014) United States Geological Survey (USGS) California sea otter survey count is 2,944, almost flat for the last five years.
Reintroduction of sea otters to British Columbia has led to a dramatic improvement in the health of coastal ecosystems, and similar changes have been observed as sea otter populations recovered in the Aleutian and Commander Islands and the Big Sur coast of California However, some kelp forest ecosystems in California have also thrived without sea otters, with sea urchin populations apparently controlled by other factors.
Another area of concern is California, where recovery began to fluctuate or decline in the late 1990s.
The fifth digit on each hind foot is longest, facilitating swimming while on its back, but making walking difficult.
In 1970 and 1971, a total of 95 sea otters were transplanted from Amchitka Island, Alaska to the Southern Oregon coast.
It can chew and swallow small mussels with their shells, whereas large mussel shells may be twisted apart.
Other nations joined in the hunt in the south.
In the 1980s, the area was home to an estimated 55,000 to 100,000 sea otters, but the population fell to around 6,000 animals by 2000.
Sea otters currently have stable populations in parts of the Russian east coast, Alaska, British Columbia, Washington, and California, with reports of recolonizations in Mexico and Japan.
To casual observers, it appears as if the animals are scratching, but they are not known to have lice or other parasites in the fur.
Its relatively large kidneys enable it to derive fresh water from sea water and excrete concentrated urine.
An estimated 1,200 sea otters live within the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, and more than 500 live within the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary.
Their principal range has gradually expanded and extends from Pigeon Point in San Mateo County to Santa Barbara County.
Many Aleuts were either murdered by the Russians or died from diseases the hunters had introduced.
Birth usually takes place in the water and typically produces a single pup weighing 1.4 to 2.3&nbsp;kg (3 to 5&nbsp;lb).
Genetic analysis indicates the sea otter and its closest extant relatives, which include the African speckle-throated otter, European otter, African clawless otter and oriental small-clawed otter, shared an ancestor approximately 5 million years ago (Mya).
It is unique among the mustelids in not making dens or burrows, in having no functional anal scent glands, and in being able to live its entire life without leaving the water.
Sea otters are polygynous: males have multiple female partners.
Population estimates made between 2004 and 2007 give a worldwide total of approximately 107,000 sea otters.
Currently, the most stable and secure part of the sea otter's range is Russia.
The hind feet, which provide most of its propulsion in swimming, are long, broadly flattened, and fully webbed.
The 2013 USGS survey found 2,941 California sea otters, a slight increase from 2012 but a portion of the increase is artificial because the count included, for the first time, the SNI population which had recovered to 59 individuals.
In this zone, only San Nicolas Island was designated as sea otter habitat, and sea otters found elsewhere in the area were supposed to be captured and relocated.
In 1973, the population in Alaska was estimated at between 100,000 and 125,000 animals.
They remove mussels from rocks, liberating space for competitive species and thereby increasing the diversity of species in the area.
The status of the sea otters has improved since 2004 with a report of 4,700 in 2008 that improved their status to "special concern" in Canada.
Many facets of the interaction between sea otters and the human economy are not as immediately felt.
Observations of the amount of time a sea otter must spend each day foraging range from 24 to 60%, apparently depending on the availability of food in the area.
In some respects, though, the sea otter is more fully adapted to water than pinnipeds, which must haul out on land or ice to give birth.
The holotype, a lower carnassial, was in the Norwich Castle Museum but seems to be lost.
In the Aleutian Islands, a massive and unexpected disappearance of sea otters has occurred in recent decades.
They can swim as close as six feet off shore along the Olympic coast.
They currently occupy much of the exposed west coast of Vancouver Island and parts of the central mainland BC coast.
For these reasons, the sea otter remains classified as an endangered species.
Otters were observed twice in Southern California in 2011, once near Laguna Beach and once at Zuniga Point Jetty, near San Diego.
It had stopped the Aleutian Islands, by 1808, as a conservation measure imposed by the Russian-American Company.
By 1817, sea otters in the area were practically eliminated and the Russians sought permission from the Spanish and the Mexican governments to hunt further and further south of San Francisco.
However, temporary pair-bonding occurs for a few days between a female in estrus and her mate.
In 1778, British explorer Captain James Cook reached Vancouver Island and bought sea otter furs from the First Nations people.
The Seattle Aquarium became the first institution to raise sea otters from conception to adulthood with the birth of Tichuk in 1979, followed by three more pups in the early 1980s.
However, because of the species' reputation for depleting shellfish resources, advocates for commercial, recreational, and subsistence shellfish harvesting have often opposed allowing the sea otter's range to increase, and there have even been instances of fishermen and others illegally killing them.
Among the Ainu, the otter is portrayed as an occasional messenger between humans and the creator.
Both items are on display at the Peter the Great Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography in St. Petersburg.
Several captive individuals have lived past 20 years, and a female at the Seattle Aquarium died at the age of 28 years.
There has been some contraction from the northern (now Pigeon Point) and southern limits of the sea otter's range apparently related to lethal shark bites.
Sea otter pelts were given in potlatches to mark coming-of-age ceremonies, weddings, and funerals.
The sea otter population is thought to have once been 150,000 to 300,000, stretching in an arc across the North Pacific from northern Japan to the central Baja California Peninsula in Mexico.
In the wild, sea otters live to a maximum age of 23 years, with average lifespans of 10–15 years for males and 15–20 years for females.
The sea otter walks with a clumsy, rolling gait on land, and can run in a bounding motion.
Females become sexually mature at around three or four years of age and males at around five; however, males often do not successfully breed until a few years later.
A record number of sea otter carcasses were found on California's coastline in 2010, with increased shark attacks an increasing component of the mortality.
Where prey such as sea urchins, clams, and abalone are present in a range of sizes, sea otters tend to select larger items over smaller ones of similar type.
Filmed five years previously at the Vancouver Aquarium, it was YouTube's most popular animal video at the time, although it has since been surpassed.
However, biologists have confirmed isolated sightings of sea otters in these areas since the mid-1990s.
Necropsies of dead sea otters indicate diseases, particularly ''Toxoplasma gondii'' and acanthocephalan parasite infections, are major causes of sea otter mortality in California.
The Nuu-chah-nulth, Haida, and other First Nations of coastal British Columbia used the warm and luxurious pelts as chiefs' regalia.
According to the U.S. Geological Survey and the CDC, northern sea otters, off the coast of Washington state, are infected with the H1N1 flu virus and "may be a newly identified animal host of influenza viruses".
The shape of these different hair fibers connect to trap air between them.
In California, sea otters usually breed every year, about twice as often as those in Alaska.
Alaska is the heartland of the sea otter's range.
When foraging, she leaves her pup floating on the water, sometimes wrapped in kelp to keep it from floating away; if the pup is not sleeping, it cries loudly until she returns.
Adult sea otters typically weigh between , making them the heaviest members of the weasel family, but among the smallest marine mammals.
Of these, about 19,000 are at the Kurils, 2,000 to 3,500 at Kamchatka and another 5,000 to 5,500 at the Commander Islands.
Archaeological evidence indicates that for thousands of years, indigenous peoples have hunted sea otters for food and fur.
Although each adult and independent juvenile forages alone, sea otters tend to rest together in single-sex groups called rafts.
Fossil evidence indicates the ''Enhydra'' lineage became isolated in the North Pacific approximately 2 Mya, giving rise to the now-extinct ''Enhydra macrodonta'' and the modern sea otter, ''Enhydra lutris''.
Under Aleksandr I, the administration of the merchant-controlled company was transferred to the Imperial Navy, largely due to the alarming reports by naval officers of native abuse; in 1818, the indigenous peoples of Alaska were granted civil rights equivalent to a townsman status in the Russian Empire.
The nostrils and small ears can close.
The Russians found the sea otter far more valuable than the sable skins that had driven and paid for most of their expansion across Siberia.
At birth, the eyes are open, ten teeth are visible, and the pup has a thick coat of baby fur.
In addition to promoting growth of kelp forests, sea otters can also have a profound effect in rocky areas that tend to be dominated by mussel beds.
By 2005, only 30 sea otters remained at San Nicolas, although they were slowly increasing as they thrived on the abundant prey around the island.
Articles depicting sea otters were considered to have magical properties.
When Russia sold Alaska to the United States in 1867, the Alaska population had recovered to over 100,000, but Americans resumed hunting and quickly extirpated the sea otter again.
Pups born to experienced mothers have the highest survival rates.
Other observations indicate the sea otter's sense of sight is useful above and below the water, although not as good as that of seals.
As of spring 2010, the northern boundary had moved from about Tunitas Creek to a point 2&nbsp;km southeast of Pigeon Point, and the southern boundary has moved from approximately Coal Oil Point to Gaviota State Park.
The liver, kidneys, and lungs of sea otters also become damaged after they inhale oil or ingest it when grooming.
They spend much time alone, and each adult can meet its own needs in terms of hunting, grooming, and defense.
Females perform all tasks of feeding and raising offspring, and have occasionally been observed caring for orphaned pups.
The sea otter is the heaviest (the giant otter is longer, but significantly slimmer) member of the family Mustelidae, a diverse group that includes the 13 otter species and terrestrial animals such as weasels, badgers, and minks.
Increasing the size and range of sea otter populations would also reduce the risk of an oil spill wiping out a population.
The bones show osteosclerosis, increasing their density to reduce buoyancy.
Cold water is kept completely away from the skin and heat loss is limited.
The only member of the genus ''Enhydra'', the sea otter is so different from other mustelid species that, as recently as 1982, some scientists believed it was more closely related to the earless seals.
Long, highly sensitive whiskers and front paws help the sea otter find prey by touch when waters are dark or murky.
In some areas, sea otters are popular tourist attractions, bringing visitors to local hotels, restaurants, and sea otter-watching expeditions.
The sea otter was formerly sometimes referred to as the "sea beaver", being the marine fur-bearer similar in commercial value to the terrestrial beaver.
In California, they have been noted to ignore Pismo clams smaller than 3&nbsp;inches (7&nbsp;cm) across.
The Exxon Valdez oil spill of 24 March 1989 killed thousands of sea otters in Prince William Sound, and as of 2006, the lingering oil in the area continues to affect the population.
Its digestive efficiency is estimated at 80 to 85%, and food is digested and passed in as little as three hours.
By 2006, though, the Alaska population had fallen to an estimated 73,000 animals.
This pouch also holds a rock, unique to the otter, that is used to break open shellfish and clams.
The individuals within a particular area often differ in their foraging methods and prey types, and tend to follow the same patterns as their mothers.
They are particularly vulnerable, as they rely on their fur to keep warm.
The milk from a sea otter's two abdominal nipples is rich in fat and more similar to the milk of other marine mammals than to that of other mustelids.
In 1741, on his second North Pacific voyage, Bering was shipwrecked off Bering Island in the Commander Islands, where he and many of his crew died.
In 1989, a separate colony was discovered in the central British Columbia coast.
Individuals generally occupy a home range a few kilometers long, and remain there year-round.
The most recent sighting of a sea otter off the Oregon coast took place on 18 February 2009, in Depoe Bay, Oregon.
Sea otters live in coastal waters 15 to 23&nbsp;meters (50 to 75&nbsp;ft) deep, and usually stay within a kilometer (⅔&nbsp;mi) of the shore.
Researchers have noted when they approach in plain view, sea otters react more rapidly when the wind is blowing towards the animals, indicating the sense of smell is more important than sight as a warning sense.
The round, expressive face and soft, furry body of the sea otter are depicted in a wide variety of souvenirs, postcards, clothing, and stuffed toys.
However, reintroductions in 1969 and 1970 off the Washington coast were very successful and sea otters have been expanding their range since.
By 2004, sea otters had repopulated all of their former habitat in these areas, with an estimated total population of about 27,000.
Twins occur in 2% of births; however, usually only one pup survives.
A subsequent international ban on hunting, conservation efforts, and reintroduction programs into previously populated areas have contributed to numbers rebounding, and the species now occupies about two-thirds of its former range.
Reported sightings of sea otters in the San Juan Islands and Puget Sound almost always turn out to be North American river otters, which are commonly seen along the seashore.
The last native sea otter in Oregon was probably shot and killed in 1906.
When underwater, its body is long and streamlined, with the short forelimbs pressed closely against the chest.
It is the only marine mammal that catches fish with its forepaws rather than with its teeth.
A remnant population survived off Vancouver Island into the 20th century, but it died out despite the 1911 international protection treaty, with the last sea otter taken near Kyuquot in 1929.
Prevention of oil spills and preparation for the rescue of otters in the event of one are major areas of focus for conservation efforts.
Juveniles are typically independent at six to eight months, but a mother may be forced to abandon a pup if she cannot find enough food for it; at the other extreme, a pup may nurse until it is almost adult size.
It preys mostly on marine invertebrates such as sea urchins, various molluscs and crustaceans, and some species of fish.
Although it can walk on land, the sea otter lives mostly in the ocean.
Predation of sea otters does occur, although it is not common.
The sea otter propels itself underwater by moving the rear end of its body, including its tail and hind feet, up and down, and is capable of speeds of up to 9&nbsp;km/h (5.6&nbsp;mph).
First, its use of rocks to dislodge prey and to open shells makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools.
Although many factors affect shellfish stocks, sea otter predation can deplete a fishery to the point where it is no longer commercially viable.
Historical records revealed the Russian-American Company sneaked Aleuts into San Francisco Bay multiple times, despite the Spanish capturing or shooting them while hunting sea otters in the estuaries of San Jose, San Mateo, San Bruno and around Angel Island.
Sea otters can do well in captivity, and are featured in over 40 public aquariums and zoos.
Sea otters consume over 100 different prey species.
The largest raft ever seen contained over 2000 sea otters.
In most of its range, it is a keystone species, controlling sea urchin populations which would otherwise inflict extensive damage to kelp forest ecosystems.
Thus began what is sometimes called the "Great Hunt", which would continue for another hundred years.
'''Above''': Aleut carving of a sea otter hunt on a whalebone spear.
Between 1803 and 1846, 72 American ships were involved in the otter hunt in California, harvesting an estimated 40,000 skins and tails, compared to only 13 ships of the Russian-American Company, which reported 5,696 otter skins taken between 1806 and 1846.
In about two-thirds of its former range, the species is at varying levels of recovery, with high population densities in some areas and threatened populations in others.
Growth has slowed slightly, suggesting the numbers are reaching carrying capacity.
Distressed or frightened adults may whistle, hiss, or in extreme circumstances, scream.
Under each foreleg, the sea otter has a loose pouch of skin that extends across the chest.
Leading mammalian predators of this species include orcas and sea lions; bald eagles also prey on pups by snatching them from the water surface.
Russia was also exploring the far northern Pacific at this time, and sent Vitus Bering to map the Arctic coast and find routes from Siberia to North America.
The sea otter population in Prince William Sound was also hit hard by the Exxon Valdez oil spill, which killed thousands of sea otters in 1989.
During the 1880s, a pelt brought $105 to $165 in the London market, but by 1903, a pelt could be worth as much as $1,125.
Sea otters, whose numbers were once estimated at 150,000–300,000, were hunted extensively for their fur between 1741 and 1911, and the world population fell to 1,000–2,000 individuals living in a fraction of their historic range.
An adult's 32 teeth, particularly the molars, are flattened and rounded, designed to crush rather than cut food.
Gestation appears to vary from four to twelve months, as the species is capable of delayed implantation followed by four months of pregnancy.
In comparison to cetaceans, sirenians, and pinnipeds, which entered the water approximately 50, 40, and 20 Mya, respectively, the sea otter is a relative newcomer to a marine existence.
Their beautiful fur is a main target for many hunters.
The sea otter's use of rocks when hunting and feeding makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools.
The generic name ''Enhydra'', derives from the Ancient Greek ''en''/εν "in" and ''hydra''/ύδρα "water", meaning "in the water", and the Latin word ''lutris'', meaning "otter".
The great white shark is believed to be their primary predator, and dead sea otters have been found with injuries from shark bites, although there is no evidence that sharks actually eat them.
At rest, all four limbs can be folded onto the torso to conserve heat, whereas on particularly hot days, the hind feet may be held underwater for cooling.
Its hearing is neither particularly acute nor poor.
The most significant threat to sea otters is oil spills.
Its foraging and eating habits are noteworthy in several respects.
Describing the public sympathy for sea otters that developed from media coverage of the event, a U.S.
Since the mid-1970s, the beauty and charisma of the species have gained wide appreciation, and the sea otter has become an icon of environmental conservation.
In 2004, a lone male sea otter took up residence at Simpson Reef off of Cape Arago for six months.
Remnant sea otter populations may have survived in the bay until 1840, when the Rancho Punta de Quentin was granted to Captain John B. R. Cooper, a sea captain from Boston, by Mexican Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado along with a license to hunt sea otters, reportedly then prevalent at the mouth of Corte Madera Creek.
By the 1760s, the Russians had reached Alaska.
They keep the population of certain benthic (sea floor) herbivores, particularly sea urchins, in check.
In studies performed at Amchitka Island in the 1960s, where the sea otter population was at carrying capacity, 50% of food found in sea otter stomachs was fish.
North Pacific areas that do not have sea otters often turn into urchin barrens, with abundant sea urchins and no kelp forest.
A male sea otter is most likely to mate if he maintains a breeding territory in an area that is also favored by females.
They are found most often in areas with protection from the most severe ocean winds, such as rocky coastlines, thick kelp forests, and barrier reefs.
Scientists agree that sea otters and abalone fisheries cannot exist in the same area, and the same is likely true for certain other types of shellfish, as well.
The recovery of the sea otter is considered an important success in marine conservation, although populations in the Aleutian Islands and California have recently declined or have plateaued at depressed levels.
If the sea otter pelts brought back by Bering's survivors had been sold at Kyakhta prices they would have paid for one tenth the cost of Bering's expedition.
A major Ainu epic, the ''Kutune Shirka'', tells the tale of wars and struggles over a golden sea otter.
When their fur is soaked with oil, it loses its ability to retain air, and the animals can quickly die from hypothermia.
So few remained, perhaps only 1,000–2,000 individuals in the wild, that many believed the species would become extinct.
It is not to be confused with the marine otter, a rare otter species native to the southern west coast of South America.
Russian fur-hunting expeditions soon depleted the sea otter populations in the Commander Islands, and by 1745, they began to move on to the Aleutian Islands.
